SEVERAL Short, but seasonable Discourses Touching COMMON and PRIVATE PRAYER,
Relating to the Public Offices of the CHURCH.

By a Reverend Divine of the Church of England.

I will pray with the Spirit, and pray with the Understanding also. 2 Cor. 14.
15. OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Richard
Sherlock Bookseller. In the Year 1684.

A CATALOGUE Of all the following DISCOURSES.
I. Of the Irregularity of Private Prayer, etc. II. Dr. Stewards Judgment etc.
III. Of the Difference betwixt long Prayers prohibited, and continuance of
Prayers commanded. IV. Meditations upon our going to the Church, with some
short Directions for our Demeanor in the House of God, touching some too-much
mistaken and neglected Acts of Divine Worship. V. A Sermon preached upon the
Archbishop of YORK's Provincial Visitation at Warrington.
The IRREGULARITY Of a Private Prayer in a Public Congregation.
SIR,
I Have sent you herein my repeated and enlarged Thoughts, upon what was once
the subject of our serious discourse; wherein I would not at all disparage, or
in the least undervalue the private prayers and devotions of any person,
whether of the Laity, or Clergy; whether those prayers be by himself composed,
or by others; whether they be premeditated, or sometimes ejaculatory; whether
fixed, or occasional; oral, or mental; for thus, and all these ways, every
truly Religious Christian prays, and undoubtedly finds the benefit, and feels
the comfort of such holy breathings forth of his Soul unto Heaven in his
private recesses.

But that any Person, especially such who have entered into holy Orders in this
Church of England, should presume to use any Prayers in Public of his own
private conception, whether premeditate, or extemporary, before, or after his
Sermon, other than those Prayers, which are by public Authority allowed, and
published to that end; I humbly conceive (with submission to my Superiors) to
be unlawful in several respects.

First. It Is a disorder and confusion in the service of God: For thus the
Public and Private Worship of God are confounded, whilst those private
Prayers, which our Lord has confined to the private Closet, do yet, contrary
to his express command appear in public and usurp the place of his public
Service in the Congregation. The holy duties of public and private Prayers, as
they are distinct in their own nature, and constant use, so they are
distinguished by our Lord, and distinct rules prescribed for the distinct and
discreet performance of either Duty. First, for private Prayer, Mat. 6. 6. When
thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, -- speaking in the singular number to
every particular person. Secondly, for public Prayer, v. 7. But when ye pray,
use not vain repetitions, -- speaking in the plural number to many assembled
together: where, to avoid the Heathenish practice of much speaking, or
multitudinous words in Prayer, v. 8. a short and most excellent Form is given
us. v. 9. Thus then public prayer being distinguished by our Lord from
private, we are thereby forbidden to confound them in their use and practice: 1
Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order; not preposterously,
and disorderly, one part of divine worship undermining another, and the lesser
and more particularuty Dusurping upon the greater and more general religious
Office.

Secondly, It Is not only a disorderly, but also an unreasonable Service, and so
not likely to be acceptable to him, who is both the God of Order, and of
Wisdom. And the unreasonableness of this private prayer in public will appear,
by considering, That all prayers offered up unto God in public, must be
publicly known, consented unto, and agreed upon (which the private prayer
generally is not) by all them that join therein. Upon which agreement (and not
otherwise) Christ has promised his presence, viz. to hear our Prayers, and
grant our requests. Mat. 18* 19, 20. Again, I say unto you; If two of you shall
agree upon Earth, touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done unto them
of my Father, which is in Heaven: for where two or three are gathered together,
there am I in the midst of them: whereupon says the Gloss out of Origin, This
is the cause we are not heard when we pray, in that we agree not in all things,
-- For as in Music there must be harmony and agreement of voices, or else it
delights not the hearer; so in the Church, an assent and agreement is
necessary, or else God is not pleased, neither will he hear the voice of our
prayers. It Is this agreement in prayer that denominates our public worship of
God Common Prayer, because agreed upon by common consent; which does
presuppose, that it is known to all, that all may join therein: So it was ever in
the Church of Christ, the faithful knew what they prayed for; and this, not at
the second hand, from the mouth of the Minister, but before they joined with
him. So Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 6. in Tim. You that are faithful know, what
things are to be desired in Prayer, because all Prayer, viz. that is in
public, ought to be common. It Is the exhortation of Ignatius, Ep. ad Magn. who
lived in the times of the Apostles, and saw our Lord in the flesh, That we
assemble together in one place, and use one prayer common to all: For if the
prayers of a Congregation be not known, common, and agreedupon, then

First, the people cannot join therein, it being little less than the sacrifice
of fools, for men to ask of God they know not what, but wholly depend upon the
Ministers unknown expressions.

Secondly, A Prayer, that is unknown before it be offered up, is to an English
man, though spoken in English, as a Latin prayer to him who understands no
Latin, for they are both lame and maimed, and cannot stand with common sense,
except they make use of that Crutch, which we so much blame in the Papists,
viz. an implicit faith to support them; and both the one and the other do
equally transgress that rule of prayer prescribed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.
15. I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with the understanding also.

Thirdly, It is against both the Judgment and practice of the Universal Church
of Christ: no footsteps thereof are to be found in Antiquity, but many Canons
of the Church against it, whereof some are noted in the Margin. Council. Leodic.
cel. Anno 320. Can. 15. 17. and ult. Council. Milevit. 2d. An. 416. Can. 12.
Council. Epaunens. celeb. An. 509. Council. Gerund. celeb. An. 516. C. 1. Council.
Toles. quart. Can. 2. Council. Venet. celeb. An. 452. Can. 15. Council. Bracor.
1. celeb. An. 562. 19. and 20. and 22. Council. Vasen. celeb. 442. Can. 5, 6,
and 7.


Fourthly, It Is a transgression of the Laws and Orders of this particular Church
of England, and this accompanied with the breach of that solemn promise, which
every Minister, lawfully ordained, has made; no man being admitted into holy
Orders, until he has attested the lawfulness of the Book of Common Prayer,
and promised that he himself will use the same and no other in public,
subscribing with his own hand this attestation and promise: so that the
contrary practice in the use of any private prayer by any Minister of this
Church, is a breach of Fidelity to the Church, and to the Reverend Bishop that
Ordained him.

Fifthly, It Is also a transgression of the Common Law of the Land, which in the
Acts of Parliament for Uniformity in Common Prayer, both old and new, enjoins
peremptorily, under severe penalties, That no man shall use any prayers openly
or in public, but such as are set forth in the said book: so that both in this
and in the former respects it is an act of Disobedience to the higher Powers, and
breach of the fifth Commandment.

I might add, in the last place, the Nonconformity of this practice with all
other Protestant Communicants beyond the Seas, their Ministers being neither
fond of it themselves, nor permitted such a liberty by their Governors.

Object. But to solve all these particulars, it is said, A private prayer before
Sermon is allowed, nay enjoined by the 55th. Canon of the Church, which is
called indeed a Form of Prayer, but therein the Minister is not bound up to the
use of the same words, but may pray to that effect.

Answ. First, But surely there is no man, that understands sense, and is not
blinded with prejudice, will say, That the form prescribed in the Canons is a
Form of prayer, but an Exhortation only to move the people to join in prayer
for Christ's Holy Catholic Church, for the King's Majesty, for -- and it is most
properly called a bidding of Prayer. And 'twas Mr. Cartwright, that Ringleader
of the Puritan Faction, in the time of Q. Elizabeth, who first turned this
Bidding prayer into a long prayer of his own head; and 'twas the very Engine,
whereby he and his followers undermined the Common Prayers of the Church.

Secondly, Because the observance of this Canon was obnoxious to the censure
and exceptions of many, who desired an absolute Prayer in stead of that bidding
Form, it was proposed at the Convocation held An. 1640. that it might be so
ordered, and accordingly there was a short Prayer drawn up, comprising all the
heads of the Canon; the which, notwithstanding the confidence some had of its
universal reception, was rejected by the most Reverend Archbishop, who judged
it neither safe nor fittng to alter that Canon, which was founded on the
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, and King Edward the Sixth, at the first
Reformation; which sufficiently evinceth the said Canon to be no Prayer, nor
yet lawfully to be altered, and used Prayer*wise.

Thirdly, It Is a presumptuous usurpation and affront upon the Church of Christ,
for any man to thrust himself upon such a Ministerial Office, as he is not by
the Authority of the Church entrusted withal, and whosoever acts the
Presbyterian in this particular, becomes Independent; the one having no more
just Authority derived from the Church that ordained him, to use such a private
Prayer of his own in public, than the other has either to preach, or pray in
public, being not admitted into holy Orders, nor lawfully called thereunto.

Fourthly, It Is an Innovation in Religion, a new up start practice, brought into
the Church not above 70 years ago, and may therefore be reckoned inter profanas
vocum novitates, which the Apostle admonished to avoid, even all profane and
vain bablings, 1 Timothy 6. 20. canting language, new words, and new ways, such as
are contrary to those old paths, and those good ways, which the Lord commands
us to enquire after, and to walk therein. Jer. 16. 16. And such New ways are
fitly called profane, quasi procul a fano, says the Commentator, Lyra in loc.
because far from the Temple, or different from the words and ways of Christ's
Church, and contrary to the Apostles Depositum tene, in the following words,
hold fast that which is committed to thee, 1 Timothy 6. i. e. says the Father,
quod tibi creditum; non quod a te inventum; what the Church, whereby thou art
admitted to the Ministerial Function, has committed to thy trust, and
commanded thee to observe, hold fast that, keep close to that, not following
thine own fancy and invention to bring in what is New, which ever undermines
the Old and true way of Divine worship.

Fifthly, If a Call or command from God be herein pretended, though not allowed
by the Church, yet in this particular they are at a loss, except they pretend
immediate Revelation with the Enthusiasts; for there is neither command, nor
example in holy Writ to justify this Private prayer in Public: We have many
Sermons of the Apostles upon record, but no Prayer before any of them, so that
this is an act of usurpation, upon the Public Divine Worship, a presumption to
do that, which God has no where commanded, nor the Church of Christ allowed,

Sixthly, Liberty being permitted for any person of what persuasion soever to
vent his private conceptions by way of Prayer in public, opens a gap to Heresy
and Schism in the Church; to Sedition and Rebellion in the Kingdom. For their
private errors and designs being inserted in their prayers, do insinuate into
the Affections, and more mightily inflame the People, than by any other way of
persuasion whatsoever; Old Truths being undermined by New ways of Worship, and
vain bablings, the constant Parents of errors in the Faith. 1 Timothy 6. 20, 21.

Seventhly, Thus Separations and Divisions, both amongst Ministers and People,
are bred and nourished: for whilst one Minister, or gifted man (as such are
called) prays thus, and thus, and and another in a way, and with words diverse
from him: one sort and sect of men likes this man's way, method, and language,
tone and gesture; another sort is taken more with another way. -- Hence, One
says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo* and another, I of Cephas, 1
Cor. 1. 12. which is the life and being of Schism: the remedy whereof is to
obey that most pathetical exhortation, Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, That there be no
divisions among you. 1 Cor. 1. 10. To speak the same thing, and to use the same
words in the public worship of God: or, as the same Apostle, to glorify God
with one mind, and with one mouth, is the way to avoid divisions, and to take
off the people from their partiality and fondness, in prefetring one Minister
before another, merely for their less or more eminencies in this unwarrantable
way of praying.

Eighthly, By this Private prayer, the Public prayers of the Church are
implied to be imperfect and deficient; are slighted, nay contemned, and
undermined. For they, with whom this way is in repute, generally slight, and
slubber over the Common prayer carelessly, irreverently, and indevoutly; but to
their own conceived prayers give all the advantages of seeming zeal, both in
their tone and language, elevation of eyes, hands, -- and no marvel then that
the one be so much applauded by the vulgar, and the other slighted; especially
when they are persuaded by these Enthusiasts, that Common Prayer, and all the
Ceremonies in that celebration, are taken out of the Mass Book; that they are
but a dead letter, and the invention of man; whereas the private, conceived
Prayer, is no less than the immediate influence of the holy Spirit of God.

Object. At least they say, That Prayers read in a Book have not that quickening
vigor in them, like to the prayer memoriter, and without book; the one savours
of the deadness of the Letter, the other of the quickening Spirit.

Answ. But in holy prayer it is not the words said, whether written, or not
written, whether said within, or without book; but the affectionate Zeal of him
that prays, That gives vigor and efficacy to this holy Duty; and where this is
wanting, the fault is not in the Prayers themselves, but in the persons, that
profanely slight and undervalue them the deadness they talk of, lies in their
own hearts, which are not touched with the quickening spirit of devotion, in the
use of those holy and good prayers. And whosoever. Is more affected with a
conceived than a written prayer, thinks sure, that the one is more immediately
by inspiration from Heaven than the other, and so smells strong of the Heresy
of Enthusiasm; Orationis sublimitas ex part orantis, non ex sublimitate vel
subtilitate verborum, sed humilitate and devotionis affectu ejus qui orat
pensanda est. Jac. Alvar. de inquis. pac.
I am sure, to speak foolishly and impertinently, has been usually accounted,
and called speaking without Book.

Object. 3. There be many Episcopal persons, and such who both use and are
zealous for the Liturgy of the Church, do yet use private prayer of their own
before Sermon; the which surely they would never do, if they conceived it
unlawful.

Answ. This is done, it is confessed, by many persons of known worth and integrity;
some with good intentions, to win upon such persons, whom no other kind of
prayers will please; some that their private prayer may be a Pattetn, whereby
their people may learn to pray in private: and for these reasons* I conceive,
this practice has been, and is still overlooked by Ecclesiastical Superiors.
But in the general, this custom is continued through inadvertency, in not
considering, and deeply weighing the equity or iniquity, fitness or unfitness
thereof; nor can the practice of this, or any other custom prove the same to be
lawful. There is a great difference betwixt Versat nos and praecipitat traditus
per manus error, alienisque perimus exemplis: sanabimur, si modo separemur a
caetu. Seneca de vita beata.
a custom founded upon the principles of truth and equity, and such a custom as
is contrary hereunto, how plausible soever. Many persons also that are eminent
in knowledge, and piety, in the general, may, through long custom, and many
examples, fail in some particulars through inconsideration.

Object. 4. It Is observable by experience, that variety of expressions, and
change of Forms in prayer, do more work upon the Affections of the People, and
stir up their Devotions, than one and the same constant standing Form.

Answ, 1. This does more tickle the itching ears of the people indeed; and the
itching of the ears comes from the corruption of the heart: And surely their
devotion is very cold, that must be warmed by variety of expressions; the which
in preaching may be commendable, but not in praying, except by way of private
ejaculations, it being one great design of Exhortations, and moving ing
admonitions in Sermons, to excite their Affections to what is taught, and
exhorted unto: whereas holy Prayer is not the cause, but the effect and issue
of devout Affections; and it is then only acceptable unto God, when it comes from
a heart replete with humility, compunction, fervor, and Divine love, which do
necessarily infer foreknowledge of the Prayers we use, that they be such, as
whereby our devout Affections may be expressed.

Answ. 2. It is generally observed by the Masters of Mystical Theology, and
Spiritual Life, that there is a sensible Devotion, which begins in the
sensitive Nature. producing tenderness of spirit, drawing often sighs from the
bosom, and tears from the eyes, and begets a secret delectation and sweetness
in the soul; with which many persons are much taken and transported, as
conceiving such pleasing delights in Prayer to be no other than the influences
of the holy Spirit of God* And yet this exterior pleasure of a sensible
Devotion is not always a sign of a Iac. Alba. de inquis. pac. lib. 2. par. 3.
cap. 3. Sanct. Soph. Tract. 3. sermon. 2. c. 5.
sound and right temper of holiness in the soul: Because, First, many wicked
irregenerate persons may, and have enjoyed the same. Secondly, it may proceed
from the natural temper. Thirdly, from the vehement intention of the mind.
Fourthly, from the mournful tone, cadence of words, and power of language. And
such sensible delights, even in Prayer, are sometimes the insinuations and
illusions of the Evil spirit, to puff up the soul with self-love, vainglory,
presumption in Gods favor, and contempt of others. I deny not but such
sensible consolations are often the influences of the holy and true Spirit,
given us for our encouragement in holy and divine Offices, in the love of God
and obediener. But there is great discretion and humility also required in the
use we make of them; neither are we over-highly to esteem of them (as the
Casuist Consolations sensibiles quumvis non sunt despiciendae, non sunt tamen
supra modum aestimandae: quia nec verae virtutes, nec solidarum virtutum
effectus, nec necessaria prefectus instrumenta, sine quibus plurimi ad magnam
virtutem, ac mentis puritatem ascendunt. Jac. Alv. ibid*
observes,) Because they are neither true virtues, neither are they neeessary
instruments of proficiency in true devotion: for without such sensible
consolations, many holy persons have ascended to a great height of virtue, and
purity of mind.

The strongest Devotions, and most effectual Prayers, are seldomest attended
with these sensible consolations, and sweetnesses, which flow in upon variety
of taking expressions; for a great Devotion is like a great Grief, which is not
so expressive in words, as a less moderate passion: a lesser Grief also is
wasted away by tears and complaints, whilst the greater is both more silent,
and more lasting; so the less and more weak devotion of the Soul is breathed
out and wasted in variety of language, but not the solid, strong, and lasting
servor. Such was the prevailing devotion of Moses, when he fell down before the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 9. 18. 25. and that of Hannah, when she prayed in the Temple, 1 Samuel 1. 10, 11. Their words in their prayers were few, and low, unheard* but
their desires and affections strong and prevalent, as being not wasted by much
speaking. And such was that Devotion of our Lord in the Garden, and on the
Cross, when he poured out his Soul in prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears: Heb. 5. 7. His words were few, but his devotion great, and
prevailing mightily; which devotion was neither begotten, nor increased, nor
poured forth in a flood of language, and various expressions, for he went away
(says the holy Ghost) and prayed, saying the same words. Mat. 26. 44. So that
settled and stinted* Forms of Prayer may be expressive enough of the greatest
Devotion: nor is God more pleased, or the Soul that prays more profited by
variety of expressions, though the exterior pleasure of a sensible devotion may
be raised thereby.

Object. 5. But stinted forms of Prayer cannot suit with all tempers and
conditions: a Garment may as well be made to fit the changeable Moon, as one
Form of Prayer to fit all men, or any one man at all times.

Answ. 1. It Is true, that limited forms of Prayer cannot be fitted to every
man's fancy and affection, especially amongst such men where such prayers are
either suspected, or coldly entertained: but they may be fitted to all men's
necessities, though not to their curiosities; they may be such as may
sufficiently serve every man's duty, though not please all men's fancies.

Answ. 2. Though they suit not with every man's particular condition in all
circumstances, it is no argument against them; for that would conclude against
all Laws whatsoever, wherein it is impossible to make provision for all
particular circumstances and accidents that occur: it is sufficient, that all
Public Sanctions do secure the public Interest, and whatsoever has influence
upon public Societies and Communities of men.

Answ. 3. Every man's private Condition, wherein he may be separate from the
public, is to be fitted by his private prayers; and therein he has liberty to
expatiate himself, and enjoy all those fancied benefits, and selfpleasing
sweetnesses, which variety and liberty can afford him; that which cannot be
expected in public prayers, which are of a public nature and design, suiting
with public interests, the duties, and conditions of all Christians; and
providing also for public Events, that are either probable, or can be
rationally foreseen.

Answ. 4. There are many Circumstances relating to particular men's businesses,
that are not fit to be inserted in the public Service of the Church, or to be
mentioned in public. It is more safe and prudent to recommend many things unto
God in general expressions, than to insist particularly and positively upon
them, especially in such things as are temporal and* worldly, wherein men are
more apt to be positive, and expressive than becomes. Our blessed Savior knew
well enough the particular wants and conditions of his Disciples, when they
begged of him to be taught to pray; yet he descends not to any enumeration of
those particulars, but gives them a Form of Prayer in general terms, because it
was for a public use and benefit.

Answ. 5. If any defects and inconveniences be fancied in those devout and
accurate peayers of the Church, which have been framed and approved by the long
experience of 1600. years, to fit all public concerns, and meet with all
necessary conditions, to be commended unto God in public; how much more may we
fear the many inconveniences, disorders, irregularities -- in the private
prayer, though pretended to complete and fill up the emptiness of the public?
The defects, and impertinencies, tautologies, errors and blasphemies of many
such private prayers are obvious to each man's observation.

Object. 6. It Is further said, that it may as well be ordered, that one common
Sermon should be preached in all Churches, and at all times, as that one common
Prayer should be constantly used, and no other.

Answ. 1. The Church does indeed trust all her Priests, and Deacons to preach
to the people, and by way of Sermon to exercise their gifts for the edification
of others; wherein variety of expressions are very useful to move, excite,
admonish, exhort, reprove, -- which are the ends of preaching, not so of
praying, as before was observed.

Answ. 2. If the Minister chance to fail by impertinent, tedious, or any
irregular expressions in preaching, the matter is of less moment than to err in
prayer: Because, first, it is more safe to be bold with the people than with
the great Majesty of Heaven; the people may pardon an indiscretion, a rudeness,
a mistake, if any such happen in a Sermon; but that boldness, or impudence
rather, which ventures to offer up unto God their mistakes and undecent
expressions, is not so venial, and easily pardonable. Secondly, Sermons to the
people are but the means, not any essential part of Gods worship it self; but
holy Prayer is a part and a principart of Gods outward worship; so that to
mistake and err in the one, is but indiscretion, if not wilful; but to err in
the other is impiety, and irreligion. A mistake, a falsehood in prayer, is not a
lie unto men, but unto God, Acts 5. 4, 5. the great Sin for which Ananias and
Sapphira were struck with sudden death. Which should strike the hearts of all
men with such an awful fear, as not to dare to utter any thing unto God, that
may prove false, or be improper to be spoken; nor yet to go beyond what they
are authorized to say in public by the commands of God, and of his Church.

Object. 7. Our Savior prayed Extempory, and by the Spirit, and his Prayer (
John 17.) was long, and no part of a Liturgy.

Answ. Those Prayers of our Lord, which are recorded, were not Extempory, but
set forms, and parts of the Jewish Liturgy in the Temple; which might be proved
by particulars, if it were not too tedious to be here inserted: And his prayer
Ioh. 17. was a private, not a public prayer; 'twas designed indeed to a
public use and benefit, not offered up in public, and with his Disciples,
though for, and in their behalf: and 'twas a prayer that was proper and
peculiar to Christ alone, as the only Mediator betwixt God and man, and so not
to be drawn into an example.

Object. 8. Solomon prayed in the Temple a private prayer of his own in
public* 2 Chronicles. 6. So did Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. So did Elijah the
Prophet, 1 Kings 18. 16. and St. Paul the Apostle, Acts 20. 36.

Answ. All these prayers, with all others recorded in holy Writ, were
undoubtedly the immediate dictates of God's holy Spirit, whereunto no man,
without sin and presumption, may pretend, at least not depend and rely
thereupon. And as for St. Paul's prayer, Acts 20. 36. whether it was a set Form
or not, it is not expressed, nor yet many of our Savior's prayers upon record,
and so no argument pro, or con to be drawn from thence.

Object. 9. The Fathers frequently began their Homilies with prayers, and St.
Paul himself began and ended his Epistles with prayers, and there is a prayer
extant of Saint Ambrose, which he used before his Sermon.

Answ. But what kind of Prayers these were is not considered, viz. short
Collects, or rather Ejaculations, imploring the Divine Assistance, which they
used not always before, but sometimes in the midst of their Sermons also, when
they treated of some high mystery of Godliness, of other matter of difficulty,
or were transported with more than ordinary zeal to the practice of such of
such a virtue, or the eradication of some reigning offense amongst the people;
as is frequent in many of St. Chrysostom's Homilies. And of St. Ambrose, he,
being a Metropolitan, might surely assume such a power, to compose a prayer for
his own use, which is not, nay ought not to be allowed to every inferior
Presbyter. Secondly, because he used a short prayer, and this but sometimes
before his Sermon, it does not follow, That every green-headed Minister may use
a prayer of his own private conception twenty times as long as the other, and
so fully as far distant from the pattern which our Lord has given us; which is
also answer sufficient to St. Paul's example objected.

Object. 10. But St. Augustine affirms the necessity of this Prayer before
Sermon, saying That Queen Esther prayed for the temporal safety of her Nation,
before she adventured to speak before the King Ahasuerus, that God would* be
pleased to put into her mouth congruous words. How much more ought we to pray
for the like gift, when we are to speak for the eternal salvation of souls in
the Word and Doctrine? August. de Doct* Christiana. And again, says he, When
the hour is come (to preach) before he opens his mouth, let him lift up his
thirsting soul unto God.

Answ. It is undoubtedly a laudable practice for every Preacher to pray for the
Divine Assistance in his Sermons to the People. And this not only in the
public prayers of the Church, but in private also, betwixt God and his own
soul; and this, as the Father directs, before he opens his mouth in public.
And such was Queen Esther's prayer in private, before she publicly spoke to
the King; which makes rather against, than for the private prayer in public
for, and with the whole congregation. St. August. could not be guilty of any
such practice; for it was against his judgment, being himself one of the Two
Hundred Fathers of that Milevitan Council, wherein it was decreed, that no
prayer should be used in public, but such as were approved in the Synod.
Sometimes this Father did conclude his Sermon with an Exhortation, conceived in
form of a Prayer, e g. Conversi, -- Turning unto the Lord God, Father Almighty,
let us render him all possible thanks, beseeching him of his great mercy, that
he would vouchsafe to hear our prayers, and expel the Enemy from having any
influence upon our thoughts and desires, words and actions; that he would
increase our faith, govern our minds, fill us with spiritual cogitations, and
at last bring us to everlasting happiness through Jesus Christ -- which is not
so much a Prayer, as an Invitation to Prayer, suitable to the Form prescribed
in the Canon of our Church.

Object. 11. The liberty or private prayer in public is the way to make an
able Ministry, whilst thus they are put on to exercise and improve their
Ministerial gifts and graces.

Answ. It Is rather the way to make a Licentious, Fanatic, Brainsick Ministry,
and in process of time no Ministry at all; for from this practice it is that so
very many unlearned, unstable souls, have taken up the trade, and proved as
eminent, at least as well approved of by the people for their gift of Prayer,
as the most learned of their Tutorers therein.

And whosoever shall impartially weigh, and without prejudice consider it, he
may observe, that this private prayer in public. both in Church and at home,
is the very life and soul of that Schism and Division, which is still so
perniciously kept up in this Church: It Is hereby maintained more than by
preaching, and disputes: It Is from hence that Parties do call their Leaders
Godly Ministers, and themselves the godly Brethren; the children that cry Abba
Father, the chosen and familiar friends of God, from their over-saucy and
familiar converse with God. This is that great Idol, whom all the world of
Non-conformists on this side the pale of the Roman Church adore and worship,
crying down the goodly frame of Gods worship in his Church under the notion of
Idolatry, Superstition, and Will Worship, that every one may set up his Idols
in his own heart, follow the sway of their own imaginations, to be guilty
themselves of that Will Worship, which they falsely impute to the Church of
Christ*

Upon this Rock many thousands of Souls have suffered shipwreck, who have been
otherwise piously inclined: For being taken with holy language, religious tone,
and sceming zeal of this or the other person in their private and conceived
prayers, they have in respect thereof slighted and undervalued even the
Celestial Prayer of God the Son, all the divinely inspired prayers of God the
Holy Ghost recorded in Holy Writ, with all the devout and excellent Prayers of
the Church of Christ which are framed after the pattern prescribed by our Lord,
commanded by the higher Powers, used by the devout people of God in all Ages,
and whereby many thousand triumphant Saints in Heaven have prayed themselves
into that blissful place of Eternal Glory.

After all this it would be considered,

That, as every error in Religion is very prolifick in bringing forth many
others of the same misshapen stamp and nature; so this erroneous way of divine
worship, the use of a private Prayer in a public Congregation is also
productive of many mistakes, and falsehoods, and deformed ways of worship in the
management thereof: And

1. Such private Prayers in public are generally erroneous in the length of
them: For that Long Prayers are unlawful, is apparent

First, Because they are prohibited by our Lord, Mat. 6. 7. When ye pray, use
not vain repetitions: which cannot be understood of the same prayer repeated,
(which is falsely objected against the prayers of the Church) for so prayed our
Lord himself, and his example surely contradicts not his Doctrine; whose
Prayer, when most earnest in his Desires, was the same three times repeated,
and a very short prayer also, Mat. 26. 44. By vain repetitions then must be
meant the repetitions of the same thing in other words. For First, to use
multitude of words, and variety of expressions in prayer is vain, i. e:
superfluous, impertinent, and to no purpose; since our desires may, and ought
to be expressed in few words, and pertinent. Secondly, such are generally vain,
i. e. empty, and insignificant, that have more noise than weight, more sound
than sense, serving only to fill up the time, to amuse the minds, and tickle
the itching ears of the Hearers.

That such kind of long Prayers are here forbidden by our Lord, is manifest,

Secondly, From the parallel Text quoted in the Margin. Eccles. 5. 2. Be not
rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God; for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few.
And this Text in the margin quotes another to the same purpose, Prove. 10. 19.
In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that refraineth his
lips is wise.

Thirdly, From the custom of the Heathen, as it follows, Use not vain
repetitions as the Heathen do. It was the manner of the Heathen, says the
ordinary Gloss out of Cyprian, to endeavor rather to be eloquent, than devout
in their prayers; and to be loud and clamorous, rather than fervent and
zealous. And example whereof we have 1 Kings 18. 27. where Elijah mocks the
Priests of Baal, calling upon their Pagan Deities: Cry aloud, for he is a God;
either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure
he is asleep, and must be awaked. And accordingly they cried aloud, thinking*
as our Savior here says, that they should be heard for their much speaking.
And therefore, as it follows, v. 18. Be not like unto them. It is a shame for
Christians in the worship of the True God, to be like the Heathen in the
worship of their false and feigned Deities. Our duty is, to endeavor more for
humility, purity, and fervency in heart, than for glib, nimble, and voluble
tongues; to pray, not with multitude of words, and variety of phrases, but with
pertinent and pithy expressions; with ardency, and godly zeal: and the reason
follows. For

Your heavenly Father knows what things you stand in need of, before you ask
him: He is every where present, and knows all things, even the secrets of all
hearts; and therefore to court him with long and loud Peayers implies our
ignorance, or misbelief of his perfections.

Against such extravagancy in prayers our Lord prescribes us a Form, with
command saying, After this manner pray ye, verse. 9. i. e. as from the context
is manifest, not after the manner of the Heathen, who think to be heard for
their much speaking* but after this manner, i. e. in few words, and such as are
pithy, and to purpose.

And, That it is the meaning of our Lord in this place, that all our Prayers
should be short, and not much exceeding the length of the Pattern he has given
us, is manifest,

1. Not only from the Context impartially weighed and understood, but

2. From the practice of Christ's Church, which is undeniably the best and
surest Interpreter of Christ's meaning in his words* And all the Prayers of the
Church of Christ are, and ever were such in all Ages, in all places, amongst
all persons that are called Christians: their Liturgies, or Public prayers are
short and pithy, called therefore Collects, as being so many Collections of
much matter in few words.

3. Such are all the Prayers of the Holy and True Spirit of God, which stand
upon record in Holy Writ, both for use, and imitation, viz. the whole Book of
Psalms, with many more; all which, though some of them be long, as to the whole
Psalm, or Hymn, yet they are divided by Verses into so many shorter Prayers.

4. Long Prayers are not only forbidden by our Lord, as the custom of the
Heathen, but also frequently reproved by him as the practice of the Hypocrites.
Matthew. 23. 14. Mar. 12. 40. Luke 12. 47.

5. By long and manifold sad experience it is well known, and has been often
observed, That all long, conceived prayers have been guilty of manifold
infirmities; light, vain, and unseemly expressions, not fitting to be offered
up to the All wise, All-glorious Majesty of Heaven; yea many falsehoods, many
impieties and profanations, have been uttered in such kind of prayers, and what
have been contradictory to the Religious Duties we owe to God and men.

6. If it be here said, How can we be too long in our Prayers, since our Lord
continued all night in prayer, Luke 6. 12. and says also, that we ought always
to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. 1. and his Apostle commands, Continue in
Prayers, and watch, Col. 4. 2. and pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. and how
can these Commands be obeyed without long prayer?

Answ. To this I answer, that there is a great difference between long prayers,
and praying long. The one is unlawful, because forbidden and reproved by our
Lord; the other is a Religious Duty, because both commanded, and practiced by
him: and therefore St. Augustine says, Oration plus gemitibus quam sermonibus
agitur, plus fletu quam afflatu: And it is thus, The Spirit helps our
Infirmities by quickening our Devotions, and inflaming our Desires; he makes
intercession for us, i. e. as the same Father, secretly inclining our hearts to
intercede for our selves, with groanings that cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26.
From which Text it is apparent (quite contrary to the Enthusiasts sense
thereof) that it is inward groanings, not outward bellowings; the internal
fervent desires of the Soul, not multitude of words, which is the proper work
of the Holy Spirit in prayer.

The ordinary Gloss out of St. Chrysostom asks the same Question: If we must
not use many words in our Prayers, how shall we pray without ceasing, as it is
commanded? And answers out of the same Father, That both are to he observed in
our Religious Devotions: viz. 1. That our Prayers be short. And aly Frequent,
and continued. So Christ has both commanded, and also exemplified in his
Personal Prayers. And St. Paul also; That our Prayers be short, but often
renewed; in few words; but with great devotion; ending briefly, and beginning
afresh; leaving some intervals, or spaces of time for the re-enquickening and
enkindling the fire of fervor and holy zeal in the Soul. And its added out of
Cassianus; The Fathers conceived it most useful to use short, but frequent
Prayers. To be frequent, that our Souls may cleave the more steady unto God by
often addresses to his Majesty. To be short, that we may quench the fiery darts
of the Devil, who is most busy to tempt us to dullness and deadness of heart in
our prayers; which he very easily effects, when the prayers we say, or hear,
are long, and continued without any intermission.

It Is recorded of those Primitive Christians in Egypt, who were most famous for
their transcendent Devotions, and great Austerities in the exercise of
Religious Duties, That their Prayers we many, and often, night and day
continued; and yet, that they were short also: not only in their solemn
Assemblies, and public Offices of Devotion, but also, That their private
Prayers were as so many Raptures, and Ejaculations, or Desires, darted up into
Heaven. For, as the Father says thereupon, Absit ab Oratione multa lobutio,
sed non desit multa precatio, si fervens perseveret intentio* Let not our
Devotions be accompanied with much speaking, but much praying, so long as we
can hold out in attention and fervency.

FINIS.
Dr STEWARD's Judgment of a Private PRAYER in Public, Relating to the Orders
of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

With an Account of the BIDDING PRAYER.



OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printed to the University, for Richard
Sherlock Bookseller. In the Year 1684.

These are the words of his Inscription, near the place where he was interred
in France.

MEMORIAE RICHARDI STEWARD, DECANI WEST MONASTER. ET SA CELLI REGII IN ANGLIA:

Qui hoc tantum Monumento suo inscribi voluit Epitaphium.

Hic jacet R. STEWARD, QUI Assidue oravit pro pace ECCLESIAE.

Obiit 14o. November. 1652.

AETAT. LVIIIo.

THat it is not lawful for any Person, that has received holy Orders in the
Church of England, to use any extemporary, or premeditated Prayers of his own
private composure, either before or after Sermon, or in the Church in the
public Worship and Service of God, but only the Liturgy set forth and allowed.

First, Because it is directly against his own solemn promise made to the
Church, when he came to be ordained* and that Promise is set down under his
hand, when he subscribed the three Articles, (contained in Canon 36.) the
second whereof runs thus, That he will use the Service* Book prescribed in
Public prayer, and no other*

Secondly, Because the use of such Prayers is directly against an Act of
Parliament, viz* that for the Uniformity of Common Prayers, which enjoins
peremptorily under sharp punishments, that no man shall use any other open
Prayers than are mentioned and set forth in the said Book.

Thirdly, No man is to presume to exercise any Office in the Church, except he
be called to it, as it was in Aaron.

Seeing therefore both the Church and State have expressly enjoined us to use no
Public prayers, but the Liturgy, (except his Majesty give leave upon
extraordinary Occasion for the drawing up of Forms, which leave has ground de
Iure communi, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil) it follows, that neither Church
nor State have given power to any to vent themselves in such open Prayers in
the Church, because they expressly forbid it.

To presume then to use such Prayers, contains in it a complication of several
Sins.

1. The Sin of Falsehood, or the breach of solemn Promise, confirmed by
subscription of the Church.

2. It Is an act of Disobedience to the Higher Powers, and so it is an express
sin against the Fifth Commandment.

3. It Is an act of Injury, aed Usurpation offered to the Church, in presuming to
thrust themselves into a sacred Office, which such men are not to be entrusted
with, nor thought fit at all to execute: for many may be able to discourse unto
men, (since if they chance there to fail in point of truth, or congruity, the
matter is of less consequence,) but the Church will but trust but few that
shall lead Men, when they speak to God; because there a Falsehood may prove an
abomination in Speech, an Incongruity may soon amount to a Blasphemy.

I would glanly demand of any prudent person, whether he conceive, that when
the Church of England was in her greatest glory, she had ever in it 9500
Persons, answerable to the 9500 Parishes, that were able to lead the people in
prayer? Sad experience tells us the contrary, and informs us loudly enough of
the Soloecisms, and Blasphemies* and the same experience tells us, that their
Directory helps them not at this dead lift, nay it may often prove the greatest
impediment, since were some weak men allowed as well their Matter as Words,
they might perhaps come off with some tolerable approbation; but being forced
to confine themselves to matter, which either they well understand not, or are
not so well used to speak of, their Prayers are oftentimes vain and ridiculous,
or, which is worse, erroneous and blasphemous.

The licentiousness of Devotion (that each private Priest durst adventure to
lead others in Public prayer) breeding great disturbance in the Primitive
Church, brought the Fathers to decree thus, in the second Council of Milevis,
(where St. Austin sat, as appears by the Subscription) That no Public Prayers
should be offered up to God, that had not been approved of in a Council; or
least agreed upon by the more discreet sort of men. Ne forte aliquid contra
fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium fit compositum: Lest either
through ignorance or want of good pains, the public Faith might receive hurt
by such Prayers. Now, besides other hurts which the Church of England has
received by this unlawful course, all know that she has received one
remarkable mischief in the neglect and scorn of her Liturgy. For when
Cartwright, the Puritan Incendiary, saw he wanted Power, either to extirpate,
or to alter our established Book of Common Prayer, he was the first durst
boldly use this forbidden Knell of Devotion; and those that followed him
improved it to so great an height, by posting over our Liturgy with so much
carelessness and scorn, and by giving all the Advantages to those Forms of their
own, both of the Voice, and of the Eyes, and of the Hand; that the People began
e're long to think, that the reading of the Liturgy was but an useless task
imposed by the Church on the Priests; but that they completely served God, if
they came when the Psalms were singing, because, besides that they served God,
and had the benefit of a Sermon, they heard a long Prayer also, set out with
all the Devotion, and all the advantage that it could possibly receive, from
the Art, or from the natural good parts of the person who composed it. So that
he who will needs continue the use of these forbidden prayers in the Pulpit,
takes the readiest course (as much as in him lies) for the rooting out the
public Liturgy.

I suppose, that these men do not at all like the course which the Independants
now use in Prayer, who permit this extemporary or voluntary way, not only to
the Priests, but to the Soldiers, and to the Mechanics; and I imagine a main
cause of their mistakes to be, because such an Office is intruded on by those
men, who have not just authority to perform it. But then, if they would
consider things well, they would easily find, that this use of forbidden Prayer
has metamorphos'd them into Independants, since they have no more authority to
compose such Forms from that Apostolical Church that ordained them, than either
that person has, who is now employed to make Shoes, or that other
Ecclesiastic, whose Formalities are a Belt, and a Buff -- Jerkin. It may be
said perhaps, that many Churchmen both of great knowledge, and great place,
have themselves used these forms of Prayer, and upon that ground why may not
they? Truly, if to argue thus were concluding, it might soon free us, not only
from the ties of many English laws, but from the obligation of the Decalogue it
self; which, without all doubt, is broken often enough, not only by those of
the common sort, but by men of great Place and Knowledge. But we must
distinguish between Consuetudo, and Corruptela, and so learn, that Usages taken
up against press-written Laws are Corruptions, but not justifiable Customs.

One thing I shall add more, and it is a short Discourse, How the Pulpit-Forms
of Prayer were brought into the Church of England. We must know then, that in
the time of Popery, the manner commonly was to use the Lords Prayer, or else an
Ave Maria before Sermon; so that when Edward the Sixth came to compose his
Injunctions, he made choice (as he had good reason) of the Lords Prayer for
that purpose. But because it was thought fit, that the King's just Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical things should be at the least weekly published to the People, it
was thought expedient to premise to the ' Pater noster a Form (as his
Injunction styles it) of Bidding Prayer; wherein the Priest was not to speak to
God, but only to the People, exhorting them to pray instantly for such and such
persons, but he prayed not to God at all, until he closed with the Lords
Prayer. This was likewise confirmed in the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, and
expressly called the Form of Bidding Prayer. And when King James of blessed
memory turned those Injunctions into Canons, his Law runs ( Canon 55.) That
Ministers should move the People to join with him in Prayer, viz. in this Form
of Bidding Prayer; Ye shall pray for Christ's Catholic Church etc. concluding
always with the Lords Prayer.

Now let any indifferent man judge: Are Exhortations proper Forms of Prayer?
Nay, let a discerning man consider it well, and it will appear, that things
there prudently spoken by way of Exhortation, and Narration, would prove very
absurd in Prayer. How fond would it appear, to tell the great GOD of Heaven of
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of
God King of England, etc. or, as some do often tell GOD of such a Lord, Earl of
such a Place, and Baron of another, and of his Majesty's Honorable Privy
Council, and his very good Lord etc. And yet when we do but exhort them to join
their Prayers, such Clauses may not be unfit. I can scarce think of any other
way to defend them; and yet it is true that this Form is there, viz. Can. 55.
called Prayer before Sermon, and so it is, because we then say together with
the Preacher the Lords Prayer, to those very purposes he exhorts. And they well
know, who know Divinity, that all kinds of Prayer are reducible to that holy
Form; but it follows not, that the Preacher's Exhortation is a Prayer, for that
he then speaks not at all to God himself but to the People. Indeed upon an
occasion extraordinary it is a Prayer of no ordinary composition* and therefore
called the Form of Bidding Prayer both by a reformed King, and a very glorious
Queen. and yet de facto misused by an itching Puritanical party; at first (no
doubt) by Cunning, and Design, and afterward (as I verily think for the most
part) by a mistake of that bad end to which it drove; or by inadvertency of the
Law. But it is most apparent, that such forbidden Prayers are an especial means
to eat out the whole English Liturgy.

A DISCOURSE Of the Difference betwixt Long Prayers prohibited, and Continuance
in Prayers commanded.

When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites, etc. Matthew. 6. 5.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Richard
Sherlock Bookseller.

In the Year 1684*

A Discourse of the Difference betwixt Long Prayers prohibited, and coutinuance
in Prayers commanded.

THey who are true members of Christ's Church below, are conform to the
glorious Saints in Heaven above: Exodus 25. 40. Acts 7. 44. Heb. 6. 11.
they do the will of God on Earth, as it is in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 11.
and that is undoubtedly the way to Heaven: We cannot possibly lose our way
thither, whilst we follow their steps, who are thither gone before us.

Those Triumphant Saints in Heaven rest not day nor night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Is. 6. 3. Rev. 4. 8.
Almighty. Whereunto conforms the man after Gods own heart, saying* O Lord God
of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee. Ps. 88. 1.
Our Lord commends it as a duty incumbent, that men ought always to pray Luke
18. 1.
: and by his Apostle commands it positively, Pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.
13.
Giving thanks always: Ephesians. 5. 20.
Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication. Ephesians. 6. 18.


But these Examples and Commands are not so to be understood, as if we should
do nothing else but pray, which was an old Heresy of the Messalians, and
Euchites S. Aug. l. de haer. Theod. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 10.
, long since condemned by the Church of Christ, as being a thing impossible to
pray without ceasing, in the bare literal sense, because this corruptible body
presses down the soul, and corporal necessities do call for supply: Neither
yet, that we should make long Prayers, which is the new error, and great
mistake of these times; the which, though generally the most used, and best
liked, as being set off with the paint of a seeming zele, and pretense of the
Spirit, yet the unlawfulness of such long Prayers will appear, if we will
without prejudice and partiality consider, that

1. They are forbidden by our Lord, saying, When ye pray, use not vain
repetitions* Matthew. 6. 7. in which words our Lord means not, the same prayers
repeated, (as is falsely objected against the Prayers of the Church,) for thus
our Lord prayed himself, Matthew. 26. 39. 44. where his Prayer was short, and
three times repeated.

And therefore undoubtedly, by vain repetitions in praying, is understood
multitude of Words, and variety of expressions to the same purpose, or rather
to no purpose; since our Desires both may and ought to be expressed in few
words and pertinent, according to the pattern our Lord has given us.

And that it is the meaning of our Lord, when he says, After this manner pray
ye, that our Prayers should be generally formed to the length of his Prayer
prescribed, will appear

1. From the Context, if seriously weighed, and rightly understood; wherein is
manifest, that the manner of praying by such a short Form, is commanded in
opposition to the Heathenish use of much speaking in Prayer.

2. From the Parallel-Text in the Margin, Eccles. 5. 2 Be not rash with thy
Mouth, and let not thy Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is
in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, and therefore let thy words be few.

3. From the Prayers of Christ's Church, which are in all Liturgies of the
Christian World, for the most part of the same length; and surely, the general
Practice of the Church is the best Interpreter of the Scripture.

4. Such are generally also all the Prayers of the Holy Spirit of God* which
stand upon Record in Holy Writ* [ viz. the Book of Psalms, with many more:] We
meet with none that are of such a continued length, as are in use amongst us,
but they are all divided, by distinct Verses, into so many several shorter
Prayers.

Long Prayers are forbidden by our Lord, because such is the custom of the
Heathen, [ as the Heathen do, Matthew. 6. 7.] who mind more the Oratory and
Language, Tone and Pronuntiation, than the Humility and Devotion of the Soul in
prayer: and it is much misbecoming Christians to worship the true God, as the
Heathen do their false and feigned Deities. And

Because they imply a false notion of the Majesty of Heaven, and a misbelief of
his Divine perfections; as if he were asleep, and must be awakened, or did not
understand our Wants and Desires, or, being otherwise employed, he could not
attend our Petitions, except in multitude of Words expressed, and loud bawling
for audience: So prayed the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 27. and so says our
Lord of all Heathen people, that they think they shall be heard for their much
speaking; which is directly contrary to the true faith of a Christian, who
believes and acknowledges the Omniscience, and Omnipresence of God; as it
follows in the Eighth verse, Your Heavenly* Father knows what things you
stand in need of, before you ask: which Divine Truth is implicately denied by
loud and long Prayers.

Long prayers are not only forbidden by our Lord, as the custom of the Heathen,
but also frequently reproved by him as the practice of the Hypocrites, who love
to stand praying in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the Streets, that
they may be seen af Men, that they may be taken notice of for Godly men,
desiring rather to seem, than really to be Religious, loving the praise of Men
more than the praise of GOD. Matthew. 6. 5. c. 23. 14. Mark 12. 40. Luke 20. 47.
Ioh. 12. 43.

To pray continually then, is neither to be understood of doing nothing else
but pray, nor yet of using long prayers; the one being prohibited by our Lord*
and the other condemned by his Church; but in this and the like Expressions is
commanded

The intense Devotion of the Soul in Prayer: So our Lord expounds his own
Command, that men ought always to pray, viz. that they faint not, Luke 18. 1.
to wit, for want of that holy fervor and devout zeal, which is the life and
soul of an effectual Prayer. And this same Celestial fire of holy Zeal in
prayer, spends not it self in multitude of Words, and much babbling of the Lips,
but is expressed in sighs and groans which cannot be uttered. Romans 8. 8. 26.
which are truly the Breathings of the holy Spirit of God in prayer, who dwells
not upon the Tongue, but in the Heart.

To pray continually, enjoins the constant, and continued returns of this holy
Duty; that we lose no time, neglect no opportunity either of the Public
prayers of the Church, or of private prayer, and Closet-Devotions, upon the
set, solemn, and accustomed times thereof; remembering, that the Time only,
which is employed in the sacred Acts of Piety toward God, and Charity toward
Man is redeemed Ephesians. 5. 6.
out of the all-devouring jaws of Death, and dark Oblivion, to be the Seminary
of a blessed Eternity, Gal. 6. 8. Mark. 12. 35.
when time shall be no more. It Is to this end our Lord commands us to watch and
pray; by our constant prayers at Evening, at Midnight, at the Cock crowing, and
in the Morning, to watch for the coming of our Lord to put an end to Time, and
to all that is by Time limited and circumscribed.

That we ought always to pray, i. e. (say the Fathers upon the Text) at those
appointed Hours observed by the Church of God, both under the Law, called
therefore the Hours of the Temple, and under the Gospel, called the Canonical
Hours; so generally observed formerly of all devout Christians, that St.
Hierome, [ Epist. ad Eustor.] with his Quis nescit, takes it for granted, that
no Godly Christian is either ignorant or negligent in the observation of such
Hours, as being probably observed by holy David, or from his example derived,
saying of his own daily practice, Psalm. 119. 164. Seven times a day do I praise
thee, because of thy righteous judgments.

To continue in prayer, is to have our Hearts so inflamed with the love of God,
as to be in a continual disposition to pray; and this not only at all set and
accustomed times but at all times, and upon all occasions and objects presented
to raise up our souls upon the Spiritual wings of holy Meditations, celestial
Affections, devout Colloquies, and Ejaculatory converses with Heaven.

Thus Enoch walked with God, and was translated. Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 11. 5. Thus
King David professes, I have set God always before me: I sal. 16. 9. And, I
will give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my mouth: Ps. 34.
1. No time omitted, Evening, and Morning, and Noonday: Ps. 55. 17, 18. Early
and late, Ps. 63. 1. 7. No place pretermitted; in the Wilderness, in the land
of Jordan, and the unbeaten paths of Hermon. Ps. 42. 8.

It Is the great and constant employment of a true Christian's life, to depend
upon God, to fix all our Hopes, all our Joy, and Consolation; all that we can
reasonably desire to enjoy conducing to our happiness, both in this, and in the
other world; in God alone, who is the Beginning, the Mean, and the End of our
Being.

In the first and purest times of Christianity, while the blood of Christ was
yet warm, and more inflamed the Souls of true Believers, than in these later
and colder times; then were the hearts of the Religious continually in Heaven,
by holy and Divine Aspirations, even when their hands were employed in any and
every of their works upon earth. So the Divine Ephrem. Sive opereris, sive
sedeas, sive comedas, -- In all thy works, even in Eating, and Drinking, and
Traveling, sitting, going, standing, lying, -- Pray without ceasing; Take hint
from every thing thou see, hear, tastest, -- to lift up thy heart unto
God, and refer all to his glory.

It Is recorded of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, that he prayed an hundred times
in a day, and an hundred times in the night also.

Ephrem. tom 1. Homil. de Orando Deum. So the great St. Basil, Hom. in S. Jude.
So St. Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Mat.

St. Hierom professes of himself, that often on the tops of Mountains, and in
hollow Valleys; and craggy Rocks, with eyes lifted up to Heaven, and flowing
with tears, he poured forth his soul in holy prayers, and meditations. S.
Hierom. Ep. ad Eustor. So meditates S. Austin also; Te, Domine, mediter per
dies sine cessatione, Te sentiam per soporem in nocte; Te alloquar -- Aug. Med.
O that I could meditate upon Thee, O Lord, through the whole day, and not cease
to be affected with thee in the night; my spirit speaking unto thee, and my
mind conversing with thee always, and alone! Blessed are they, who think of
nothing, speak of nothing, but the Lord; who love nothing above thee, desire
nothing besides thee: Blessed are they, whose Hope alone is the Lord, and all
whose Work is Prayer. And several of the devout Fathers computed all that time
lost, wherein God was not in their minds, and memories: And there is great
reason for it, as the same St. Austin meditates; For as there is no moment of
Time. wherein we enjoy not the sweet influences of the Divine Goodness, and
stand in need also of Gods protecting Presence with us; so there should be no
time, wherein we have not God in our thoughts. Aug. in Marcum. Wait on thy God
continually. Hos. 12. 16. Seek the Lord, and his strength; seek his face
evermore. Ps. 105. 4. Thus St. Paul, and truly devout Christians with him, have
their conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20 whilst they are upon Earth; and that is
the way surely to have our consummation in Heaven, when we shall be taken from
the Earth.

MEDITATIONS UPON Our going to CHURCH, with some short Directions for our
Demeanor in the House of GOD, touching some too much mistaken and neglected
Acts of Divine Worship.

As for me, I will come into thy House in the multitude of thy Mercies; and in
thy fear will I worship toward thy Holy Temple. Ps. 5. 7.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Richard
Sherlock Bookseller.

In the Year 1684*

MEDITATIONS upon our going to Church; with some short Directions for your
Demoanour in the House, and in the Service of GOD.

UPon your going to Church, three things will be necessary for you to consider:
1. The Condition of the Place whither you are going, 2. The great End of your
going thither, and 3. How there you are to demean your self. All this you would
consider, if you were going to the Palace of an earthly Prince, who is but a
mortal man, like your self: and you surely have much more reason to consider
the particulars, now that you are going unto the Courts of the Lord's house.

First then, as to the House whither you are going, it is indeed, as to its
Fabric, but like other houses, made of wood and stone; [even as the Lords day
is but like other days, as to the air and light of heaven:] but the relative
holiness of this House, and its eminency above other houses, will appear by the
Names whereby it is called* both in the Book, and by the people of God.

Under the Law, it was called the Tabernacle of the Congregation, i. e. the
place of God's meeting with his people; the Temple of the Lord, where he
presents himself to the contemplation or view of his Worshippers, sitting
betwixt the Cherubims as on his throne of State. It Is also called the Sanctuary
of the Lord, the House of God, the Habitation of his Holiness, and the place
where his Honor dwells. All which Names do explain each other, and need no
Interpretation.

Under the Gospel it is called (...), the Church of God* (...), the Lord's House;
(...), the King's Palace; and Oratorium, the House of Prayer. Any of which
Names (much more all of them together considered) will oblige any man, who has
any sense of Religion, to obey that command of God himself, which is not merely
ceremonial and typical, but moral and perpetual, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and
reverence my Sanctuary. Lev. 19. 30.

Secondly, As to the great end of your going to Church, it is to present your
self before the Lord, and there to adore the great Majesty of Heaven, from whom
you have your life, and breath, and all things.

It is not to serve your self, by hearing this or the other fine-gifted Minister
tickling your itching ears, by his taking Discourses agreeable to your fancy;
but to serve the Lord is your Errand to his House, viz. there to join with the
Minister, and the Congregation, in public prayers and praises of God, in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual songs, in Confessions, Thanksgivings, and
Benedictions, as wherein chiefly the Service of God consists.

Behold, now praise the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord; ye that by night
stand in the House of the Lord, even in the Courts of the house of our God.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and praise the Lord* Ps. 134. 1. 2.

As for me, I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name -- Ps.
138. 2.

Thirdly, As to your Carriage and Demeanor in the house of God, you are
commanded, Keep thy foot, when thou go into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1.
enjoining thee, First, to beware of all light, unseemly* indecent, and
irreverent carriage, and to show humility, and devotion in all the gestures of
thy Outward man; bowing down thy self, and kneeling before the Lord thy Maker;
Ps. 95. 6. before him, who made both thy body, and soul, and joined them
together, that they might be joined in his Service. So worshipped the people of
God, the whole Congregation bowed themselves with their faces to the ground. 2 Chronicles, 7. 3. And so all good people resolve to do: We will go into his
Tabernacle, and fall low on our knees before his footstool. Ps. 132. 7.
Secondly, The foot of the Inward man must also, and chiefly, be kept upright in
the house of God. Thy Affections are the feet, or motions of thy Soul: these
must be kept free from all secular cares, pure from all sensual lusts, clean
from all wanton, wicked inclinations, yea from all thoughts of any worldly
concerns; for ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Mat. 6. 24.

In the High-priest's forehead was engraven in a plate of Gold, Holiness to the
Lord, Exodus 28. 36. and every ordinary Priest was commanded to wash before he
entered into the Sanctuary; Exodus 30. 19, 10. intimating that exact Purity and
Holiness which is required of all, both Priests and People, when we approach
the presence of the Lord in his holy Temple. So says the holy man of God,
Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever, Ps. 93. 5. and he resolves
accordingly, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I go to thine
Altar. Ps. 26. 6.

Be not slothful and negligent, averse and careless, backward and tardy in
coming to the Church; for many and mischievous are the consequents of coming
their. For 1. you rob your self of the opportunity of your private prayers for
a Blessing upon the public. 2. You lose the benefit of the public Confession*
and Absolution, which are of high esteem and value to all who are wisely
religious. And 3. to deprive your self wittingly and willingly of any part of
God's public Worship, is both a sin and a loss of so great an account* as
cannot easily be expressed, nor will be ordinarily believed. Against such sinful
sloth and neglect endeavor to have imprinted in your heart the love of God's
House, and of his Service there performed. Say with the man after God's own
heart.

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
honor dwells. Ps 26. 8.

I was glad when they said unto me, We will go unto the house of the Lord.
Psalm 122. 1.

Our feet stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem. verse. 2.

I. When you come to the Churchdoor.
COnsider, that you are now upon entrance into the Presence* chamber of the
great King of the World, whose Throne of Glory is in Heaven above* but his
Throne of Grace in his Temple here below. Say then within your self.

Surely the Lord is in this place --

How dreadful is this plaee! This is none other but the house of God, this is
the gate of heaven. Genesis 28. 16, 17.

How amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of hosts!

My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

Yea the Sparrow has found her an house, and the Swallow a nest, where she may
lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God!

Blessed are they who dwell in thy house: they will always be praising thee.
Ps. 84. 1, 2, 3, 4*

And most happy were I, could I both esteem it, and make it my greatest joy,
and constant labor of love, to praise the Lord in his Temple.

II. When you are entered, and view the Baptisterion, or Font.
GIve hearty thanks unto God for your Christendom; that by holy Baptism he has
called you to the state of Grace and Salvation through Jesus Christ; and humbly
beseech God to give you his grace to continue in the fame to your life's end, by
the religious observance of that Vow, which was so solemnly taken in your Name,
the which you must now perform, that you forfeit not the great privileges,
rewards, and honors, of being a member of Christ, a child of God, and an heir
of the Kingdom of Heaven.

III. When you view the Pulpit.
REmember how many good Lessons you have received thence; the which not being
carefully practiced, will rise up in judgment against you in the great day of
your Trial. Resolve therefore, for the future, to be a Doer of the Word, and
not a Hearer only, deceiving your own Self.

IV. When you look up toward the Altar, say,
WHat reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the benefits he has done unto
me?

I will receive the cup of salvation, [offer the sacrifice of Thanksgiving for
my Redemption,] and call upon the name of the Lord.

I will pay my Vows unto the Lord in the sight of all the people, in the Courts
of the Lords house; even in the midst of thee O Jerusalem. Praise the Lord. Ps.
116. 12, 13, 14, 18, 19.

Glory be to the Father --
As it was in the beginning --
V. When you come to your Seat, kneeling down, pray,
I. Prayer.
LET thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble servants:
and grant that what we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually, through Jesus
Christ.

II. Prayer.
O God, for as much as without thee we are not able to please thee, grant that
thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our hearts; and more
especially be assistant to us in all the holy Actions of this Day, through
Jesus Christ --

III. Prayer.
AND since by reason of our sins we are unworthy to offer up any sacrifice to
so pure a Majesty; grant, merciful Lord, both to me, and to all thy faithful
people, Pardon, and Peace: that being cleansed from all our sins, we may serve
thee with a quiet mind, through Jesus Christ --

DIRECTIONS relating to some parts of the Public Worship.
AS soon as the Minister begins with the Public Worship, all your Private
Meditations and Prayers must be waved, and your Mind applied to attend
diligently, and to join devoutly in every part and passage of Divine Service;
considering, that this is the great end of your coming to Church, and your
business there is to serve the Lord with your Christian Brethren in Public.

1. Therefore when the Minister exhorts you, out of the Word of God, to confess
and acknowledge your sins and wickedness, harden not your heart, but with all
possible humility both of Body and Soul say after the Minister in the
Confession of Sin: and to this, and to every Prayer, or other Act of Divine
Worship, where it is prescribed, neglect not to say, Amen; for that is, as it
were the Seal to confirm to your soul the benefits thereof. And the Hebrews
have a saying, that, Whosoever says Amen, with all his might, opens the doors
of Paradise.

2. Alter the Confession, when the Minister comes to the words of Absolution,
bow down your head, and say softly in your heart, Lord, let this Pardon
pronounced by thy Minister fall upon my soul, and seal thereunto the
forgiveness of all my sins.

3. The Psalms and Hymns are to be answered verse by verse with the Minister,
that so all may join and bear a part in the Service of God: for, in his Temple
does every man speak of his Honor. Ps. 29. 9. And here, although you cannot
read, yet your Heart may join with them that do read; and your Mouth also may
show forth the Praise of God, by saying after every Psalm, Glory be to the
Father, and to -- or else, if it fall in couse, As it was in the beginning, is
now -- adding always, Amen, to express how affectionately you desire the Glory
of God.

4. Be not silent, nor ashamed publicly and audibly to make Confession of the
holy Christian Faith, when you are thereunto called by the Minister; for this
is a duty you owe both to God and Man; it is an act of God's Worship* and a
Declaration that you hold the same Faith with all true Christians: and therefore
it is required of you, not only with the Heart to believe unto righteousness, but
that with the Mouth also Confession be made unto salvation.

And when the Confession of Faith is publicly pronounced, do not you sit, or
loll, as if it concerned you not, but stand up, with the rest of the
Congregation, to signify and declare, that you will stand to this Faith, and
earnestly contend for it, as being the same which was once given to, or by, the
Saints, the holy Apostles.

5. Be not so cold and careless in giving Honor to God, as not to bow at the
Name of JESUS; for it is a duty positively commanded, and universally practiced
by the Church and people of God in all ages. And therefore give no ear to those
deceivable Criticisms, corrupt Glosses, and false Inferences, which are too
frequently, but profanely, urged, to make void the Commandment of God, in the
omission of this Religious Practice. If you hear any such Allegations out of
the Pulpit, detest them the rather, that any Act of Religious Worship should be
spoken against in the place, where whatever tends to the honor of God should
be magnified and advanced.

6. That you may not be tired with the length of Divine Service, consider 1.
the great variety of its several parts, as consisting of Prayers, and Praises,
Confessions, Thanksgivings, Invitations, Lessons, Admonitions, -- all of which
are with most admirable Prudence, and religious Wisdom so ordered and contrived
to follow each other* that so the ending of one, and beginning of another* may
renew and reenquicken your Devotion, cheerfully to join in all.

Remember 2. whose Service it is you are a doing, and continue therein from the
beginning to the end, that you may reap the Beneft of the whole Office, both of
the Absolution in the beginning, and of the Blessing in the end, and of the
Amen's throughout.

A SERMON.

Preached upon the Archbishop of YORK's Provincial Visitation at WARRINGTON.

Acts. 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock* -- OXFORD,
Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to the University, for Ric. Sherlock
Bookseller.

In the Year 1684.

A SERMON PREACHED AT A VISITATION.
Act. 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock --
IN the context we have S. Paul upon his Visitation at Miletus, verse. 17. And
the Visitation, as this which is now holden with us, is Provincial, all the
Clergy of the Province of Ephesus, being convened by this great Visitor, and
appear before him, verse. 18.

The Text presents you with a part* but it is the principal part of the
Visitatiion Sermon, or as I may rather call it, The Visitors charge to the
Clergy of the Province. The first part of which charge is:

1. Take heed to your selves: To you my Brethren of the Clergy, is this charge
more strictly given, then to the Laity: For to the people God has appointed
Pastors who are commanded in the text to take heed to the charge committed to
them: But who shall feed and guide the Shepherds, who shall watch over the
Watchmen, or teach the Teachers? Ye are the salt of the earth but if the salt
have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted, it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men, Mat. 5. 13.

2. Take heed to your selves, is the first part of the charge, And secondly to
your Flock: The order observed in this Double Charge* is the next thing
observable, which is the same observed by our Lord himself, in his charge to S.
Peter, and in him to all Pastors of the Church, saying Luc. 22. 32. When thou
art converted, then afterward strengthen thy Brethren, and John 21. 15. Simon,
son of Jonas, love thou me, and if so, it then follows, Feed my Sheep:
Implicitly commanding all Pastors of his Flock: First to be themselves truly
converted unto God, and their souls inflamed with the sacred fire of Divine
Love, and then they may hope that their pains will be successful for the
feeding and strengthening the Sheep of Christ: That rule of Righteousness and
Charity which is the sum of the second Table of the Law, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, commands this order to be observed, To love thy self
aright in the first place, and then thy Neighbor as thy self: St. Bernard thus
bespeaks every Shepherd of souls, Tu frater cui nondum est firma satis propria
salus, cui Charitas adhuc nulla est, aut adeo tenera and arundinea, ut omni
statuicedat, omni credat spiritui, omni circumferatur vento doctrine, quanam
dementia quaeso, aliena curare, aut ambis aut aquiescis? And upon Cant. 1. 6.
They have made me the keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not
kept; he severely checks, and reproves himself, that he had taken on him the
Cure of of other men's souls, having not sufficiently cared for and cured his
own: Et miror -- I do much wonder (says he) at the Impudence of those persons,
that thrust themselves to be Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, whilst their own
Vineyard is overgrown with Briars and thorns: The Leper under the Law was
commanded to have a covering upon his upper lip, Lev. 13. 43. ut non docere
alios praesumat -- says Hesychius: that no man presume to open his lips in the
Congregation, for the instruction of others, who is himself infected with the
Leprosy, either of sinsulness or error: for non est cadentis alium erigere.
Plutarch: It is not for a man that lies in the dirt, to raise up another
thence; not for a man that is a sleep in his sins, to awake others from that
spiritual sleep of death; That Proverb remembered by our Lord. Physician heal
thy self, Luc. 4. 23. 18. chiefly appliable to the Physician of souls, who must
begin at home, if he will work any cure upon the Souls of others.

3. But this is not all, for thirdly the Cure of a Pastors soul, is a more
difficult task; as being to be perfected in a higher degree, then ordinarily
can be expected from any of his Flock: For as our office of Priesthood, is more
high, more emment, more holy, so should our Conversation be, (...) -- St.
Chsysostom, De sacerdotio, As Angels above men, as Shepherds above their flock,
as Masters above their Scholars, so should a Bishop a Priest a Pastor excel and
transcend the people in wholesome doctrine, and holiness of life. so the great
Gregory, Tantum debet actionem populi, actio transcendere praesulis, quantum
distare solet a grege vita Pastoris, -- with much more to the same purpose, De
cura Pastorali: A book which was once translated by the wisest and greatest of
our Saxon Princes; King Alfred, and by him commended to the Clergy of this
Nation; and a happy Clergy should we be, an holy Priesthood, if the
Instructions in that Golden Book, were well observed amongst us.

4. Take heed to your selves and to all the Flock] and both these jointly and
severally. To your selves: As to the Innocence and Holiness of your lives, as
becomes good Christians: And to your Flock, as Shepherds and Guides of souls:
Under the Law, the Priests and Prophets of the Lord are frequently called the
Angels of the Lord of hosts, Iud. 2. 1. Mal. 27. And under the Gospel, the
Angels of the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Rev. 2. 1. 8. 12. -- And as we
read of the Angels on Jacobs Ladder, ascending and descending from heaven, Genesis
28. 12. so the Priests of the Lord should first take heed to themselves by
ascending with the Angels into heaven, having their hearts and affections,
their meditation and Conversation in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. And withal take heed
to the flock, by descending with the Angels from heaven, enriched with the word
of Life, breaking unto them that bread which comes down from heaven, and
gives life unto the world, John 6. 33.

But this joint charge is sadly disjoined and perverted, by such as take heed
to themselves indeed, but it is not with the Angels to ascend, but descend, only
grovelling in the dust, and wallowing in the mire of Luxury, Riot, and Excess,
Pride and Coverousness, the pomps and vanities of the world, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh, which every one, even the meanest of their Flock, has
solemnly abjured, when by holy Baptism admitted into the Fold of Christ. By
such as take heed to themselves, but it is not in a spiritual but carntl sense;
who will look narrowly to themselves, as to their worldly concerns, their
Revenue and Income; but are to careless to the spiritual concerns both of
themselves and their Flock, Who seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ, Phil. 2. 21. Caring more for their Families at home, then for the
Family of Christ, more for their bodily then for their spiritual relations,
providing better for their natural heirs, then their spiritual successors in
their respective places: And in a word, by all such as mind more the Benefice,
then the office, more the Fleece then the Flock: All such do falsely wrest, and
wickedly pervert, this double charge of the great Visitor in the Text: Take
heed to your selves and to your Flock. To your selves, by being examples of
holiness to your Flock; And to your Flock; as Shepherds, to feed and guide
them, as Fathers to admonish and reprove them, and as Mothers to nourish and
cherish them: For these are the four Essentials of a faithful Pastor: Holiness
of life, soundness of Doctrine, Christian courage, Christian Charity.

5. To all the Flock] not to the flock at random, not to this, or that
particular Sheep, that fawns upon the Shepherd, nor to this, or that Party or
Sect, which agrees with his Humors and Opinions; but, To all the Flock
impattially, and without Hypocrisy, and this first affirmatively, to instruct
the Ignorant, to strengthen the weak, to confirm the wavering, to reduce the
erroneous, to visit the the sick, to comfort the afflicted, to bind up the
broken in heart, to reprove the sinful, and to testify against the stubborn and
disobedient: Secondly Negatively, not to break the bruised reed, and quench the
smoking flax, Mat. 12. 20. not to sow Pillows under all Armholes, Ezekiel. 13.
18. Not to suffer them to settle with ease, and without reproof, upon the Lees
of their sins, and and the errors of their ways: Not to claw the scabbed
Sheep, and scratch the itching ears, not to tickle and foment the petulant
humors of the Factious, not to please those squeazy Palates, who nauseate the
solid food of Gods public solemn standing worship, under the profane
scurrilous name of Porridge, and for no other cause, but because it is like it
self, ever the same, constant to it self: Like the Glorious Sun in the
Firmament, which shines every day the same; which renders it a worship
acceptable, as being herein most agreeable to the Immutable nature of God, the
Father of lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.
17. But the Itch after novelties in the Flock, and the Itch of popular applause
or filthy Lucre in the Pastor, whilst the one scratches the Itch of the other;
Hence the putrid Scabs of Schism and Heresy in the Church, of Disobedience and
Rebellion in the Kingdom, are engendered,

Against all such sinful Compliance, Take heed to your selves, my Brethren take
heed to your selves, and to your vows and promises, Sacerdotal and
Ecclesiastical, confirmed by your respective Subscriptions to the Articles and
Canons of the Church, to the Injunctions of your Metropolitan and Diaecesan, to
the Approbation and constant use of the Liturgy of the Church, and of that
only in public: In which last particular, wherein the greatest part of
Ministerial Function consists, I cannot but testify in this Assembly, so much
concerned therein: That there is utterly a fault amongst us; In that those
divine and excellent Prayers, and heavenly inspired Praises of God, and that
ancient and constant way of Gods worship in Public, is by many too much
slighted and neglected, by many irreverently and indevoutly celebrated, by many
mangled and maimed, curtailed, abbreviated, and by the Additions of others
implicitly vilified: And generally almost by all secretly undermind; enervated
and subverted by each man's private prayer in public: The which private prayer,
whether before Sermon, or at any other time in the Congregation, does not only
secretly imply a defect in the Public Prayers of the Church, which must
(forsooth) be supplied by men's private conceived prayers: but also, it is a
disorder and confusion in the service of God; for thus public and private
prayer are confounded, which our Lord Christ has distinguished and commanded
to be seperately observed, to avoid Hypocrisy and vainglory limiting private
Prayer to the private Closet, Mat. 6. 5, 6. and for avoiding Tautologies and
impertinent bablings after the manner of the heathen, he prescribes a set form
to be used in public, verse. 8, 9. We are commanded when we call upon the Lord,
to pay our vows to the most High, and then he will hear, Psalm. 50. 14. But can
any man think it probable, that God will hear their Prayers, who sacrilegiously
break their vows when they pray, by praying otherwise then they have vowed and
promised? those promises also being agreeable to the Commands of Christ, and
the orders of his Church?

And this undoubtedly amongst many others, is not the least canse, of so many
stray and wandering Sheep in every Flock, of so many giddy headed and factious
minded men in every Congregation, of so many separate Congregations or
Conventicles in every Parish: one great cause hereof is the falsehood and
treachery of the Shepherds, who in compliance with the noxious humors of the
diseased part of their Flock, take no heed to themselves, nor to the vows and
promises they have made in order to the right and regular execution of their
Function, in feeding of their Flock: so for the iniquity and irregular carriage
of the Priests, the sons of Eli in the sacrifices of the Temple; Men abhorred
the offering of the Lord, 1* Sam. 2. 17.

6. But should not the Flock take heed to the Shepherd, as well as the Shepherd
to the Flock? The duty of the one to the other (undoubtedly is reciprocal, and
the mutual Relation respectively binding. Take heed to thy said (said the Lord
to his people) that thou forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon
the earth, Deuteronomy. 12. 19. and Chap 14. 27. Fccl. 7. 30. There is nothing more
plainly asserted and more punctually commanded in the book of God, then that
the people should take heed to their Priests, the flock to their Shepherds,
especially such as are Orthodox and holy, that they should hear and obey their
voice, and make their Application and recourse unto them, in all cases of
ignorance or doubting: For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
(the people) should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger (or the
Angel) of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. Haec sunt initia haereticorum, ut sibi
placeant, and praepositum superbo tumore contemnant, Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. ad
Florent. Hence the Rise of Heretics in the Church, when the people swelling
with presumption of their own knowledge, and pleasing themselves in their
fancies and opinions, proudly neglect and scorn to submit to their directions,
whom the Lord has appointed to be their Shepherds and Guides of their Souls:
And thus even thus, the people of God fell into Idolatry, even that gross and
infamous Idolatry of the Golden Calf, when slighting Moses, and overawing Aaron
the high Priest, they commanded him, who should have commanded them, saying,
Make us God to go before us, for as for this man Moses, we wot not what is
become of him, Numb. 22. 1.

When the same people were weary of the Government of Samuel the Prophet, and
desired a King, the Lord said unto Samuel, They have not despised thee, but
they have despised me, 1 Samuel 8. 7. Whereupon St. Gregory: Quam reverendi sunt
Pastores optimi Sanctae Ecclesiae -- how reverendly to be esteemed are the
Pastors of holy Church, who whilst they faithfully serve the Lord in the
Execution of their function, they are so closely joined unto him in the bond of
love, that the least slight, disesteem or neglect, that is cast upon them, the
Lord takes it as an injury to himself: So said the Lord to his Apostles, and in
them to their Successors: He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me, Luc* 10. 16. And this duty, that the people should take heed to their
Priests, is commanded under a severe penalty, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If there arise a
matter too hard for thee in Judgment, thou shall arise and come unto the
Priests, the Levites, and that man that will do presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest, that stands to Minister -- even that man shall dye.
And under the Gospel also the same command is given, Heb. 13. 17. O hey them
that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your
Souls.

But notwithstanding these and many more commands, in the sacred sheets of
either Testament, yet is this Christian duty slighted and generally omitted,
and especially by those who pretend most to the sole Authority of the holy
Scriptures, without any Relation to the doctrine and Authority of the Church in
the Interpretation thereof: There being many amongst us in every Flock; who
presume to direct their Shepherds, guide their Guides, and teach their
Teachers; who if they teach not, preach not, pray not, as they would have them,
and consonant to their humors and opinions; they will censure their doctrines,
contemn their directions, revile their persons, scandalize their profession,
and even snatch the holy Oracles out of their mouths, and separate themselves
into Conventicles, where they may heap to themselves Teachers after their
lusts, having itching ears, and they turn away their ears from the truth, and
are turned unto fables; believing and delighting in lies, and vain empty
prophesyings which profit not, as was foretold of such, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

And having mentioned Conventicles, I cannot but add a word of the danger of
them, not so much in order to the disturbance of the peace of the Nation,
leaving that to the Secular Magistrate, but in order to the seduction of unwary
and unstable souls into falsehood and errors in Religion; Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth
up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber, Joh. 10* 1. It Is the
practice of subtle thieves when they seize on the honest Traveller to drag him
out of the high road-way into hedges and by-places, the more securely and
without interruption to robb and spoil him; so the spiritual thieves, false
Prophets, ringleaders of faction and sedition, do more easily seduce, and robb
poor silly men and women of the inestimable treasures of truth and obedience,
by drawing them from the open and Public Assemblies of Gods people in his
houses of prayer, into By-places and lone honses, where they may more securely
breath forth the spiritual Infections, sow the seeds of Schism and Sedition,
and whisper their irreligious Treasons, under the mask of Religion. In such
places they may to their advantage vent and put off their counterfeit ware,
their false glosses, and misinterpretations of holy Writ, and make their
Apocryphal Comments upon Canonical Scripture, making the Holy Word of God to
speak not what the Spirit of God intends therein, but what their factious
spirits and wild fancies would have it: That there should be such false
Prophets in desert places and private houses, our Lord has foretold,
commanding all his disciples not to believe or follow them, Mat. 24. 26.
Wherefore if they should say unto you he is in the desert, go not forth; behold
he is in the secret chamber, believe it not. St. Augustine observes of the man
that fell among thieves, and was robbed and wounded, Luc. 10. 30. Si non
descendisset -- If he had not been going down from Jerusalem, the place of Gods
Temple, to Jericho a profane and common place, he had escaped that sad
disaster* To teach all people to beware how they leave the place which God has
chosen to put his name there the Temple and house of God, to convene in any
common or profane By places, under pretense of Religion, and the performance
of holy duties in such places* 'Twas otherwise with the man after Gods own
heart, Psa. 5. 7. As for me I will come into thine house even upon the
multitude of thy mercies and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy
Temple. And with him resolves the whole body of Gods people, Psalm 132. 7. We
will go into his tabernacle, and fall low on our knees before his footstool:
And not only this under the Law* but under the Gospel, Mark 11. 17. My house
(not the houses of men shall be called the house of Prayer of all Nations: Not
of the Jews as under the Law, but of the Gentiles also under the Gospel, and
it is there especially in Gods own house, that he has promised to meet his
people, to be in the midst of them* to hear their prayers and bless them, To
teach them his ways by his faithful and true Pastors, and there (in a word) to
dispense all the blessed means of grace and salvation to them, Deuteron. 12. 5,
6. 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Kin. 8. 29 30. Mat. 18. 20. Luc. 19. 46. 1 Cor. 11. 20.

7. But the grand excuse of the wandering sheep and the cry of many Orthodox
also, is, The division of the Shepherds, who being divided amongst themselves,
do lead their flocks into several divided ways of divine worship: And the
generality of the flock being not wise enough to know what way to take; or whom
most securely to follow, they hereupon heap to themselves Teachers after their
own Lusts, and with the Schismatical Corinthians 1 ep. 1 cap. 12. verse. Every
one says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ* one
man, or Sect of men, liking this man's way of preaching and praying, another
another way, and others none at all, but independently rely upon the immediate
teaching of Christ by his Spirit. And thus Sects and Divisions are multiplied.

This complaint is too true, and such sad effects thereof too evident, and if
not stopped will prove bitterness in the end.

But would you know who be these divided Pastors or Preachers, or Sectmasters
rather, the corrupt springs from whom all our polluted streams of divisions
flow? They are such (in a word) as first divide from the Church of Christ in
general (wherein they all agree) and then divide amongst themselves, into
particular Sects, and Factions, wherein they all differ: There is but one body
and one spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. one mystical body of Christ, which is his Church,
and one spirit of truth, quickening this is our body, and its members, and them
only: And as it follows, One Lord, one faith, one baptism one God and father
of all, who is above all, through all, and in you all, verse. 5, 6. In you all,
that are members of this one body, and quickened with this one spirit, and
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, which is the
duty enforced from the premises, verse. 3. Contrariwise then such, that divide
from this one body the Church, into several Sects and Factions, and (which
necessarily follows) such are not quickened with this one spirit, but each with
the foolish Prophets follow their own spirit, Ezekiel 13. 3. which the mistake and
mis^term the Spirit of God; such as worship, not this one Lord, as we are all
commanded, with one mouth and with one mind, Rom 15. 6. Such as hold not the
Articles of this one faith, with one joint unanimous consent of truth; Unto the
unity of which faith, till we all come, we cannot be perfect men in Christ
Jesus: but are like children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 13, 14. Such are all false Prophets, treacherous
Shepherds, or in the Language of Saint Paul, 2 Corin. 11. 13, 14. Such are all
false Apostles; deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ, and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light:
I may call them according to the metaphor of the text, The Bell weathers of the
Flock, the Ringleaders of those numerous Sects, and daily increasing divisions
amongst us.

And although each sect and division must necessarily be false and erroneous,
because there is but one Truth, and one true way of Divine worship, which is
ever constant to it self, yet has each division it numerous followers of the
divided Flock: as silly sheep when a gap is opened, follow one another to the
breach to stray from their Pasture: So flock the people (if not restrained)
into the ways of division and error, if any Sect-master but open a gap, and
lead them the by ways of straying from the Sheepfold of Christ, which is his
Church. For such alas, is the sad condition of man's corrupted and depraved
mind, as naturally to be more affected with error, then with the Truth; more
prone to believe lies, and more zealous in the maintenance of falsehood, then to
believe and maintain the Truth: 'Twas ever so, When the Prophets prophecy
falsely, the people love to have it so, Jer. 5. ult. but a sad question follows,
What will ye do in the end thereof? When the Prophets prophecy Lies, or (which
is the same) do make and foment divisions, and the people withal are affected
with their lying prophesies, and side with them in their respective divisions:
it is easy then to prophecy and foretell the end thereof to be ruin and
confusion: If a kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand,
and if a house be divided against it self, that house cannot stand, Mat. 3. 24,
25. Not the house of God, not the family of Christ, in what Kingdom and Nation
soever established: All the Kingdoms and Nations in Christendom, ancient and
modern, from the first to these last and worst of times, have felt, by sad
experience, the bitter effects of divisions and errors in Religion; and none
more than our own, so lately bleeding, even to the last gasp of death, and
almost buried in her own confusions; which took beginning from the prophesying
of Lies, and overspreading of mistakes and errors in Religion, sowing the Seeds
of Schism, Faction and Sedition, in separate and divided meetings, or
Conventicles in private; joined with a sacrilegious vow breaking performance of
holy duties in Public. All which now are as much, if not more practiced then
ever; some of whose Factors and Followers* do really intend, all do certainly
tend to involve this Church and Kingdom, into the sad condition of intestine
war, blood and Confusion, from whence by the great mercy of God, we so lately
escaped.

And now to you, the Reverend persons, who are come to visit us in our
distempers and infirmities, to you it bebelongs, as much as in you lies, to
give stop to our overflowing divisions: To restrain our licentious
exorbitancies, both in doctrine and practice, in Praying and Preaching, and
this, whether in the house of God, or in the houses of men: Et fiat justitia,
ruat coelum.

FINIS.

