An APPEAL TO HEAVEN and EARTH, Against The Christian Epicureans, Who have
betrayed their KING and Country, And Exposed them to the Judgments of GOD,
Drawn up in QUESTIONS Theological, and Theologico-Political

By Socrates Christianus.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCI.

THE DESIGN Of the Following Questions,
BEcause it may be mistaken by many, and is otherwise like to be fully
understood by few, it is necessary to premise a brief Explication of it. It is
not to expose any person, much less Him, whom all may perceive to be
particularly concerned in them. They were indeed written with some respect to
him; but for his service: partly for the necessary and more full Conviction of
a dangerous Error by him unhappily committed, that he may, before it be too
late, provide to prevent the further Mischiefs of it, by humbling himself in
the sight of the Lord speedily, and giving Glory to God by acknowledging his
Fault, and a resolute actual Amendment, whatever Difficulty or Danger occur in
it. For a Great Fault it seems to be, and such as is not to be denied or
palliated, in not well attending to the Design and Conduct of the Providence of
God, and Prosecuting his Service with that Fidelity, Generosity and
Magnanimity, as became an Instrument raised up by him; but stooping through
Evil Counsels to vulgar, mean, and vain Policies: And the Danger of the
Consequence thereof seems to be no less, viz. Lest being destitute and out of
the way of that Conduct, which he deserted to secure himself, or promote his
Business, he fall into the very Evils he sought to avoid, find the Egyptians,
upon whom he leans, prove as broken Canes, which run into his hand; and the
Cananites, whom he has not, by a vigorous exerting his Authority, endeavored
to subdue, as Pricks in his Eyes, and Thorns in his Sides, and a Snare unto
him: Partly to represent to him the True Ends and Business of Government, and
some of those Faults therein, which have been committed by, and brought no
little mischief upon his Predecessors in this Kingdom, that he may with great
Caution avoid the same, and all such Counsels as might mislead him into them:
For it would greatly aggravate such a Fault in Him, if He should become guilty
in the least, but by attempt or desire, of what he is raised up to punish in so
near a Relation; and scandalize the Extraordinary Manifestation of the
Providence of God in the late Revolution, and his own Enterprise, and make it
and his Declaration suspected of Hypocritical Ambition from the Beginning: And
partly to make manifest to him what kind of Persons in matters of Religion, and
what in matters of State and Government, are very unsafe and dangerous for him,
to rely upon their Counsel, Advice, or Judgment, even by his own Experience, as
well as by the Examples of his Predecessors. For I can hardly be persuaded that
ever any Man in such a height of Fortune was more betrayed than he has been,
one way or other by all sorts, but most perniciously by those of the Clergy,
who have had any special Obligation or other Advantages of access to him, Which
brings me to another Part of the Design.

And this, as I said before, is not to expose any, much less the Sacred
Function; but for Admonition to those who are faulty, either through Neglect of
Watchfulness and Faithful Warning, through Unfaithful Caution and Forbearance
for any self respect, or through Error and Corruption of Judgment, whereby they
departed out of the way and caused him to stumble from the Ancient Paths; that
they may consider well the Danger, which not only He, through their fault, but
themselves also are fallen into; For if he miscarry therein, his Blood, and the
Blood of thousands more will be required at their hands, as I doubt they have
much to answer for already for the many Souls, which in Ireland and elsewhere
have died in their Sins and Wickedness, and might have been reclaimed; that
they may consider the danger thereby in Him brought upon all; for this is the
pernicious Root of all our Mischief, the Accursed thing for which we cannot
prosper: and well considering these things, they may consider further, what is
to be done, and by them more especially, to stop the Wrath which we may fear is
gone out, and apply themselves to it speedily, with a Zeal no less than that of
Phineas.

And for this purpose it is but reasonable that this should be done, to make it
the more effectual, by way of APPEAL to all the Divines of this Church, or
rather of all Protestant Churches, if not to Heaven and Earth, to High and Low,
Rich and Poor: for all are concerned in it, and it may be feared that the Sin
reaches Heaven it self, and may bring down Judgment upon our Heaven and Earth
very suddenly, if not prevented by some extraordinary Means used without
further delay. And this is the last part of the Design, subordinate to the
Supreme End of All, to make All, (for All are concerned,) sensible of their
concern in this matter, and how dangerous the Case is; which is with us, just
as it is in some Diseases, which are never more dangerous, than when the
Patient is least sensible of Danger or Disease.

As Insensibility is a most dangerous Symptom, so of it in any such Case we
need not seek for further Evidence, when we may perceive it to have invaded the
Clergy, who are as it were the Vitals in such Cases. Of which we have three
notable Arguments and Proofs. The first is the Faults before mentioned, of such
as have any special Obligation, or other Advantage of Access, to the King, of
which I need say no more.

Another is the common Discourse of many in good earnest, who can plainly laugh
at a Universal Reformation, as a thing Impracticable, or at least Unseasonable,
and think themselves very wise in it; and therefore please themselves in
commending the Zeal of such as are any whit earnest for the promotion of it
with a kind of insulting pity for their weakness. These Persons, though I am
well assured some of them do not intend it, really do strengthen the hands of
Evil Doers, and discourage the Work of the Lord; and how conceited so ever they
may be of their own Parts or Prudence, are in this particular under two great
and shameful Mistakes or Over-sights. 1. They do not consider the Prevalence
even of Humane Authority well exerted in a good Cause, and what has been
effected in their own time, or in the time of their Fathers, to the suppression
of the most common and impudent Vices which are now revived and reign amongst
us, in so much that they durst not appear, but were either wholly suppressed,
or fled into Corners. 2. Nor do they any better consider the Power of God, the
Methods of his Providence, or the Nature of that Faith, which is so highly
extolled in the Sacred Scriptures; but are in truth, though they little think
it, a kind of Christian Epicureans, who confine the Providence of God to the
Heavens, and have little apprehension of the secret Interposition of his Power
in Humane Affairs and Actions.

This I impute in a great measure to an ill Education in our Universities,
which were intended for Seminaries and Nurseries of solid Learning and sincere
Piety and Virtue; but are by many thought to be now rather Seminaries and
Nurseries of Vanity, Vice, and Faction; which I doubt has too much of truth in
it, and is therefore not impertinent to be here noted, especially since in one
of them we have a late notorious instance of their much greater inclination to
favor scandalous Persons, than good Discipline, even by a Public Act; a Case
wherein I doubt even one of our Bishops has but too much followed the Genius
and Example of some of the Popes of Rome in their Usurpations upon other
Churches in the Matter of Appeals, to the Obstruction of Discipline, which was
before scandalously defective in ours. But as to the Education of youth there
at this time, it seems more to exercise the Memory and Fancy than the
Judgment; and to habituate it rather to a loose Sophistry, (apt to be swayed by
the bias of the Affections, and to make Men conceited, captious, and
contentious) than to close and sound Resolutions; more to excite a concern for
Politeness, Correctness of Expressions, and the superficial Ornaments of
Learning, and a passive disposition to applauded and modish Notions and
Opinions, to recommend themselves and get Preferment, than an industrious Study
of useful and necessary Truth, and to promote the Service of God and the Good
of their Country. And hence it is that if a man for the service of the Public
neglect or hazard what these men call his Interest, he is presently looked upon
with a little contempt, as an Object of Pity, if not reproached and severely
censured. Thus are those Virtues, which in their time have had the highest
Esteem and Veneration with all Wise and Good Men, or rather with all Men, not
only neglected, and lost, but suppressed, discouraged, or opposed, in this
degenerate Age, even by such as should be the greatest and most forward
Encouragers and Promoters of them; the just Punishment whereof we are very like
to feel e're it be long: and it does not a little concern the Clergy, and the
Universities, to be sensible of it in time.

And this Admonition will appear the more necessary by what I shall here
observe in the third place; and that is from the Form of Prayer lately
(Composed I cannot say, but) Published for the Fast, which if I be not much
mistaken, is so defective in an Essential and Principal part of a special
Office for such a purpose; I mean, Confession of Sins, that it does neither
answer such an occasion in general, much less, the present condition of the
Nation therein acknowledged in general; nor the Forms formerly Composed for the
like occasions, nor the Purport of the Queens Proclamation, nor the Doctrine of
the Church of England; which is so great an Evidence of what I say in those to
whom the Care of that Business was committed, that I shall forbear to say more
of it here: And shall only add an Observation, which I happened to cast my Eye
upon while thinking of these things, That the War in New England first began,
and the Sword was first drawn upon a Day of Humiliation; and that much of the
sad News in the progress of those Wars came at the close of those days: The
Lord (says the Author) declaring thereby from Heaven, that he expects something
else from his People, on such days, besides Fasting and Prayer; and that Prayer
without Reformation will not do. And he further observes, That upon their
renewing their Covenant with God, to reform the Evils among them, and to
endeavor for the future to live more according to the Will of God in Christ
Jesus, the Courage and Spirit of the Indians was much taken off, and they had
great success against them. And because I fear we may be too apt to deceive our
selves with Mis-interpretations of Providence as well as of Prophesies, I shall
leave it to Consideration, Whether Mr. G. Walker's Interpretation of the
Providence of God, to intimate by what Hand he would defend and maintain both
their Majesty's Interest, and the (Protestant) Religion, was not afterward
confuted, or checked at the next Engagement, at the Boyn, where he was one of
the first slain on our side.

I wish as well as any Man to the Church of England, and therefore cannot but
wish that better and more effectual Means might be used in time for the
Preservation and Good of it. And because we are like to have some new Bishops
e're long, from whom we may expect some good Considerations and Actions for
that purpose, I wish it may be considered, both how that Defect aforesaid may
be seasonably supplied, and whether some other Hymns may not be more proper for
a Solemn Humiliation than the Te Deum, and O be joyful. But with all it is fit
to be considered whether it may be safe for the Clergy that any Form should be
imposed upon them, or they be enjoined to read any but what is Authorized by
Act of Parliament; or that any such Expressions should be prescribed in the
Prayers for Religious and Gracious Princes, which in the Reign of a profane
Prince or a Tyrant they can neither leave out without Danger, nor use without
Offense to their Conscience, and Scandal to the People. The former Reigns
afford Evidences of the Inconvenience, and the present Opportunity to Reform
them, according to the Ancient Simplicity and Piety.

But to Conclude, the Design of all is the Preservation and Prosperity of the
King and Queen, the Church, and the whole Nation; and in order thereunto the
Removal of the Impediment; which cannot be but by some Great and Heroic Acts,
whereby the Favor of the Divine Providence may be recovered: For by that Fault
so often mentioned, the Adverse Powers have gotten that Advantage which cannot
otherwise be overcome. And for the Truth of this, I Appeal to the Invisible
Powers of Heaven, and to the truly Wise upon Earth, who in this Enchanted,
Fascinated, Blinded and Dementated Age are very few, notwithstanding all that
great conceited Confidence and Presumption every where to be met with; I
believe it will not be long before we see the Resolution of it one way or
other, as we behave our selves.

QUESTIONS Theological, and Theologico-Political:
I. THEOLOGICAL, Proposed to the DIVINES of the Church of England.
I. WHETHER a Latent or Vnobserv'd Sin, does not often, like a Root of
Bitterness, produce great and continued Afflictions to single Persons,
Families, and whole Nations, until it be found out and reformed; and often
Excision or Extirpation at last, if there be no Reformation?

II. Whether a Person succeeding in the Civil State of others, who successively
by abuse of that State had contracted much Guilt, may not by committing the
like Faults, or by neglecting the Reformation of the Evils, which his
Predecessors had introduced, derive the load of that Guilt upon himself?

III. Whether it be not a most Usual Method of the Divine Providence, when it
pleases God to Call, Lead, or Excite any Person to be his special Instrument
for Good to a People (and not for Judgment or Vengeance, in which case he often
uses Evil, and sometimes the worst of Men) to try and exercise such person
with various Trials, many times Difficulties, and such sometimes as in the
judgment of Men might seem insuperable?

IV. Whether Fidelity to God in Trust and Confidence in his Wisdom and Power,
be not a special Duty in such case absolutely requisite, and so necessary that
a Fault therein does always produce some smart Effects of God's Displeasure;
and many times Rejection or Destruction, unless prevented in time by manifest
Works of Repentance and Reformation?

V. Whether much of that, which is Reputed and Practiced as Wisdom or Prudence
in the World, even by Men of Learning and Religion, be not a mere Cheat and
Imposture, a Cover for those dangerous Sins of Fearfulness and Disowning of
Christ, Revel. 21.8. Mar. 8.38. a subtle Stratagem and pernicious Delusion of
the Evil One to undermine and frustrate that Great and Heroic Virtue of Faith
so much recommended in the S. Scriptures, and to corrupt this Fidelity to God
in the prosecution of his Service in difficult matters?

VI. Whether in any good Occasion or fair Opportunity for the Service of God,
and Good of Men, especially, if put into ones power, or recommended, as it
were, afterward by any special and extraordinary Manifestation of the
Providence of God in Conducting, Preserving and Prospering the Person,
Remisness, Negligence, or Evil Management, especially through such satisfaction
in some worldly acquest, or application to vulgar Prudentials and Worldly
Wisdom, as imply an Abatement either of Zeal or Affection to the further
prosecution of the Service, or of clear and generous Trust and Confidence in
God, viz. without recourse to dawbing shifts, in the prosecution of it, be not
such a Fault as aforesaid?

VII. Whether the Correction and Reformation of gross and scandalous
Profaneness and Impieties amongst a People by such an extraordinary Providence
subjected to ones Power and Authority, especially when desired and expected by
many and the best part of them, be not a special Duty incumbent upon such a
person, and to be prosecuted without delay by all Good Means; and the Neglect
and Procrastination thereof, and employment in the mean time of persons
notorious for such sins and wickedness, without check or reproof of their
Faults, be not a piece of such worldly Wisdom, and such a Neglect and Fault,
and like to produce such Effects, as aforesaid?

VIII. Whether a Fault in such case as aforesaid, continued or again committed,
after plain Admonitions by whomsoeoer it be, if they be true, be not thereby
greatly aggravated, and become so much the more dangerous?

IX. Whether such a fault continued, or again committed after remarkable
Providential Warnings or Experiments in a Man's self or others, be not thereby
also aggravated, and become the more dangerous.

X. Whether a considerable Change or Stop in Success in the Prosecution of a
Good Cause, so favored as aforesaid, by the Providence of God, does not oblige
all, (but most the Persons most concerned therein,) to enquire speedily with
all care and circumspection into the true Cause thereof, and whether there be
not something amiss, which might provoke God to withdraw or suspend his
Direction, or his Blessing, and permit the Disappointment; and speedily to
reform the same?

XI. Whether Neglect of Great Mercies without due Improvement and suitable Acts
of real Gratitude be not a great Provocation of, and usually followed by, so
much the Greater and Severer Judgments?

XII. Whether it be not the Duty of Ministers of the Gospel to be Watchmen as
well as Pastors, and to consider well, and discern truly all such Faults as may
provoke the Judgments or Displeasure of God against a People, or their
Governors, and to discharge faithfully the part of True Prophets in plain
Admonitions thereof; and not to seek Excuses, but seek all Opportunities to do
it: But the property of False Prophets to flatter Princes, and Great Persons,
and to lead them and the People into Security, or confirm them therein, by
smooth, and pleasing, and procrastinating Doctrines, instead of exciting them
to serious Repentance, speedy Reformation, or necessary Duty, especially when
Judgments are approaching?

To these I think fit to subjoyn One Question of Fact, concerning the present
State and Condition of all the Protestant Churches, worthy to be well
considered by all serious Persons of whatever Protestant or Reformed Church, at
least for their own Use and Benefit. viz.

Whether the Religion, State and Condition of all or most of the Churches,
called in general Protestant or Reformed, however distinguished into several
subdivisions, be not greatly deformed, and degenerated from the geniune and
complete State of Christianity? viz. either into

1. External Formality, Superficial Morality, and uncharitable violent Faction,
after the Genius of the Imperial Romans; or

2. Notions, and unprofitable Speculations, and Animosities and Contentions
about them, after the Genius of the popular Grecians; and

3. Neglect,

1. Of diverse great and fundamental Christian Doctrines and Virtues, viz. of

1. Humility, out of a due Sense of the Excellency and Holiness of God, and of
the Meanness and Corruption of Man, and Vanity of all Earthly things.

2. Contempt of the World, and of the Pomps and Vanities, and Superfluities
thereof, which anciently all Christians did renounce in their Baptism.

3. Generous, Active Faith and Vigorous Charity in promoting the Honor of God,
and the Salvation of Souls; notwithstanding the great Advantages God by his
Providence has given to prosecute so Glorious a Work to the remoter parts of
the World.

2. Of certain necessary Christian Means.

1. In secret Retirements, of Meditation, Contemplation, and Fervent Prayers,
with Fasting and Watching upon special Occasions.

2. In Public, of the most Solemn and peculiar part of the Christian Worship,
designed both for the Honor of God by solemn Recognition of our Redemption,
and for our own Benefit, as an external Medium of Sacred and Spiritual
Communion both with Him, and with one another.

3. Of Improvement of that portion of our time, which most Churches in all Ages
have commended at least, and observed, (if not enjoined to be used) for
religious Employments, for Edification of our own and others Souls, under the
name of the Lord's Day. And at last,

4. A Deluge of provoking Sin: either

1. Gross and Scandalous Profaneness, Impieties, and Contempt of all Religion
through want of effectual Discipline: or

2. Such as easily escaping the external Discipline of Men, are frequently
punished, even in this World, by some remarkable Judgments of God; such as
Covetousness, which the Sacred Scripture calls Idolatry, and the Root of all
Evil, Col. 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.10.) Deceit, Exaction, Pride, Ostentation, Emulation,
Contention, Idleness, Luxury, and many such like. And upon that Consideration,

1. Whether from such a deformed and corrupt Estate, there be not great reason
to fear, (especially if the Motions of Providence be more swift in after times
than formerly, as some Learned Men suppose,) that most of these Churches may
e're long be overtaken by some severe Correction, to purge that Wickedness,
which neither extraordinary Mercies, nor the remoter approaches of Judgments
could prevail with them to reform?

2. Whether it be not more prudent and more pious to take that Warning of the
Lord of Hosts by his Prophet: Amend your Ways, and your Doings; and Trust ye
not in Lying Words, saying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc.
But go ye to My Place, which was at Shiloh, where I set My Name at the first;
and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of My People Israel. and to
consider well the following Denunciation: And now because ye have done all
these works, says the Lord, and I spoke unto you, rising up early, and
speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not: Therefore
will I do unto this House, which is called by my Name, wherein ye trust, and
unto the Place which I gave to you and to your Fathers, as I have done to
Shiloh, Jer. 7.3, 4, 12, 13, 14. then either to flatter our selves in our Sins,
Transgressions, or Neglects of Duty and Reformation, with vain hopes that God
will either accept of our Inward Purposes, or spare us for our outward
Profession, lest the Adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and
preserve us from the Power of King Lewis, any more than he did his People
heretofore from that of King Nebuchadnezzer; or hearken to such as pervert the
words of the Living God, cause us to err by their Lies, and by their Lightness,
and strengthen the hands of Evildoers, that none does return from his
Wickedness.

II. Questions Theologico-Political,
Proposed to the Wise and Virtuous of the Nation.
I. WHether what Theology resolves to be the Duty of Princes and Governors,
that is, to be the Ministers of God, for Good to the People, ( Romans 13.4, 6.)
that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty, be
not also as certain and clear a principle of true Policy, the very End of
Government, and the interest of Governors, and the proper way to make their
Government Stable, Easy, and Honorable? This in general: But more particularly,

II. Whether it hold not true in Policy, which is affirmed in Theology, that
The Throne is established by Righeeousness ( Prove. 16.12.) that is, whether the
strict and punctual observance of Religion and Piety toward God, and of
Justice, Love, and Goodness to the People, especially by promoting of Godliness
and Honesty amongst them, be not the most effectual means to Establish a
Government, even upon Civil Considerations, as well as Religious?

III. Whether Justice, Righteousness, and continual Attendance to the Good of a
People, and the Peoples Experience of the good Intentions and Prudence of their
Governors, be not the most effectual method to make a Government Easy to the
Governor, as well as to the People, even upon a Civil account?

IV. Whether such continual Attendance, Study, Care, and Endeavors to promote
their Good in all respects, be not the very Work of Good Angels, nay, of God
himself, and a Subservience thereunto in Governors, and their proper and
special Calling, and as therefore very pleasing to God, and his Blessed Angels,
so also the direct and most certain means to be truly Honorable amongst Men,
especially the best, both of the present and future Generations?

V. Whether to take care, For the Defense and Protection of the People, For
necessary Accomodations for their Living, That they may be trained up in
Industry, and Activity, That they may be Sober, and Frugal. That they may be
great Lovers of their Country, and their Emulation be most excited that way,
And that they may be instructed to be Understanding, and Ingenuous, and to be
Virtuous, and Pious,
be not necessary Particulars of that Good of a People, which is to be so
studied and endeavored? And whether it be not much more Honorable to be a
Beloved Governor of an Industrious, Wealthy, Free, Ingenuous, and Virtuous
People, than a dreaded Tyrant over a Poor, Base, Slavish, Barbarous and Vicious
People?

VI. Whether it be not more Generous and Commendable for a Prince to relinquish
such Rights as are either indirectly gotten, or cannot be used without
Inconvenience, either to the People, or (which may sometimes happen) to
himself, to gratify the People or oblige their Affections to him, than
strictly to assert it, out of a vain Disdain ( Rehoboam like) to comply with
the People, or to gratify some particular Favorite; most agreeable to the End
of Government, most pleasing to God, and most Advantageous and Honorable to
the Prince himself?

VII. Whether Ambitious Desire of Independent Power over others, and to be
feared and worshipped by them, and actual Study and Endeavors to acquire the
same by Fraud, or Force, by War, Slaughters, Devastations, and Disturbance of
the Peace and Quiet of Men, be not the very State of the Devils, and Diabolical
Actions, odious both to God, and to Men; and such as frequently produce very
unhappy Effects to such ambitious Persons, or their Posterity?

VIII. Whether Oppression of Subjects by Power, or Encroaching upon their
Rights by Craft and Tricks, and setting up of a Separate Interest, be not
contrary to the End of Government, tending to the Dissolution thereof, and
usually first or last, as pernicious to such Governors, or their Posterity, as
troublesome to the People?

IX. Whether to set up, and engage a Party or Faction to betray the Rights of
their Fellow-Citizens or Countrymen, and to oppress the rest under pretense of
Religion or Civil-Right, does not greatly weaken a Government, tend to the
Dissolation thereof, and provoke the Judgments of God, who hates all Injustice
and Oppression, but especially when done with a High-Hand, Great-Crast, or
under pretense of Justice, or of Religion, which adds Profaness to Injustice?

X. Whether the true and proper End and Design of Honors be not to recommend
Virtue and Merit by eminent Service for the Public; but the conferring of
Honors upon Ambitious and Aspiring Persons for other Respects, an Abuse and a
Frustration of the proper End thereof, rendering them insignificant, an injury
to Eminent Virtue, Public Merit, and true Nobility, and an Encouragement to
Ambition, Vanity, and indirect Practices; and contrary, both to good
Government, and to Christianity? and such Ambitious and Aspiring Persons to be
looked upon as Enemies to Humane Society, and the Pest of their Country?

XI. Whether Prodigality of Princes to insinuating or impudent Favorites, or
permitting Officers or Servants to Cheat them, be not an Abuse of their Estate,
an Injury to the Public, a great Occasion to corrupt the Manners of the People
with Covetousness, Dishonesty and Knavery, and inconsistent with good
Government, and with the Duty of Gover^ours to God, whose Stewards and Deputies
they are? And such greedy Favorites, and dishonest Officers and Servants, to
be looked upon by all honest Men, as Vermin, Horse-Leeches, and common
Enemies, and to b^ p^osecuted by all just and lawful means, that they may b^
(...) to refund, and be discharged from all Public Trust and Implo^ment?

XII. Whether to allow greater Salaries and Profits than necessary to Great
Officers, and less Wages and Pay to common Seamen and Soldiers, than will
maintain them to live honestly and comfortably, and be a reasonable Reward for
their Labor and Hazard; or to suffer Officers to abuse their Soldiers in
their Pay or Wages; be not a great Iniquity, contrary to good Government, to
Christianity, and even to Humanity it self?

XIII. Whether the maintaining and protecting of Favorites from Justice, who
by their Insolence, Ambition, or Covetousness; or by Evil Counsels, are grown
odious or suspicious to the People, and occasion Differences between the Prince
and People, be not a great Fault in Divinity, and a great Error in Policy, and
inconstant with the Ends of Government?

XIV. Whether the common Sentiments and Practices of the greatest part of
Mankind, be not as Corrupt, False, and Erroneous in respect of true Policy,
and Prudent management of Public Affairs, as in respect of Morality in Private
Matters?

The true Resolution of these Questions
Is very easy by Reason and Humane Authority as well as Divine: If a Prince
will act like a Man, he must consider, What is the End of Man's being upon
Earth? And then apply himself with all his Vigor and Advantages to promote
that. And from this one Principle of Reason may all these and many more
Questions be resolved. And for Humane Authority, Aristotle, (whom, even those
learned and ingenious Gentlemen, who do not much admire his Physics, repute a
Great Man in Politics, as that which he was most versed in) has well
distinguished the difference between a King, viz. He who intends the Common
Good; and a Tyrant, viz. He who acts all for himself, and converts all to that;
and to that end, usually endeavors to unman the People, by corrupting their
Manners; to Divide them into Parties and Factions; and to Disable them in their
Estates and Power. But a King, one worthy of that Name, who intends the Common
Good, takes Care of Religion, and to keep his Reputation in that respect; takes
care of the Education of the People, that from their very Youth they may be
preserved from Vice, even from the sight of Obscene Objects, and the hearing of
obscene Speeches; and from Plays, etc. and is more ready to strengthen his
Empire in the Hearts of his People, even by Abridging his own Power, than to
enlarge his Power by encroaching or usurping upon their Rights: And therefore
he commends the Answer of Theopompus to his Wife, who reproached him for
admitting some Limitations? of his Power, That he had rather have his Empire
Firm and Strong, than Large and Loose.

And indeed if we look into History, and especially our own, we shall find,
that the bravest Princes, the most Wise and Generous, and most Happy, have
been of his Mind: That those who have done otherwise have been Persons of weak
or mean Parts or Spirits, or imposed upon by Favorites: That the great and
most active Assertors of pretended Prerogative and irresistible Regal Power
have been for the most part either Men of Design, or imposed upon by the
Prejudice of Education, or by the Authority of some Leaders, who have only
served themselves thereby, to the great Disservice of their King and Country;
and that the Income thereby raised for the King has all in a manner been
devoured by those Vermin, and the Power so usurped, employed for the most part
only to secure them in their Evil Practices, or to serve them to Tyrannize and
Oppress their Fellow Subjects, while the King in the mean time reaped no real
Benefit or Advantage at all, but lost much in the Affection of the People, in
the Stability and Strength of his Government, in his Honor both with the
present Generation, and to all Posterity, and in the Satisfaction of a good
Conscience; and for the most part incurred other Mischiefs besides, by the
Special Judgments of God upon him, for his Abuse or Evil Administration of so
great a Charge. So that upon a true account it is most certain, that there is
not a worse sort of Men in any State, and more pernicious to Princes themselves
than these; and that the Crimes of Thieves, Robbers and Pirates are small and
pardonable Faults in respect of them. They have two Properties which can never
be concealed from others, that is, Covetousness and Ambition; but they have a
third, which Princes ought to be as jealous of, as of the most subtle Policies
of their professed Enemies, and that is Flattery, and pretense of Service. As
it is punishable only in Parliament, so that Parliament must be very unfaithful
both to King and Country, which shall neglect to do it with all Care and
Resolution, and so much the more, by how much the more dissicult it is. Nor can
any Prince be more unjust to himself and to his Government, than to hinder them
in it. Nor was ever such Justice more necessary than at this time, when so
extraordinary a Mercy of God, as our late Deliverance, is like to be frustrated
and turned into Confusion by the Wickedness of such Ravenous Beasts, as in such
a Case as we are now in, will not forbear to prey upon the Country, (poor
miserable Ireland especially) to prey upon their Fellow Soldiers, and to prey
upon the public Revenue and the King himself, to gratify their Insatiable
Ambition and Brutish Lusts. It is a Wickedness that reaches Heaven, and will
bring down speedy Judgments thence; nay, will prove such it self, and bring
Confusion upon King and Parliament both, if they do not speedily and severely
punish it, and redress it. I know not a more abominable Wickedness against Man,
than to add Affliction to the Afflicted, to make Advantage of Public
Calamicies and Dangers, and to rob Men of the Price of their Blood: nor a more
Just, Glorious, and Prudent Action for a Prince, than to hang up, and make
Examples of some of the Greatest Offenders of this kind, and squeez the rest,
as an acceptable Expiation to God, and most grateful Satisfaction to Men. I
shall conclude with a brief Abstract concerning such Creatures in former times,
taken out of

The Lord Chief Justice Coke 's Chapter Of Flattery, in his Pleas of the Crown,
chapter 99.
THE Flattering mouth works ruin, Prove. 26.28. and more Kings and Kingdoms
have been overthrown by the means of Flattery, than by Public Hostility.

Rex caecus cernit cum Sycophanta perit.

What Fearful Ends Flattering Favorites, Corrupters of their Sovereign Liege
Lord, abusing their Favors in Subversion of their Laws, have had, appears in
our Parliament Rolls, Records and Histories.

[William 2. had Ralph Flambard Bishop of Durham, Daniel in W. 2. and H. 1.
and others, whom he corrupted to counterpoise the Clergy, awe the Layety, and
countenance his Illegal Proceedings. Of him the King used to say, that Ranulph
was the only Man for his turn, who cared not whom he displeased, Mat. Par. p.
56.
so he might please his Master. Sed mortuo Rege iniquo, and Henrico coronato,
de Communi Concilio, Gentis Anglorum, posuit eum Rex in Vinculis, a quibus cum
custodibus suis pecunia corruptis, evasisser, tranfsactavit clam in Normanniam,
and sua Exhortatione Ducem Robertum commovit in Regem fratrem suum.]

King Henry 3. had Hubert de Burgo, Rot. Parl. and 17 H. 3. Speed 18 H. 3. 520.
2 Inst. Proem. p. 2.
Chief Justice and Earl of Kent, and many others: But this was his Safety, that
upon just occasion, without any great Grief, he would forego a Favorite. See
in the Preface to the Second Part of the Institutes, his Counsel to H. 3. to
burn Magna Charta.

E. 2. had Pierce de Gaveston, the Spencers, etc. Rot. Parl. 7 E. 2. 2 part,
44.50. ^,
and the Spencers proceeding against le Grand Charter by Name, (amongst other
things) tending to the Subversion of the Law, etc.

R. 2. had Sir Robert Tresilian Chief Justice, etc. Rot. Parl. 11. E. 2. nu. 8.
etc.
and Robert Earl of Oxford and Duke of Ireland, etc.

H. 6. had William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, etc. Rot. Parl. 28 H. 6. nu. 1^
to 47.
who endeavored to have brought in the Civil Laws; which was the occasion that
the Chief Justice Fortescue wrote in the Commendation of the Laws of England,
preferring them for the Government of this Land before the Civil Laws. This
Duke, with others, plotted the Death and Destruction of Humfrey, the Good Duke
of Gloucester, who ever stood in his way.

Hollinsh 713.2.30.
E. 4. had William Lord Hastings, the Kings Chamberlain, and Captain of Calice.
All these came to fearful and untimely Ends.

Hollinsh. 722.748.767.
R. 3 had Sir John Catesby, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and Henry
Duke of Buckingham, etc. Privy Plotters and Counselors with R. 3. for the most
execrable Murder of his Nephews E. 5. and Richard Duke of York. What a
miserable End the Duke had, you know; and Justice Catesby in his Journey to
London, in the Kings High way, had Subitaneam and improvisam mortem.

Coram Rege An. ^H. H. 8. In Information verse D. Petor, and alios. The like
Indictment against Edmond Dudley. 4 Inst. 198. Anders. 1.156. Godb. 107. Herb.
H. 8. p. 6. Bac. H. 7. p. 209
7. Had Sir Richard Empson, Edmond Dudley, etc. Sir Richard Empson was
Indicted, Quod ipse Consiliarius Excellentissimi Principis Henrici nuper Regis
Angliae Septimi, Deum praeoculis non habens, sed ut filius diabolicus
subtiliter imaginans honorem, dignitatem, and prosperitatem dicti nuper Regis
ac prosperitatem Regni sui Angliae minime valere, sed ut ipse magis singulares
favores dicti nuper Regis adhibere unde magnatem sieri potuisset, ac totum
Regnum Angliae secundum ejus voluntatem gubernare, falso, deceptive and
proditorie Legem Angliae subvertens, diversos ligeos ipsius nuper Regis, ex sua
falsa Covina, and subtili ingenio contra communem legem regni Angliae de
diversis feloniis, etc. Indictari fecit, etc. Per quod plures and diversi
populi dicti nuper Regis his gravaminibus and indebitis exactionib'
multipliciter torquebantur, in tantum quod populi dicti nuper Regis versus
ipsum nuper Regem multipliciter murmurabant, and malignabant in magnum
periculum ipsius nuper Regis Regni sui Angliae, Tr. 23 H. 8. coram Rege Rot 14.
See the Articles against Cardinal Woolsey, 4 Inst. chapter 8. p. 89.
ac subversionem legum and consuetudinum ejusdem Regni, etc. And the like
Indictment was against Dudley.

Hen. 8. had Tho. Woolsey Cardinal, Ipse intendens finaliter antiquissimas
Angliae Leges penitus subvertere, and enervare universumque hoc Regnum Angliae,
and ejusdem Regni populum Legibus Imperialibus vulgo dict' Legibus Civilibus
and earundem Legum Canonibus subjugare, and subducere, etc.

We will for some Causes descend no lower. Qui eorum Vestigiis insistunt, eorum
exitus perhorrescant.

FINIS.

