AN ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH OF DEISM IN ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, MDCXCVI.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE GROWTH OF DEISM.
SIR,
IT IS now three Years since you and I had a serious Discourse concerning the
rise and progress of Deism: which is an Opinion of late Years crept into
England, tho not so widely spread here as in other parts of Europe. I well
remember we were both agreed, that there was no shadow of Reason why any one
should suspect the Gospels of Forgery, since the matter contained in them has
not the least savor of any worldly Interest, or indirect Design, but all the
Lines of them do only center in the highest Improvement Humane Nature is
capable of. So that in conformity every Man may take great comfort in himself,
and all Mankind live well with one another. Besides, the Preachers of this
excellent Doctrine had at first all the Discouragements which an irreligious
and idolatrous Age could give them, (as is confessed by their Enemies) insomuch
that nothing but their own personal full Conviction of the Truths they
professed could engage them to Preach 'em; and the intrinsic Goodness of the
Law of Christ, was sufficient to gain men's hearts, after Miracles had born down
their Prejudices, and gained their serious Attention. In fine, you and I could
see no reason to doubt of the Truth of any matter of Fact contained in the
Gospels, which relate the miraculous Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of Jesus Christ; but what would oblige us to deny the truth of all
History whatsoever. And from these Considerations laid together, we concluded
that the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ was undoubtedly sent to us by God.

This still made it appear more strange to us both, how DEISM (which is a
denial of all revealed Religion) should creep in upon us where the Scriptures
are made so public, and where so many Learned Treaties are written, which so
strongly assert their Authority to be Divine. I confess, I was as desirous to
know upon what Grounds Men rejected the Gospel, as you your self were, and
therefore I willingly undertook the Task you laid on me, viz. To collect and
put together those Motives whereby some had been induced to lay aside all
Revelation. For which Performance I was the fitter, because it does not require
any Learning and strength of Wit, but only Observation, and Inquiry, which I
might easily make, because of the numerous Acquaintance I have contracted in
Town, where (you know) I spend the Winter, and in the Country, where I bestow
my Summer Visits. But all I shall do in this matter, is barely to give you a
Relation of those Prejudices, and (as I think) false Reasonings, which have
drawn some of my Acquaintance from Revelation to DEISM.

1. Now, first I have observed, that some who pretend themselves Deists, are
Men of loose and sensual Lives; and I make no wonder that they dislike the
Christian Doctrine of Self-denial, and the severe threatenings against wilful
Sinners. You may be sure they will not allege this Reason: But having read
Spinosa and Hobbes, and been taught to laugh at the story of Baalam's Ass, and
Sampson's Locks; they proceed to ridicule the reality of all Miracle and
Revelation. I have conversed with several of this Temper, but could never get
any of 'em serious enough to debate the reality of Revelation: But a witty Jest
and the other Glass puts an end to all further Consideration. These are mere
Skeptics, and practical Atheists, rather than real Deists. 2. But there are
others, who, although they have not a due regard to Revelation, are Men of
Sobriety and Probity, who with great freedom have let me into their Thoughts,
whereby I can very clearly and fully (as I think at least) discern the rise and
progress of this their Opinion, which is this;
1. In the time of King Charles the First, (which confineth my longest
acquaintance with Men) 'twas usual for Gentlemen to send their Sons abroad into
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, etc. to accomplish themselves by Travel. But
lest they should be prevailed upon to change their Religion, care was taken
that their Tutor or Governor, who traveled with 'em, should show them the
Idolatry and Superstition of the Roman Religion; and also let 'em in to see
that Popery in all its Branches was only a device of the Priesthood, to carry
on a particular Interest of their own; to increase their Wealth, Honors, and
Power over the Lay People; to exalt the Head of their Order above all the
Crowned Heads in the World, and equal one whole Order of their Clergy, viz. the
Cardinals, to the Princes of Christendom. Nay, since all People were obliged to
make their Confessions to, and receive their Absolution from the Priest, the
meanest of which Order could create a God for the People's Worship; it is plain,
that their Religion was calculated for the Profit, Power and Honor of the
whole Order of the Priesthood in this World, whatsoever advantages they might
find by it in the other. Now the Young Gentleman being thoroughly convinced of
this Holy Cheat, returns to Old England; where he meets with very zealous
Contests about Religion (as was pretended) between the Church of England,
headed by Archbishop Laud on the one part, and the Presbyterian Kirk on the
other; and having carefully read the Debate (as it appeared in the Prints) on
both sides, with those very Eyes which he had so lately cleared up in Italy or
France, he could not forbear to see that both these Protestant Parties, under
the pretense of Religion, were only grasping at Power, and that the Controversy
at bottom, was not who is Religion was best, but only what Sect of the Clergy
should make the best Market of the mere Laymen. And as this Young Gentleman
had before resolved with himself not to become a Property to the Popish
Priesthood, no longer now will he be such to the Protestant Clergy of any
Denomination, since both pursue the same Ends. He perceives that our
Protestant Highpriests do all of them rival the Sovereign Power; the Bishop's
House like that of the King, must be called his Palace, he must still keep up
his claim to the Miter and Crosier, to vie with the Crown and Scepter; and as
the Style of the King's Courts is Anno Regni nostri, i. e. In the Year of our
Reign: So that of the Bishop's Court is Anno Consecrationis nostrae, i. e. In
the Year of our Consecration; the Year of the King's Reign being unknown in the
Bishop's Court: The King speaking to the People does usually call 'em his
Loving Subjects; the Bishop does not make himself so familiar, but styles the
People of his Diocese barely his Subjects, Jurisdictioni nostrae subditos: The
King is Inthroned, and the Archbishop Inthronized; both derive their Power
from a Divine Right; but the Bishop is the higher Power, because by the
Principles of Episcopacy he can Excommunicate the King, i. e. forbid him the
very Conversation of his Subjects, and thereby render them incapable to make
good their Oath of Allegiance, in yielding their Aid and Assistance.

Nor does he find that the Presbytery claims any inferior Powers; each Party
allege Scriptures and Fathers on their side; and for ought I can see, (says
this Gentleman) they are all in the right. Through an excess of Prejudice thus
occasioned, he makes a further step toward Deism, and Reasons after this
manner: It Is not impossible (continues he) that the ancient Clergy might be
possessed with the same Spirit of Pride, which has prevailed over the modern.
If those Writings, which they call Holy Scriptures are of their side, as they
all say they are, I make no doubt but they were of their own inventing; and if
Jesus Christ their Patron, laid the Foundation of those Powers, which both
Popish and Protestant Clergy claim to themselves from under him, I think the
old Romans did him right in punishing him with the death of a Slave. After this
manner I have heard it said of late, by another of the same Constitution, that
as the Church of Rome was a modelled Faction against all other Christians, so
was the Church of England, by Law Established, against all other Protestants,
who were by Law excluded from every Office of Profit and Trust; who were made
subject to the Piques and Malice of every Churchman, and became a constant
Revenue to Apparitors and Spiritual Catch-poles. And though at present there be
a Toleraration by Law granted, yet it is still opposed by the Spirit of the
Church, as appears by Sermons Preached at Visitations, and the constant
ordinary Discourses of the Clergy, in which the Church of England is always
represented, as at this time, in greater danger than ever it was; though I
should think the danger had been as great in King James's Time: And
notwithstanding the Toleration (said he) no Man can enjoy a place of Profit or
Trust, though he be ever so dutiful a Subject, and ever so able or honest a
Man, unless he has a Conscience by Law Established: By which Church-device Men
are deprived of the Privileges of their Country to which they are born, and for
the discharge whereof they never did in any respect incapacitate themselves;
and hereby it comes to pass, that the Nation cannot act vigorously in its own
defense, being debarred the Use of one Moiety of it self; and notwithstanding
this, they have the Confidence to tell us Laymen, that we ought to love our
Neighbors as our selves. Now if this be the way of the Christians, (concluded
he) let my Soul be with the Philosophers.

2. And this brings to my Thoughts what another Deist said jestingly to me,
viz. That since I was a Christian, 'twas lucky for me that I was of the
Bishop's Church; for though you were ever so Loyal (said he) to the King, yet
if you did not pay as dutiful an Allegiance to the Bishops, you could not hold
the Place you now enjoy; for as certain as the Cross is above the Crown, so
sure a thing is it, that the Bishop will be above the King; which he undertook
would appear to me if I looked back to King Charles's Restoration, or King
William's Revolution. The Presbyterians, though they quarrelled with Charles
the First, yet became the loving Subjects of Charles the Second; joined with
the Episcopalians in assisting him to the Throne, and made no scruple of
Swearing their Allegiance to him, and owning his Supremacy. But after all this,
the King was not able to support these his Loving Subjects against the Power of
the Bishops, who in two Years time outed 'em of their Livelihoods, and after
that, drove 'em five Miles distance from all Market Towns; and at last the Acts
made against Papists were extended to them. But since King William's Revolution
the Case is altered; for the Jacobite Clergy, though turned out of their
Livings by Law, for refusing Allegiance to the King, yet from the Allegiance
they bare to the Bishops, they find such Favor from their Lordships, that if
the Livings they lose are in the Bishops gift, he shall present any Friend
which the dispossessed Jacobite shall recommend; now what can be more by them
desired, than to enjoy the Profits of their Livings, and put in what Curate
they please? And after all, that they may enjoy the full Profits of their
Livings, and pay their Curates another way, these Jacobites may hold their
Conventicles where they please, nay, Preach publicly and seditiously in an
open Church near Cheap Side, London, without the least offense to the Spiritual
Power. And is it not plain (said this Gentleman) from all this, that on this
side the Water as well as on the other, the Clergies Zeal for their Communion,
Church and Religion, is only meant to support their own Party, Dominion and
Empire?

3. Now the oldest Deists of my Acquaintance having conceived so great a
Prejudice against the Christian Faith, from the Behavior of the Clergy, and
having levened their Disciples therewith, it has fallen out unhappily, that the
late Revolution has by another way also confirmed them in this their Prejudice.

For the late happy Revolution, (which came on too soon, and was cut off too
short) though it was not so highly beneficial to us, as was by some expected,
was yet of very great Importance. But as there is nothing in this World ever so
good, but what has some appending disadvantage; so by mere Accident this
Revolution, which has saved not only the Church of England, but (as I hope) the
whole Protestant Interest throughout the World, has wonderfully increased Men's
Prejudices against the Clergy, and so by false Consequence (such as Men through
Resentment will make) against the Truth of Religion it self. The old Deists
tell those of their Pupils, who never traveled abroad, that there is now no
need of going over the Water to discover that the name Church signifies only a
Self-interested Party, and that the Clergy have no Godliness but Gain. Have you
not (say they) for many Years together heard them Preach up the Divine Right,
and indefeizable Authority of Kings, together with Passive Obedience, as the
chief distinguishing Doctrines whereby their Church approved it self Apostolic
beyond all other Churches? Nay, were not the Doctrines of Loyalty to the King,
insisted upon more than Faith in Christ? and yet when their particular Interest
required it, their Doctrine of Non-Resistance was qualified by Non-Assistance,
the whole Stream of Loyalty was turned from the King to the Church, the
indefeizable Right was superseded by a miraculous Conquest without Blood, the
Oath of Allegiance to the Divinely Rightful King James has its force allayed by
another Oath of the same Importance made to the de facto King William and Queen
Mary, and all this is Sanctified by the name of the Church, i. e. their own
Party and Interest, for the sake whereof it is done. This is indeed keeping to
the Text -- Rem rem quocunque modo rem.

And the wretched Defense they make for this their Apostasy (say the Deists)
makes the matter worse. For notwithstanding King James is, as they will have
it, Conquered; and his Throne, which was declared vacant, is legally filled by
one who by Act of Parliament is declared our Rightful King; yet after all this
Dr. S -- will reserve a Right to King James, though through Success and
Settlement he will allow a Right also to King William. And this Notion the
Clergy generally adhere to, because thereby they kill two or three Birds with
one stone. 1st. They preserve to themselves their ancient Right of giving
Titles to Sovereignty. For though both King and Parliament have disclaimed and
damned the Conquest, yet the Clergy still insist upon it. 2ly. They make fair
Weather with King James, by keeping his Title alive, and by still asserting his
Right, open him a Door to recover his Possession again. For what honest
Christian can oppose a Rightful King in regaining the Possession of his Throne,
which is kept from him by a Successful Usurper? and 3ly. They think they have
obliged King William sufficiently by the formality of an Oath, and owning him
in his Possession. Put all this together and 'twill prove, that When all the
Argument is out,
It Is Interest still resolves the doubt.


Thus (cry they) you plainly see, that your Church is nothing but a Party, to
which whosoever joineth himself shall find his Account thereby, notwithstanding
any Error, Heresy, Immorality or Disloyalty to the present Government
whatsoever; whilst any other who is conformable to the Rubricks and Canons,
whose Learning and Morals are an Honor to his Gown, and who is truly dutiful
to his Majesty, shall be excluded from all those benefits his Profession would
entitle him to. Thus the bold Asserters of King James's Right enjoy some of the
best Preferments, and particularly Dr. S -- sits D -- of St. P -- whilst honest
Mr. Johnson is starving upon Charity.

The Church of England is a mere Party, (say they again) and has a Watchword
whereby they know one another, which they can vary upon occasion.
Non-Resistance was the Word in King Charles's days. For though at that time you
did conform to every tittle and ceremony, enjoined by Rubric and Canon, yet if
you failed in the Point of Non-Resistance, you were a Phanatick and Republican,
a Rebel, and what not? Now if this Doctrine be contained in the Book of
Homilies, as the Jacobites say, it is a Sacred Record of the Unjustice of some
of those who concurred in the late Revolution. The Shiboleth of the Church now
is King William's de facto Title; And no Conformity to Homilies and Rubricks
will make you owned by the present Church, if you should acknowledge the King
to be otherwise said than a mere de facto. Now (say they) although we grant
that Men will submit to the Government, upon their own particular Principles,
and therefore it is reasonable that the King should admit the Obedience of his
Subjects upon what Grounds they please, yet we know no Reason why the Church
should set up the de facto, as the only Principle of Obedience: And when the
King had better Titles to his Crown, as the Consent of the People in
Parliament, and his Matrimonial Title with the Queen, yet he must be made to
pay the greatest price for the weakest and worst of all Titles; and give Dr. S
-- Sixteen Hundred Pounds a Year, for a Defactoship only.

You see, Sir, that the Deists want not Occasions for their Prejudices, how far
soever they are from having Reason of their side. And pray resolve me, why must
this false Title be set up as 'twere by the King's Consent, to worm out the
only true one? Why must none be preferred to Church-Dignities, but such who
come in upon this Title only? And those who own the King's Right upon the
Consent of the People, be still laboring under the Church's highest
displeasure? and poor Johnson, a Man against whom no Immorality was ever
objected, that is an Object even of the Deists Compassion, be left to starve
for the Cause? Nay, they have gone so far upon the Strength of Dr. S --
Convocation-Title, in Opposition to that of Parliament, that since the good
Queen is dead, and the Consent of the People, according to them, null and void;
they have left the King a bare Possession, without any Title at all.

4. I am acquainted with a Gentleman, who for some Years has not gone to
Church, having taken offense at those Practices I was now writing upon. This
Man, you must know, had an extraordinary Veneration for the profound Learning
(so he thinks much reading and common-placing to be) of a certain Eminent
Divine, who had a fat Bishopric bestowed on him by King William and Queen
Mary. But he to requite their Kindness, when a Bill was brought before the
Lords, declaring the King and Queen's rightful and lawful Title to the Crown,
not only opposed and voted against it in the House; but when it had passed, he
entered his Protestation against it in the Journal. Nay (said this Gentleman) if
King William be only King de facto, then the Bishop is de facto only. Truly
Sir, you may believe me, that I was amazed at this Relation; for (as I then
said) though most Men look no further, than only to get Money de facto, and do
not with much strictness inquire quo jure; yet 'twas strange that any Man
should protest that he had no right to that Estate, which he openly continued
in Possession of. But I was soon answered by this his former Admirer, that if
that Bishop had strengthened his own Title to the Bishopric from King J. I
might cease my wonder.

I am indeed sorry to hear Stories of this Nature, especially when they assure
me of the Truth of 'em, and when I see the ill Consequences of them. For though
nothing be more certain than that the Baseness and Falsehood of Man can never
disprove the Truth of God; yet when Men are highly Scandalized, and greatly
deceived by those for whom they had Esteem, and by whose Authority they in
great measure governed themselves, they will stretch their Conclusion beyond
their Premises, and disown Religion in their Principle, because it is
disregarded by some great Men in their Practice.

But though to strict Reasons, such Arguments for Deism appear ridiculous; yet
from the Promotion of these de facto Men, I am told, has arisen great
disadvantage to the King, and those Subjects, whose Principles and Practices
have been always faithful to his Majesty's Interest: Since hereby it is, that
it has always been in the power of the open and professed Enemies of the King
to oppress his most dutiful Subjects. For these de facto-men, and the
Jacobites, were but lately the same sort of People, both of the same Principle
and Temper. And though the Jacobites do now rail at them, for their base
Complyances (as they term it) with the P. of O's Revolution; yet the de factos
are unwilling, for old Acquaintance sake, to pass by their Railing, and
underhand to show 'em any kindness: And this they submit to, as being
Self-conscious, that the Jacobites have a Right to reproach them; so that they
are willing to appease the anger of their old Friends by their best Services.
Now the Jacobites having always an innate Hatred to the Whigs, (as they now
style all those who think themselves obliged to own the King for their rightful
Sovereign) and being willing to keep up their old Master's Right to the Crown,
(to which the Whigs are irreconcilable Enemies) easily prevail upon these de
factos to oppress those other sort of Men, which is an Office they are as
willing to undertake, as the Jacobites can be to put it upon 'em. Thus it
comes to pass, that according as an open professed Enemy to the Government
shall dictate, a Churchman shall strenuously exert that Power the King has
given him, to discourage and oppress his Dutiful and Loyal Subjects. I will
only (said a certain Person) make a Supposition, to show you how this may be;
suppose the King should bestow a Bishopric upon a de facto Doctor, and this
Doctor should there find his old Acquaintance Dr. H. and being a Stranger in
his Diocese, should be willing to instruct himself in the Characters of Men
from the good D., would it not fall out so, that the Clergy of that Diocese
must be used well or ill, as the most open and notorious Enemy the Government
has, shall design? And was it not possible that the E. of N. might oblige his
old Friends in the same manner? Thus, though King James be at last excluded,
his Subjects reign in his stead. And whether an Oath of Abjuration laid upon
the Jacobites Proxy-men, will put an end to this Corruption, Time must tell us.

5. But to return to the Reasons, (or Prejudices I may rather call 'em) which
occasion Deism; It has been observed to me, that where the Notion of a Church
has been carried on with the highest Tide, there even natural Religion is at
the lowest Ebb; as in Italy of old, and lately in France, where gross
Immoralities and Atheism are at the greatest height. And though in our
Reformation we discarded some Idolatrous and Superstitious Doctrines and
Practices, which were grown scandalous among the People, yet still Christ was
made to serve that turn, which his Holy Vicar can no longer do, viz. Support an
Holy Order of Men in as haughty Insolences, in as proud, ambitious and
malicious Designs, as those which King Henry (though a Son of the Church) and
his Times could not bear. Now in answer to this, I bid these Deists only read
the Bible, and see if the Spirit of that Book be not as good as their Thoughts
can reach to; or let 'em read the Character of the Christian Religion, given by
Sir Matthew Hale in the first of his Three Letters concerning Religion, where
he says, It teaches and tuters the Soul to a high Reverence and Veneration of
Almighty God, a sincere and upright Walking, as in the Presence of the
invisible all-seeing God. It makes a Man truly love to Honor, to Obey him, and
therefore careful to know what his Will is: It renders the Heart highly
thankful to him, both as his Creator, Redeemer and Benefactor: It makes a Man
entirely to depend upon, to seek to him for Guidance and Direction, and
Protection, to submit to his Will with all Patience, and Resignation of Soul:
It gives the Law not only to his Words and Actions, but to his very Thoughts
and Purposes: It brings a Man to such a Deportment both of External and
Internal Sobriety, as may be decent in the Presence of God and his holy Angels:
It crusheth and casts down all Pride and Haughtiness, both in a Man's Heart and
Carriage, and gives him an humble frame of Soul and Life, both in the sight of
God and Men: It regulates and governs the Passions of the Mind, and brings them
into due moderation and frame: It gives a Man a right estimate of this present
World; and sets the Heart and Hopes above it, so that he never loves it more
than it deserves. It makes the Wealth and Glory of this World, high Places and
great Preferments, but of a low and little value to him, so that he is neither
covetous nor ambitious, nor over-sollicitous concerning the advantages of it:
It brings a Man to that frame, that Righteousness, Justice, Honesty and
Fidelity, is as 'twere part of his Nature; he can sooner dye than commit or
purpose that which is unjust, dishonest or unworthy a good Man: It makes him
value the love of God and Peace of Conscience above all the Wealth and Honors
in the World, and be very vigilant to keep it inviolably: Though he be under a
due Apprehension of the Love of God, yet it keeps him humble and watchful, and
free from all Presumption; so that he dares not under a vain Confidence of the
Indulgence of God, commit or purpose the least injury to man: He performs all
his Duties to God in Sincerity, Integrity and Constancy; and while he lives on
Earth, his Conversation, his Hopes, his Treasure, and the Flower of his
Expectation is in Heaven; and he entirely endeavors to walk suitably to such a
Hope. In Sum, it restores the Image of God unto the Soul in Righteousness and
true Holiness.

I prevailed upon one of my Friends, a Deist, to read those three Letters,
because therein the Substance of the Christian Religion is distinguished from
the Circumstantials and Appendages; for want of which distinction being well
understood, Deism has arose, as that great Man in the forecited Letter has
observed. When Men (says he) see so much Religion placed by Professors of
Christianity in these things which every intelligent Man values but as Forms,
or Inventions, or Modes, or Artifices, and yet as great weight laid upon them,
as great fervor and animosity used for or against them, as almost for any
Points of Christian Religion; They are apt presently to censure and throw off
all Religion, and reckon all of the same make. Thus that Upright Judge, whose
three Letters my Friend having read, did well approve of 'em, acknowledging,
that with great Exactness he had distinguished between Religion and
Priestcraft: And he added, If you will show me, Sir, any Christian Church
where that distinction is observed, I will become a Member of it. I recommended
the Church of England; he presently told me that he had read the 39 Articles,
and observed that 3 of them were wholly designed to uphold the Power of the
Clergy over the People. And then he bad me only compare the Design, which has
been, and still is, carrying on under the Name of the Church of England, with
the Design of the Christian Religion, as it is described by Sir Matthew Hale;
and I should find the one in all its parts a Contradiction to the other. It Is
plain (said he) the Clergy do not allow of Sir Matthew's Notions, nor will they
suffer us to take any thing for Religion, that is distinguished from their
particular Interest. To what end have so many Perfecutions and Penal Laws been
set a foot by the Clergy in Christendom? was it to bring Men to any one Point
of that full Description of Christian Religion, which you cited from Sir
Matthew Hale? or only to bring them to that short Article of their Clergy
Religion, i. e. to submit to their Power? Did not the Honorable Sir R. H.
lately write a Treatise, wherein with great Learning and accurate Judgment he
distinguished betwixt Religion and Priestcraft? and was he not treated for it
with a true Priestly Insolence and Malice in the Pulpit at White Hall, by A.
one of their Majesty's Chaplains, and represented as a Scorner and an Atheist,
because he scorns to submit to any Religion but what is of Christ's
Institution? Suppose a Man should govern himself by the Law of Christ, and go
no further, is there any Christian Church which would own such an one for a
Member? If you will be a Son of the Church of England you must hold Kings and
Bishops to be jure divino, the Apostolical Doctrine of Passive Obedience; you
must not be indifferent to their Ceremonies, though declared but indifferent
things; and the Reason is, because you must have a profound Respect for the
Power of the Bishops, by which these Ceremonies were ordained: And besides
this, you must show a perfect Abhorrence of all who do not submit to the
Spiritual Royalties of their Diocesan Bishops; for your Churchmanship will not
appear by any Mark so well, as by the Hatred you bear to all Dissenters, in
Conjunction with a deep aversion to all the ancient Rights and just Liberties
of your Native Country. In fine, (said he) when your Clergy Preach the Law of
Christ without turning it to any By-end, or false Interest, you shall meet me
at Church. You know the Clergy love Precedence of the Laity; Let them turn
Christians first, and I can follow.

6. I have known some, who have alleged as a Reason why they have forsaken the
Christian Faith, the impossibility of Believing. Many Doctrines (say these) are
made necessary to Salvation, which it is impossible to believe, because they are
in their nature Absurdities. I replied, That these things were Mysteries, and
so above our Understanding. But he asked me to what end could an unintelligible
Doctrine be revealed? not to instruct, but to puzzle and amuse. What can be the
effect of an unintelligible Mystery upon our Minds, but only Amusement? That
which is only above Reason must be above a rational Belief, and must I be Saved
by an irrational Belief? If a Proposition be inconsistent with it self, I
cannot but believe it to be false: 'Twas once to serve a Turn against the
Papists your Church held all Doctrines necessary to save Souls, were plainly
revealed in Scripture; How could you say plainly revealed unless you understood
the Revelation? Besides, I cannot think that the belief of any unprofitable
Doctrines, i. e. such as admit of no Application to Moral Duties, can be a
saving Faith so much as in part; nor can I imagine that Faith tends to save a
Soul, because what we believe is only True, (for so the belief of Euclids
Elements might have a saving Effect upon Souls) but because our Belief is Good,
it has a practical Effect, and tends to make us better Men. Besides, you all
agree the Belief of your Trinity is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and yet
widely differ in what we must believe concerning it; whether three Minds or
Modes, or Properties, or internal Relations, or Oeconomies, or Manifestations,
or external Denominations; or else no more than a Holy Three, or Three
Somewhats; or otherwise only one of these Three to be God in the highest Sense,
and each of the other two to be a God without Self-subsistence and
Independence. I am confident, if I should be persuaded that an Explanation of
the Trinity were necessary to save my Soul, and see the Learned so widely
differing and hotly disputing what it is I must believe concerning it, I should
certainly run mad through despair of finding out the Truth: But since these
Doctors cannot agree which Party of 'em shall captivate my Belief in Obedience
to his Faith, I will reserve it to be the Handmaid of Truth; whenever she
appears she shall command it.

7. I remember one Gentleman objected to the Christian Faith, that it made Men
insolent, quarrelsom and ill-natured. From whence I concluded, (as I told him)
that he had never read over the Gospels; truly he could not say that he had
read 'em carefully, but yet that in reading the History of what had passed in
Christendom, he observed that most of the Quarrels in which this part of the
World had been engaged, arose from Contentions among the Christian Priesthood.
Church History is chiefly a Relation of Church-mens Wrangles, and D. Cave in a
late Book of his had denominated every Century from some eminent Quarrel which
arose among the Clergy. But besides this, what was the Holy War, what all the
holy Massacres and Croisados which filled Europe with Blood, but the Inventions
of Holy Church? And what is holy Inquisition, but a perpetual Series of
Murders carried on in barbarous Forms of Law against the common Sense of
Mankind? Does History account for any Barbarities so great as those committed
by the Popes? Any Cruelties so savage as those of the Holy Inquisition? Any
Murders so solemn, and religiously brutal as the Acts of Faith? Any
Pragmaticalness so insufferable as that of the Jesuits? is not their Humanity
extinguished by their Christian Religion? such is their Malice that no Man can
eat Bread where they have to do, unless he submit his Faith to their guidance,
witness the present French Persecution. Nor can any Sovereign Prince keep his
Word or Oath, though he had only sworn to maintain those Laws by which he
Reigns as King, any longer than this Spiritual Fatherhood will give him leave,
as Lewis XIV. of France, and James. II. of England do witness. Let these
Inhumanities be considered, as supported and carried on by the name of
Catholic Church, and (if the Devils believe) you may as decently say Church of
Hell as Church of Rome.

And as Devotion, continued our Deist, to holy Church is the center upon which
all things turn on the other side the Water, so is it the same thing here. Do
not our Priesthood of England make as high Pretenses to dispose of all Offices
and Trusts in the Kingdom, to those of their own Faction, as those of Rome?
Have they not long since got their Bill of Exclusion to be passed into a Law,
whereby no Man can enjoy a Place of Profit or Trust in the State, but whom they
qualify at their Altars? where Men were capacitated to be Bumbails, keep
Gaming-houses and sell Ale. What was it but the Insolence of the Priesthood
that brought about Father Laud's and Father Peter's Revolutions? Besides (said
he) do you not observe what a keen Edge Christian Faith puts upon the
ill nature of Divines, when they are disputing about matters of Religion? It Is
common for Philosophers, Lawyers, Physicians, etc. to differ about matters
which concern their Professions, and write one against another: But you will
find some Temper and Decorum observed in their Writings. But let the
Controversy be about any Branch of Christian Faith; and then see the Odium
Theologorum, the Malice of Divines in the late Writings of two of your Church
Doctors against each other; at least this shows that Christian Faith does not
improve the Temper of such Men who are of mean Birth, and narrow Education. And
I cannot but observe, that your Protestant Malice is under a worse Management
than the Popish; they only thirst for the Blood of Protestants, but you are for
sucking one another Blood; as when for the Service of King Charles the II.
(who was Head of your Church) and his Popish Brother, the Blood of the best
Protestants in England, (and some of them of your own Church) was to be spilt,
the Court Blood-suckers, viz. Attorney general, and Judges, besides Juries and
Evidence, were all of 'em chosen Men out of your own Church; and the Posse of
the Clergy was raised to hold their Heads to the Block, by Preaching the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

But in requital, it must be confessed, that your Clergy require the King to do
their Persecuting Journey-work with the same Insolence as the Popish Priesthood
use; For must not the Sovereign Monarch of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, by his Authority Royal, execute the Decrees and Anathema's of the
Archdeacons and Bishops Chancellors, by Imprisoning his loyal and useful
Subjects, for not conforming to their Ceremonies? If a King will submit to this
Drudgery, he shall have the vox Cleri of his side, and be as great as Noise and
fulsom Flattery can make him; but in the mean time is really King but of one
Moiety of his People, whilst the danger which the other half apprehend from the
Secular Arm directed by Spiritual Power of Necessity, weaneth their Hearts from
the Government. Thus Charles the II. who for two Years after his Return,
reigned in the Hearts of all his People, was by the Act of Uniformity reduced
to be King of the Church-party; and at last, whilst the Popish and Protestant
Priesthood zealously contended whose Property he should be, (like the Truth
among Controversial Divines) he was lost in the Scuffle.

He instanced in likewise the late King James, who (said he) had it in his
power to be universally beloved and obeyed, beyond any King of England this Age
has produced. His Right to the Crown was owned by all; his Wilfulness had
passed upon the Church of England Party for Magnanimous Resolution, which
struck such an Awe upon them, that they were coming to a Temper, and would have
consented to a Toleration of Protestant Dissenters, and Roman Catholics too,
provided their Maintenance might be continued to them. Thus the Heart of all
England had been set upon the King; but the Popish Priesthood would be content
with nothing less than delivering the whole Nation to Satan, and their King
must execute the dreadful Anathema, though 'twas manifest that he must thereby
lessen himself to the size of one of the 7 Kings of Kent; for he could be
Sovereign of no more than the Two hundredth part of the People. For King
Charles in numbering the People, had found that the Proportion between Papist
and Protestant was as 1 to 200: whereas had his own Priesthood been so
favorable to him, as to have excused him from executing that Satanical Power,
which by a Right purely Divine was vested in Sacred Majesty, his Reign might
have been happy, and his Memory precious. What an unhappy Effect had the Spirit
of Father Laud upon King Charles the First? And what has brought Lewis the
XIV. to the present Diminution of his Glory, but that haughty Insolence and
unnatural Cruelty in Persecuting his own Subjects, which Father la Chaise has
inspired him with? What Figure will this Grand Monarch make in Story? His Name
will pollute the Annals of this Age, and his cowardly Conquests be the Scorn of
Posterity. Now from all that he had said, he concluded, that for Lucksake, as
well as to preserve his good Nature, he would be cautious of being (at least) a
zealous Christian.

8. 'Twas not long since I met one of my old Acquaintance, who told me that he
had lately cast off these Prejudices he had conceived against the Christian
Faith, by the Assistance of a Book called, The Five Letters of Inspiration. By
the last of those Letters he was convinced of the reality of revealed Religion,
from the Intrinsic value and Excellency thereof; and he was fully confirmed in
his Judgment by a late Book called, The Reasonableness of Christianity, as
delivered in the Scripture. Upon this, he had read over the Old Testament once,
and the New several times, with great attention of Mind. Indeed he always
thought the Moral part of the Bible very good; but then he also thought, that
by the strength of his own Reason, he could have written as good a Moral
himself. But by the last of these Books he was convinced, that he was indebted
to Revelation more than he thought of, and considering how long the Ceremonial
Law had obtained among the Jews, and what a profound respect they paid to the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Spiritual Guides and Rulers; he plainly saw that there
was need enough of Miracle to bear down their Prejudices, to make 'em leave
their Ceremonies, and listen to that excellent Moral which Christ gave 'em;
nay, he was convinced that no Miracles were strong enough to prevail over the
Priest, or a Priest-ridden People, to become Proselytes to the Doctrine of
universal Love and Charity; for (said he) if a Teacher should now be sent from
Heaven with this Message, that all the Protestant Parties in England should be
reconciled and live well with one another, making nothing necessary to their
religious Communion, but what Christ had appointed, and such Circumstances as
Time and Place, and what in the nature of the thing was needful, and if this
Teacher's Mission were confirmed by Miracle, it would have (as he thought) no
better effect upon our several Sects of Clergy, and those who are bigoted to
their Parties, than it had upon the Pharisees and their Disciples of old.

Having heard him speak so sharply against the Clergy after his old way, I
could not but tell him that I perceived he was but almost a Christian; for he
who loves the Institution of Christ, cannot but respect those who are the
Ministers thereof; at least, I hoped that he would pay a respect to the Clergy
of the Church of England, which was the best Reformed Church in the World; and
therefore I expected that he was already a Member of our Church: He replied,
that he should always be ready to pay his respect to every good Man of what
Order or Degree soever; he should always be willing to hear a good Minister
Preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to him, and exhort him to the sincere
Practice of it. That he was ready to contribute his share to the Maintenance of
such Ministers, and to join with that Church-of- England Congregation near to
which he lived, in public Worship; but yet he could not condemn the Worship of
other Congregations, nor exclude himself from joining with them as occasion
should serve him. So that as to Church Membership he could be a Member of any
Church, which would own him upon the terms of Faith and Practice, contained in
the Book he mentioned, concerning the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion,
etc. But still he conceived, that Church Communion in holy Offices was designed
only to raise his Devotion toward God, not toward the Clergy, which made him
admire the unparalleled Impudence of the Roman Priesthood, who measure the
Religion of all Christians by their Devotion to the Sea of Rome, i. e. indeed
to themselves; and he doubted whether any Church were sufficiently Reformed
from Popery, which made any Doctrines of Faith necessary to Salvation that were
not declared so in the Gospels, and where the Clergy would always distinguish
between Church and State, and give the Precedence to themselves. But yet he
would join with any Church as far as it promoted the Honor of God, and
separate from it, wherein on pretense of Religion, he saw, ^^at it aimed at a
By-end of its own.

Here I urged him again to join to our Church, which had no other design but
God's Glory. To this he said, that he should be glad that the Church of England
would own him, though he could not be of their Party: He would willingly pass
as a Churchman for his Credit-sake; for (said he) though a Man does ever so
firmly believe Jesus Christ to be the Messiah whom God had of old promised, and
in due time sent to give us a perfect Rule of Life, in order to make us truly
religious here, and ever happy hereafter; and though a Man should show forth
his Faith by an agreeable course of Life, in doing Justice, loving Mercy, and
an humble walking with God; yet if he were not owned as a Member of some
Church, he would by all Churches be accounted, if not an Atheist, yet a
Skeptic, a Man of no settled Principle, but own who has his Religion to choose.
For if you look over the State of Religion as it stands in Christendom, there
is no Church whatsoever which will accept you as a Member of its Communion, but
upon some particular terms of Belief, or Practice, which Christ never
appointed, and it may be such as an honest and a wise Christian cannot consent
to. I am not more able to give up my Reason to the Church of England, than to
give up my Senses to the Church of Rome; it looks like a Trick in all Churches
to take away the use of Men's Reason, that they may render us Vassals and Slaves
to all their Dictates and Commands. But what greater slavery than to force on
Men a Belief of such things as necessary to Salvation, of which it is not
possible to form any Idea? Though I am satisfied there is no such thing as a
change of Bread into the Flesh of Christ, yet I can form an Idea, that such a
thing may be, that the same Power which changed Earth into a Man, may change
Bread into Flesh: But I can frame to my self no Idea of what your Church
Teaches in the Sacrament, that the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and
indeed taken and received of the faithful; And when I ask how can this be
understood by a Protestant, who believes that there is no other Body but that
of Bread? I am told that the Church means it in a Spiritual Sense. Now I have
tried, and find it impossible for me to form to my self an Idea of a Body
verily and indeed in a Spiritual Sense.

And therefore I must say it is an unwise and a hard Thing for any Church to
impose absurd or unintelligible Notions (especially such Speculations, which
tend to make no body the better) as necessary to Salvation; for Wise Men, and
such who will take Courage to examine what they Believe, will not submit to
such an Usurpation; and weak Men are kept all their Life long in Fears and
Doubts of their Eternal State, as being always uncertain whether they firmly
believe such Doctrines, or no.

Besides this (said he) your Church will require me to believe other
Absurdities as bad as these, as that Kings and Bishops have a Divine Right to
that Power, which they exercise over us, whereas with my own Eyes I saw our
Great and Gracious King accept the Crown of England, as the Gift of the People.
And I see as plainly, that Bishops are an Order of Men of their own (not of
Christ's) making. I was told that our Bishops Order was founded in that of the
12 Apostles, and the Presbyters Order in the 70 Disciples: Upon this I resolved
to see if the 12 and the 70 were different Orders, or no, and read over the
10th Chap. of Matthew, the 3d and 6th of Mark, and the 9th of Luke, in which
places the Power which Christ gave to the 12 is set forth, which amounts to
this, viz. a Charge to Preach the Gospel, a Power to work Miracles in casting
out Devils, healing the Sick, etc. And I also read in the 10th Chapter of Luke,
that the 70 were sent forth for the same Reason, and with the same express
Power as were the 12, viz. To preach the Gospel, heal the Sick, and cast out
Devils, verse. 2.9.17. And he tells the 70 at the 16th Verse, That he who
hears them, hears him; and he who despises them, despises him, as he had
said to the 12, in Matthew 10.40. Indeed they were only added to the number of
the 12, Because (as it is said there) the Harvest was great, and the Laborers
few, i. e. because Multitudes followed Christ, and were disposed to become
Christians, therefore he increased the number of his Apostles, or Teaching
Disciples. I can find no Footsteps of any Jurisdiction given to the 12 over the
70, or indeed over any body else; and in the 18th Chapter of Matthew, where
Christ speaks of binding and loosing, it is manifest from the first Verse,
that his discourse was made to his Disciples. So in the 20th of John, the
Holy Ghost and Power of remitting and retaining Sins, was given to the
Disciples which met together after Christ's death, verse. 19. in which meeting,
there might be some of the 70 as well as some of the 12: It Is certain the 70
received the Holy Ghost, and if Baptism be a Key of Admission into the Church,
they had it: If binding or loosing be declaring wherein we are bound in duty,
and wherein we may use our liberty; if remitting and retaining Sins be
declaring what Iniquity God will forgive, and what he will not; the 70 shared
this Power with the 12. As for delivering up to Satan, and inflicting Diseases;
since 'twas a miraculous Power, which we read not that Christ appropriated to
the 12, we have no reason to think 'twas detained from the 70. If then Christ
appointed but one Order, viz. that of Teachers, the Order of Rulers dignified
themselves above, and distinguished themselves from their Brothren, yet I am
willing to submit to those Powers, which the Laws of England have given to the
Bishops, though what they claim by Divine Right, I esteem as an Usurpation.

Moreover (says he) although I am become a Christian, I have not ceased to be
an Englishman, and for that reason cannot be in party with the Bishops, who by
their false-prerogative Doctrines, and other shameful Assistances, so lately
betrayed the Charters and Liberties, Rights and Privileges of their Country,
were setting up an absolute irresistible Power in K. Charles II. which being
demised to K. James, endangered not only the Liberty and Property, but Body and
Soul of the Nation. Nor can I so soon forget how their long debates, about
admitting the P. of Orange, our Good and Great King, to the Sovereignty, was
the occasion of spilling so much Protestant Blood in Ireland; nor the late
Protestation of some of the chief of their Party against his Majesty's Right to
the Crown; nor how careful they have been since, that (as it now falls out) he
should have no pretense to any rightful Title. If any Clergyman was so honest
as to Preach up his Right, as justly grounded on the Consent of the People, (as
Mr. Johnson for instance) he must lie under pain of the Church's highest
displeasure, though otherwise ever so Orthodox and Conformable; so that since
the beloved Title of Conquest is burnt by the Parliament, and the Matrimonial
Title is (to the great grief of all good Men) dead and buried with the Queen;
it remains according to Holy Church, that he has no Title at all, but only
bare Possession; and this they mean when they call him de facto.

But I cannot find that they will allow him to be King of the Clergy so much as
de facto. Alas! his Livings, whereby alone he is capable to oblige them to call
to mind their now forgotten Loyalty, which of late years they preached up, as
the sum of the Law and the Prophets; Alas! these good Things are taken out of
his hands by the Conquering Bishops, that the Clergy may have a separate
Interest from the State on this side the Water, and be led to pay an entire
Allegiance to the holy Order. When Hen. VIII. came to know that his Bishops
swore Allegiance to the Pope, he began to think of some ways and means how to
make himself King of his Clergy, which he saw could not be done but by casting
out the Pope's Power; and hence sprung that King's Reformation of his
Politics, rather than Religion. And if our good King were sensible of the
Reasons why an English Papacy is settled in a Committee of Six, viz. to fix the
Obedience of the Clergy on themselves exclusively, (for no Man can serve two
Masters) I doubt not but he would think fit to demand what is so much wanted,
viz. the Allegiance of the Clergy to their King; if he dissolves this Committee
he may ask and have, for where their Treasure is, there their Hearts will be
also. For these Reasons (said he) I shall be cautious how I enter into
Church Membership, since I plainly see that every Party of Christians embodied,
organized, clergy'd and modelled into a National Church, casts an awe upon
the Sovereign Power, and suffers it not to provide equally for the Common
Good of the Subject, but will appropriate the salus publica, and influence the
Government to serve its own particular, its own private Ends.

Thus, Sir, I have given you an account of those Prejudices, which have brought
forth Deism. But yet these very Prejudices without a strong assistance of
Passion, could never have wrought upon Men to cast off Revelation; for you see
the same Prejudices remain in the Deist turned Christian. Whosoever therefore,
upon the forementioned Reasons turns Deist, cannot be excused, though I could
heartily wish all these Pretenses could be taken away from 'em. I am far from
begrudging the Bishops and Clergy that small Maintenance, which by Law is
settled upon them; and, I hope, they have no other aim in discharging their
Offices, but to save our Souls, by imprinting on our Hearts the Reason, the
Excellency and Advantages of the Law of Christ. I hope also, that they comport
themselves to the Common Interest of their Native Country, and of the
Protestant Religion throughout the World. Truly I could wish that Notional
Divinity were laid aside for Practical, and that unintelligible Mysteries were
not insisted on, as matters of necessary Belief. He, who lately wrote his
Thoughts of the Causes and Occasions of Atheism, might have considered, that
he, who cloggeth the Notion of God with Absurdities, mis-leadeth Men beyond
Deism. I pray God give me his Grace, by which I may sincerely conform my self
to the Law of Christ, and I will never concern my self with the Speculative
Drs. in Divinity. And I heartily join with our Church in that Petition, Give
grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops and Curates, that they may both by
their Life and Doctrine, set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and
duly Administer thy holy Sacraments. By this they would bring Souls to Heaven,
gain the Love of all good People, secure their own Temporal Interests, stop the
Mouths of their Adversaries, and compel the Deists to become Christians.

I am, Sir, Your Affectionate, etc.

FINIS.
If your Curiosity should lead you to be an Ear witness of such Discourses I
have here Written to you, when I come to Town, which will be as soon as the
Parliament Sits, I will endeavor to give you that Satisfaction.


