OF PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD: Whether the Practice and Tradition thereof in the
CHURCH be truly CATHOLIC, and a competent Evidence of Apostolic Original and
Authority?

Humbly tendered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the JUDGES, and of
the Gentlemen of the Honorable Profession of the LAW:

With a PREFACE concerning the Reasons thereof, and the Concern of the Nation,
that the Differences about Religion be better considered, in order to a more
firm Foundation of an Honorable and Lasting PEACE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

To the Right Honorable John Lord Summers, Baron of Evesham, Lord High
Chancellor of England; Sir John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench;
Sir George Treby, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir Edward Ward, Lord
Chief Baron; and the rest of the Honorable Judges.
May it please Your Lordships.
THough at first to some it may seem strange and improper to offer a
Theological Controversy to the Consideration of Magistrates, and Judges of
Civil Causes; yet if the present Constitution of the Church of England, the
Nature of the Question, and the special Qualifications of the Persons for the
Consideration of such a Question, besides the Common Concern of all States and
Persons in Matters of Religion, be well considered, nothing can be more
reasonable: A Church professing, and glorying in the Profession, of a Religion
Established by Law; and so entirely subject to the Authority of the State, that
it cannot call a Synod, choose a Bishop, Dean or Prebend, make a Canon, or
alter any public Prayers of the Church without it; a Question of Prescription,
Usage, and Custom, than which none are more frequently examined, tried and
determined in our Civil Courts; and, by consequence, no Persons more proper to
give a Judgment upon such a Question, because none more versed and expert in
Cases of that nature than those of the Honorable Profession of the Law.
Besides, Your Lordships, and the rest of that Honorable Profession, have
another Qualification indispensably requisite to a just and true Judgment,
Indifferency and Freedom from any special Prejudice, more than what is common
to the whole Nation, and as much above that as any Persons in it; I mean that
of Education; by which, though the inconsiderate Vulgar, and People of little
Judgment, are very strangely affected and moved, either fondly affecting, or
childishly abhorring what has nothing of real Good or Evil, but what proceeds
from an abused or deceived Imagination; yet Men of Parts, Judgment, and
Experience can more easily extricate themselves out of the fetters and manacles
of such Impressions and Prejudice upon consideration of sufficient Grounds and
Reasons. But the Generality of the English Clergy, and Non-Conformists, are
under a double special Prejudice and Pre-ingagement: the Authority and Credit
of their Party; and their own in particular, having not only imbibed a Special
Opinion in the Case, but inconsiderately asserted, and so espoused it also,
besides the Prudential Caution of not disobliging or offending their Auditors:
though many Protestants in other Parts are of another Opinion, and the most
learned here have deserted the old Cause, both in their Disputes in the
University, and in their Controversial Writings. And therefore, as every honest
Man in any Difference would desire the Judgment of such as are most
indifferent, unbyassed, and impartial, so every wise Man will desire that they
may be Persons of most Ability, Skill, and expert in such Matters: And in both
these respects I know none more proper to judge of this Case than Your
Lordships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honorable Profession.

Nor is this all, that You are thus qualified to judge of this matter; but you
have also a Concern, a double Concern in it; but, that it may be fairly and
truly determined; a Concern which obliges you to Impartiality, that the Truth
may be cleared, and an End put to such Differences; both in regard to the
Places you hold, and the Interest you have in the Civil State of the Nation;
and in regard of your Personal Interest and particular Concerns both in this
Life and hereafter. For Matters of Religion are of no little Importance to the
Well-being of States, as well as of particular Persons; and to the Well-being
of particular Persons as well in this Life, as hereafter. And all this in a
double respect; in respect to the Providence of God, and in respect of their
Natural Efficacy and Tendency. It is very manifest, that almost all the
Unhappiness, Troubles and Disturbance which this Nation has suffered for more
than 150 Years last past, have proceeded from unhappy Differences about Matters
of Religion: And it would be as evident, if duly considered, that there is as
little Likelihood, if Possibility, of any long Continuance of Peace without
some proper Application to so fatal a Root of Mischief amongst us, for the
Extirpation or Suppression of it. Nor is this so vain, unreasonable, or
impracticable a thing to be thought on or attempted, as most Men are apt to
presume upon the Vnsuccessfulness of the Attempts which have been made, if
better considered. It is no unusual thing for Men to learn from the Errors of
former Attempts so to correct their Methods and Measures, as to accomplish with
ease what others with great Labor were not able to effect. Many things in
Practice are like Riddles in Speculation, which, after many have found
insoluble by their utmost Study, appear at last, when the Secret is once
revealed, very plain and easy to the meanest Capacity. But in such Differences
as these there is usually a double Secret; the one Supernatural, managed by
invisible Ministers of the Divine Providence; the other Natural and Humane,
proceeding from Error of the Understanding, or Corruption of the Will and
Affections in one or both of the Parties: And for the most part there are
Faults on both sides, if not from the beginning, at least in the Progress and
Continuance of the Difference. For it is no unfrequent thing for such as have a
Good Cause at first, to spoil it in the Management.

And such is the Case in these Differences in Religion, which have so long
infested this part of the World: Wherein the Supernatural Secret is the
Operation of those Invisible Powers by the Commission or Permission of God, for
Correction of what was and is amiss in the several Parties, among whom they
arose; the Consideration of which belonging more properly to Divines, I shall
say nothing of it here. But of those Differences, the first and most
considerable are those between the Roman Church, and those who pretend a
Reformation. And the Natural and Humane Secret in them lies in certain Faults
on both sides. The Faults and Scandals of the Papacy and Court of Rome were so
gross and notorious, that all good and intelligent People groaned for a
Reformation long before Luther was born. But the Faults of them, who pretended
to that Work, will appear, when well considered, no less, neither in Number,
nor Nature: There is none of them all that is not notoriously guilty of
Sacrilege, Schism and Heresy; besides diverse Unchristian Practices to promote
or maintain their Party. It is even natural to Men to run out of one Extreme
into the other: and the Evil Spirits, when they are permitted, cease not to
instigate the corrupt disposition of Men to the utmost they can. Hence have
proceeded those many endless Differences among themselves, who at first
differed only from the Church of Rome: And their Faults and Miscarriages are so
notorious, that they are many of them confessed, acknowledged, and disclaimed
by diverse of the most learned of all Parties. The English Reformation, which
was not faultless before, was farther corrupted by Cranmer, (who, tho by some
magnified as a Martyr, will appear in time to have been so mischievous an
Instrument both in Church and State, as makes him very unworthy of any
honorable Character or Memory in any part of the Catholic Church, but
especially that of England) and settled at last through the prevalence of a Party
of Calvinian Sectaries, with such Abuses and Corruptions in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as the most learned and eminent of the English Clergy
have long desired and endeavored what they could to rectify, but have never
been able to effect, or scarce dared to attempt it in any great Matters, being
abused and bug-beared with popular Outcries and Imputations of Popery, (with
which the People of this Nation have been very grossly abused) whenever they
dared to assert or own any thing of the Primitive Genuine Christianity contrary
to the Nations of that Faction; who have been pricks in their Eyes, and thorns
in their Sides, both to Church and State, ever since, by the just Judgment of
God, for their Politic Compliances with the Corruptions of that pretended
Reformation; which are in truth much greater than is believed or suspected by
many good People, as I may possibly, by the Grace of God, show more
particularly in due time.

But for the present, to calm the Minds and stop the Mouths of such as may be
offended at what I say, as briefly as may be, I shall only recommend to their
Consideration, if they be Dissenters, the Expostulation of a late leading Man
amongst them, Mr. Richard Baxter, to the zealous Anti-Papists, which, he says,
is written to try, if it may be, to promote our common Repentance, and to
reform the Dominal Distaken Reformation of those, who have sinned by Extremes;
which, by the assumed Name of Reformation have wronged God, and the Truth, and
Men's Souls, with the greater Advantage and Success. Thus of the Reformation in
general in his Book against Foreign Jurisdiction, printed but little before his
Death, Part 2. chapter 1. and chapter 7. he sets down together no less than seven
summary Heads of False Charges and Wrongs done to the Papists by the Sectarian
weakheaded part of Protestants, as he elsewhere calls them: 1. Some Men, says
he, do ignorantly charge some Errors on the Papists, which they are not guilty
of: 2. or lay the Errors of some few upon the most: 3. Some make Errors, which
are but de Nomine, to seem to be de Re: 4. and lesser Errors to seem Great: 5.
Some take diverse Truths to be Errors: 6. And some are ready to call some lawful
Customs of the Papists by the Name of Popery and Antichristian: 7. Some would
deny the Papists the common Civilities and Liberties which are their due, etc.
And elsewhere he gives us part of a Catalogue of such rash Charges with an etc.
to let us know that those are but part: How far Protestants mistake and rashly
Charge them in the Doctrines of Predestination, Free Will, Grace, Merits,
Justification, Redemption, Perseverance, etc. I, says he, have freely showed
in my Catholic Theology, and End of Doctrinal Controversies, and Ludovicus le
Blank, after Others, has excellently opened. Which is a plain Confession that
in all those Differences, besides that about Antichrist, (which he does not at
all approve) the Fault lies on the side of the Protestants and the Nominal
Mistaken Reformation. And herein I know no Conformists, except Calvinian
Sectaries, who do not agree with him, and those Others he mentions. And for
Conformists, they may there see, without looking further, that there are and
have been many amongst us of greatest Reverence and Name, (as he elsewhere
expresses it) who have thought the Differences as unjust and unreasonable on
the Protestant side in diverse other Particulars; such as Archbishop Laud,
Archbishop Bramhall, Bishop Guning, Bishop Sparrow, Bishop Parker, Dr.
Hammond, Dr. Heylyn, Dr. Pierce, Dr. Saywell, Dr. Beveridge, Dr. Sherlock, Mr.
Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell; all whom he particularly names, and endeavors to
answer: To whom might be added, for my purpose, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Cousens,
Bishop Tailor, Bishop Forbes, Dr. Field, and diverse other eminent learned Men
in and since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, besides diverse now living. And a
worthy dignified Clergyman of the City, in a Book lately printed, has
asserted that the Reformation was, and was to be, but an imperfect Work. By all
which it is easy to be perceived, that the Cause of the Reformation is no such
clear Cause, or infallible Truth, as is generally believed, by those who are
educated in such a Presumption or Persuasion: Which might also justly be
suspected from the Differences, which arose presently, and have been continued
from the beginning with bitter Contentions between the Principal Actors in that
Work, and their several Parties to this day; which are things manifest to all
People in all Places, where any thing called the Reformation has prevailed.
But there are other Matters very observable in this Case, as several indirect
Ends and Motives, which probably might be, and certainly were the Inducements
to many of the Beginners and Promoters of it; the Irregular Manner in which it
was managed and settled; the subtle Accommodations of the principal parts of
the Work to recommend the Preachers, and gratify the People, but undermining
the Honor of Christ, and the Power of Godliness, and settling the People in
Presumption and Security upon a False Foundation; according to the Description
of the Apostle, Speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after them; and
the Fruits and Effects agreeable thereunto; a plain Indication that it was not
of God, but in the Nature of a Judgment, and that they knew not what they did,
nor what Spirit they were of: which, though certain Truths, and very evident when
looked into, yet are not so obvious to common Observation. Nor indeed, was I my
self so sensible of much of them till after much Study and Endeavors to
promote the Service of God, and Good of my Country, it all seemed to me to be
under an Enchantment, so that no Good could be done: Whereupon considering the
Fruits, according to our Savior's Rule, upon a fair Invitation and Opportunity
I resolved upon a Retirement, and a Review of the Reformation, the Root which
produced no better Fruits: And coming to it with much Sincerity and
Impartiality, I soon perceived all this that I have here said, and more, very
clearly; and some things, which relate to the Civil State and present
Settlement of this Nation; of which I soon gave an account to such Persons as I
thought most proper, to acquaint His Majesty with it; to discharge my own
Conscience, whatever was farther done in it.

I do not deny but there was need of a Reformation of diverse things: but none
know better than your Lordships, and the Gentlemen of your Profession, how
common a thing it is for Men, who have really a good Cause, to make it ill
through Passion, Partiality, unreasonable Demands or Charges, and such ill
Management as, if it come to Trial, it must be found against them; or though it
be not Good, yet through Partiality or Prejudice to think it Good; and then,
when by degrees they have well fixed and rivetted that Opinion, and besides
engaged their Reputation in it, to persuade themselves that those things are
lawful for the Maintenance of it, which, in truth, are not; and those things
useful or necessary, which, in conclusion, will but expose and ruin it: how
much Mischief People thus affected frequently bring upon themselves and others,
and endless Vexations, when obstinate in their Opinion, resolute in their
Demands, and pertinacious in their Contentions, right or wrong: how undecent
and unbecoming, even in Civil Matters, this appears to all wise and good Men,
who have Opportunity to observe the Truth of the Case: On the other side, how
much more Prudent it is, as well as Just and Honest, if a Man have the
Misfortune to purchase an ill Title, or be unhappily concerned in an ill Cause,
to endeavor to make it Good by fair Agreement with Parties concerned, and
Tender of what is just and reasonable; and such honest Means as will at least
secure his Reputation, if not his Cause also, however much mend the matter.
This has been always my Practice, and this I am resolved to do in this Case, of
what I have discovered upon my Review aforesaid: I do utterly disclaim all the
Iniquity of the Case that I have already discovered, or can discover, all the
Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy, and other Corruptions of the pretended
Reformation in general, and of that of England in particular. And though I do not
forsake the Corruptions of this Church to espouse those of another; yet I think
fit to make my own Cause good, and to stand only upon such Terms, as I can
comfortably refer to the Goodness and Mercy of God, and as I am satisfied will
make it their Faults, not mine, who shall refuse Agreement and Communion with
me. What I think prudent in my own Case, if it be so indeed, I could wish the
whole Nation did see it as well as I: For I believe it a more firm Foundation
for a lasting Peace and true Happiness than any other we can build upon. And if
I be not mistaken in the Matters in Difference, there is scarce any but such,
as many principal Men of the one side think ought to be yielded by them, or as
all on the other confess may, for just Cause, be granted by them; or may be
otherwise accommodated by only fit Explications and Expressions. To which,
since the most considerable on both sides have showed a very good Disposition,
and the Nature and Precepts of the Gospel, and the Peace, and Repose, and
Common Good of Mankind, especially in this part of the World, which may have a
great Influence upon the rest, do require it; I believe it would be for the
Honor and Interest of which side soever should do it, to make the Proposal,
provided it be very just and reasonable. Of those Matters, which are thought
ought to be yielded, this, which I propose to your Lordships Consideration,
concerning the ancient Practice of Prayers for the Dead, is one, and the most
proper Instance that can be in all respects. It is indeed a double Instance;
for it is a plain Evidence, that one of the principal Suppositions, with which
not only Multitudes of People in these last Ages, but ever since the first Ages
of Christianity, have been deceived and misted, with very plausible pretense,
is notwithstanding false in it self, besides fallacious misapplications of what
is true: as appears abundantly by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and the Common Practice
of the Ancient Christians in their Contests with Heretics and Schismatics.
And it is in its self one of the greatest Instances of the Power of Prejudice
to abuse weak Men out of their apparent Interest, without any other competent
ground or reason; of the Weakness of Men to be so abused; and of the
Inconsiderateness of those who presume to be positive, and direct others in
such Cases, that I know of.

My intention at first was to have published a Vindication of the True English
Liturgy, the first Book of Ed. 6. composed by known English Clergymen, and
afterward corrupted and disordered by Cranmer, and a Faction of Foreigners, and
other unknown Calvinian Sectaries in Secret, and so craftily imposed upon the
Church and Nation. But when I considered, in these unhappy Differences, how
partially Zealous the Generality of Clergymen (who have any Zeal at all) are
for their own Party, more than for the common Concerns of Religion, or of their
Country; and how unconcerned the chief of the Clergy of this Nation are, and
have been ever since the State assumed the Supreme Power of Ecclesiastical
Matters, as if either dispirited, or presuming that the Care also is incumbent
only upon them who have assumed the Power; and how little I have found, by
Experience, is to be expected from them; and, on the other side, how necessary
notwithstanding it is for the Peace and Repose of this Nation, that the
Occasions of such mischievous Dissentions should be better considered and
removed; I presently perceived I had a fair Opportunity in this to present a
proper instance of a Matter of such Importance to Persons as well qualified to
judge, and who were likely to be as sensible of the Importance of it, as any;
and thereupon concluded to present it alone to the Consideration of Your
Lordships, and the Gentlemen of Your Honorable Profession; having already, as
to the rest, made a considerable Experiment of what I have here said, of the
Hopes we may have of a good Success, if they, to whom it does belong, will but
do what is in their Power toward it: For having published a Liturgy,
Entitled, The Liturgy of the Ancients represented, as near as well may be, in
English Forms, not much different (only a little more complete) from that
Restitution of the True English Liturgy attempted by the Scotch, with the
Assistance of the Principal of the English Bishops, Anno 1637. I presented it
to some of the principal learned Men first of the English, who much approved
it, and wished it restored by Law; then of the Lutherans, who also approved it,
and declared their Satisfaction to communicate in that Form; and, at last, of
the Roman Catholics, who had no Exceptions to the Matter or Form of it. And,
in short, to say the Truth, the Abuse and Corruptions of the Public Liturgy in
these two particulars, Of Prayers for the Dead, and the Christian Sacrifice, to
mention nothing more, are so gross and notorious, that they alone are
sufficient to make the Church of England inexcusably Guilty of Schism, and
justly obnoxious to Excommunication, (which may be the Enchantment it seems to
lie under) and unsafe for any pious Person, after notice, to hold Communion
with it: so that it seems not only expedient and prudent for the State to
consider these Matters, (for otherwise nothing is to be expected from these
Bishops) but absolutely necessary: And so I leave it with Your Lordships.

Your Lordships most Humble Servant.

Of the Practice of Prayers for the DEAD In the Christian Church.
THE Performance of any good Offices for the Dead, even to their Bodies, their
Bones, their Memories, their Wills, etc. has always been reputed a very
commendable thing among all civilized Nations; and whatever has been acted to
the contrary, barbarous, and inhumane; and the only Neglect of such Offices by
such as were under any special Obligation, of evil consequence; as if Mankind
had some secret sense that Separate Souls were sensible of the Kindness or
Unkindness of those who survived them, and had some power to gratify or
revenge the Kindness or Injuries, especially of their Relations, and such as
they had any special Interest in in their Lifetime. And if such inferior
Offices to their Bodies and Memories have been so reputed, much more may such
good Offices, as Prayers for the Souls departed, deserve commendation. And
accordingly it has been always commonly practiced, by all Nations, Gentiles,
Jews, Mahometans, and Christians; and that without any known Beginning: but
very probably by Tradition from the common Concerning Matters transmitted from
them, and received and conserved by the Gentiles. See Mr. Dodwell's 2d Letter,
8.
Parents of Mankind, being very agreeable to Nature, and confirmed by
Apparitions.

And certainly this is a thing so innocent, so free from all appearance of
Evil, so desirable both for ones self and their Friends, that it is very
strange that any, especially good People, should be persuaded, nay frighted
from it; and much more that any should so presume, upon their own Opinion and
Conceit, as to offer to persuade them so contrary to the Practice of the whole
World in general, and of the whole Catholic Church, without clearer Evidence
in so obscure a Case, as is that of the middle State of Souls to us Mortals:
which is not to be believed could ever have been without some secret Energy of
those Powers of Darkness, which have effected greater Mischiefs than this by
the same Instruments.

It is the Practice of the Jews at this day, and has been so without any known
beginning: was so before our Savior's time, as appears by the Book of
Maccabces, and their ancient Form of Prayer, which, it is said, they used in the
Captivity, still extant in their Talmud; and never was reproved by our Savior,
or any of his Apostles, or of the Primitive Christians.

It is the Practice of the whole Catholic Church at this day, and of all
Christians, except such as according to the unanimous Sentiments of the
Ancients are gone, and are, out of it; and has been so without any known
beginning, in their most solemn Worship; so that no Church can be assigned
where they, who scruple at it now, could have had Communion without it: And
never was opposed, contradicted, or questioned by any one of any Reputation in
the Catholic Church; or by any one at all for near 400 years.

The first, who is known to have questioned it, was Aerius, in the time of
Epiphanius, a Presbyter, a frantic, proud, conceited Man, discontented because
he could not get a Bishopric, and thereupon, it is probable, quarrelled not
only at diverse Practices of the Church, but at Episcopacy it self: an ill Man
by the Judgment of all; and Epiphanius and St. Austin reckon him in their
Catalogues of Heretics for his Opposition of this Practice especially.

The next, whose Testimony is produced in this Cause, is one Stephanus Gobarus,
and obscure Scribler, and a confessed Heretic, even by Usher, who alleges
his Testimony, as well as by Photius, from whom he takes it, and who gives this
Character of his Book, that it seems a Work of much Labor, but little Profit;
and a Study rather of Applause and Vainglory, than any great Usefulness. It
was a Collection of the different Sentences of the Fathers in diverse points of
Doctrine, and alleged to prove such a Difference of Opinions in this Case,
and what was the true Sentence of the Church. A special Witness, and to much
purpose! an Heretic to prove the true Sentence of the Church! and a
vainglorious Person, who, out of Ostentation of Parts and Learning, seeks for
Differences in the Fathers, and sets himself up for a Judge! which he might, if
he had pleased, have done also in the Scripture it self. But after all he does
not so much as declare his Opinion in the principal Question in this Case, but
only in a by-point. A poor Cause that stands in need of such Supports!

If we set him aside, as well we may, who is neither a competent Witness of the
Sentence of the Church, nor does declare his own in this Case, we find not
another in near 700 years after Aerius, till Peter de Bruis, and one Henricus,
a runagate Monk, who took up a Trade of Preaching, and spent what he got in
Gaming, and on Harlots: They denied also the Baptism of Infants, the Christian
Sacrifice, Public Churches, etc. against them Petrus Cluniacensis, a Man
eminent for Learning and Sanctity, wrote, and St. Bernard preached, and
confirmed his Doctrine with so great a Miracle, as convinced Multitudes, who
had been seduced by them.

After these arose one Waldo, a Citizen of Lions, very rich, but unlearned, who
probably had a Zeal for God, but not according to Knowledge, and attributing
too much to his own Opinion, procured certain Books to be written in his own
Language, and distributing his Estate among the Poor, took upon him the
Apostolic Office of Preaching, and began the Sect, called after his own Name,
Waldenses; and from their Place and Quality, The Poor of Lions. Among other
Heterodox Opinions, (whereof some were peculiar to their own Sect, and
disallowed by all others) this of rejecting Prayers for the Dead was one.

The Apostolici of that time, I suppose, were not a distinct Sect, but the
same, who assumed that Name. And the Albigenses, who in the next Century
increased very much, till by the secular Power and force of Arms they were
suppressed, seem to have been a Branch of the same Root; however, in this
particular they agreed, as they did in most others.

Since those, I know not any Sect which has arisen, and which questioned or
contradicted Prayers for the Dead, till those which have sprung out of what is
called the Reformation: For I do not find that Wickelif, and his Followers
here, the Lollards, or John Huss, or Hierom of Prague, who carried his Books
and Doctrines into their own Country, and were all three Men of Parts and
Learning, ever opposed Prayers for the Dead, though among the Opinions attributed
to Huss, one is, that there is no Purgatory Fire; which is denied by others,
who yet are for Prayers for the Dead. But by all the several Sects of the later
Reformers, since Luther began, they have been questioned, opposed, and left out
of their Public Prayers.

Only here in England, in the first Liturgy, composed by English Clergy, in the
Reign of King Edward 6. which I therefore call The True English Liturgy, the
ancient Prayers for the Dead were retained, both in the most Solemn Office of
the Daily Sacrifice, and at Funerals: But these and other principal Parts of
the Liturgy were soon after new-modelled in a clandestine manner by Cranmer,
Bucer, and other Foreigners, and Calvinian Sectaries; and craftily imposed upon
the Church and Nation: And the Abuse is continued to this day.

This is the true Original and Succession of all the Opposition which has ever
been made to this Practice, of all Mankind in general, and of the whole
Catholic Church of Christ; by Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics, and the
meanest of all those; not a Man amongst them of any Eminence for Piety, or any
Virtue, or so much as Parts or Learning: much less any Man of Note in the
Church: much less any Church, Party, or Part of the Catholic Church, who were,
or who continued in Communion with The Catholic Church, or any Particular
Catholic Church, as they anciently distinguished them from the Assemblies and
Associations of Heretics, and Schismatics in the same City. It is very
observable, wonderful, and a great Evidence of unquestionable or undeniable
Truth, that in so many Ages, when there had been so many so considerable
Parties of Heretics and Schismatics, and so malicious, spiteful, and enraged,
as many of them were against the Church, that none of the most considerable of
them should ever seek to advantage their Cause by such a Question; which
doubtless they would not have failed to have done, had they apprehended any
color of Truth or Advantage in it: that none in all the Parts of the World
should ever oppose it but such an obscure, inconsiderate and inconsiderable
Generation of People, till the late Reformers sprung up, who thought they could
never reform enough, or pick quarrels too much, till they had brought that,
which might have been a considerable Cause, if well laid and managed, to an
indefensible brable. Amongst them indeed there have been many Men of sufficient
Learning; but, but few of that Ingenuity, Impartiality, freedom from Prejudice,
temporal Interest, or Fear of Displeasing, and of that Generosity, as to assert
the Truth plainly, without respect of Persons or Parties: and those few have
been very much born down (among us especially) by the Violence and Headiness of
Parties and Factions. Yet such is the Power and Evidence of Truth in this Case,
that it has found Advocates amongst the most learned of all Parties.

Of this I think it not improper to produce an instance or two in this Place:
The first shall be an eminent Person both for Learning and Virtue, Bishop
Forbes, the first Bishop of Edenburg, promoted by King Charles 1. who is
reported to have said of him, That he had found out a Bishop, who deserved that
a See should be made for him. In his Considerationes Modestae, Controversia de
Purgatorio, cap. 3.. 17. coming to speak of Prayers and Oblations for the Dead;
Sed hic primum, etc. But here first, says he, is to be reproved the Opinion of
some rigid Protestants, who do altogether censure and condemn Prayers for the
Dead; because they find no Precept or Example of such Prayers in the Old or New
Testament. Certainly even those, who are most against it, dare not deny that it
is a most ancient Custom, and most (universally) received in the whole Church
of Christ, that in the Public Prayers of the Church Commemoration should be
made for the Dead, and Rest be prayed for to God for those who died piously,
and in the Peace of the Church. And having cited diverse of the Ancients for it,
he adds: This most ancient Custom was full of Piety, and most truly did
Cassander say, This was always fixed in Note. Then this was agreed among All.
All Christian Minds, That the Spirits of those, who being initiated in the
Sacrament of Christ, departed this Life in the Confession of his Name, with
signification of Repentance, should be commended to the Mercy of God, that
Remission of Sin, Eternal Rest, and a Part with the Elect, might be entreated
for them. This second part is so cited in Usher, p. 246. as is apt to lead the
Reader into mistake, as if they were not agreed in more than the Author did
intend.
And although concerning that State of Souls, for which those things were
profitable, it was neither sufficiently manifest, nor agreed among all, yet all
judged this Office, as a Testimony of Charity toward the Deceased, and a
Profession of Faith concerning the Immortality of Souls, and Resurrection to
come, to be grateful to God, and profitable to the Church. Then he says, This
most Ancient and Universal Custom of the Church very many and most learned
Protestants do not disallow; and cites the Apology of the Augsburg Confess.
Chemnicius, Mentserus, Luther, Gerard, Vrbanus Regius, Vorstius, Vossius, Dr.
Field, Bishop Andrews, and passing over in silence very many others, as he
says, he recites the Words of the Liturgy of Edward 6. both in the Office for
the Communion, and that for Burials; laments that such most ancient and pious
Prayers should, by the Persuasion of Bucer, and others, be expunged; and
wishes that the Church of England, which has showed great Moderation in many
other things of less moment, had rather conformed her self in this business, as
also in some others, to the most ancient Custom of the Universal Church, than
for some Errors and Abuses, which had by degrees crept in, plainly rejected it,
and wholly taken it away, to the great Scandal of almost all other Christians.

I need add no more after this Learned and Apostolic Bishop, only, in short,
take notice of what Vrbanus Regius says, that None reject it but Epicureans
and Sadduces; and Vorstius, that No Good Man can dislike it; and Bishop
Andrews, that There is little that can be said against it; and conclude this
matter with the Words of the learned and famous Hugo Grotius; The use of
Praying for the Dead, received through all Churches of the East, no less than
of the West, ought not to be condemned. And after some reasons for it, and
something concerning the Jews, he adds, The Ancient Liturgies are not to be
condemned, since Christ himself did never reprehend the Prayers for the Dead,
commonly used among the Jews; of which there is a Form extant in the Talmud,
made, as is believed, in the Babylonian Captivity, and mentioned in the second
Book of the Maccabees.

It will be replied, That as great a Man, and of the Church of England, as any
of those, has written against it, the famous Usher, Archbishop of Armath. It
is very true he has, and employed and strained all his Learning, all his
Parts, and all his Skill, and a little too much, to oppose it; and all to very
little purpose for his own Cause, but to very good purpose against it: For it
is a great Evidence and Demonstration of what Bishop Andrews truly said, That
there is little that can be said against what this great Man takes such pains
to oppose. The sole Question between him and his Adversary was, Whether the
Fathers of the first 400 or 500 Years held that Prayer for the Dead is both
commendable and godly? as appears by the Challenge, which was in those very
Words, and no other. How, and where, does he answer this plain Question? His
Title of that part of his Answer is general, Of Prayer for the Dead. He saw
well enough how little he had to say to that plain Question; and therefore
resolved to take more Liberty, to say something of the matter of his Title, tho
little or nothing to the Question. He spends three score and ten pages upon the
general matter; but, if I mistake not, not ten lines directly and closely to
the special Question. To use his own words p. 170. He alleges indeed a
number of Authorities to blear Men's Eyes with all; which being narrowly looked
into will be found nothing at all to the purpose.
Which is to abuse, not so much his Adversary, as his Reader, with a specious
appearance of an Answer, which, in truth and reality, is nothing to the
purpose. That which comes nearest to the purpose is what he says, page 246.
These Two Questions, says he, must necessarily be distinguished: Whether
Prayers and Oblations were to be made for the Dead? and, Whether the Dead did
receive any peculiar Profit thereby? In the latter of these, he (the Reader)
shall find great Difference among the Doctors: in the former, very little, or
none at all. This is indeed to the purpose: but his Resolution of the former
Question, though very true, is a plain Confession against himself. For if they be
agreed that Prayers and Oblations were to be made for the Dead, then certainly
they held that that was commendable and godly; which is all that his Adversary
did affirm then, and that I do principally assert now: for what I have to
allege farther, is but a Consequence of that. And his Resolution of the
latter Question is manifestly false, and a disingenuous Assertion: for if among
so great a number of Doctors in so many Years he could have assigned five, or
six, or ten, who had really differed in that point from the rest, (which those
few he cites rightly understood did not) had that been a Great Difference? And
if some Authors do say, that some, or that many, in their time, were doubtful
in the point, is that a sufficient proof that it was still a Question in the
Church? when they name not one Person in particular, much less any Doctor, nor
tell us so much as of what quality they were, who had those Doubts. When a
Difference is Great, there must be some proportion between the Contenders: and
where a Question is continued, there must be some Disputes, Contention, or
Debates. But if Peoples secret Doubts must be taken for Questions in the
Church, that is the ready way to bring all Religion into question: and it is
not to be doubted but such dealings in Controversies has had its share in
producing this growth of Skepticism and Atheism of late. That such a Man as
this should put Colors upon Causes; should hold up Contentions; should be so
addicted to Parties, as in favor to them to confirm People in Opinions, which
if false are mischievous, and if true of little Advantage, and contrary to so
great Authority as is on the other side; and so expose his Judgment or
Integrity, is a great Unhappiness to himself, and a Scandal to others.

It is possible, what others may have observed in this great Man (for it is a
scurvy thing to be engaged in an ill Cause) may have taught them more Wisdom;
for, for ought I can find, as well in the Controversial Writings of late, as in
the Disputations at the University, the Old Cause, An Preces pro Defunctis sint
Licitae? is quite deserted, and that Question is turned into another, An Preces
pro Defunctis antiquitus usurpatae inferant Purgatorium Papisticum? It is well
Men have learned so much Wisdom for themselves, as to mend their Cause so far
as that; and it is to be wished, that they may also learn so much Honesty, as
to undeceive the People, and restore to them, for themselves and their Friends,
the Comfort and Benefit of that ancient Catholic Practice. Mr. Thorndike, one
of the learned Persons this Church has produced, and a late Bishop of St.
Asaph, have done well to do what they could, and restore it upon their own
Tomb-stones, though they could not do it in the Church: and if all who believe
well, would but do so well, as profess what they believe, which certainly they
ought to do, we should soon see the Truth revive and flourish beyond
Expectation; and so, much of our Contentions abated.

Thus concerning the Persons who have opposed this Practice, and set up
themselves against the Authority of the whole Catholic Church. I come now to
consider the Opposition it self, their Allegations and Reasons. Such is the Wit
of Man, and the Subtilty of Satan, that scarce any Truth is so evident, but
they can find out some specious Appearances to set up against it. But such is
the Mercy and Wisdom of God, that he has provided sufficient means for
Direction for all such as keep within the Bounds of Humility and Obedience;
that is, in Subjection not only of their Wills, but also of their Intellects
and Understandings, to his Orders, Ordinances and Prescriptions, the very
Business of their Lives in this World, for Preparation for another. And to
such, besides the Common Means, he will kindly vouchsafe a special Guidance
sufficient for their Circumstances. Of the Danger our Savior and his Apostles
have given to all fair Warning, and great Caution; acquainting us with the End,
why the most Wise and Gracious God permits it, for Trial and Exercise; the
Danger and Subtilty of the Ministers of Satan, such as should deceive, if it
were possible, the very Elect; the special Marks to know and avoid them, viz.
Their Fruits, specious Pretenses, (Sheeps Clothing,) and Distraction and
Disagreement among themselves, crying, Here is Christ, and There is Christ; and
special Directions, Believe them not, Go not out after them. All this Provision
has the Devil attempted to undermine, partly by raising real Scandals and
Offenses, and partly by strongly representing Imaginary ones. But against all
this Humility and Charity will fortify us; and the Grace, special Guidance and
Mercy of God will preserve us, if we be careful to continue in those Graces. It
was Pride, and Arrogance, and Discontent in Aerius, which gave the (...), etc.
Epiphan. p. 905. a.
Devil Advantage to instigate him to the first Opposition of such a Catholic
Practice. It was Pride, Vanity, and Ostentation of Parts, by which he set
Gobarus to work to show his Learning and Acuteness in finding out Differences
of Opinions among them, who perhaps in many of those things differed no more
than the Writers of the Sacred Scriptures seem to do. For I do not find that he
made any special Opposition against this Practice. But I doubt it was not
imaginary, but real Scandal and gross Abuses of a good Practice, by which Waldo
and his Followers, and the Albigenses, were moved to oppose all without
Distinction: though there seems to have been in him, with a Zeal for God, but
without Knowledge, a Mixture of Pride and Conceitedness. And it was real, and
not imaginary Scandal, by which Luther was at first moved to oppose
Indulgencies, and his Followers at first to oppose even this innocent and
commendable Practice. But in such Men as Usher and Bucer, it was the Reputation
of the Cause they had espoused in gross, and Compliances with the Times, and
their particular Interests, by which they were moved. But let us but carefully
follow our Savior's Admonitions and Directions, wisely distinguish the
Ingredients of the Composition of Truth and Falsehood, and honestly embrace,
hold fast, and own the Truth, when we have the Opportunity, and we shall not
want sufficient Light and Evidence to find it.

The specious Appearances set up against this Catholic Practice of the Church
of Christ are these: 1. That there is no Scripture Authority for it. 2. That
the Ancient Practice was to Pray for all, such as were at Rest. 3. That the
Ancients were not agreed in their Opinions concerning the State of Separate
Souls, or the general Intention of the Church in those Prayers.

To detect the Fallacy, Falsity, and Impertinence of these Allegations, as
briefly as may be: To the first, I say, it is a mere Fallacy, and grounded upon
a false Supposition, that nothing is to be admitted in Doctrine or Worship but
what there is Scripture Authority for, if it be understood of a special
Authority; and their usual Pretenses of not Adding, or Diminishing, are to be
understood of those particular Parts or Books of the Scripture, as is plain by
the Additional Writings and Practices of Holy Men afterward. 2. It is
inconsistent with the Tradition of the Doctrine, and Institutions of the
Gospel, and of the Ordinances of the Apostles, which were all by Word and Deed,
without Writing, as the Common Laws of this Nation were at first settled: and
much of what was written, was written upon special Occasions, and much with
that Brevity and Conciseness, by the special Providence of God, as was
sufficient for them for whom it was intended, and yet so as should need an
Authentic Explication to preserve the Authority of the Catholic Church. 3. It
is contrary to the express Directions of the Scripture, to contend for the
Doctrine once delivered to the Saints, in general, and to hold the Traditions
they had received, whether by Word, or Epistle, etc. And if it be understood of
a general Authority, the Allegation it self is false: For it is contrary to all
those Scriptures, which declare the Authority of the Church, and require
Obedience to Superiors: And either way it is contrary to the Sentiments,
Testimony, and Practice of the Ancient Christians, who, in Questions of
Difficulty and Contests with Heretics, always inquired, not only what was
written by the Apostles, but also, or principally, what was delivered by them
to the Churches, which they founded, in all Parts of the World, of which the
Catholic Church does consist, which the Scripture it self styles the Pillar
and Basis of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. v. Grot. not only for the Sense and Meaning of
the Scripture, as Lawyers, with good reason do, when in doubts about the
Construction of Writings they inquire how the Usage has gone; for in that case
the Writing is the Principal Evidence: but in this case, what was delivered to
the Churches, which were completely and plainly instructed and ordered by the
Apostles, was the principal Inquiry, and the Scriptures but an accessory
Evidence, as our Year-Books are of the Common Law, in Questions concerning the
Common Law. But I doubt not but there was a special Providence in it, that so
much was written, and no more, and that it was written in such a manner.
Lastly, This has been the Practice and Pretense of Heretics and Schismatics,
in all Ages, to the intent with the better color to set aside the Authority of
the Catholic Church, that they might so make way to set up their own private
Opinions and Conceits in the Place thereof; but never more grossly, nauciously,
and scandalously, than by some of the Principal of the late Reformers, Calvin
especially, on the one side, inculcating and crying up The Pure Word of God,
The Pure Word of God; and on the other, abusing it, by straining wresting it to
serve their own turns, and eluding and evading what is plainly contrary to
them; which is now past all doubt, not only by the Confessions of Mr. Baxter
and Le Blank, but the many of all Parties, who have deserted diverse of those
Assertions, which were so hotly contended for under that specious Pretense: a
plain Evidence and Demonstration that they were no better than their
Predecessors in that Pretense. But besides all this, what I am now doing, if I
be not much mistaken, will be a particular demonstration of the Truth of what I
say.

To the other two Allegations, I say, they are both impertinent to the Question
under consideration here; which is only concerning the Matter of Fact and
Practice; I do not say that they are impertinent to the Subject in general, to
be considered upon other Occasions; but to this special Question: and therefore
to insist upon them in this Case, instead of directly answering to the
Question, is fallacious, captious, and an abuse to the Reader, to impose upon
him, distract him, and withdraw him from the proper Question. There might be
Difference in Forms, and various Intendments, and all consistent. Certainly
there was no such Difference or Variety either of Forms or Intendment, as there
is this day amongst Protestants of both, in their greatest Solemnity of the
Sacrament. But if the matter of Fact be certain, it may be in the Power of the
Church to order the Form, and at Liberty for every one to construe the
Intention, or make his Inferences or Observations for his own Use, as well as
of the Scripture. And the Matter of Fact is granted by the very Allegation: Nor
indeed is it much denied by any Men of Learning. Scio esse pervetustam hanc
precandi pro pie defunctis consuetudinem, says Bucer in his Censure; and after
he had a little endeavored to put off Tertullian, S. Cyprian, and Dionysius,
he adds, Sed sit hic quantumvis vetustus Dionysius; Et sit hujus atque aliorum
S. Patrum authoritas quantumlibet magna: attamen nostrum est tanto anteferre
omni humanae authoritati divinam, quanto Deus omni homine major est, and
sapientia, and nostri charitate, docendique nos omnia propensione. Jam or are
pro Defunctis nullae docent Scripturae, sive verbo, sive exemplo. Et vetitum
est quicquid his adjicere vel detrahere, Deuteronomy. 4. and 12. Solet nobis objici,
says Peter Martyr, Ecclesiam semper pro Defunctis orasse; quod quidem non
inficior; sed assero illius facti, neque Verbi Dei, neque Exempli, quod
desumitur ex Sacris literis auctoritatem habere, in 1 Cor. 3. fol. 45. Ed. Tig.
1579. Verum est quod Papistae aiunt, says Bullinger, Dec. 4. Ser. 10. Veteres
orasse and sacrificasse pro Defunctis: Scio quid Doctor Ecclesiae Insignis
Augustinus, quid Eloquentissimus Chrysostomus, aliique viri vetusti ac clari
hac de re scriptum relinquerunt: Sed quaero number hi recte fecerunt? Scio
damnatum fuisse Aerium, quod hujusmodi Orationes and Oblationes improbaret.
Afferunt secundum Maccabaeorum librum: Sed is nihil probat, cum non sit
Canonicus: Adjiciunt and Traditionem Apostolicam: Sed mihi id non videtur; nec
illi unquam in scriptis ita praecipiunt. This is the Sum of the Case, and
honestly said; and therefore I shall conclude this part with it.

Such is the Folly, Passion, and Inconsiderateness of Men, that they many times
bring such Causes to Trial, as upon their own showing, and hearing their own
Evidence only, appears to all intelligent and indifferent Persons to be against
them. And such I believe will this Cause of these Men appear to be to all
competent Judges, without more a do. Notwithstanding, for the more plain and
full Conviction and Satisfaction of such as are less intelligent and more
scrupulous; and that those Honorable Persons, to whose Consideration I present
it, may themselves judge of the Evidences, which extort these Confessions from
such as would elude them if they could, I will produce so much as is sufficient
for the purpose: and that I be not tedious, I will forbear all that, which
would prove it to have been a true Catholic Practice of the whole Church for
above 1200 years last past, and confine my self to the time allowed and
approved by the Church and State of England, that is, the time of the first
four 1. Of Nice, Anno 325. 2. Constant. Anno 381. 3. Ephesus, Anno 431. 4.
Chalced, Anno 481.
general Councils, and that preceding to the time of the Apostles; that is,
from that to the Year of our Lord 451.

As for the succeeding Ages, to this day, that it was observed all along per
totum Orbem, and therefore believed to have been delivered by the Apostles, as
the most ancient Writers upon the Church Offices affirm, I presume no Man will
deny; and therefore I shall only mention one Observation concerning those Ages:
I have made all the Search that possibly I could, both by Manuscripts and
printed Books, to discover the most ancient Forms of celebrating the Holy
Eucharist in the Latin Church: and though I have met with diverse Variations in
other parts, yet I never could discover any Alteration in that that is the
principal part, and as Dr. Barlow, late Bishop of Lincoln, says, the most
innocent part of the public Office, called The Canon of the Mass, since
Gregory the Great, nor indeed by him (...) believe the whole Canon is not of
less Antiquity than Gelasius, or S. Ambrose, if not much ancienter, diverse
particulars of it being found in more ancient Authors. It is not long since a
very Reverend and Learned Bishop, since deceased, speaking to me of it, said,
it was a Noble piece of Antiquity; and Dr. Barlow has left under his hand a
just Censure of one who cut that part out of an ancient Missel at Oxford, for
an ignorant half learned Fellow. This alone is an ample Evidence of the
Practice of all the Latin Churches for these Ages; which, from thence, I shall
endeavor to trace back to its Original.

S. Austin and S Paulinus both lived within the time prescribed, and died 20
years before the last of the said four Councils, about An. 431. S. Augustine was
a Person of great Natural parts, acquired Learning, Piety, Holiness, and of
great Authority and Reputation in the whole Catholic Church, especially in the
Latin Church, of which he is reckoned one of the chiefest Doctors. He had in
his younger time taught Rhetoric at Rome, and afterward at Millan, so that he
was acquainted with the World, as well as with Books, and every way as well
qualified to bear his Testimony in the Case as possibly could be. S. Paulinus
was a Person of great Quality and Estate, in great Esteem with the Emperor, and
of so great Devotion, that, embracing our Savior's Counsel, he Sold all,
distributed it to the Poor, and pious Uses, and betook himself to a strict
Religious Life in Poverty, after he had been preferred to great public
Offices; he was a Man of Parts and Learning, and well acquainted with the
Western parts, especially Italy, France, and Spain; and for his great Virtues
and eminent Sanctity was, by the Importunity of the People, made Bishop of Nola
in Campania: so that he also was every way qualified for another Witness in
this Case: and these two I suppose sufficient for their time, especially for
the Latin Church.

S. Paulinus in an Epistle to St. Augustine says as much as need to be in few
Words; that Vacare non posse, quod universa pro Defunctis Ecclesia supplicare
cons^evit, ap Aug. de Cura pro Mort. pr.
It cannot be in vain that the Universal Church is accustomed to pray for the
Dead. Not the Church, but the Universal Church; not only did at that time, but
was accustomed so to do; that is, time out of mind, without any known
beginning. And what was it accustomed to do? Not barely to commemorate, but to
pray and supplicate for them. Vniversa pro Defunctis Ecclesia supplicare
consuevit. As ample a Testimony, I think, as can be expressed in so few words.

S. Augustine in confirmation of this alleges the Book of Maccabees, and
adds, Sed etsi nusquam in Scriptu^is veteribus omnino legere^ur, non parva
tamen est Universae Ecclesiae, quae. in h^c consuetudine claret, Authoritas;
ubi in pre^ibus sace^dotis, quae Domino Deo ad ejus altar funduntur, locum
suum habet etiam Commendatio Mortuorum, S. Aug. de Cura pro Mortuis, c. ^.
But although we did no where at all read this in the ancient Writings, yet is
not the Authority of the Universal Church, which is clear in this Custom, a
small matter, when in the Prayers of the Priest, which are poured out to the
Lord God at his Altar, the Commemoration of the Deceased has also its proper
place. In this Testimony are diverse things observable, and very considerable:
1. The Authority of the Universal Church, not of a Particular Church, of a
City, of a Province, of Hippo, or Africa, but of the Universal Church, which,
however manifested or declared, is no small matter. 2. But in this it is
declared, in the most Solemn Acts of the Church, her most Solemn Address to
Almighty God at his Altar. So that here is the greatest Authority that is among
Mankind, and that most solemnly declared. 3. It is no new Resolution, but a
Custom, Consuetudo Vniversae Ecclesiae, an ancient Custom, and a universal
Custom, which he elsewhere upon another occasion expresses in this manner: Hoc
a Patribus traditum Universa observat Ecclesia, ut pro eis, qui in Corporis and
Sanguinis Christi Communione Defuncti sunt, cum ad ipsum Sacrificium suo loco
commemorantur, oretur, and pro illis quoque id offerri commemoretur. S. Aug. de
verb. Apost. Ser. 32. c. 2.
This being delivered from the Fathers (a Patribus traditum) does the Universal
Church observe, that for them who are departed in the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, when they are remembered at the Sacrifice it self in their
place, Prayer be made, and it be commemorated that that is offered for them
also. Not only for the Living, but for the Dead also, and in their proper
place. 4. This Custom and Tradition was not only for a general Commemoration,
but for a special Commendation.

And here, because this excellent Person has written much, and therefore
affords more observable matter than is ordinary in any one Author, I will
endeavor out of him alone to present the honest and ingenuous Reader with a
Scheme of the whole Custom and Practice of the Ancients, whereby he will the
better understand their Testimonies, and decern the Fallacies, Evasions,
Cavillings and Shufflings of the Adversaries of it. What was done by them on
behalf of the Deceased was either Public or Private: What was done in Private,
was Prayers, such as S. Augustine offered for his Mother in his Confessions,
lib. 9. cap. 13. Fasting, and Alms, etc. What was Public, was done either by
the Relations or Friends of the Persons deceased, and that was presenting their
Oblations, whether ordered by the Deceased, or freely offered by their Friends
on their behalf: Which, if they departed in Communion of the Church were
received, otherwise rejected, unless they were in the State of Penitents, and
were surprised in such case as the Priest should have absolved them, if he
could have been present: or what was done by the Bishop or Priest, with the
rest of the Clergy and People: And this was either a general Commemoration pro
omnibus in Christiana and Catholica Societate defunctis, as he speaks de Cura
pro Mat. c. 4. for all departed in the Christian and Catholic Society, (or
Communion) without any particular recitation of their Names, or a more
particular Memory of them by Name with others; or a more special Commendation
of a particular Person at his Death; and, besides certain other days, upon
their Anniversaries. And these were all performed at the Altar, and with the
Holy Sacrifice, except that at his Death, in case that happened after the
Priest had eaten, and then by some Canons it was to be performed solis
Orationibus, with Prayers only; but otherwise, and Orationibus and
Oblationibus; that is, with Prayers and Sacrifice both, for that is there to be
understood by Oblationibus. And as S. Augustine did intend all this in what he
says of the Universal Custom by Tradition from the Fathers, so did he believe
that the Souls departed were benefitted by them all. For his words immediately
preceding those before-recited out of his Sermon. de Verb. Apost. are,
Orationib. vero S. Ecclesiae, and Sacrificio salutari, and Eleemosynis, quae
pro eorum spi^itibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos adjurari, ut cum eis
misericordius agatur a Domino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt.
It is not to be doubted that the Dead are helped by the Prayers of the H.
Church, and the Salutary Sacrifice, and the Alms which are distributed for
their Spirits, that the Lord should deal more mercifully with them than their
Sins have deserved. This was one End and Benefit of those Commemorations and
Prayers; and therefore was not only comprehended in the general Intendment of
the general Commemorations, but was expressly prayed for both in the Common
Prayers and in the more special Commendations, as we shall see further
hereafter; but this does not exclude Others; of which, I think fit to take
notice of one in this place, which is mentioned by S. Austin and others, and
which concern two Articles of our Creed, but little understood or considered
amongst us. It is in his Book de Civ. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 9. in these words:
Neque enim piorum animae mortuorum separantur ab Ecclesia, quae etiam nunc est
regnum Christi. Alioquin nec ad altar Dei fieret little memoria: in communione
Corporis ^ Christi.
Nor are the Souls of the Pious deceased separated from the Church, which even
now is the Kingdom of Christ: Otherwise, neither at the Altar of God should
Memory be made of them in the Communion of the Body of Christ. In these words
is couched one general Intendment of the Church: For as the Holy Rite of the
Eucharist was intended not only for the Peculiar Solemnity of the Churches
Address to God here upon Earth, with the Memorials of our Savior's Passion,
the great Propitiation for the Sins of the World, but also for Communion
between our Head and the Members of his Mystical Body here upon Earth, and also
between the Members of his whole Mystical Body themselves; so the Church in
that Holy Solemnity has always performed Acts of Communion, not only with the
Head, but with all his Members, both present, in external Communion, and
Participation of the sanctified Creatures; and with all absent, whether in the
Body, or out of the Body, by Commemorations, Thanksgivings and Prayers. And
because they were in several States, they were accordingly remembered
distinctly, in order, which is what S. Augustine expresses suo loco. This
Communion was by the ancient Christians reputed a matter of very great
Importance, and accordingly they were equally careful, whose Oblations they did
receive, and whose Names they did remember, whether Living or Dead: and those
who were ejected, or rejected or refused, were looked upon as out of Communion,
and excluded from all the Privileges of the Church, both on Earth, and also in
the separate State, according to our Savior's Promise. It was then believed,
that the Souls departed, which should be saved, were all indeed with Christ,
but not at the Right Hand of his Father; but some before the Throne; some upon
Mount Sion; some in the Holy of Holies; some in the Temple, but not in that
place; some in Paradise, in Abraham's Bosom, in the Third Heaven, in very
different Mansions or Receptacles: as one may be said to be with the King, who
is with him in foreign Parts, though but in his Army, or at his Court, though never
admitted into his Presence Chamber; and that by some the Church here upon Earth
her self received much Benefit; but others received Benefit by her Communion
and Prayers, and stood in need of it. Nor ought we to think that these two
Articles of the Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, were put
into the Summary of the Christian Faith and Profession, and in the Order they
are, but for special and weighty Reasons; and indeed such as are little taught,
or understood, or regarded amongst us in this Age.

S. Augustine has many Testimonies concerning this matter of Fact and known
Practice of the Church in these distinct Orders of Commemoration of the Dead,
so plain, that the Archbishop himself could not but confess that in the Church
Service there was made a several Commemoration; first, of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, after one manner; and then of the other Dead,
after another, page 194. and one or two he cites in the Margin, but was so wise
as not to recite the words. It is Sermon. 17. de Verbis Apost. Ideoque habet
Ecclesiastica disciplina quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyrs eo loco recitantur
ad altar Dei, ubi non pro ipsis oretur, pro caeteris autem commemoralis
defunctis oretur. Injuria est enim pro Martyr orare, cujus nos debemus
orationibus com mendari. And Tr. 84. in Evang. Johan.
This has the Church Discipline, which the Faithful know, when the Martyrs are
recited at the Altar of God in that place, where Prayer is not made for them;
but Prayer is made for others, who are commemorated. For it is an Injury to
pray for a Martyr, to whose Prayers we (our selves) ought to be commended. And
Tr. 84. in Evang. Johan. Ad ipsam mensam non sic eos commemoramus, quemadmocum
alior, qui in pace requiescunt, u^ et^am pro eis or mus, s^d magis, ut
crentipsi pro nobis; ut eorum vestigiis adhae^eamus; quia impleverunt ipsi
charitatem, qua Dominus dixit non posse esse majorem.
At the Table it self we do not so commemorate them, as others who rest in
Peace, that we should also pray for them, but rather that they pray for us,
that we may tread in their Steps; because they themselves have fulfilled that
Charity, than which our Lord says there cannot be greater.

And here I cannot but take notice of the Partiality and Disingenuity of this
magnified Man in this place; for it is a Scandal and Offense to me. Having
cited the words of S. Augustine in Euchrid. ad Laurent. cap. 110. Cum sacrificia
sive altaris, five quarumcunque Eleemosynarum pro baptiz^tis defunctis omnibus
offeruntur; pro valde bonis gratiarum actiones sunt; pro valde malis, etsi
nulla sunt adjumenta mo^tuorum, qua^^icunque vivorum consolationes ^u^t.
That the Oblations and Alms usually offered in the Church for all the Dead
that received Baptism, were Thanksgivings for such as were very Good;
Propitiations for such as were not very Bad: but for such as were very Evil,
although they were no Help for the Dead, yet were they some kind of Consolations
of the Living. He calls this a Private Exposition; not only (as he pretends)
because it is not to be found in the Writings of the former Fathers; but also
because it suiteth not well with the general Practice of the Church, which it
intends to interpret, p. 194. If it had not been in the Writings of any of
the former Fathers, had not the notorious Practice of the Church, which he
often mentions with special notes of the Notoriety of the matter of Fact, been
sufficient, and much more than any thing mentioned dogmatically by others, though
more ancient? But besides that is false: for we shall see it hereafter attested
by Cyril of Jerusalem; and not by the by, but in a professed Description, and
Explication of the Greek Liturgy; which shows the Agreement of all, both Greek
and Latin Churches. And therefore it is but reasonable that the honest Reader
be admonished to beware of this Author, how he trusts him: for he is a partial
and crafty Writer; of which other instances may be produced.

But perhaps it may not only do right to S. Augustine, but be a Satisfaction to
the Reader, to see him more fully declare his mind, which he does in the words
precedent, to this effect: Neque negandum est Desu ctorum animas pietate suorum
viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium Media^oris offertur, vel
Eleemosynae in Ecclesia fiunt. Sed e^s haec pro unt qui cum viverent, ut haec
sibi postea prodesse possent, meruerunt. Est enim quidem vive^di modus, nec tam
bonus, ut non requirat ifta post mo^tem; nec tam malus, ut ei non prosint ista
post mortem. Est vero talis in b^no, ut ista non requirat; and est rursus talis
in malo, ut nec his valeat, oum ex h^^ vita transi^rit, adjuvari. Quo circa hic
omne meritum comparatur, quo possit post h^nc vitam releva^i, quisplam, vel
gravari. Nemo autem se speret quod hic neglexerit cum obierit, apud Deum
promoreri. Non igitur ista quae pro defunctis commendandis frequentat Ecclesia,
il^i Apostolicae sunt adversa sententiae, qua dictum est; Omnes enim astabimus
ante Tribunal Christi, utreserat unusqu^sque secundum ea quae per corpus gessit
sivebonum, sive malum: quia etiam hoc meritum sibi quisque cum in corpore
vi^eret comparavit, ut ei possent ista prodesse. Non enim omnibus prosunt, and
quare non omnibus prosunt, nisipropter differentiam vitae, quam quisque gessit
in corpore? Cum ergo sacificia etc.
Nor is it to be denied, says he, that the Souls of the Deceased are relieved
by the Piety of their living Relations, when the Sacrifice of the Mediator is
offered, or Alms given in the Church for them. But to those are these things
profitable, who, when they lived, merited that these things might be profitable
for them afterward. For there is one sort of Life neither so Good, that it
might not need those things after Death; nor so Evil, that they cannot profit
after Death. But there is such in Good, that it may not require them: and there
is again such in Evil, that it cannot be helped by these things when this Life
is ended. Wherefore here is all Merit acquired, whereby any one can after this
Life be relieved, or grieved. But let none hope that he may obtain of God after
he is Dead what he has neglected here. Wherefore those things, which the
Church does frequently use for Recommending the Dead, are not contrary to the
Sentence of the Apostle, where it is said, We must all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to those things
which he has done in the Body, whether it be Good, or Evil; because even this
Merit every one acquired for himself when he lived in the Body, that these
things might profit him. For they do not profit all. And why do they not profit
all, but by reason of the Difference of Life which each lived in the Body? When
therefore Sacrifices, whether of the Altar, or of whatever Alms, are offered
for all the Deceased, who were baptized, etc. as before recited by Usher. More
to like purpose may be seen in his Book de Cura pro Mortuis, cap. 4. and cap.
18. where he adds, Sed quia non discernimus qui sint, oportet ea pro
regeneratis omnibus facere, u^nullus eorum praeterm^^tatur, ad quos haec
beneficia possint and debeant pervenire. Melius enim supererunt ista eis,
quibus nec obsunt, nec prosunt, quam eis deerunt quibus prosunt. Diligentius
tamen facit haec quisque pro necessariis suis, quod pro illo fiat similiter a
suis, p. 294. b. 2. to 4.
But because we do not distinguish who they are, (who are profited by them) we
ought to do these things for all the Regenerate, that none of them be
pretermitted, to whom these Benefits may and ought to come. For it is better
that they should be superfluous as to them, who are neither helped nor hurt by
them, than be wanting to those whom they may benefit. Yet every one does these
things the more diligently for his (deceased) Relations, that the same may be
done by his Relations (surviving) for himself. The same he has qu. 2. ad
Dulcitium: and more to like purpose, Sermon. 32. de Verb. Apost.

To the Testimonies of these two Eminent, Holy, Learned Bishops of the Latin
Church, I will add the Testimonies of two or three Eminent Bishops of the same
Age in the Greck Church, concerning the Practice and Custom of the Church in
their time, and the Ages precedent, even to the Apostles, in this Case. The one
is S. John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople, a Man as eminent for his
own personal Worth, as for the Place he held. He has much concerning Prayers
and Oblations for the Dead; but much of it by way of Exhortation: and therefore
to be as brief as may be, I will select principally what concerns the Practice
and Original, which he refers expressly to the Ordination of the Apostles, and
Directions of the Holy Spirit. But first for the common Practice of the People:
Hom. 32. in Mat. (...).
Why after the Death of any of thy Family do thou call the Poor together? Why
do entreat the Presbyters to pray for him? Thou will say, That he may obtain
Rest. And do thou then weep and lament for these things? Secondly, S.
Chrysostom's Advice, Hom. 61. in Johan. (...).
But if a Sinner, and who has often offended God, dies, is he to be bewailed?
or rather, not at all, since that cannot do him any good. But these things are
to be performed for him, which may do him good; viz. Alms and Oblations. And
concerning Alms, he presses it much, Hom. 21. in Act. page 605. And, Thirdly,
for the common Office of the Priest, in his Sixth Book de Sacerdotio, cap. 4.
(...).
What manner of Man ought he to be, who interceeds for the whole City? What, do
I say for the City? for the whole World, and prays to God that he will be
propitious to the Sins of all, not only of the Living, but also of the Dead?
Then that these things are of Apostolical Authority, Hom. 3. in Phil in the
Moral. Exhorting People to pray themselves, and to entreat the Prayers of
others, and to give Alms continually for their deceased Friends: (...).
Will this, says he, give any Relief? and then answers: Hear God thus saying,
I will protect this City for my own and for my Servant David's sake. If the
Memory only of a righteous Man avails so much, where Works are also done for
the Dead, what cannot they do? and then goes on: These things were not in vain
constituted by the Apostles, that in the venerable and tremendous Mysteries
Memorial should be made of those who were departed. They knew much Benesit
would accure to them by it, and much Advantage. For at that time, when all the
People stand with their hands lifted up, and the Company of the Priests, and
that venerable and awful Sacrifice, present, how shall we not please or appease
God praying for them? And that indeed for those who departed in the Faith; But
the Catechumens are not deigned this Consolation, but are destitute of all
help, one only excepted. But what is that? Why, Alms may be given to the Poor
for them: and hence they receive some Refreshment. For it is God's Will that we
should mutually help one another. And to the same purpose, Hom. 69. ad Pop.
Antioch. Lastly, and that this was by the Direction of the Holy Spirit, he is
express, Hom. 21. in Act. (...)
Not in vain are Oblations for the Dead; Not in vain Prayers; Not in vain Alms:
For all these things did the Spirit Order, willing that we should mutually help
one another.... Doubt it not, the Fruit will be pleasant: It is not a light
thing that the Deacon calls out, (to pray) For those who are departed in
Christ; and, For those who offer for their Memories. And the same he says
also, Hom. 41. in 1 Cor. 15. and adds: (...)
For if Commemorations were not made for them, not so much as this would be
said: For our Matters are not Stage Plays. Far be that. For these are done by
the Ordination and Disposition of the Spirit. Let us therefore afford them
help, and perform their Commemorations, etc. The Propitiation proposed is
common to the World: therefore do we then confidently pray for all the Worthy,
and name them with Martyrs, with Confessors, with Priests: for we are all one
Body, though some Members more splendid than others.... Why do thou grieve and
lament so much? Favor may be obtained for the Deceased. And that he himself
formed a Liturgy, which is at this day in use in the Greek Churches, is
affirmed by the Greeks, and cannot with any good reason be denied; and though
it is likely there may be some Alterations or Additions in it, yet what relates
to this matter is so confirmed by this, and by more ancient Authority, that it
cannot reasonably be questioned.

The other is S. Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis, the Metropolis of the Isle of
Cyprus, a Man of good Reputation for Ability and Piety, and particularly
studied in all the Doctrines and Practices of the Church, and the several
Heresies contrary thereunto. In him we have a double Testimony, that of Aerius,
and his own, in a Book of all the Heretics and Heresies. In that of Aerius, is
observable, 1. The Matter of Fact and common Practice, viz. commemorating the
Names of the Dead, and Praying for them. 2. (...)
The End for which it was done, viz. That they might be benefitted by the
Pardon of their Sins at the Prayers, etc. of their Surviving Friends and the
Church. Both these he opposes; and that is a Proof of both; and by the
Testimony of an Adversary; which is reputed the most convincing. 3. The
Opposition, without any denial or question of the Antiquity or Universality of
the Practice or Observation, or of the Tradition of either the Practice, or the
Intention and Doctrine: which, if he had had any color or pretense for it, he
would certainly never have omitted: but he is able to say nothing against
either the Practice, or Benefit of it; but, If it be so, it is in vain to be
pious; it would be sufficient to get People to pray for the Pardon of ones Sins
after his Death. In all these respects is the Opposition of Aerius a very
considerable Testimony of both the Practice and Intention, and consequently of
the Doctrine of the Church in this case. But because our great Man uses his
utmost Skill, and very grossly, to evade and elude these Testimonies, I will
here present them both entire, according to his own Translation, with Notes of
the Pages where most of the distracted Parcels may be found in his Book, that
the Reader who has a mind to entertain himself with a Prospect of his
Ingenuity, may the more plainly discern it.

The Objection of Aerius: For what reason do you commemorate after Death, the
Names of those that are departed? He that is alive prays, or makes
Dispensation (of the Mysteries) what shall the Dead be profited hereby? And if
the Prayer of those here do altogether ((...)) profit them that be there; then
let no body be Godly; (...)
let no Man do Good; but let him procure some Friends, by what means it
pleases him, either by persuading them by Money, or entreating Friends at his
Death; and let them pray for him, that he may suffer nothing there; and that
those inexpiable Sins, which he has committed, may not be required at his
hands. p. 238.

Epiphanius his Answer and Testimony: As for the reciting of the Names of those
that are deceased, what can be better than this? What more commodious, and more
admirable? that such as are present do believe that they who are departed do
live, and are not extinguished, but are still Being, and Living with the Lord:
and that this most pious Preaching might be declared, that they who pray for
their Brethren have hope of them, as being in a Peregrination, p. 240. But the
Prayer also which is made for them does profit, although it does not cut off All
their Sins. ((...) here answers to (...) in the Objection.) Yet, forasmuch as
whilst we are in the World, we oftentimes slip both unwillingly, and with our
Will; it serves to signify that which is more perfect: For we make a
Memorial, both of the Just, and for Sinners: For Sinners, entreating the Mercy
of God; of the Just, both the Fathers, and Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
and Evangelists, and Martyrs, and Confessors, Bishops, and Anchoretes, and the
whole Order; that we may sever our Lord Jesus from the Rank of all other Men,
by the Honor that we do unto him, and that we may yield Worship unto him,
[while we thus judge, p. 240. That] our Lord is not to be compared unto any
Man; though a Man live in Righteousness a thousand times and more: for how should
that be possible? considering that the one is God, the other Man; and the one
is in Heaven, the other in Earth, by reason of the Remains (or Relics) of the
Body yet resting in the Earth. [p. 242. Except those, who being raised from the
Dead, entered together into the Bride-chamber, as says the Holy Gospel, etc.
But forbearing these things, I return to what I was about.] The Church does
necessarily perform this, having received it by Tradition from the Fathers: And
who may dissolve the Ordinances of his Mother, or the Law of his Father? p.
237. [ as Solomon says, Hear, my Son, the Words of thy Father, and reject not
the Laws of thy Mother; declaring by this, that (our) Father; that is, God, the
Only begotten, and the Holy Spirit, has taught (us) both in Scriptures, and
without Scripture: But] our Mother, the Church, has Ordinances settled in her,
which are inviolable, and may not be broken. Seeing then there are Ordinances
established in the Church, and they are well, and all things are admirably
done; this Seducer is again refuted. p. 237. This is the Answer of Epiphanius:
the words enclosed in Crochets are not in Usher.

To this we may well apply what he says before concerning Easter, the
Observation of which was another thing, which Aerius quarrelled at: But who
knows these things best? This seduced Fellow, who is but newly sprung up, and
now living amongst us; or they who were Witnesses before us; and who held the
same Tradition in the Church before us, which they had received from their
Parents, and their Parents had learned from their Ancestors; as the Church to
this day observes the true and sincere Faith, which it received with the
Traditions from the Fathers.

In all this we may observe, 1. The Practice of the Church, both in the General
Commemorations, and in the Prayers, agreed on both Sides. 2. The End and
Intendment of the Church, that it was the Profit and Benefit of the Deceased,
also agreed. 3. The Question between them, Whether the Prayer of the Living
could profit or benefit the Dead, as the Church intended? 4. That this was what
Aerius did principally deny: and therefore, that the Practice was reasonable,
as a necessary consequence. 5. His only reason was, that it would make Piety
and good Life needless. 6. Epiphanius his Answer, 1. from Reason; 1. as it is a
seasonable and excellent Declaraction of the Faith and Hope of the Church; 2.
as an Act of Charity, for the Benefit of the Deceased; 2. from Authority, as
received in the Church by Tradition from our Savior, and the Holy Spirit.

And now, how does our great Man elude this? Epiphanius, says he, does not
Name this, ( viz. That Prayers and Sacrifice profits not the depa ted in
Christ,) an Heresy. 2. Nor does it appear that himself did hold that they
bring such Profit to the Dead as these Men Dream, page 236. 3. He does not at
all charge him with forsaking the Doctrine of the Scripture, or the Faith of
the Catholic Church, but with rejecting the Order, p. 237. 4. Aerius his
Argument would have been in force indeed, if the whole Church had held, as many
did; That the Judgment after Death was suspended until the General
Resurrection, and that in the mean time, the Sins of the Dead might be taken
away by the Suffrages of the Living: But he should have considered, as Gobarus
(as great an Heretic as himself) did that the Doctors were not agreed upon the
Point, p. 238.5. It was a foolish part in him to confound the Private Opinion
of some, with the Common Faith of the Universal Church. 6. That he reproved
this particular Error, he did well; but that thereupon he condemned the General
Practice of the Church, he did like himself, headily and perversely, ibidem. As
to the first of these, I must refer the Reader to Epiphanius himself, for the
Character he gives of the Person and Opinions of Aerius, a very Vile man, a
thorough-pac'd Arian, and who exceeded Arius himself in his new Opinions, which
he imputes to the operation of the Devil; though he does not particularly name
them Heresies, yet, it is plain, he and S Austin too accounted them such; and,
of the rest, the Reader may judge by what is here laid plainly before him.

S. Ephraem was not much before these; but because he was neither Greek nor
Latin, but a Syrian, and a Man of Parts and extraordinary Sanctity, greatly
esteemed by the most excellent Persons of that time, and of so great
Reputation, that his Writings were read publicly in diverse Churches after the
Holy Scriptures, I cannot pass him by without taking notice of his Testament,
his Discourse to his Disciples upon his Deathbed: wherein he tells them he is
Dying, and desires to be mentioned in the Commemoration of their Holy Prayers;
and bewailing his Sins, and declaring his Sense of the terrible Judgment of
God, he does admonish, exhort, and strictly enjoin them to remember him
constantly, after his exit and passage, in their Prayers: and after some
Admonitions to them, and account of himself, he again desires to be remembered
in their Prayers. Then he strictly forbids his being Buried under the Altar, or
in the House of God, all Solemn Pomp, and Funeral Orations and Encomiums; and
all cost of rich Vestments, of Grave Clothes, of Spices, of Odors, of Candles,
and the like; but desires that all that Cost may be bestowed upon the Poor; and
for himself; that in the place of all such Pomp and Funeral Orations, they will
accompany him with Psalms, and help and assist him with their Prayers, and Bury
him in the Churchyard, where the contrite in heart are Buried. Then he bids
them come near and embrace him, for his Spirit fails him, and again entreats
them diligently to make Oblations for him; and prettily represents the
Communion of Saints, by a Simile of the Sympathy of things in Nature, the Wine
which flowers in the Cellar, when the Vine Buds in the Vineyard, and the like:
And tells them, that the Oblations of Priests under the Law were effectual for
those who were slain in their Sins: and how much more the Priests of Christ
under the New Testament! And gives great caution, that when they come to his
Memory, (I suppose he means the Thirtieth Day, which he expressly mentioned
before and his Anniversaries) ne quisquam in Sancta peccet; that none commit
any thing unmeet for holy things, (by any Excess): but that the Vigil be kept
attentively, and reverently, and humbly, and holily, and purely: for it would
be a miserable thing for him, if by occasion of his Memory, he should be
accountable to his God for their inordinate Actions. Thus this Holy Man: an
Instance equal to a very ample Testimony of the Practice in those parts.

About the same time was S. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem. He in his Mystagogick
Catechism concludes all with a Description and Scheme of the Liturgy then in
use; wherein, after mention of the Holy Trisagium Hymn, (...)
Therefore, says he, do we recite this Seraphick Theology delivered to us,
that in that Celestial Hymnody we may communicate with the supra-mundain
Militia, (the Heavenly Host:) and thus by such kind of Hymns sanctisying our
selves, we pray the most benign God that he will send out his Holy Spirit upon
the proposited (Elements) that it may make the Bread the Body of Christ, and
the Wine the Blood of Christ. For certainly, whatever the Holy Spirit does
touch, it is sanctified and transmuted. Then after that Spiritual Sacrifice,
that unbloody Worship is done, (that is, after the Consecration and Oblation in
Commemoration of the Passion of Christ) over that very Host of Propitiation do
we obsecrate God for the common Peace of the Churches; for the Tranquillity of
the World; for Kings; for their Armies and Confederates; for the Sick and
Afflicted; and, in sum, for all who need Help. We commemorate also those who
have fallen asleep before us: First, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, that God at their Prayers and Deprecations would accept ours: Then we
pray for the Holy Fathers and Bishops deceased; and, lastly, for all who are
deceased amongst us, believing it to be a very great Help to the Souls, for
whom the Obsecration of that tremendous Sacrifice, which is placed on the
Altar, is offered.

I will add but one instance more for the flourishing times of the Church, and
so comprize the whole time of the four first General Councils from first to
last. Eusebius in his 4th Book of the Life of Constantine describing the
Martyrium of the Apostles, built by him at Constantinople, adds, chap. 60. All
these did the Emperor dedicate, that he might consign to Posterity the Memory
of our Savior's Apostles. But he had another Design in his Mind when he built
this Church: which was at first concealed: but in the end it became known to
all. For he had designed this place for himself after his Death, foreseeing, by
a transcendent Alacrity of Faith, that his Body after Death should be made
Partaker of the Apostles Apellation, that even after Death, he might be
esteemed worthy of the Prayers, which should be performed there in Honor of
the Apostles, believing that their Memory would be useful and advantageous to
his Soul. And afterward describing the Solemnity of his Funeral, chap. 71. he
says, that a vast Number of People, together with those Persons, consecrated
to God, not without Tears and great Lamentation, poured forth Prayers to God
for the Emperor's Soul; thereby performing a most grateful Office to this pious
Prince. And herein also God demonstrated his singular Favor toward his
Servant, because after his Death, -- agreeable to his own most earnest Desire,
the Tabernacle of his thrice blessed Soul was vouchsafed a place with the
Monument of the Apostles; and that it might be joined with God's People in the
Church; and might be vouchsafed the Divine Rights, and Mystic Service; and
might enjoy a Communion of the Holy Prayers.

This was but 12 years after the Nicen Council, and a great and most
illustrious instance of the common received and settled Practice of that time.
And here, before I proceed further, it is fit to consider, how far the
continuance of that wicked and shameful Abuse by Cranmer, put upon the Church
of England in his clandestine Corruption of the True English Liturgy; I say,
the Continuance of it to this day, whether by supine Negligence, or base
Compliance with a Faction of Sectaries, be consistent with that Profession of
Reverence to Antiquity in general; and to those first four General Councils in
particular, which is made by all who pretend to be genuine Sons of the Church
of England? with their use of the Constantinopolitan Creed in the most solemn
Office, so foully deformed, contrary to the Public Office at that time used in
the Church, and attested by S. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, who was present at
that Council, and a principal Man there? How consistent with the Statutes of
most ancient Colleges in both the Universities, and the Oaths taken by so many
Scholars for the Observance of them? How consistent with the Belief of One Holy
Catholic Church; and of the Communion of Saints? with that Reverence and
Respect, which the Holy Scriptures require should be paid to the Body of
Christ, the Depository of Christian Verities, and the Pillar or Monument and
Basis of Truth? with that Reverence, and Honor, and Esteem, which all true and
genuine Christians cannot but have for so many glorious Saints as flourished in
the Church of Christ, and all agreed in this pious Practice for more than 1200
years from the time of Constantine, who himself was none of the least, being
converted in an extraordinary manner by special Vision from our Savior, and
the Truth thereof confirmed by very remarkable Victories, and afterward so
great a Promoter of Christian Piety, that he was, as Eusebius relates, partaker
of the Apostles appellation, being called (...), in the Offices of the Greek
Church, and deservedly: How it can be consistent therewith, and with Christian
Modesty, to set up a Calvin, a Bucer, a Cranmer, an Usher, like little Idols,
above all; and not rather an undeniable proof of the very Spirit of Heretics
and Schismatics.

Mr. Life Appendix, p. 55.
Baxter's Questions in another Case, not unlike this, may very properly be
proposed to our modern Opposers of this Catholic Practice: Would they have
held Communion with the Catholic Church for a Thousand Years together? Or
would they not, if they had lived in those times? If they would, then why not
with us, who are of the same Judgment? Was it a Duty then? And is it unlawful
now? If they would not in all those Ages have held Communion with the visible
Church, what would they have done but separated from the Body, and so from the
Head, and cast off Christ in all his Members, and taken him to be a Head
without a Body, which is no Head; and so no Christ? What would they have done,
but denied his Power, and Love, and Truth, and consequently his Redemption; and
his Office? Has he come at the end of 4000 years since the Creation, to redeem
the World, that lay so long in Darkness? And has he made such wonderful
Preparations for his Church, by his Life and Miracles, and Blood and Spirit?
etc. and promised, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and
that his Kingdom shall be an Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion endures
from Generation to Generation; and yet, after all this, shall he have a Church,
(even as the Seekers say) but for an Age or two? Thus Mr. Baxter; and very
good: but if this be good in the Case of Baptism of Infants, why not as good in
the Case of Prayers and Oblations for the Dead? which, I think, has as good
Evidence of Apostolical Original as that, or the Lord's Day, or Episcopacy, or
a good part of the Scriptures of the New Testament: And if they stand all upon
the same Foundation, why should they not stand or fall together?

There is also an Assertion of St. Augustine 's, which deserves to be here
considered in this Case; That Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec in Consil^s
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum
rectissime creditur. cont. Donat. l. 4 c. 24.
what the Universal Church does hold, and was not instituted in Councils, but
always retained, is most rightly believed to have been delivered by no other
than Apostolical Authority. For as this is a Practice which none did ever
pretend was instituted by any Council; so amongst all, who have written
concerning the Original, or first Invention, or Introduction of things, none
has ever assigned any Original of it in the Catholic Church later than the
Apostles; or in any part of the Catholic Church, later than of the rest of
Christianity it self. So that could we trace it no further back than the time
of Constantine, it would be unreasonable to believe, that the whole Christian
Church, so largely spread over the Face of the Earth, and planted by so many
several Persons at first, and in Places so divided and remote one from another,
should so unanimously agree in such a Practice, did it not proceed from some
Common Cause; which could be no other than the Mutual Agreement of all the
Apostles in it. Nostra quidem Scripta cur ignibus meruerunt dari? Cur immaniter
Conventicula dirui? in quibus Summus oratur Deus, Pax cunctis and venia
postulatur, Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus, Familiaribus, Inimicis, adhuc
vitam degentibus, and resolutis corporum vi^ctione. lib. 4. suo. fi.


But though this might be sufficient, yet have we further Evidence to trace it,
even through the more troublesome times of the Churches, so near to the
Apostles, that no Man, without Disparagement to his Judgment, or his Honesty,
can question its Original to be indeed Apostolical. For though those troublesome
times have left us so few Monuments of the Primitive Christianity, in
comparison, that all will hardly equal the Writings of some one of the Writers
of after-Ages; yet among those few have we what is sufficient. Arnobius, an
eminent Professor of Rhetoric, who had been a bitter Enemy against the
Christians, even in the time of Persecution under Dioclesian turned Christian,
and wrote Seven Books against the Gentiles: in the fourth of which he
expostulates with them in this manner: Why have our Scriptures deserved to be
cast into the Fire? Why our Meeting-Places to be cruelly destroyed, in which
the Great God is prayed to, Peace and Pardon is besought for all; for
Magistrates, Armies, Kings, our Familiars and Enemies; for those yet living,
and those released from the Bond of their Bodies? Where he speaks of Prayers
for these last, as as common as for any of the rest. About 50 years before this
was S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, a Person of great Worth, and most deserved
Reputation in the Church, and at last a Holy Martyr. He in his LXVI Epistle
(with his Colleagues in Council) tells the Clergy and People, to whom he wrote,
that their Predecessors, upon religious Consideration, as a necessary
Provision, had decreed, That no Christian Brother at his Departure should name
a Clergyman for Guardian, or Executor; and that if any one should do this,
there should be Si quis hoc fecisset, non offeretur pro ^o, nec sacrificium pro
Do^mitione ejas celebretur. Neque enim, etc.
no Offering for him, nor Sacrifice celebrated for his Departure; for he does
not deserve to be named at the Altar of God in the Prayer of the Priests, who
would call away the Priests and Ministers from the Altar: And therefore since
one Victor, Contra formam nuper in Concilio a sacerdotibus datam.
contrary to the Order lately made in Council by the Priests, had presumed to
constitute a certain Presbyter for a Guardian, Non est quod pro Dormitione ejas
apud vos fiat Oblatio, aut Deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecclesia
frequentetur.
there should no Oblation be made among them for his Departure, or any
Deprecation commonly used in the Church in his Name, that the Decree of the
Bishops religiously and necessarily made might be observed by them, and Example
given to others, etc. This Prohibition of those things to be done, by way of
Punishment, is a plain Evidence of what was accustomed, and should have been
done, if there had been no Prohibition: and an Evidence not of a single Person,
but of a Council: and not of Matter of Opinion, but of plain Matter of Fact;
and that so notorious, as was well known to all, and of such Importance in the
Opinion of all, as the Prohibition was adjudged a competent Punishment for such
a Crime, as they all thought no little one: It was a kind of Excommunication.

Another fifty years before this lived Tertullian, a Man of very great and
universal Learning, very acute Parts, and very strict for Discipline, and for
the Orders of the Church. He mentions this Practice in diverse of his Writings,
not only as common and usual, but also as delivered by Tradition, and so well
known, and unquestionable, as to be it self an undeniable Instance and Proof of
unwritten Traditions. This he does in his Book de Corona Militis, 3. where,
amongst the Instances which he alleges for proof of the Authority of
unwritten Traditions, this is one: Oblationes pro Defunctis, pro Natalitiis,
annua die facimus. We make Oblations for the Dead upon the Annual day of their
Departure; which the Ancient Christians called their Natalitiae, or Birth-Days.
And after all concludes, Harum and aliarum ejusmodi discipiinarum si Legem
expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies: Traditio tibi praetenditue auctrix,
Consuetudo confirmatrix, and Fides observatrix.
If of these, and other Matters of Discipline, you seek for a Rule of
Scriptures, you shall find none: Tradition is alleged for the Author, Custom
for the Confirmer, and Faith for the Observer. But of Traditions in general he
has other Discourses elsewhere: and of this particular Tradition, which he
does but only mention here, as an instance of Fact not to be denied, we have
farther mention in other of his Writings; In his Book de Monogamia, against
second Marriages, speaking of the Custom of the Widow's praying for her
deceased Husband; he says, Et pro anima ejus orat, and Refrigerium interim
adpostulat ei, and in prima Resurrectione Consortium; and offert annuis diebus
dormitionis ejus. 10.
She prays for his Soul, and entreats for Refreshment for him in the interim,
and Consort in the first Resurrection, and offers (for him) on the Annual days
of his Departure. Again, in his Book de Exhortatione Castitatis, he thus
upbraids him who had had several Wives: Et jam repete apud Deum pro cujus
Spiritu postules, pro qua Oblationes Annuas reddas. Stabis ergo ad Deum cum tot
Uxoribus, quot illa oratione commemoras? and offeres pro duabus, and commemoras
illas duas per sacerdotem de Monogamia ob pristinum de virginitate sanctitum,
circumdatum virginibus and univiris? and ascendet sacrificium tuum iibera
front? and inter cete ras voluntates bonae mentis postulabis tibi, and uxori
castiatem^ 11
Say before God for whose Spirit thou do pray, for which thou do make thy
Annual Oblations. Will thou therefore stand before God with so many Wives, as
thou do in that Prayer remember; and offer for two, and commemorate those two
by a Priest once married, by reason of the ancient Sanction of Virginity,
encompassed with Virgins, and once married Women? And will thy Sacrifice ascend
with Confidence? and amongst other Habits of a good Soul, will thou pray for
Chastity for thy self, and thy Wife?

This, I think, is plain, and full for the common Practice, both in private,
and in public by the Priest at the Altar; and for the Tradition. But it is
objected, that Tertullian, when he wrote these Books, was a Montanist, and
wrote them against the Church. And it is as easily answered, that it is not
Matter of Opinion, but Matter of Fact, for which they are here alleged: and
it is certain he was no Fool; which he must have been, if this had been the
Practice of the Montanists, and not of the Church. But for the Readers better
Information, and more ample Satisfaction, that the Objection is a mere
Scarecrow, and serves only to discover the Disingenuity and Inconsiderateness
of the Objectors, he must know, That Montanus, (and his Companions) Alcibiades
and Theodotus, were at first looked upon, in the Opinion of most Men, as
Prophets: For very many Miracles of Divine Grace at that time wrought in many
Churches made most Men believe that they also were Prophets. Eusebius. 5. Hist. 3.
So that if Tertullian did believe this, it was no more than what most others
did. But what more specially inclined him to favor Montanus was this: He was a
Man of great Austerity and Strictness in Matters of Discipline, Penance,
Fasting, Chastity, Suffering, etc. which were things which Montanus asserted,
and highly pretended to: And that which fixed him in his Opinion of Montanus,
was some unhappy Contests which arose between him and the Roman Clergy, about
some of these things, which gave him that Offense, that he not only reflects
upon them in his de Corona Militis; Novi and Pastores eorum, etc. but
afterward in his other Writings frequently calls them Psychici, Animal or
Sensual Man. And this, which is observable in his Writings, is also affirmed by
S. Hierom. This was his For as to what relates to the Rule of Faith that is, to
the Principal Doctrines of Religion, Tertul. and the first Montanists were of
the same Opinion with the Church, etc. says Du Pin p. 82, 83.
Montanism. And what is this to the Prejudice of his Testimony concerning
Prayers for the Dead? It is so far from that, that it is the greatest
Confirmation and Amplification of it, that this Practice and Tradition was no
part of Montanism: for nothing could have been a greater Prejudice to the
Church of Rome against it, and it had certainly been condemned by them: nor
peculiar to the African Church; but the known Practice of the Catholic Church,
and of the Roman Church in particular: quite contrary to what the Objectors
would persuade us. But such Infatuations are the greatest of Men subject to,
when they will obstinately persist in the Maintenance of an ill Cause. We may
here therefore fix, upon as good ground as can reasonably be desired, this
Practice and Tradition of the Catholic Church.

And now it is time to consider how much we are short in our Evidence of the
Apostles Age; and from what Original this Practice did in truth proceed. It is
agreed that St. John wrote his Gospel about the beginning of the second
Century; and that Tertullian fell to the Sect of Montanus in the beginning of
the third. Vid. Du Pin, p. 44. and p. 70. And S. Hierom informs us, that he
lived to a great Age, usque ad decrepitam atatem; and that after he had
continued usque ad mediam aetatem a Presbyter of the Church, invidia postea and
contumeliis Clericor. Romanae Ecclesiae ad Montani dogma delapsus. After having
continued in the Church 40 or 45 Years, he separated from it in the beginning
of the 3d Centutury, etc. says Du Pin, p. 70.
So that he lived the greatest and best part of his Life in the same Age
wherein St. John wrote his Gospel, and did live some time. And here comes, as
seasonably as unexpectedly, to my hand, at the very instant that this is at the
Press, a Book of a learned Opponent; who seeing this too plain to be
dissembled, and supposing that he can otherwise evade the force of this
Evidence, presents us with a plain Confession of the Matter of Fact; Of the
Sibyls, l. 2. c 23.
David Blondell: I make no difficulty (says he) to affirm, that it might be
practiced some time before the Year 200, in as much as Tertullian, the most
ancient of all those that say any thing of it, numbered it even then among the
Customs received in his time, writing in the Year, 199. Oblationes pro
Defunctis, pro Natalitiis, annua die facimus, etc. and recites also the other
two Testimonies, only in that de Monogamia, mistakes the Husband for the Wife,
and then adds: From the things which this great Person, the most Ancient, and
most Learned of all the Latins, that we have remaining, does advance, as to
Matter of Fact, concerning the Oblations, which were publicly made, and the
Employment of the Priests, the only Ministers of the public Service, as a
thing Ordinary, and grown into Custom, it is manifest, that Praying for the
Dead was, in his Time, used, not only by particular Persons, but also in the
Body of the Church, and that the Liturgies thereof were full of it. Thus we
see, not only by plain Proof, but also by the The same is confessed by John
Dalle, since recommended to me, as one who has written learnedly on this
Subject: but I find not any thing in him added to Blendel, but such Pride,
Arrogance, Insolence, Contempt, and reproachful Expressimso^ the Anci^nt Holy
Christians and Martyrs, as cannot but be very offensive to any true Christian
Spirit being most apparently the common Spirit and Genius of all wicked and
obstsnate Heretics, leading to Atheism and Ap st^cy, and as contra ry to the
Pare Word of God, which they pretend, as to the true Spirit of Christianty.
Confession of a learned Adversary, that this was not only a Practice in the
Church when Tertullian wrote, but a Received Custom in his time, and therefore
of some standing before; and of such standing as he knew no other Original of
it but Apostolical Tradition: and for such does he allege it; and not only
so, but for an unquestionable Proof of such unwritten Traditions; as this
Author also confesses and asserts. cap. 24. p. 142. And what other Original
could it have in that little time, and such a Man as he have been ignorant of
it? And had any other been known, could He have been guilty of so great
Weakness, as to have alleged this for an unquestionable Proof in such a Case,
if he had had so little Honesty?

But we have here a learned Man, who under pretense of detecting an Imposture,
presumes, by his Learning, to impose upon the World. How well he has used his
Learning in other Matters, some Learned Men of the Church of England, I think,
besides others, have sufficiently showed; and how far his Judgment is to be
relied upon. In this I shall show the like in a word. He would persuade that
not only Tertullian, but the whole Church of Christ, has been imposed upon in
this Matter by a counterfeit Sibyl, written between the Years 138 and 151. and
of Tertullian says positively, That he relied upon no other Hypothesis than
those proposed by the Author of the pretended Sibylline Writings. But in these
few words there is no less than at least one notorious Fallacy, and two
Falsities: a Fallacy in the word Hypothesis: for he relied not upon any
Hypothesis, but upon the received Custom of the Church: And that he did rely
upon, as is confessed: But he did not in the least rely upon any thing at all
of the pretended Sibyl: Nor has this Champion produced, I think, any one Proof
that either Tertullian, or any other of the Ancient or Modern Christians, did
at all rely upon any such Authority for that Practice: but all unanimously
relied upon Tradition from the Apostles. His whole Book is full of Fallacy and
Deceit, and of the very Spirit and Genius of an Heretic, who makes no scruple
to abuse the whole Church of Christ, and the most Excellent Persons in it, to
maintain his own Principles. It is certain, that diverse of the great Truths of
Christianity were known to the Gentiles long before, and received by Tradition
from the Common Parents of Mankind; but received as Articles of Faith by
Christians upon the Authority of Christ and his Apostles: And such was this,
which he fathers upon an Impostor, and pretends the Church received it from
him; without any Proof of either, whereas, if he was a Christian, it is much
more likely that he received the Hypothesis from the Practice of the Church at
that time; and is therefore rather an Evidence of it. Other matters of this
Book have been considered by learned Men of our own Country; and I think I need
say no more of this with any regard to him.

But as to the Practice, besides all this positive and Affirmative Evidence, I
do deny that any competent Evidence can be produced, among all the Churches of
the World, of any where the Christian Religion was planted without it, or where
it was introduced by any particular Person, upon any special Occasion, at any
different time, after the first planting of Christianity there, in all those
Ages since the Apostles; being verily persuaded that no such thing can be
produced, but what will strongly confirm and illustate the contrary Evidence;
like Mr. Usher's Flourish with his most ancient Manuscript Missals, wherein the
Commemoration of the Dead does no where appear, which yet were but two in all,
if not all but one mentioned by two several Authors, and that no complete
Missal neither, but only Liber Sacramentorum, an Abstract, and it self at last
not to be found, as his expression, habebatur, seems to imply: a good Argument
of the Agreement of all, or most others in that particular, that so industrious
a Searcher into ancient Records and Monuments of Antiquity, of that kind
especially, could neither see nor hear of any other, either at home or abroad,
wherein it was not. Such another Exception may perhaps be met with, which may
serve to confirm the general Rule; but not any thing considerable, I believe,
to any other purpose. Certain it is, it must either have been settled in all
those several Places in the World, where Churches were planted, together with
the rest of the Christian Doctrines and Institutions; and then it must have
proceeded from the same Founders, who agreed as unanimously in this, as they
did in other necessary things; of which sort this may therefore be concluded to
be one: or it must have had a several distinct particular Introduction by it
self, in all or most of those several Places, and be derived from several
Authors, Originals, Occasions and Times: and then the Accounts of its special
and particular Introduction, in all probability, would have very much varied in
several places, at least have remained upon Record, or by Tradition in some.
But not a word of any such thing, can I find, that was ever heard of in any
part of the World; but a Unanimous Agreement in all, both in the Practice
continued by Custom, and Original by Tradition from the Apostles.

And thus much for Proof a posteriori, from Evidence of Matter of Fact; which I
think enough to satisfy any reasonable Man of competent Ability, and to
convince any Man of Modesty and Sincerity: yet because simple genuine Truth is
always consistent with all that is such, it may, ex abundanti, gratify an
honest ingenuous Reader to observe briefly the Universal Agreement of this
Catholic Practice of the Church of Christ, 1. With common Reason, and the
Nature of things: 2. With the common Sentiments of the Primitive Christians
concerning the middle State of Souls: 3. With diverse plain Texts of the Holy
Scriptures: And 4. with the common Practice of the Jews in and before our
Savior's time, never reprehended by him, or any of his Apostles, and therefore
allowed by all, and indeed practiced by them: and, on the contrary, the
Inconsistence of the obstinate Opposition with Truth and Justice in diverse
respects.

As for Common Reason: The Universe is of vast and unconceivable extent; in it
we see are many great Bodies, Orbs, and Regions; the Life of Man upon this of
the Earth is very short; the Time from the Resurrection of our Savior to this
is near 1700 years, and how much more it may be to the General Judgment no
Mortal knows; in the mean time the Souls of Mortals go out of their Bodies in
infinitely various States of Purity and Impurity: And certainly it is most
reasonable that there should be, not only one general Distinction of Souls, but
moreover many distinct Places, States, and Conditions, wherein the separate
Souls are disposed, according to their several Qualifications, when they go out
of the Body. And as that curious Observer of the Works of Nature, as well of
the Holy Scriptures, the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, speaking of towardly
Plants by Death transplanted into another Region, a Garden of Happiness and
Comfort, adds: And possibly by continuance of time, as they received
Improvement and Perfection here, so in that other Region they add to their
Degrees of Perfection, and are promoted to farther Accessions, and Degrees, and
Stations of Happiness and Glory, till they come to the State of Spirits of just
Men made perfect. Now in all these Varieties of States is there nothing capable
of receiving Benefit by the Prayers of the Living? Is there no Communion of
Saints between those in the Body, and those out of the Body? But if there be,
how can it better be exercised or expressed than in the solemn Offices of the
Church?

For the Common Sentiments of the Primitive Christians, because it would be too
long to recite so many Testimonies in this place, and they are collected
already to my hand by Sixtus Senensis and others, I need but refer the Reader
to them. But this also is confessed and asserted by Blondel and Dalle; but they
would have us believe that they received them from an Impostor, a Counterfeit
Sibyl, a groundless, impudent and impious Calumny.

The Agreement with plain Scriptures is observable in that expression of our
Savior concerning the Sin which shall not be forgiven, neither in this World,
neither in the World to come, Mat. 12.32. and that which agrees with this, of
being cast into Prison, and not coming out by any means, till Payment of the
last Farthing, Mat. 5.25. Prisoners of Hope, Zechar. 9.11, 12. Sins blotted out
when the times of Refreshing shall come, Act. 3.19. Such as show the
Incertainty of many Souls in their separate State, even such as were Professors
of a high Form in this World, of what their final Doom shall be at that Day, as
Mat. 7.22, 23. and 25.44, 45. etc. And the Recompense of Rewards at that day, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. 1 Cor. 5.5. Luke 14.14.2 Tim. 4.8. etc. Which if our confident
Opposers had sufficiently considered, one would think they should not have
presumed to make so light of that middle State, as for the maintaining of
Parties to deprive so many Souls there of all Benefit they might receive by
their surviving Friends here; which many Apparitions, even among Protestants,
do frequently signify.

The Practice of the Jews I have noted already, and shall add only here, That
in Discourse lately with one of them, he assured me that the Form they now use
for that purpose is generally believed by all to have been composed by Ezra and
the Great Congregation. I there also remembered an instance of the Practice of
the Apostles themselves in St. Paul's Prayer for Onesiphorus, in such a Form as
is hardly to be met with for any Person living, however proves it not in vain
to Pray for any Person, of whom there is Hope, but not Certainty, till that
day. So that though our great Man, with more Considence, I doubt, than
Conscience, and without any Proof or Reason at all, does positively affirm him
then living, p. 210. he gets nothing at all by it.

Thus we see in this a Universal Agreement in all things: but, on the contrary,
if we examine the Obstinate Opposition of it throughout, we shall find nothing
solid and consistent in it; neither with Truth, nor Honesty, nor any good
Consequence: but a plausible Pretense of the Pure Word of God to cover an
impure Inclination and Desire to set aside the Authority which God instituted,
and set up themselves and their own Conceits in the place of it. 2.
Inconsistent with it self; first, denying or cavilling at the Antiquity or
Universality of the Practice; and then, when they thought they had found out an
Evasion, confessing that, which they could no longer for shame deny, and
betaking themselves to their new Invention: 3. Inconsistent with the Sincerity,
Simplicity, and Ingenuity of the Gospel, in their shameless Shuffles, Cavils
and Evasions; of which I have noted diverse, and many more might be observed;
but there is one not to be omitted here; their alleging the Writings of
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, against not only their own, but
the confessed ancient Practice of the Church in their time, in this Case:
Inconsistent with that Modesty, Respect and Decency which the Gospel requires
toward all, in their Censuring as delirous, not only some particular Persons,
but generally all the most Holy, Ancient Christians, in what was their common
Sentiments, and is believed by the most learned of the Church of England to be
plainly taught in the Holy Scriptures: 5. Inconsistent with that Reverence and
Regard that Christians should have for the Honor of the Church of Christ, his
Promises to it, and Care of it, in so foul and scandalous an Imputation, as
that they received their common Notions of the present State of separate Souls
in the other World from an Impostor; which, was not their Impudence therein as
notorious as it is groundless, and destitute of any proof at all, might prove a
Tentation to unsettled Souls, to suspect all to be no better: And for other
Consequences, it is plain they lead the way to all others to reject their own
usurped Authority with the same Ease and Impudence that they do that of the
Church of Christ; and to set up their own Conceits against theirs, and pretend
Scripture for it; and so to an endless Course of Separations, Schisms, Sects
and Confusions; and, in conclusion, set up that Authority over others, which
they themselves in the mean time reject; as by their Synod of Dort, and others
in France appears: And besides all this, it is much to be feared, that they
lead multitudes of Souls into that miserable Security and Presumption,
wherewith our Savior has acquainted us that many will find themselves
deceived at that day, Mat. 7.22. And therefore if these be not pertinacious
Schismatics and Heretics, speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them, and therefore carefully to be avoided, I know not who are; or what
so many Cautions in the Scripture to that purpose do signify.

FINIS.

