THE Shame and Humiliation OF THE QUAKERS, IN A Remarkable Judgment of
^^^^ituation, already begun upon some of (...) Ministers of their Second Days
Meeting.
With a fair Warning and kind Admonition to the rest, who are sincere, and
desire to escape the Snare of Deceit, to beware of them.
1. A Brief Account of the Beginning and Progress of the Difference between
George Keith and the other Quakers, and of their Meeting at Turners-Hall, April
29, 1697.
GEORGE KEITH, who had been bred a Scholar, had taken his degree of M. A. at
Aberdeen in Scotland, and was one of the most Learned of all the Quakers,
coming into Pensilvania, and observing the Quakers there to Preach up the Light
within, but nothing of Christ without, contrary to what he had asserted in
behalf of the Quakers, against some who had charged them to be no Christians;
and being moved thereat, began to Preach up the true Doctrine concerning
Christ; whereupon he was charged with Preaching up two Christ's, and for
asserting, that the Light within was not sufficient without something else. And
several Hearings there were there about it: but it was carried there against
him: so that he was forced to write about it to the Friends here; and, at last,
to come over himself: but before he came over, this gave him occasion to
consider better of some other of their Principles, and he discovered in them
diverse other Errors, which he had never held, and that he himself had been
carried away and deceived in some things, and particularly concerning the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper; so that he is now become one of
the most moderate of the Dissenters, but engaging in no Party; only some of the
Quakers are come off to him. When he came over, instead of Redress, he met with
the like usage here; only because it would have been too gross to have censured
him expressly for that Cause, they made the most plausible Pretenses they could
for it, and passed a Sentence of Excommunication against him. Whereupon he
charged them with diverse gross Errors and Heresies, and appointed the 11th of
June last to make good his Charge, at Turners-Hall in Filpot-Lane; but none of
the Persons concerned appearing then to answer the Charge, he Printed a
Narrative of that Meeting: and again this Year, by a Printed Advertisement,
dated April 9. 1697. gave notice of another intended Meeting by him and his
Friends at Turners-Hall, upon the 29th of the same Month. At which Meeting he
was further to detect the vile and gross Errors and Heresies of certain Quakers
of their Second Days Meeting at Lombard Street, (that is, of their Ministers)
wherewith they had been formerly charged by him in relation to Four
Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, to which those Errors and Heresies are
directly repugnant: And the said Persons were desired to be present. The Errors
charged were these: 1. That Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered at
Jerusalem, is not necessary to our Salvation. 2. That Justification and
Sanctification is not by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed. 3. That there is
no Resurrection of the Body that dies. 4. That Christ is not to come without
us in his glorified Body, even the same that formerly suffered Death for our
Sins, to judge the Quick and the Dead.


At the day appointed none of the Persons desired to be present appeared; so
that he had nothing to do, but to produce the Proofs of his Charge against
them, which he read out of the Books themselves which were brought thither on
purpose, and discoursed upon them: Of which a full Narrative is preparing for
the Press. But two Persons placed themselves at the Entrance of the Gate of
Turners-Hall, and gave each of them a Paper to such as were going in; the one,
Entitled, A Letter on George Keith 's Advertisement, a Counterfeit, written as
by one of the Church of England, but a very silly thing, and without any Name
to it, and not worthy to be regarded? but the other, Entitled, A Solemn
Protestation against George Keith 's Advertisement, etc. Though as weak, yet
appearing in that Form of a Protestation, and dated the very day of their
Second Days Meeting, and written by some of them concerned; a Person of the
Church of England, who had had diverse Conferences with them, out of good will
to do them good, and received one of them as he was going in, made some brief
Observations upon it, which he put in Writing, and at the end of the Meeting
read to the People there: Which being desired by many, were permitted to be
Printed with some Enlargements, as follows:

2. Observations upon the Quakers Solemn Protestation against George Keith's
Advertisement.
THIS Protestation being delivered at Turners-Hall-Gate at the time appointed
by G. K. by Persons known (I suppose) to be Quakers, and being written by and
in the Name of the Persons concerned, for so they style themselves, we
therefore, who are concerned, etc. p. 1. and in the Conclusion, Written, etc.
by some of them concerned; for these Reasons it may deserve some Consideration.
And these things are observable in it.

1. Their Tergiversation, refusing to vindicate themselves and their Doctrines,
when they had fair Notice of Time and Place, when and where diverse vile and
gross Errors and Heresies were to be objected and proved against them, before
any who would be present to hear it.

[Had this been only at this time, there might have been some special Cause for
it: but this is not the first time; nor is George Keith the only person whom
they have refused to answer. I must be a Witness against them; and many of
their own People, if they be sincere, and not more affected to a Party, than to
the Truth, must bear me Witness against them; that I have diverse times offered,
at their own Headquarters, as I might call it, their Meeting Place between
Grace Church Street and Lombard Street, where they have their Conclave, and
hold their Principal Assemblies, in a friendly and amicable manner to have
discoursed some Matters wherein I know they are out of the way, or short, and
to have done my Endeavor to help them out, that they might be complete in all
things; and offered, if they thought it not convenient at the time, to do it at
some other time, which they should appoint: but they never would be persuaded
to it. This their own People can many of them witness. But I must say more: I
had before this had diverse very friendly Meetings with 7 or 8 of the Principal
of them at a time; and had sent them several very kind Letters; had acquainted
them with the special Reasons and Motives of my Kindness to them; and given
such Evidence of my Sincerity that no reasonable Man could question: so that
there can be no reasonable Cause imagined why they should refuse to hear me,
but only Obstinacy and Consciousness of the Truth of what they knew I had to
say, and of their own Errors; which, if they were indeed acted by the Spirit of
God, and not by a Seducing Spirit, they would in all Humility acknowledge,
admit the Conviction, and give Glory to God. Nor is this all: They had not so
much confidence in the truth of their Cause, as to return so much as a Civil
Answer in writing to any one of my Letters; nor to more than eight (as I
remember) of twenty Questions, which I sent to them; which being only
preliminary, and not proceeding immediately to the Matters in question between
us, they answered plainly; but at the next two, which came nearer to the
purpose, they began to boggle: and to any of the rest they would not be
prevailed with, by any means, to return any Answer, not so much as in private.
And though some of these things have been in Print ever since the beginning of
this Year, in January last, and before, and in their own hands, yet have they
never offered at any Answer to them. And the reason will be apparent to those
who peruse them. But to proceed to the next Observation, which is,]

2. The Weakness and Emptiness of their Pretense to cover and excuse that their
Tergiversation, That he assumed to himself a Power and Authority to erect
several Meetings, etc. which, had it been so, had been no more than what they
themselves have done, who have assumed such Authority, not only to hear, but
also to determine, censure, and pass Sentence.

[Such another weak Pretense is that, That this Meeting tends to gratify and
streng then the Popish Interest: forgetting how much their Faction and Errors
do that, and how wisely they do to immind us of it, and of what has been
objected against them in that respect.]

3. That their Pretense is not only weak, but manifestly and notoriously false;
for he has not taken upon him any thing of the part of a Judge; but only of a
Witness, or an Informer, and that not in any appearance of a Judicature, but
only in a Common Auditory, for the better Information of the People, that such
as have been seduced into such vile and gross Errors and Heresies might be
reduced to the Truth, which is a good and commendable Undertaking and worthy of
the Encouragement of both, the Governors of the Church, and of the Civil
Magistrate.

4. That their Pretense is not only false in it self, but contrary to their
Conscience: for they know, and own in their Paper, that he alleged the
Permission of the Civil Authority: [The Letter also takes notice of that] And
it is well known, that at the former Meeting an Officer of the Lord Mayor did
attend. And there was no reason to question the Readiness of the present
Lord Mayor to take the like Care upon the like Occasion, being allowed by the
Bishop of London.

[But it appears since, that they had certain knowledge of this: for they made
application to the Lord Mayor not to permit the Meeting, and solicited the
Intercessions of others to him, but could not prevail.]

5. Their Presumption to censure the Civil Authority, and all concerned
therein, (as the Lord Bishop of London was, without whose Approbation neither
of the Lord mayors would have given any Countenance to it,) to censure them for
permitting a Usurped Authority, or Pernicious President, for so they call the
Fact, which was permitted by them; and these Men could not be ignorant of it.
[Of this more afterward.]

6. The rest of the Paper is very silly and impertinent, being principally
against a Usurped Authority, which is not in the Case, and such little stuff as
deserves not to be noted.

And from all this we may further observe, 1. The Weakness of these Men. [Of
which more hereafter.]

2. Their little regard to Honesty and Conscience. [This appears in the third
and fourth Observation.

3. Their Consciousness of the Weakness of their Cause.

4. That their Spirit is a false seducing Spirit, which has deceived them, and
can no more stand before the true Spirit of Christ, where it is present, than
the Spirit of the Heathen Gods could heretofore before true Christians. [This
appears in all beforementioned.]

5. That they are Deceivers, though deceived themselves.

6. That the Judgments of God are coming upon them, to their Shame and
Confusion, who rejected the kind Offers of a Friend for their Good: and if they
persist Obstinate in their Heresies, all People ought to avoid them, have
nothing to do with them, but fly from them, as the People in the Wilderness did
from Korah and his Companions, Numb. 16.34.

3. Admonition to the Sincere.
THis I do not say of all that are called Quakers, nor of all those whom they
call Ministers: for I am in hopes there are many sincere People amongst them,
who are misled, and go on in great Simplicity; for whom, I hope and pray daily,
that God will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, that they
may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by
him at his Will: and to that purpose I have been endeavoring, for many Months,
in Meekness, both by Conferences and by Letters, to instruct them better, who
now oppose themselves, and assist them to make a decent Retreat in what they
have overshot themselves; and to be themselves the Instruments of reducing the
People they had misled into the Truth, without ever appearing my self in
public: But there are some of the principal busy and active Managers at the
Conclave in White-hart-Court, who are filled with a Spirit of Pride and
Obstinacy, and impose upon the rest, oppose and cease not to pervert the right
Ways of the Lord, and the true Gospel of Christ. And these are the Men I speak
of, who have had Offers of Grace and Truth, and stop their Ears, and harden
their Hearts, and would blind and hoodwink all their People, lest the true
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. And upon these,
I do believe, the Judgments of God are coming, and that they shall proceed no
further; for their Folly shall be manifest to all Men, as that of James and
Jambres was. v. Hos. 13.3, 15.

Nay, The Judgment of Infatuation is already begun upon them, in that they
should not only betray their Consciousness of the Weakness of their own Cause,
by thus refusing, both in public and even in private, to give an Answer of the
Reason of their Belief; but expose their own Weakness, Disingenuity, and little
regard to Honesty and Conscience, by such a little despicable shuffling devise
for their Excuse, as these two Papers; and one of them a false Counterfeit,
pretending to be written by one of the Church of England, who lived at a
distance, and knew not who George Keith was: whereas it is very casie to
perceive that both came out of the same Forge, and that the Letter was hammered
out by one of the same Workmen. It had certainly been better for their Cause to
have been quiet, and done nothing at all. But it wants a ground of Truth, and
cannot stand; and this little shuffling contrivance may justly make all, who
have any care of their Souls, or even regard to their Reputation, to suspect
them to be Deceivers, and be ashamed to continue of a Sect, which is headed by
such silly, shuffling, dishonest Men, who make merchandise of them, and cheat
them of their Souls, to enrich themselves by the trade of their Hearers.

But especially is their Folly manifest in their Presumption to reflect upon
the Civil Authority, and all concerned, as the Bishop of London is, for
countenancing or permitting such a Usurped Authority, or Pernicious President,
as they say George Keith has Assumed and Attempted, and thereby provoke them
to inquire into a Matter, which is not at all practiced by George Keith, but
notoriously by themselves, in such manner as neither the Civil nor
Ecclesiastical Authority can be excused to connive at, after such an awakening
Alarm; their Second Days Meetings, their Monthly Meetings, their Quarterly
Meetings, and their Yearly Meetings, being all of them out of the Act of
Toleration, plainly Seditious and Factious Meetings, punishable by other Laws,
and not justifiable or excusable by any: This is a manifest Infatuation upon
them: For it is very apparent, that they must be Men of more Subtilty and
Ability, who have ordered these things, formed such a Body, and trained the
People to such an entire Subjection, than such silly Fellows who drew up these
Papers: and therefore that the Civil Authority is obliged, according to the
Judgment which these Men have passed in the Case, which is their own, and not
George Keith's, not longer to connive at or permit such a Usurped Authority, or
Pernicious President.

As for the rest, who are sincere, and not willing to be imposed upon and
deceived in a matter of such moment, but desire to see their way plain before
them, I have done two things already, which may be of no little use to them in
this Business. 1. I have given as great Evidence and Demonstration of my
Sincerity and Good Will to them, as can reasonably be desired; not only from
the whole Course of my Life, which is well known to have been all along very
plain, open and downright: but more particularly in my dealings, both in
Conferences and Letters, with the Chief of their Party. 2. I have so fully and
plainly set out the Case of the Difference between us in certain Letters, and
so prepared and led the way to a clear Resolution in certain Questions, as is
sufficient for any serious, considerate, and thinking Person, of a competent
Capacity, by the Grace of God, to satisfy themselves of the Truth in this
matter. And both these are sufficiently manifest in my Apology for, and
Invitation to, the People called Quakers; and other Tracts Bound up with them.
And this I shall be ready further to do for them: If any serious conscientious
Persons, who having read and well considered what I have written in the Letter
and Questions printed in that Book, and what besides is there relating to them,
remain unsatisfied, upon any reasonable grounds; and shall in writing under
their Hand give me a reasonable account of their Dissatisfaction, and the
Grounds thereof, I shall faithfully endeavor, by the Grace of God, to give
them full Satisfaction, either in public or private, as I shall have
Opportunity, and see there is Occasion; and demonstrate, That, in diverse of
their peculiar Tenants and Doctrines, they are Deceivers, either knowingly
Deceiving, or grossly deceived themselves; and if by any Spirit, by a Wicked,
False, Lying, Seducing, Antichristian Spirit, disguised under the Appearance of
the Spirit of Truth, such as have been foretold should come, that all might
beware of them.

More particularly; both from their Principles, and from their Practices, or
from matter of Fact: 1. That it is a Spirit of Error, a Lying, Seducing Spirit.
2. That it is a Spirit of Iniquity, acting contrary to Civil and Moral Justice
in matters of their Faction. 3. That it is a Spirit of Opposition, a fallacious
undermining Antichristian Spirit, and that not only in their other Principles
and Practices, but in the principal of all their Principles, even that great
and holy Principle, The Guidance of the Spirit of God, which this wicked Spirit
has taken upon him to personate, and does deceive them by a most subtle
Tentation of Misapplication of that great Truth: and that it does act now in
that kind of Injustice, Fraud and Deceit; but would if it had Humane Strength
enough, and certainly will, if ever it has, act also the other, of Force and
Violence, like the Mahometans: and that it is justly permitted by God for
Correction of what is amiss in the Church, as an Instrument of his Vengeance,
to make them sensible of their Unfaithfulness, and reform. All this I intend,
by the Grace of God, to demonstrate in due time: and desire all serious People
to consider of it in the mean time.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TRacts Theological. 1. Asceticks, or the Heroic Piety and Virtue of the
Ancient Christian Anchorets and Coenobites. 2. The Life of St. Antony out of
the Greek of St. Athanasius. 3. The Antiquity and Tradition of Mystical
Divinity among the Gentiles. 4. Of the Guidance of the Spirit of God, upon a
Discourse of Sir Matthew Hale's concerning it. 5. An Invitation to the Quakers,
to rectify some Errors, which through the Scandals given they have fallen into.

Sold by D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar And R. Smith,
at the Angel without Linco^ns-Inn-Gate, near the Fields.

FINIS.

