Advertisement.
AN Exposition on the Lord's-Prayer, in several Sermons, Preached by the
Reverend Mr. Joseph Stephens, Late Lecturer of St. Giles's Cripplegate, St.
Margaret's Lothbury, and St. Michael's Woodstreet. Prepared for the Press by
himself in his Lifetime. Very necessary for all Persons and Families,
instructing them how to pray to God in an acceptable manner. Will speedily be
Published and Printed for H. Walwyn at the Three Legs in the Poultry, against
the Stocks-Market.

THE Last Sermon OF Mr. Joseph Stephens, Late LECTURER of St. Giles's
Cripplegate, St. Margaret's Lothbury, and St. Michael's Woodstreet.

Together with I. A Sermon Composed by him a little before his Death, (but
never Preached, being prevented by his Last Sickness.) II. A Sermon concerning
The Hopes of the Righteous at Death. III. A Sermon on Jam. IV. Verse 17th;
Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin.


Lately Preach d at the said Lectures. All Published from his own Manuscript
Copies, fairly Written out for the Press by himself.

LONDON: Printed for H. Walwyn at the Three Legs in the Poultry, against the
Stocks-Market. 1699.

To the HEARERS of Mr. Joseph Stephens, Late LECTURER at St. Giles's
Cripplegate, St. Margaret's Lothbury and St. Michael's Woodstreet.
THE following Sermons having the Late Reverend Mr. Stephens for their Author,
need not an Epistle to recommend them: To You especially, it is needless, who
are so well acquainted with his Worth, and who at this time labor under the
heavy sense of your great loss of him. And indeed in the Age we live in, a
Minister, who is indefatigable in his Endeavors after the spiritual good of
his Flock, ought not to be parted with without a Concern as singular as his
Example is rare. And I am sure the Subject of your sorrow will justify the
Degree of it; for such an one was Mr. Stephens; One who had an unsatiable Love
for the Souls of Men, and for yours in particular; a Love which lasts longer
than his Life; for when he had spent that in your Service, and the time was
come that be must Depart hence, and be your Lecturer no more: He did (by
ordering his Works to be Printed) as it were, Multiply himself among you; for
whereas before you had him only teaching you from the Pulpit, you may now every
one [of you] have him home with you, Instructing you in your Closets at all
Times, and upon all Occasions; so that although his Labor upon Earth be
ceased, yet he seems to be still teaching you from Heaven, and showing you the
steps by which he went thither.

'Twas observed, that when he preached this his Last Sermon, he urged it with a
more than ordinary Warmth, as if he had known it to be the last he should
utter; for which reason it is published first (before his other Excellent
Discourses and Sermons) that so if he had any peculiar drift in the Choice of
the Subject, or the home Application of it with respect to that Circumstance of
Time (which I am apt to think he had) we might further his intentions, and
leave the Effect to Providence. Herewith is also Published another Sermon which
he composed a little before he Dyed, (but never Preached, being disabled by his
last Sickness.) Together with his Discourse concerning the Hopes of the
Righteous at Death: And another on Jam. 4. 17th Verse; Therefore to him that
knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin. All which, for the
Relation they bear to each other, and the Importance and Seasonableness of
their Doctrine, were thought fit to be printed together.

And to Conclude; May you so Regulate your Lives by the Rules he gave you (as
it is also the Doctrine of Christ) that neither these, nor any other of his
Works hereafter to be Published, may Rise up as Witness against you at the last
Day, is the Prayer of

Your Friend and Servant,

JOB XXVII. 5, 6. Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. My
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live.


THESE words were spoken by Job, who here makes a solemn Resolution to maintain
an unprejudiced Mind, and an innocent Conscience; to behave himself prudently,
and not to be guilty of that thing wittingly, or ^y choice, which should either
shame him to reflect upon, or slur his Reputation, were it exposed to human
knowledge. It was in the midst of Adversity, and depth of Disgrace, when he
thus covenanted with himself; when his Wealth and Store were taken from him,
his Children spirited away, and his Servants despised, and his Friends stood at
a distance from him; when he was tormented with Pains and Sores, and had not
where to lay his Head. In the midst of such an unhappy change of things it was,
that this good Man peremptorily resolved to keep a Conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward Man. As God lives, says he, Verse 2. who has taken
away my judgment; and the Almighty, who has vexed my soul: All the while my
breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils; My lips shall not
speak of wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. Though it were my Lot, and
God's determinate Will, that I be thus severely dealt with all my Days; yet it
shall be my care and study to behave my self wisely in a perfect way; neither
to murmur under such Dispensations, or do that thing which may stain my
Integrity, or expose me to humane Censure. Till I die, I will not remove my
integrity from me. My righteonsness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my
heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. A well-disciplin'd Christian's
care is, to carry such a temper of Mind with him out of this World, which may
enhance his Happiness, and improve his Felicity in the next. Therefore it is,
that he Debates and Argues, Examines and Judges before he be tempted by
Interest or Example. Neither the prospect of Wealth or Honor, or any worldly
Advancement, shall induce him to a low-spirited Action, or put him upon unjust
Ways. He submits to the Government of Providence, and does not seem to hasten a
change of things by immoderate Wishes and Desires. In fine, in the whole Course
of his Actions he prefers a well-pleased Conscience; and will rather forego all
External Goods, than forfeit that which will be a continual comfort to him,
though in the depth of Disgrace, and worldly Debasement. For what outward Evils
can, in a sense, disturb that Man, who is perpetually followed with a harmless
Mind, which always resounds to him those best and sweetest Echoes, Well done
good and faithful servant; how bravely do thou acquit thy self; how manfully
do thou resist Temptations; what care do thou take in the management of thy
Affairs; how little art thou influenced by Interest and Example; how
courageously do thou bear up against the Flatteries of the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil? O, well is thee, and happy shall thou be. This, says the
Wiseman, is a continual feast; and will bear a Man up under all the
uncertainties, disappointments, conflicts, and miseries of this Life. He need
not resort to Drink or Company to replenish his Mind, and relax his Thoughts,
who is thus caressed and crowned with the pleasing Echoes of an unprejudiced
Spirit. This was Holy Job's Consolation during his Exilement from Prosperity,
while his Flesh groaned under a sad Catastrophe, and dismal Change of Things.
Upon a review of his Life past, he discovered that he had walked uprightly with
God; that amidst all the Temptations which Wealth and Fortune could caress him
with, he had a special regard to the thing that was just; and though Providence
was pleased to alter his Condition, and strip him of all External Goods, yet
this was his Comfort, My righteousness I hold fast, I have hitherto retained my
integrity, and am resolved, through the Assistance of Divine Grace, that my
heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. Now my design from these words,
is, First of all, To show the Necessity of Holy Resolution, wherewith Job
fortifies himself against the very worst that may happen to him, Till I die, I
will not remove my integrity from me; and so on. Secondly, To show how far Holy
Resolution is virtuous, and in what sense it turns to a good account. Thirdly,
To lay down some Motives to resolve well and timely. And then conclude.


First then, I am to show the Necessity of (Holy Resolution) wherewith Job
fortifies himself against the very worst that may happen to him, saying, in the
Text, Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. We all well know by
experience, that we are naturally depraved by the Presumption and Fall of our
first Parents; our Inclinations are vile and propense to Evil, our Wills
stubborn and irregular, our Passions violent and mutinous. In fine, in us, that
is, in our Flesh, dwells no good thing at all. What Motions to Evil do we
ever and anon perceive stirred up within us? How greedy are our Appetites of
the forbidden Fruit? What abundance of unbecoming Thoughts invade our Minds,
and invelop our Spirits in Hurry and Confusion? How naturally averse are we
from Holy Things? How disagreeable is Duty to our Affections? In a word, how
unsuitable is the knowledge of God and another World to us in our Natural
State? When a Good presents it self, and uses forcible Arguments to court our
Acceptance, how apt are we to boggle and protract, to make excuses, or to give
a flat denial? Nay, so unhappy are we, that interpretatively we take more pains
to damn, than to save our selves. For what a deal of our time do we waste in
catering for our Lusts? What Difficulties and Hardships do we rub through to
gratify our foolish Appetites? How many restless Nights, and broken Sleeps, do
we patiently endure, to bring an unmanly project to bear? In fine, what a train
of tumultuous Noises will we charge through, to oblige a fond Humor, and
answer a whimsical Disposition? This is our Condition by Nature, this our
Unhappiness through the Transgression of our First Parents.

But this is not all. As we are thus interrupted by our own corrupt Nature, so
we are in as much danger by Temptations from without. The Devil, who is rendered
for ever incapable of Repentance, as sinning without a Tempter, envies the
hopeful Condition of Man, who is admitted to Sorrow and Pardon through the
Merits and Satisfaction of a Savior; And therefore uses all his Art and
Cunning to stain his Innocence, and to bring him into the same miserable
Condition with himself. He has Apples to please those of tender, and Gold to
enchant those of riper Years; he has Kingdoms to allure the Ambitious, and
flattering Arguments to betray the Pretenders to Reason. The Apostle gives this
Character of him, That he goes up and down like a roaring lion, seeking whom he
may devour; and whom he exhorts us to resist steadfast in the Faith. He examines
and observes Men's Humors, and then suits his Temptations proportionably. He
well knew that Cain was Proud, Ambitious, and Self-conceited, and by degrees
induced him to imbrue his Hands in the Innocent Blood of his Brother Abel. He
knew that Peter was fearful and pusillanimous, and so tempted him to deny his
Master with Oaths and Curses. He knew that Judas was selfish and covetous, and
therefore prompted him to betay the Holy Jesus for thirty pieces of Silver. He
is a restless Enemy, and purposes to make all he can as miserable as himself.
But this is our happiness, though he is admitted to tempt, yet he cannot sorce
us to Sin; he lays the bait, but cannot compel us to swallow it without our
consent. He importuned our Blessed Savior to cast himself down from the
Pinnacle of the Temple, but was not empowered to do him the mischief. When we
stain our Innocence, and lose our Peace, the blame lies at our own Door; the
Adversary is not so much in fault: It is true, he used Arguements, insinuated
closely, and left no means unattempted; but it was yet in our choice whether we
would hearken to, and be overcome by his Allurements. -- Nor can we lay the
blame upon God in suffering us to fall, but upon our selves, for living
careless and secure, and giving the Enemy fair opportunities and advantages of
committing a Rape upon our Integrity. Let no man, says St. James, say, when he
is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with Evil, neither
tempts he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own
lust, and enticed, James 1.13, 14. Were we but solicitous and thoughtful, aware
of the Adversary, sensible of our own weaknesses, and furnished with wise
Considerations, we should not be so easily courted to lose our Innocence, nor
would Temptations have such Influence upon us. St. Paul in this Case thus
exhorts us, Ephesians. 6.13, 14, etc. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to
stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace. Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith you will be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. But
considering, I say, our natural Depravation, whereby we are strongly propense
to Evil, and averse from that which is Good, are liable to the Incursions of
Satan, and in imminent danger of falling as so many Victims to him; what
necessity is there of Holy Resolution: that seeing we are set in the midst of
so many and great Temptations, we forthwith wisely resolve to use our utmost
care and diligence to stem the tide of our evil Inclinations within, and to
confront the insinuating Arguments of Temptations without us; To hold fast our
righteousness, and not to let our hearts reproach us so long as we live. Which
leads me in the second place,

Secondly, To show how far (Holy Resolution) is virtuous, and in what sense it
turns to a good account. To be religiously disposed by fits and girds, to load
our selves with solemn Vows and Protestations in a melancholy Humor, or when
we have taken some disgust at our Sins; but so soon as this Mood is over, and
our Passion allayed, we return to our wonted Extravagances, like the Dog to his
vomit, and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the mire: I say, to be
thus uncertainly Good, and to resolve peremptorily upon a sudden surreption or
surprise, is not an Argument of a virtuous, but of an unconstant and wavering
spirit. Many, after a long and tedious fatigue in pursuit of their Sins, have
resolved upon amendment; but no sooner a Temptation has come in their way,
which pleased their Humor, but have forgotten what they said, and swallowed
the Bait with as much eagerness as ever. Some, on their Sick Beds, have bound
themselves under certain Obligations to become new and better Christians,
should they be blessed with a recovery of Health and Strength; but so soon as
they have been able to relish a pleasing Lust, and comply with a suitable
Temptation, have basely degenerated from their late Promise, and sold their
Innocence for a trifle. -- True indeed, it is a kind of Virtue to resolve well,
to vow amendment of Life, to be serious and thoughtful sometimes; but it is
much more virtuous to pass into Action, and express our sincerity by an
absolute and thorough Conversion: And unless Holy Promises terminate into Pious
Practices, they will be so far from contributing to our happiness, that they
will appear as so many instances of our Folly, and induce a crimson Guilt. How
many Spirits are there wandering to and fro in the infernal Shades, who, while
they were in this Life, made repeated Protestations to change their Minds and
Manners; and because they did protract and linger, and took no care to pay that
which they had vowed, are repenting of their Negligences, and must live out a
long Eternity in unpitied Sighs and Groans. It is the easiest part of Religion
to make fair Promises; and did it consist in nothing else, there are but few
who would boggle at it: For it is no great difficulty now and then to be
seriously disposed; and during the Mood, to protest a Reformation hereafter.
That which evidences our Piety, is the mortifying our Lusts and Passions,
subduing our Wills, and bringing the Flesh in subjection to the Spirit: And
without this piece of Religion, all external Pretenses are of no significancy.
If thou vowest to God, thou do well; and if thou make it good, thou do
better; for he has no pleasure in the Sacrifice of Fools. -- He dates our
Conversion from that time we have slain our Lusts, changed our Minds, subdued,
our Appetites, and are reduced to the evennesses of Virtue and a good Nature.
Resolution without practice, is only an argument of a hasty Spirit, of a rash
and injudicious Mind, that considers not what he says, as well as intends not
what he solemnly promises. But to be more concise:

He that resolves well, and does not perform, is a Sinner in the highest
degree, because he condemns that Course of Life he continues in; or otherwise,
why did he vow to forsake it? And let me add, There is less hopes of that Man's
Conversion who threatens it by promises, but yet protracts and lingers, than
of his who never made any; because it plainly argues that his Conscience is
feared, who, notwithstanding all the Appeals he has made unto God, and the
Resolution he has confirmed of becoming better, he still continues in his
Original State, as Vicious, as Sensual as ever. For were he truly affected with
a sense of his Condition, were he struck with a thorough Compunction for Sin,
his Resoultion would quicken and spur him on to deny all Ungodliness and
worldly Lust, to live soberly and righteously. Therefore to sum up this Head:
Holy Resolution is of no force and validity, distinct and separate by it self;
it carries in it nothing of true Religion unless it pass into Action, and
oblige a Man to enter upon strict Discipline, to mortify his Passions and
Lusts, and to proceed in all Virtue and Godliness of Living. And he that
reckons himself in a happy Condition, because he now and then, in a melancholy
pensive Mood, promises to become a new Creature, is miserably deceived, and
will in the end sorrowfully find, That without holiness no man shall see the
Lord. For when by the mighty Sound of the last Trump we shall be awakened, and
summoned to the dread Tribunal of Christ, it will be of no use to us, that we
many times resolved to do well; then we shall stand or fall by our Actions;
according to that saying of the Apostle, We shall all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, to give an account for what we have done in the flesh,
and to receive according to that we have done, whether it be good or bad. And
thus much may suffice for the Second thing, which was to show how far (Holy
Resolution) is virtuous, and in what sense it turns to a good Account, with
relation to that of Job's in the Text, saying, Till I die, I will not remove my
integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my
heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. I pass on now in the third place,

Thirdly, To lay down some Motives to excite you to resolve well and timely.
And here, First, consider how difficult it is to change a mind that is
naturally depraved, and to bring an originally corrupted Constitution into a
good Frame and Order. For besides that Sin is innate, born in us, so it has
been springing up, and growing in our Nature ever since our Birth, that it is
become headstrong and tumultuous, and requires much Pains and Care, Courage,
Resolution, and Patience, Watchings and Strivings, Prayers and Tears to root it
out. Sin is not soon mastered; for as it has taken time to gather together, so
it must be the Work of much time to loosen it from its strong holds, and to
banish it from thence, where it has so long continued. Faint Velleities and
Pusillanimity will never accomplish this great Concernment; nor is that
Resolution immediately formed, which can go on with such a painful undertaking.
For if there be any leak left open in our Resolution for any Sin to creep in
at, that will be sure to insinuate in the next Storm of Temptation; and if it
should not let in other Sins after it, as it is a thousand to one but it will,
it will by its own single weight sink us into Eternal Perdition. Wherefore
before we enter into the Resolution of amendment, we ought to be very careful
that our Wills be thoroughly prepared for it, that they be reduced to a fair
compliance with the matter we are resolved upon, and effectually dissuaded out
of all Resolution to the contrary. And when this is done, we may cheerfully
proceed to the forming of our good Resolution; or otherwise, all is but Heat
and Passion, irregular Motions of the Mind, which will never help a Man to
encounter with his Lusts, nor hold out till he has reduced himself to a fair
compliance with the Duties of Religion.

Secondly, The stronger and sooner we resolve upon Amendment, the easier and
less difficult will it be to tame our Passions, and extirpate our Lusts; for
they are still improving, and every day get more and more strength and ground
of us, which if permitted to spread and grow up, will at length become so
tyrannical and tumultuous, so radicated and habitual, that we shall become
Impotent, and it will be in vain to make any Sally upon them. And besides, the
longer it is before we enter into Holy Resolution, the more listless and
untoward we shall be to begin a Work of so much time and pains; so that, what
through our faint-heartedness on the one hand, and the difficulties we must rub
through on the other, before we can change our Natures, and reduce them to the
evenness of Virtue, we perchance die in the interim, and are sunk by the weight
of our own guilt into Eternal Misery. Therefore as we would succeed in this
great and mighty Concernment, and gain the Victory over our selves, as we would
not in the latter end of our days have such a troublesome Work to begin, when
we shall have the least Strength and Courage to carry it on; let us be so wise
for our selves, to enter upon a serious Resolation timely, when both our Years,
and the Youth of our Lusts, promise us the Victory over them. But why so much
admonishment in this Case? Why such need of Argument to press to such a Temper
of Mind, when our Souls lie at stake, whose Eternal Happiness or Misery depends
upon our good or bad Management of them. And if we lose them, we lose our All,
and no possibility of recovering them. As our Savior says, What can a man give
in exchange for his soul?

Thirdly, Consider what a comfortable Condition that Man is in, who by
assiduous Watchings and Strivings, Prayers and Tears, by wise Considerations,
and strenuous Arguments, has subdued his Lusts, and reduced the Sensual to a
fair compliance with the Rational Part; what slavery and hardship, what
Perturbations and Tumultuous Noises is he freed from? Whereas he that is
subservient to his irregular Appetite, is at the beck of every Motion; hurried
on from one Evil to another, fatiegued and worried by an injuried Mind, and is
never at peace from the restless Importunities of his craving Lusts. What
mischiess is he daily exposed to? And what base and unmanly Shifts is he put
upon to extricate himself out of those Difficulties he involves himself? How
does his Lusts perplex and intriegue the whole Course of his Life, and entangle
him in a Labyrinth of knavish Tricks and Collusions? But he that by special
Arts and Strengths of Mortification has gained the ascendent over his Nature,
is never thus interrupted, nor exposed to such Actions, which he shall either
be ashamed to own, or care if they were manifest to the whole World. He is no
longer governed by blind Passion, but directed by right Reason; he is not
influenced by Interest or Example, unless it be warrantable, and becomes a
Christian. And now upon the whole,

These things considered, I think there cannot be any thing more argumentative,
nor of more force to prevail with rational Men to enter upon Holy Resolution,
since it produces such happy Effects. And as it will certainly carry us safe
through a troublesome and noisy World, so it qualifies us for the Enjoyments
and Felicities of a far better; where we shall recount with Triumph and Glory,
with what courage and bravery we acquitted our selves, how manfully we resisted
the Impulses of the Natural part; how resolutely we stemmed the Tide of our
Evil Inclinations, and gave a defiance to the strongest Temptations; how
cheerfully we persevered, though we met with almost immovable Impediments, and
retained our integrity as long as we lived. And by all this, our Love and
Loyalty shown to God; then shall we triumph for ever with the glorious Company
of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, and the noble Army of
Martyrs, with all the Saints and Servants of God. To which Happiness God of his
abundant Mercy, etc.

THE SECOND SERMON.
PHIL. III. 13, 14. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this
one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to
those things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.


THESE Words seem to be a caution given by the Apostle against the false
Teachers suggestion about Perfection in this State, from the instance of
himself, so eminently called to be an Ambassador for Christ. There were some
who insinuated, That it was possible to arrive at such a Degree of Goodness in
this Life, that persons might stop there, without any further improvement, and
without any hazard of losing their Reward. This absurd opinion the Apostle
endeavors to confute; and from himself shows, That he did not think he was so
sure of the Crown, that he could not miss it. I, says he, consider not how much
of my Race I have run, what Virtues I have attained, what Proficiency I have
made in the Christian Warfare; my business is, while I have Life, and the use
of my Faculties, to be still aiming at more eminent degrees of Perfection in
Holiness. I count not my self to have apprehended, I am not so good as I may
and ought to be; nor shall the time past which I have spent in gathering
together the Christian Graces, suffice for the time to come; but that also
shall be employed in holy Exercises, in watchings and strivings, in earnest
prayers, and wise considerations; I will still be running my Race, till I come
to the very Goal; forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth
to those things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. While we are on this side the Grave, we
are continually exposed to Temptations; and by sad Experience we find, that
they too often insinuate with, and prevail over us, sometimes by sudden
surreption or surprise, sometimes for want of a good judgment and a sound
understanding; and sometimes for want of substantial Arguments and suitable
Considerations; so that still here is work for Repentance, and a renewed
Obligation upon us, to grow stronger and stronger in the Lord, and in the power
of his might. Virtue is like unto Steel, if it be disused, will lose its
luster, and contract a rust; if those Graces we have acquired, be not
exercised, and improved, they will soon faint and languish, and leave us to the
mercy of every Temptation; for it is not sufficient that we are just emerged
and recovered out of a sinful state, that by holy resolution, and much labor
we have corrected our evil Inclinations and Appetites, and are just gotten over
the line that parts a good and bad state: For besides that, the line which
separates these two states of Sin and Grace is not so easily discerned, but
that we may in all likelihood be deceived, and imagine that we are happily
gotten over into a safe condition, while we are bordering upon the brink of our
Original State, and so may at last suffer Shipwreck at the mouth of our
Harbor; I say, besides this, it is a shrewd sign that we are yet in our Sins,
that we intend no further than just to preserve our selves from that
everlasting ruin which awaits them; which also demonstrates, that the dread of
Hell is the very Life and Soul of our Religion, and that there is not the least
instance of the love and fear of God joined with it; without which, all seeming
pretensions to Christianity are nothing worth. And furthermore, while we rest
in such an imperfect state of Goodness, we have no security against a Relapse,
but are every moment in danger of returning into our natural state. The Apostle
therefore, who kept a watchful and a jealous Eye upon the inconstancy of his
nature, who had well studied himself, and the accomplishments of a Christian,
who knew the danger of stopping at any determinate degrees of Goodness, that
while he imagined himself sure of a Crown, might by this means at last fall
short of it. Herein the Text modestly censures his own insufficiency, and
urges, that it was not enough, that he had by watchings and strivings, by
earnest prayer, and wise considerations, changed his nature, and conquered his
passions; but that he still be improving, and aim at the farthermost Degree of
Perfection in Holiness. Brethren, says he, I count not my self to have
apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth to those things which are before: I press toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Which words, as they
lie, afford us these following Propositions: First, That a Christian, while he
continues in this Life, must not stop at any determinate degree in Holiness,
out of a fond conceit that he is good enough already. I count not my self, says
the Apostle, to have apprehended, and therefore I forget those things which are
behind, and reach forth to those things which are before. Secondly, That
Perfection, as such, is not attainable in this Life, and therefore we ought to
be as good as is possible. I press, toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Thirdly, And Lastly, That it is very dangerous
to stop in the Christian warfare, as being at leisure to listen to Temptations,
and so be betrayed into our natural state. I shall Treat upon these in their
order.


First, That a Christian, while he continues in this Life, must not stop at any
determinate degree in Holiness, out of a fond conceit that he is good enough
already; for Holiness is everywhere in Scripture enjoined in unlimited and
indefinite terms. We are commanded not only to have Grace, but to grow in it;
not only to walk in all well-pleasing to God, but to abound in so doing more
and more; that is, That we do not limit our selves to any present seize,
out of a slothful Opinion that we are Righteous enough; but that we aim at more
eminent improvements, reach after those things which are before. It is a very
absurd conceit that we are good enough for Heaven, that we have done enough for
the attainment of that Reward which God has promised; that we are sufficiently
qualified to dwell among Angels and Saints. For besides that such a lofty
thought of one's self, argues spiritual Pride, than which nothing more
obnoxious to God; so it implies, That we conclude our labors meritorious that
Heaven is not a Deed of Gift but our proper right; not a Reward of free mercy,
but our just and undeniable claim. Should we but recollect what imperfections
are mingled with the best of our Services, how far we fall short of perfect
unsinning Obedience, how often we stain our Innocence, and make work for our
Repentance, what strong contentions there are between Flesh and Spirit, between
our bad Inclinations, and our pious Resolutions; and how often it is, that
sometimes through natural infirmity, and sometimes by our own consent, we are
betrayed, and overcome; I say, did we but consider how many indecencies we are
guilty of, and what a mixture of evils there is in the best of our
performances, this were enough to put us out of conceit with our own Goodness,
and to quicken and spur us on to rectify the disorders of our nature, and to
advance yet more and more in the ways of Holiness; and even when we have done
all, as our Savior expresses it, we must say, that we are unprofitable
Servants, we have done that which was but our duty to do; for alas! God does
not exact duty from us because he needs it, because he is the better for it.
For (besides that he cannot want any thing without himself, that he cannot any
ways need mortal Breath to praise him, or hands of Flesh to serve him, who has
millions of better Creatures than we, absolutely at his Devotion, and can with
a word create millions of millions more fitter than we to honor him) the best
estimation we can have of him is much below him; the best expression we can
make, is very unworthy of him; he is infinitely excellent beyond what we can
imagine or declare. It is only his pure Goodness that moves him, for our
benefit and advantage, to demand it of us. He has made Obedience the condition
of our happiness, though the utmost we can do, falls far short of the reward;
nor has God set any boundary to Holiness; but enjoins, That we be always
abounding in his Work. And alas! What is Finite Service to an Infinite
Recompense? A short Life spent here in watchings and strivings, in prayers and
tears, in mortification and strict discipline, to a Life in Heaven, where every
Eye sparkles with joy, every Heart overflows with gladness, and every Tongue
perpetually is employed in singing the Song of Moses and of the Lamb, where all
tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, shall move in a wide and capacious Sphere,
and feed upon an Happiness, which is as large as our capacities, and as lasting
as our beings. Can we be good enough to dwell for ever with a God, with whom is
no variableness nor shadow of turning? is the farthermost degree of all
possible Perfection in Holiness, to be compared with that purity which admits
of no abatements? Should he strictly observe the indecencies which are in the
best of our performances, or those petulant follies we are guilty of, when in a
converted and regenerate state, they were enough by their own weight to sink us
into Eternal Perdition. So that, considering how defective we are at best,
there is work enough for Repentance, and for the Exercising of Christian Graces
so long as we live. It is not such an easy thing to change an evil mind, to
correct a rude nature, and to defend our selves against a Relapse; for this it
seems is our unhappiness, the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Galat. 5.17.
While we are in the body, we shall meet with difficulties and oppositions,
occasioned by the Flesh warring against the Spirit, and ostentimes we are put
to it to keep our integrity, and too frequently, either by surprise, or for
want of a good Judgment, or substantial Arguments, and suitable Considerations,
we fall, and make work for our Repentance; and this is the business of our
whole lives, to repent as soon as we have slipped, and to fortify our selves
with the whole Armor of God against Temptations. But thus much for the first
proposition; namely, That a Christian, while he continues in this Life, must
not stop at any determinate degree in Holiness, out of a fond conceit that he
is good enough already. From this I proceed to the Second Proposition; which is

Secondly, That (Perfection) as such, is not attainable in this Life, and
therefore we ought to strive to be as good as is possible. I count not my self,
says the Apostle, to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are
before; I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. To be perfect, in a strict sense, is to be free from imbecility,
whether natural, or contracted; from any blemish, or appearance of insirmity;
in fine, it implies such an advancement, which admits of no degree beyond it,
when a Christian, by special arts has furnished himself with such a
Complication of Graces, that he cannot err, nor be in danger of falling; now it
is impossible, while our Spirits are clogged with Flesh, and detained by the
infirmities of human nature, to be thus complete and spotless; for even the
best of men, by sad experience find how imperfect and weak they are, how apt to
fall; that to regain their innocence are forced to renew their sorrows.
Accordingly we read one of the greatest Proficients in the School of Christ,
lamenting the corruption of his nature, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Some of the Ancients call
this Verse, genitus sanctorum, the groan, or lamentation of good Christians,
who are troubled at heart, that they are so much interrupted by the
importunities of the Flesh, that they cannot serve God with better attention,
with that strictness of Zeal, and ardency of Affection, they would. For what
through the prevalency of the Flesh, and the subtle, but almost inconceivable
insinuations of the common Adversary, they are sometimes indifferent to holy
duties, disturbed by a multitude of unbecoming thoughts when engaged in them;
send up their prayers with cold desires, are more insensible of their spiritual
wants, are sometimes more inclinable to comply with a temptation, and are at a
loss for Arguments to preserve their innocence; these unhappinesses, and many
more, too tedious to insert, attending the best of men, are as so many
incentives to Repentance, to quicken and spur them on in watchings and
strivings; these oblige them to keep a jealous Eye upon the inconstancy of
their nature, and to be still furnishing themselves with wise considerations,
that they may regulate their infirmities, and reduce themselves to a better
compliance with the duties of Religion. The condition of nature is such, that
as long as we are in the World, we shall be courted by temptations to lose our
innocence; and though we have by hearty endeavors stemmed the Tide of our evil
inclinations, and made our Wills corrective and governable, so that temptations
are not so taking, nor we in such manifest danger of being deluded by them; yet
oftentimes on a sudden, not being immediately upon our guard, we are insensibly
betrayed, and make fresh work for our Repentance. Peter little thought when he
told our Savior, that he would die with him before he would deny him, that
ever he should have been guilty of such a disingenuous act; yet no sooner was
he put to proof, but he degenerated from his so solemn a promise; and
accordingly we read him a weeping for what he had done, nay, bitterly, that he
who was such an eminent Apostle, had made so great a progress in holy
Discipline, should stain his innocence, and lose his peace. In fine, while
Flesh and Spirit are joined together, there will be contention and war, and
during that, it is impossible to be void of weaknesses and infirmities. Says
St. Paul, here we see as through a glass darkly, here we know but in part; in
this Life, at best, we are frail defective Creatures; but in another World we
we shall see more clearly; there the infirmities of humane nature will be done
away, all temptation to sin shall cease, nothing shall interrupt us in our
devotion, nor call us off from our enjoyments: then the tempter, who now has
permission to use arguments, and lay his baits, shall be confined in the Prison
of Hell for ever, and shall never betray or hurt us more. But while we are in
this state, through the interruption of the flesh, we are mainly hindered, so
that we cannot do the things which we would. And in regard that such is our
unhappiness, we must not limit our selves to any present seize, stop at
any determinate degree in Holiness, out of a fond conceit, that we are good
enough already, but follow the Apostle's example, who thus speaks of himself; I
count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are
before: I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high caling of God in
Christ Jesus. But I hasten to the Third and Last Proposition, (viz.)

Thirdly, That it is dangerous to make a stop in the Christian warfare, out of
a fond conceit that we are good enough already, as being at leisure to listen
to Temptations, and so be betrayed into our first and natural State. For as it
argues the being weary of well-doing, that we begin to be cloyed with Virtue
and strict Discipline, are tired out by Watchings and Strivings, when we thus
slacken our pace in the Christian warfare, and only entertain our selves with
the consideration how much of our race we have run, and are contented with what
we have already done; so we give the fairest advantage imaginable for
Temptations to insinuate with, and the Devil to exercise his Arts upon us. A
Self-conceited Christian is a fair invitation to him; nor can he have a better
prospect of success, than when he finds a Man puffed up with an over-weaning
Confidence of his own strength. For then sometimes he works upon him by a
sudden surreption or surprise, as being not thoughtfully disposed, nor in a
watchful posture; sometimes again he insinuates with, and prevails upon him, he
not having his Mind furnished with wise Considerations. He that once begins to
abate his Endeavors, to disuse that strict discipline he was wont to exercise
himself under, to admit of larger allowances, and to limit himself to present
seize, will go back much faster than ever he went forward; for those
Virtues he has acquired, being not constantly exercised, will by degrees grow
weak and faint, and at length terminate into final Apostasy. And besides this,
it is just with God to suffer such a one finally to miscarry, who has been so
long taking Heaven by storm and violence, has broken through so many
oppositions to come at it, and in despite of all the darts of temptation from
without, and of all the weights and pressures of inclination from within, was
gotten up as it were to the top of the Scaling Ladder, had laid his hands on
the Battlements of Heaven, and was ready to leap in, and take possession of the
joys of it; and at last slackens his hold, abates his industry, and sits down
secure and careless; I say, it is just with God to permit such a one to fall,
and that finally: That after the blessed Spirit has cultivated his Nature, and
planted it with Virtues, he unravels his Workmanship, and turns his growing
Sharon into a barren Wilderness. Thus we see how dangerous it is to stop at any
determinate degree in goodness, out of a fond conceit that we are good enough
already, that we are liable to relapse into our former state, and shall plunge
our selves into a miseferable condition. The Apostle therefore wisely
considered this, and resolved to be still advancing more and more in the
Christian Warfare. I count not my self, says he, to have apprehended, or either
were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for
which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus; forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before: I press toward the
mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

I now proceed to draw some useful and practical Inferences from what has been
said, and so conclude. And here,

First, If this Life be a time of Trial and probation, wherein God has
appointed much work to be finished by us; let us forthwith set our selves about
it, especially considering how uncertain our stay is here. Let us never abate
our endeavors, nor slacken our diligence out of a fond conceit that we are
good enough already, lest we finally miscarry. It is not enough that we correct
the indecencies of our natures, and stem the Tide of our evil inclinations;
that we forsake our Sins, and hate them; but that we also attain all the
Christian Virtues and Graces, and these to grow and flourish, by exercising
them about their proper Object, even God. Now this is not a fatigue to be
accomplished on a sudden; it is not an easy thing to make an evil mind comply
with a Virtue; here must be many Strifes and Contentions, strong Disputes, and
shrewd Arguings, before our stubborn Wills can be brought to a fair compliance
with a Christian Grace; and then here must be great industry used to digest it
into habit and Custom, or otherwise it is sooner lost, than it was gained. And
then, considering the many Temptations from without us, which are continually
interrupting us by their restless importunities, it is very difficult to retain
a Virtue, after a long and tedious pursuit after it; and the case being so,
this will keep us for ever sufficiently Employed, and oblige us to Eternity to
be still aspiring beyond our present Seize.

Secondly, Nor is there the want of Encouragement, to spur us on in the
Christian Warfare. The Reward far exceeds our Labor, will make us amends for
the very worst we can undergo. What is it to spend a few days or years in
striving and contending with our inclinations; in Consideration and
Watchfulness, in Earnest Prayer and Severe Refiections on our selves, when we
are assured beforehand, that at the End of this short conflict, we shall be
carried off by Angels in Triumph into Heaven, and there receive from the
Captain of our Salvation, a Crown of Everlasting Joys and Pleasures; when after
a few moments Pains and Labor, we shall live Millions of most happy. Ages, in
the ravishing fruition of a boundless Good? I say, Who that considers what
great things God has prepared for them that love him, would boggle at the
difficulties in the Christian Warfare? Is it not a ravishing Contemplation to
think, that the time is coming, when we shall bathe our dilated Faculties in an
overflowing River of Pleasures, and feed upon an Happiness which is as large as
our Capacities, and as lasting as our Beings!

Let us therefore run with Patience the Race that is set before us. And may the
God of Peace which brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant make you
perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, Working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To whom, with the Father and Ever Blessed Spirit, be goven all Honor, Praise,
Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for Evermore. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON.
Prove. XIV. Latter part of the 32d verse. But the Righteous lath hope in his
Death.


BESIDES the many Blessings which Religion Intitles a good Christian to, while
he continues in this Life, such as God's special Favor and Protection, Success
to his Endeavors, a reputable Name, and such like; there is yet one eminent
advantage which it produces at the last gasp, as our Wise man observes in the
Text; and that is, a solid Hope and Considence of an Inheritance with the
Saints in Light, an assurance of going to God, and living with him to all
Eternity. This was it which solaced the Apostle St. Paul when under the
apprehension of an approaching and cruel Death, 2 Ep. Tim. 4.6. I am now ready
to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; but still this is my
Comfort, my Life has been spent in God's Service; I have fought the good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; and therefore I rest
in this, that henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteous Judge will bestow upon me, when he comes in the
last Day, to dispense his Rewards and Punishments. It is a sweet Reflection to
a good man, when he is packing up for Eternity, that he made it his care and
business to dress his Soul for the embraces of the Father of Spirits; to think
that he shall bathe his dilated Faculties in an overflowing River of Pleasures,
and feed upon an Happiness which is as large as his Capacity, and as lasting as
his Being; to think that as soon as his Soul is stormed out of the outworks of
Nature, the Angels, which are ministering Spirits, will convey it into Abraham's
Bosom; I say, such a thought as this upon a Deathbed, mitigates the Ragings of
an imperious Disease, sweetens the bitter Cup, and renders the approaches of
Death less formidable and scaring. Whereas, when a Wicked man, after repeated
Provocations, and wilful resistings of Divine Grace, is flung by an invisible
hand upon his Sick or Deathbed; he is presently Arraigned by his injured
Conscience, and a large Catalogue of all his Sins is opened and read before
him; he is afraid to Dye, because he has all along lived in Rebellion against
God. And here we may imagine what a surprise the Wretch is in, to think, that
he must live out a long Eternity in unpitiable Sighs and Groans, and endure the
Vengeance of an irreconcilable God; that no sooner will Death cut the Thread of
Life; but he enters into a World of despairing Ghosts; and that at the Day of
Judgment, must change his unhappy condition for a much worse; these are the
Thoughts which usually attend ungodly men, when they are making their Exit,
unless they are hardened, or deprived of their senses through the Violence of
their Distemper. This is the last punishment of a vicious course in this Life:
And one would think, that such an uncouth remembrance of things, at such a time
when a man is under the ill circumstance of an intolerable Distemper, when
Nature is almost spent, the Eyes darkened like a sullied Mirror, the Face
besmeared with a clammy sweat, the whole Body trembling under the Severity of
death, when the Soul, as it were, sets hovering upon the Lip, just advancing
upon the Shore of another invisible World; I say, one would think, that it were
enough to make men afraid of Sin, to be thus miserably tormented with the
Reflections of it, when they are stepping out of this, into a wide World of
Spirits, where their sorrows will be Augmented, and the remembrance how they
have lived here will afflict them more, than to be stung with Snakes, whipped
with Scorpions, and all the Instruments of torture applied unto them. And it is
no less a prevalent Motive to the Study and Practice of Religion, that it
influences a man to generous Actions, and to order his Conversation so, that he
shall not be ashamed, nor afraid to look back upon the passages of his Life
past, when he comes to dye; but revive his drooping Spirits with the Hope and
Assurance of commencing a Happy and Joyful Eternity; having in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, had his
Conversation in the World. And so says Solomon in the Text, The righteous has
hope in his death; the consideration of his well-spent Life, lifts him up at
the last gasp with the confidence of living with God, Angels, and Saints. Which
words manifestly imply this Proposition (viz) That a truly pious and holy Life,
produces a happy and comfortable Death.

Now my Business shall be, First, To prove the Truth of this. Then, Secondly,
To persuade Men to the Practice of Religion, from the consideration, that it
brings Peace at the last; and qualifies their Souls for the Embraces of the
Father of Spirits.


First then, I am to prove the Truth of this (viz.) That a truly Pious and Holy
Life produces a Happy and Comfortable Death; which is the same in sense and
meaning with what the Wiseman asserts in the Text, That the Righteous has
hope in his Death; as if he had said, That man that Exercises himself daily to
have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man; who by Study
and special Arts has contracted an entire love to God and Religion, and lives
in a constant and unfeigned Obedience to the Institutions of the Gospel, shall
be so far from having any frightful Reflection upon what is past, or dismal
Prospect of what is to come, at the time of his Death, that the very
consideration of his sincerity in the Practice of Religion, will revive and
cheer his drooping Spirit, with the Hope and Assurance of a joyful Resurrection
to Eternal Life, through the Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ; by the
imputation of whose Righteousness, he shall be enabled to stand blameless
before God. How true this is, our own Experience and Observation tells us. When
we have visited a Friend, Neighbor, or Relation, who have had their
Conversation here in simplicity and godly sincerity, with what cheerfulness
have they resigned to God's Will and Disposal? How little have they been
concerned at the Thoughts of approaching Death? With what Comfort and
Satisfaction have they looked back upon, and remembered the general course of
their Actions? How have they rejoiced in the Testimony of a good Conscience?
How light and easy did the Yokes of Pain and Sickness set upon them, being
taken up with the Thoughts of a future happy Life, and Established with the
assurance of Reigning the Lives of Victorious Saints? What Lectures of
Admonishment have they delivered to their surviving Acquaintances, that they
would live in the fear of God, and dedicate their days to his Service, for that
such a Conversation only will bring them peace at the last? With what Courage
did they meet the King of Terrors? How familiar and comfortable were his
approaches to them, having the same mind which was in the Apostle, desirous to
be dissolved, being confident of spending an Eternity with Christ, whose
Virtues they endeavored to imitate, and whose Example they made the Pattern
and Model of their Actions? This is the comfortable State and Condition of good
Christians, when lying under the unhappy circumstances of Mortal Pains or
Sicknesses; neither the inconvenience of a crazy and distempered Body, nor the
fear of Death, nor all the disturbances which usually attend a deathbed, can
shake their Faith, or remove their Hope of a blessed Immortality. For the very
Design and Purpose of Religion is, To teach men how to dress their Souls for
the embraces of the Father of Spirits, to furnish them with such necessary
Graces, as may prepare them to stand before the Son of Man when he comes to
Judgment; and he that is endued with this holy Principle, and by Practice has
digested it into habit, has answered the great end of his being sent into the
World, and is fortified with considerations sufficient against the worst that
may happen to him. Of such an excellent and gracious Nature is Religion, that
it qualifies a man for all states and conditions of Life; if he be Rich, it
instructs him to set loose in his Affections to the Goods and Affluences of
this World; not to prefer the Creature to, or bring it in competition with the
Creator; but to use this World, as not abusing it, moderately embracing
sublunary Blessings; with a generous Resignation of mind to leave them without
murmuring, if Providence so ordains it, either to take them from us, or we from
them. In fine, Religion also learns the Man who is fortunately blessed, to be
charitably disposed, to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to minister to
persons according to their unhappy circumstances. If a man be poor, Religion
teaches him to be content with his Lot, and to submit cheerfully to him that
governs the World, who knows what condition is best for us; it learns him not
to covet the Goods of another; it being a mighty disturbance to the Tranquillity
of the mind, to Desire, and not to have; it also instructs to be honestly
inclined, by abstaining from pilfering and stealing, poverty being a strong
temptation thereto, without the prevention of Divine Grace. In brief, Religion
prompts us to whatsoever things are honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good
Report; and he that by special arts and strengths of Mortification, has reduced
his nature to the evenness of Virtue, and a good disposition, has laid up a
good foundation against the time to come. Whenever God sends his Messenger to
call him off the Stage of this World, he comforts himself as the holy Apostle
did; The time of my departure is at hand; I am now ready to be stripped into a
naked Spirit, and to lanch into a wide Eternity; but this is my Consolation; I
have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, and have kept the Faith;
upon which I ground this assurance, That when Christ, who is my Life, shall
appear, I also shall appear with him in Glory. Whereas, when a man, whose Life
has been a perpetual course of uninterrupted iniquity, comes to dye, with what
reluctance does he submit to the Condition of Nature, and the Will of
Providence? What dreadful Apprehensions is his crazy mind infested with? What
Fears and Amazements does he labor under? Conscience, which before was lulled
into a fatal slumber, is now awakened, and alarms him with a repetition of his
wonted insolences, and at once gives him a View of his whole Life; These
things have thou done, and I kept silence; but I will reprove thee, and set all
thy sins in order before thee. This is but a bad Character to be given of a man
by his own Spirit; and the very consideration of it must needs invade his Mind
with abundance of ill-aboding Thoughts, and scaring Reflections; and the more,
because he has no time to recover himself by Repentance and a new Life; he has
neither strength nor opportunity to express such sorrow for his miscarriages,
as may move an offended God to Reconciliation, but must leave this World in
doubts and fears; and, which he has too much reason to believe, must endure the
despair of a damned Ghost for ever. This, I say, is the sorrowful conflict of a
wicked man upon his deathbed, a sad Reflection upon what is past, and a dismal
Prospect of what is to come. But it is not so with him who has ordered his
Conversation aright; he, says my Text, has hope in his death, that after this
painful Life is ended, he shall enter into an house not made with hands, whose
builder and maker is God; where nothing shall interrupt or call him off from
his Enjoyments; no satiety shall render his fruition loathsome or tedious; but
shall spend a long Eternity in perfect, constant, and unmixed Happiness.

But thus much for the first thing; which was, That a truly pious and holy
Life, produces a happy and comfortable Death, according to the Wiseman's
assertion in the Text, The righteous has hope in his death.

I proceed from hence to the Second thing; which is,

Secondly, To persuade Men to a Holy and Religious Life, from the consideration
that it brings peace at the last, and prepares our Souls for the embraces of
the Father of Spirits. And here,

First of all; Religion does not put a man upon any thing which he shall be
ashamed of; but as he is a rational Creature, capable of distinguishing between
Good and Evil, only obliges him to such actions which he may give a good
account of to his own Conscience, and to God, who is greater than his
Conscience. It instructs him to choose what is good in it self, and to reject
what is sinfully evil. Now to be thus prudent and circumspect in matters of
choice in the general course of our actions, What a comfort is it to a man, to
be followed with the joyful whispers of a well-pleased mind wherever he goes;
to be caressed by an innocent Conscience, and continually entertained with a
sweet Reflection upon what he has done? Whereas a man of a cajative
disposition, who gives Reins to his Passions, and no Bounds to his Lusts, is
often put upon unmanly Prosecutions, and hurried into abundance of
Inconveniences; to gratify his greedy and unsatiable Appetite, he is frequently
tempted to such low-spirited actions, which he is ashamed to own, and blushes
at them, though no body be privy. To how many inconveniences is a wicked man
daily exposed? And what base and unmanly shifts is he put upon, to extricate
himself out of those difficulties wherein he involves himself? What violent
passions and perturbations are raised in his mind? And into what wild tumults
of action does sin frequently hurry him? How does it perplex and intriegue the
whole course of his Life, and entangle him in a Labyrinth of Knavish Tricks and
Collusions; so that many times he is at his wits end, and knows not which way
to turn himself? These difficulties, and many more, attend a vicious and
irregular course. But now, Religion only engages a man to do those things,
which in their very nature contrive his good, are commendable and praiseworthy,
and administer abundance of satisfaction to him when he thinks upon them; it
diverts him from every transaction which confronts the Law of Reason, and would
disturb his mind upon an after-thought. In fine, the very purpose and design of
Religion is, to make a Man happy even in this Life, by managing his
Concernments so, that he may neither be afraid or ashamed to think upon what he
has done at any time. And what a comfortable state is it, to be always at peace
within, from the consideration of a Conversation managed with Christian
prudence! To lie down and rise with a mind resounding those best and sweetest
Echoes, Well done, good and faithful Servant? How bravely do thou acquit thy
self? how manfully do thou stand to thy duty against all oppositions? And
with what a gallant resolution do thou repulse temptations that bear up
against thee? This therefore I take to be one great and forcible Argument to a
holy Life, That it preserves tranquillity of Mind, peace of Conscience, as
consisting of the best actions, and the best choice.

But, Secondly, As Religion conduces to a happy Life, prolongs our days, and
keeps a calm within our Breasts; so it steps in to our Assistance at the last
gasp, by fortifying us against the fear and terror of death, and reviving our
drooping Spirits with a solid hope and confidence of commencing a blessed
Eternity. What a thought it is, when a man has his Winding Sheet in his Eye,
his last Knell in his Ear; when he is just upon a Translation out of this, into
another World, that after this sharp combat between Death and Nature is over,
his Spirit will soar aloft, and feed upon the Entertainments of those blessed
Regions above! That though his body shall be destroyed with Vermin, yet at the
command of the great Creator shall be revived, and reunited to its proper
Soul, and both live in the presence of God for ever and ever! I say, what a
thought is this upon a Death bed! How does it relax the mind, and comfort all
within a man, at such a time, who has a hope of Heaven upon good grounds? What
would not an impenitent Sinner give, when languishing, that he could but allay
the Storm within, and command such a sweet Calm! that he could chide his
outrageous Conscience into silence, recover his misspent time, and dye with a
good assurance of going to Heaven! Some of us, probably, have visited such
Wretches, who never thought of dying, till just within sight of their Graves:
What lamentable moans have they made? How miserably handled by their wronged
minds? what sighs and screeches have the remembrance of things past fetched
from them? What frightful Ideas have their disturbed Spirits presented to them?
How uneasy and restless, worried, and even confounded with despair, and left
this World in unspeakable Agonies? Now, as we would desire, when we lie under
the ill circumstances of a crazy body, and a mortal distemper, to be quiet and
peaceable within, and wear out our languishing hours with a good assurance of
Heaven, we must endeavor to lead holy lives, which alone brings peace at the
last. But here some may say, This we know already, and there is no such need of
repeating it. I confess, that I pretend not to insinuate any thing new, but
only to remind men of their latter end, and of those things which belong to
their present and future peace; and how necessary this is, too plainly appears
by the lives and practices of many, who converse here as if they were never to
dye; who instead of wiping off their guilt by a sincere Repentance,
courageously press on, as if they were ambitious of being Heroes in Iniquity;
they charge through all the modesty of Human nature, through all their native
sense of a God and a Divine Vengeance, and offer a kind of Violence to Hell, as
if they meant to force open its Brazen Portal, and enter headlong into it,
before it be ready to receive them. Is it not therefore necessary to alarm such
Wretches with repeated Lectures of Mortality? To remind them of Death and
Judgment; and what must be done by them, if they would dye comfortably, and
behold the face of the Judge, Christ Jesus, with comfort? But,

Thirdly, and Lastly, Rcligion is an indispensable Qualification for Heaven.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Though we speak with the tongues of
Men and of Angels, and have not Charity, we are but as so many sounding
brasses, and tinkling cymbals. Though we have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though we have all faith, so
that we could remove mountains; Nay, though we bestow all our goods to feed the
poor, and give our bodies to be burned; yet if we are not truly Religious,
possessed with the Spirit of Piety and Holiness, all this will avail us
nothing, says the Apostle St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3, etc. Were it possible
for a wicked Soul to go to Heaven, it would find nothing there which would
entertain it to satisfaction. For to use the expression of one, Our Souls will
continue for ever what we make them in this World. Such a Temper and
Disposition of Mind as a man carries with him out of this Life, he shall retain
in the next: If we do not in a good degree mortify our Lusts and Passions here,
Death will not kill them for us, but we shall carry them with us into the other
World; so that, I say, should God admit us so qualified into the place of
Happiness, yet we shall bring that along with us which would infallibly hinder
us from being happy. Thou Carnal and Sensual Wretch! What Happiness would it be
to thee to see God, and to have him always in thy View, who was never in all
thy thoughts! To be tied to live for ever in his Company, who is of a quite
contrary Temper and Disposition to thy self, whose presence thou dreadest, and
whom whilst thou wast in this World could never endure to think upon! So that
the pleasures of the other happy World would signify nothing to him, who is not
so disposed to take pleasure in them; for the Employment of that blessed place,
as it would be unsuitable, so unacceptable to a vicious and ungodly person. It
is therefore the greatest and most powerful Argument imaginable to the Study
and Practice of Religion, that it qualifies us for the Enjoyment of God, and
renders us capable of the Employment and Conversation of Heaven; it makes us of
the same Temper and Disposition with God, and the Holy Angels; And then what
sweet Harmony and Communion will there be, where all are of a mind, and all
seek one end! Therefore upon the whole, Let us embrace Religion as that which
will fit us for the Enjoyment of the greatest Good; then when we come to dye,
our Faith and Hope will become our Anchor, till both be swallowed up in Vision
and Fruition.

May God of his abundant mercy grant, that we may so live here, that we may not
fail of commencing a blessed Eternity with Them. And this for Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
JAM. IV. 17th Verse. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it
not, to him it is sin.


IN this Chapter the Apostle is inculcating many excellent duties, relating
both to God and man; to God, that we express our selves unto him in all the
instances of Humility, Reverence, and holy Fear; to our Neighbor, that we do
not impair his Reputation, nor provoke him by slanderings and backbitings; but
to do unto him as we would he should do unto us: And, as the Conclusion of this
his Discourse, he reminds those to whom he writes, and by them, all Christians,
how nearly it concerned them to practice what they heard and knew; and that it
would enhance their guilt, and render them the more inexcusable, if they lived
in the neglect of that which they knew to be their duty; to him that knows to
do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. By which, the Apostle gives us to
understand, That Sins against Knowledge induce a Crimson guilt, as being
committed with Consent and Approbation. For that which makes Sin to be so, as
it stands condemned, and threatened with Eternal Punishments in the Gospel is,
the doing of that which God has interdicted, which we know is in opposition to
his Holiness and Purity, when our Reason forbids the action, but yet we commit
it, to please a foolish Humor, to gratify a rude and ungovernable Appetite.
Upon which account is that of the Psalmist, Thou shall be justified when thou
speak, and clear when thou judge, Ps. 51.4. implying, That when God passes
Sentence of Eternal death upon wicked men, they shall be so far from taxing him
with excess of rigor, that they shall confess, to the Vindication of his
Justice, and the Aggravation of their Shame, that they are deservedly punished.
Sin becomes of a damning nature, because it is not only a Violation of known
Commandments; but an outrage upon our Reason, and discerning Faculties, which
God has endued us with, to distinguish between right and wrong, good and bad,
that we may choose the one, and refuse the other. It would indeed look more like
rigor in God, should he hold us guilty for doing those things which we are
ignorant are evils, though they be, and he has denounced against; because it is
not, properly speaking, a Transgression against Knowledge, which extenuates the
Crime, and excuses our persons. For even among our selves, if one ignorantly
offends us, is neither moved by prejudice, nor a malicious Spirit, propounds
to himself neither the pleasure of revenge, nor any thing that looks like
design; we cannot, unless too choleric and unreasonable, but forgive the
Delinquent, and bury the default in Oblivion. And upon this score it was, that
the Apostle St. Paul quieted himself, in some measure, under the uncouth
Reflection upon his former outrages against God, and the Christian Church, 1 Timothy 1.13. I was, says he, before, a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious; but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly. And we read in
the 19th of Deuteronomy, ver. 4, 5, 6. that God extenuates the guilt of an
ignorant Murderer, by appointing him a place of refuge; This is the case of the
slayer, which shall flee thither, that he may live: whosoever kills his neighbor
ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past; as when a man goes into the wood
with his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the ax to
cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his
neighbor, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live: lest
the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his he art is hot, and
overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him, whereas he was not worthy
of death, in as much as he hated him not in time past. But when the evil is
palpable, and the precept plain; when Reason comes in, and forbids the action;
In fine, When a man is conscious that such and such a commission thwarts the
Law of God, and of his own mind, and yet breaks through these Barricadoes to
gratify his stubborn and inflexible will; he is without excuse, his guilt is
enhanced, his presumption unpardonable without a speedy and proportionable
Repentance, and will inevitably suffer the direful effects of an unappeased
Vengeance. For it plainly argues, that an evil is done with the consent and
approbation of the will, when a man, notwithstanding his knowledge thereof, and
his modest nature blushes at the sense of the Thing, and all his Superior
Faculties, whereby he aptly distinguishes between Right and Wrong, step in, and
forbid the action; I say, when a man does any evil against so much Light and
Knowledge, it speaks much guilt, and matter of choice too, because he knew the
Sin, and against all opposition yielded thereto. And this is it that will shame
and condemn wicked men in the Day of Judgment, That they allowed themselves in
the practice of those things, which, before they could commit them, were with
delight fain to give their Consciences gash after gash, till by repeated blows
they had rendered them callous, and past feeling: Or otherwise, it would be
almost impossible that Sinners could delight in the ways of Death, that they
could laugh and be merry while going in the broad way that leads to
destruction, if they did not in the first place lull Conscience asleep, which,
if permitted to speak, would make them very uneasy, interrupt their past-time,
and plague them with horrid Thoughts and Reflections; hence is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 10.4. God is not in a wicked man's thoughts; that is, he will
not suffer himself to think of God, whom he offends, nor of the evil he
commits, nor of that place of toment which awaiteth him; these
considerations being extinguished, render his Life much more seemingly pleasant
and comfortable. But I proceed to the further Prosecution of my Text; Therefore
to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin.

From which words, I raise these following Propositions;

First, That the knowledge of a sin improveth guilt, and leaves a man without
excuse.

Secondly, That man is set out in the World, furnished with such Faculties
which are capable of distinguishing between good and evil, right and wrong;
whereby he may be acquainted with the good enjoined, and the evil interdicted.

I begin with the former of these two, viz.

First, That the knowledge of a sin improveth guilt, and leaves a man without
excuse; that is, to be convinced that such a thing is really an evil in it
self, forbidden by God's Law, condemned by our own Reason, and threatened with
Hellfire; and notwithstanding this sensible conviction, to proceed to action,
induces a crimson guilt, and renders a man, as inexcusable to his own Mind, so
to God also. For what can be a greater Argument of contempt of the Discipline
and Constitution of Religion, and what can express more a presumptuous will,
than to do that which I am not only taught by the Word of God, and the
practices of good men, is sinfully evil, but assured also by my own Conscience?
And though, if we be so charitable to conjecture, that a man does not commit a
sin, because God has interdicted it, and himself disapproves of it, meaning his
reason, but purely to please a fond humor, and an irregular appetite; yet this
demonstrates how little regard he has to a divine precept, how light he sets by
Gospel-prohibitions, thus to prefer a foolish lust before a virtue, the
satisfaction of his own will before his who is to be the Judge of Quick and
Dead, the Rewarder of good and bad men. And though some, the better to color
their evil disposition, and to take off the rigidness of censuring, plead
natural weakness and infirmity, that though they are convinced of the evil they
allow themselves in, yet they cannot withstand the temptation, and resist the
inticement; yet this also explains the bent of their hearts, and the prevalency
of their corrupt inclinations, and their unwillingness to oppose the violence
of their uncontrollable will: for were they really concerned for their
unhappiness, as they seem to be; did they make conscience of committing of
evil, as they pretend, they would study arguments, inculcate reasons, hold
disputes, summon together the auxiliaries of Nature and Grace, Religion and
Reason, to back them in the encounter; they would use special arts and
strengths of mortification, pray often, fast frequently, abstain from the
appearance of evil; which are the means our Savior prescribes as proper to
confront the incursions of Satan, the temptations of the world, and the
lustings of the flesh; and which the Apostle St. Paul recommends to us from his
own example; I labor, says he, to bring my body under, that it may be obedient
to the Spirit. Would a man that foresees a danger approaching him, and that
unless he uses some speedy prevention he will inevitably be ruined by it, stand
still, and suffer the damage, when it is in his power to preserve himself?
Would he not rather plod and contrive, contend with difficulties, and consult
an escape, if he were in his wits? Would he suffer the Notion of natural
impotency to divert him from endeavoring to eschew his Destruction? And the
case is much the same; when an Evil presents it self, and the man has an
aversion to it, would he not invent means to withstand its proffers? for this
is Argument sufficient against it, that he hates the very thoughts of it; for
thus holy Joseph replied, when Potipher's Wife importuned him to violate his
Chastity with her, how can I do this great wickedness? It was not only the
awful apprehension he had of God, which withheld him from complying with her
insinuating inticements, but the abhorrence he had of the Evil it self.

And in this sense the Scripture understands Conversion; when a man by
Consideration and Watchfulness, by earnest Prayer and Abstinence; by certain
Propositions, and severe Reflections on himself, has brought things to this
pass, that he not only abstains from sinful actions, but contracts an absolute
hatred against them; when he hates evil for evil sake; And this, without all
Controversy, is the best and surest defensitive against all wicked allurements;
for doubtless many, who not having strictly observed the Discipline and
Constitution of Religion, that is, refrained only from the overt act, but have
maintained a love for, and a desire after some certain evils, have been
betrayed and seduced to sin in the action; for outward Religion, without an
inward Conversion, is not Argument enough against a Relapse, says St. Paul,
Romans 2. ult. he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision
which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, who is one inwardly; and
Circumcision is that of the heart, and in the spirit, not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. Hence therefore are these Precepts
inclucated; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
mind, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength; that we present our Bodies
a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God; that we be renewed in our
minds; that we put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which
is after the flesh; and that we put on the new, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness: In fine, That we deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. But furthermore, there can no other reason be given, why a man commits
an evil which he knew to be so, and which God had forbidden, but that either he
resolved to come at, and enjoy the sin, though he broke through never so many
Barricadoes; and this can be nothing less than a horrid contempt of the
Lawgiver; or that he could not withstand the impetuousness of his rude
inclinations, nor the force of his predominant will; and this argues him of the
number of those whom the Apostle speaks of, that their consciences are seared
as it were with a hot iron It is the determination of the Gospel that he who
knows his Master's will and prepares not himself to do it, shall be far more
severely punished than he who is ignorant thereof, and does not fulfill it; for
this is the aggravation of his guilt, and the improvement of his crime, he knew
his duty, but presumtuously neglected it. And we observe that when habitual
sinners come to di^ if then they have any sense of the condition, or consider
the righteousness of the Judgment to come, to which they are hastening, the
accusation they then bring against themselves is, That they have committed many
evils against their knowledge. They lived intemperately, accustomed themselves
to swear and blaspheme, to commit adultery, to profane the Sabbath, to injure
their neighbors, and such like; these were sins they knew to be so, and that
God had prohibited them upon pain of damnation; but notwithstanding this, they
presumptuously allowed themselves therein. And it cannot but be a very uncouth
reflection to consider, that though they knew they were in a state of
damnation, yet would not retreat, but have continued therein to the last hours
of their life. But enough for the proof of the first Proposition, namely, that
the knowledge of a sin improveth guilt, and leaves a man without excuse, who
knows to do good, and does it not; and to him it is sin.

From this I proceed to the second Proposition, which is,

Secondly, That Man is set out in the world, furnished with such faculties as
are capable of distinguishing between good and evil, right and wrong, whereby
he may be acquainted with the good enjoined, and the evil neglected; this
requires no great proof, because our own experience evinces us, that we can
judge and determine, and make a true discrimination between things; that we can
consider and make reflections, applaud and condemn our selves, when either we
have wisely done that which is good, or foolishly and unadvisedly committed
that which is evil. We often perceive hopes of joy within our breasts, when we
can answer our prosecutions; and are apt to blush, though no body sees when
conscience calls us to the Ba^ to hear our Indictment; and thus we become our
own Judges, either acquit, or condemn our selves; and this, because we are
capable of knowing good and evil, and have reason to direct us in choosing of
the one, and refusing of the other, and therefore it is that we become
accountable also hereafter, as the Apostle expresses it; We must all appear
before the judgmentseat of Christ, to give an account for what we have done in
the flesh, and to receive according to that we have done, whether it be good or
bad. And in regard that God made us rational and considering creatures, he has
prescribed certain Laws to observe and keep, and by these he also intends to
judge us, that is, whether we have obeyed or violated them, he having suited
his Commandments to our capacities, which are able to distinguish between good
and evil, right and wrong. And therefore by way of exprobration, How wretchedly
does Man degrade himself, while he acts in opposition to his reason, and allows
himself in those things, which his own mind disapproves of, and condemns! How
inferior is he to the beasts? they act according to sense, they move in their
sphere, and what they do is agreeable to their nature and being. But when Man
by the order of his superior faculties is directed to good, he commIts evil; as
he does that which he cannot give a good account of to himself, so he acts
contrary to his very nature, and the knowledge he has of things; for by the
very design of his constitution, he knows what is good, and what is evil; and
that the former is beneficial, and the latter hurtful unto him. And how
inexcusable must he needs be, that all the injury which is done unto him, he
did it himself, and was conscious thereof, when he transacted it? And this is
it which will vindicate the Divine Justice in passing sentence of eternal death
upon wicked men, That they are condemned for doing of evil which they knew was
so in it self; and resusing of good, which they also knew was really so. It
generally prevents men from pitying one who wilfully and wittingly worked his
own ruin, when it was in his power to have avoided the mischief; and so ungodly
men shall go off unpitied in the day of Judgment, because they might have
obtained mercy, but would not. It will be an ill plea in the day of Judgment to
say, That we did not consider what we did; that we lived without care, without
thought, without observation; for this is not an allowable plea for a
reasonable creature, much less for one who knows he must be judged: for why did
you live without thought, without consideration? Had you not the power of
thinking, of reasoning, of considering? And did not God give these powers and
saculties to you, to direct and govern your lives? Did he not make you
reasonable creatures, that you might consider, and live by reason? And is it
any excuse then for a reasonable creature, that he lived and acted without
reason, and a wise consideration of things? This is the great degeneracy of
humane nature, the abuse and corruption of those natural powers which God has
given us, the source of all the evils that are in this world, and therefore can
be no excuse. And this seriously laid to heart, must needs make men have a
special regard to their discerning faculties, and that since they must be
judged, and that is to give a reason for what they do, to consider what reason
to give, before they do it. And this leads me to draw some practical and useful
inferences from what has been said, and so come to a Conclusion.

And here,

First of all, it is true, That to him that knows to do good, and does it not,
to him it is sin. What a woeful reckoning will those Wretches have, who here
live without care, thought, or consideration? Who, that they may come at and
enjoy their Lusts, lay aside their reason and understanding, that they may not
be disturbed in their vicious enjoyments, nor plagued with uneasy reflections.
What a sad consideration will it be at the hour of death, when all arguments
to, and opportunities of sin cease, that they have allowed themselves in the
practice of those things which they are now ashamed of, and condemn, as
disagreeable to rational Creatures, and should heretofore, had they but given
way, suffered their discerning faculties to have interposed, and given judgment
before they had passed into action? It seems a Paradox, that man, who has a
right notion of Good and Evil, that the one is profitable, and the other
mischievous unto him; that he should refuse his comfort, and court his own
misery, by withstanding the Good, and embracing the Evil: In fine, that he
should do that which he cannot give a sufficient reason for to his own
Conscience; and if it be so, How will he be able to stand in the great Assembly
of Angels and Saints, before the Judge Christ Jesus, to render a reason
wherefore he so often drank to Excess, committed Adultery, profaned God's Holy
Name by Oaths, Curses, and Imprecations? Why he lived in the (...) observance
of his Sabbath, and offered contempt to his most righteous Laws; Why he omitted
known Duties, and committed as palpable Wickednesses: In fine, Why he hated
reproof, and cast God's Holy Word behind? How will Wicked men be able to stand
in the Judgment and answer to these things? Sometimes Sinners are here sadly
put to it to invent excuses, to inculcate arguments, and raise propositions, to
extenuate their guilt, and obtain a favorable judgment; they are forced to
endure many shameful retreats, false colors, and loose dawbings with
untempered Mortar, to prevent contradiction and discovery: But in the day of
Judgment such pleas will not be admitted, nor need they then endeavor to
conceal their Villainies; for all things are naked and open to him with whom we
have to do; he knows our down-sitting and up-rising, he understands all our
ways; he enters every Item of our guilt into his Debt-book, with the purpose to
bring every Evil into Judgment, whether committed publicly or privately; and
this considered, What a forcible argument is it to be careful, thoughtful, and
considerate, to examine wisely, to judge prudently, and to give a good reason
for what we do before we commit it; in all our prosecutions, to call in the
Auxiliaries of Nature and Grace, Religion and Reason; in fine, to do those
things approved of by our more refined Faculties, and to omit those which they
condemn? Such a wary Conversation as this, would administer much satisfaction
to our Spirits, defend us from many Dangers and Mischiefs, produce a
comfortable Death, and a joyful Resurrection.

Secondly. It is a pleasant consideration, That God has created us Rational
Beings, capable of knowing Good and Evil, of contriving our safety, and
shunning our destruction; What a comfortable thought is it, that we are not
mere Machines, moved and actuated only by Sense, like the brute Beasts; but
understanding, thinking, and considerate Creatures, that can judge of the
nature of things, debate and examine, before we approve or disapprove of them!
Let us then live like such, especially considering that we must give an account
how we have used our Talents, what improvement we have made of our Faculties,
and what we are the better for being furnished with such large capacities. They
were not given us merely to be useful in our secular businesses, but to help us
to the knowledge of God, of our selves, and of those things which belong to our
Everlasting peace; that we may rightly understand our duty, and dispose our
selves to serve him acceptably, with reverence, and godly fear. We rather abuse
our Natural Powers, when we only employ them in plodding and contriving about
worldly matters; their proper business is, to search after truth, to find out
the way of the Kingdom, and to remove those impediments which retard our
spiritual warfare, and hinder us from bringing our holy concernments to a happy
and comfortable conclusion.

Let us then bend all our powers this way. Are we rational Creatures? Let us be
able to give a good reason for a thing before we do it; this will render our
Judgment hereafter more feisible, and less tremendous, when our Consciences
testify that in simplicity and godly sincerity we passed the time of our
sojourning here.

I conclude my Discourse with that Collect of our Church: We beseech thee, O
Lord, to grant unto us the spirit to think, and do always such things as be
rightful, that we who cannot do any thing that is good without thee, may be
thee be enabled to live according to thy will, through Jesus Christ our Lord;

To whom, with Thee, O Father, and the Ever Blessed Spirit, be given all
Honor, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Obedience, now, henceforth, and for Evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

