Old English Loyalty and Policy Agreeable to PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY.

The First PART.

By the Author of The Beginning and Progress of a Needful and Hopeful
Reformation.

Jer. xlviij. 10. Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord deceitfully, or
negligently.

Pestis Patriae Pigrities.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1691. Published 1695.

To Their Excellent Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
May it please Your Majesty's,
I Presume I may say without Vanity, that as no Man has more heartily desired,
so none has more constantly and unmoveably endeavored, in the way which I
take to be most direct and certain, to promote the Honor and Prosperity of
Your Majesty's, than my self. And though to the generality of the Men of this
degenerate Age I may seem to have treated you with less Respect than I ought;
yet to Your own Royal Judgments, enlarged with a Noble sense of Piety, Virtue
and Generosity, I cannot doubt but the following Pages will demonstrate the
contrary: and that I have treated you with greater Honor, than their narrow
Sentiments could imagine. It is true, I had a principal Respect to the Honor of
that Transcendent Majesty, to which all Creatures ought always to be ready to
sacrifice their little Sparks of Honor, and their Lives and Beings. And to
make the poor degenerate Mortals of this Age in some sort sensible of their
Stupidity and great Insensibility of the Honor due to that Glorious Majesty, I
know not any thing that could have a more direct Tendency and Efficacy, than
with great Fidelity to intermix such Freedom as might excite some sense and
concern for the Honor due to a much inferior Majesty, of a Mortal. And from
this Principle may be deduced an unanswerable Conviction of a double Fault in
most of those who shall censure me for it: 1. Of want of due and proportionable
Concern for the Honor of that Supreme Majesty upon just and great occasion. 2.
Of want of due Concern at the Dishonor done to Your Majesty's, not in Words,
but in treacherous and unworthy Actions. He who can acquit himself of the due
discharge of his Duty in these respects, may be allowed to cast the first Stone
of Censure at me.

Your Majesty's have done your selves no little Honor in resenting what I have
done, not as some mean Souls expected, and perhaps desired; but so as has
confirmed the Honorable Opinion, which I and many others had of your Virtues.
And as I much rejoice to see it, so it is matter of great pity and grief to me
to see so much Virtue and so noble Undertakings so encumbered and pestered with
so much Sordidness, Baseness and Unfaithfulness, as I cannot but observe in
some, who should be, were they like their Ancestors, the Honor and Glory of
the Nation. But I hope Your Virtues, by the Favor and Blessing of Almighty
God, will spedily subdue all that Wickedness and Unfaithfulness to God and to
Your selves, which you must first encounter with at home, and then all Your
Enemies abroad, and at last obtain an Eternal Victory. Which is the hearty
Desire and daily Prayer of,

Your Majesty's Humble and most faithful Subject.

Old English Loyalty and Policy Agreeable to PRIMITIVE CHRISTIANITY.
THE great Opposition which has always been made by the Kingdom of Darkness
against the Kingdom of Light, and by the Seed of the Serpent against the Seed
of the Woman, may easily be perceived by any who carefully read the Sacred
Scriptures, or will consider the Actions of Men upon Earth, form the beginning.
In this opposition there is nothing more admirable and amazing, than to see
such as may charitably be believed to belong to the Kingdom of Light,
notwithstanding in many things so greatly abused as to become subservient to
the Designs of the Kingdom of Darkness. Yet that so it often is, may be plainly
observed: and as plainly, that it always proceeds from some relics of Carnal
Affections, or of Impressions of the World too easily admitted, in which the
Powers of Darkness preside, and often prevail under some Appearance or other;
most commonly of Zeal for the Truth, or for the Church; of Prudence, of
Provision for Families, and the like. And few there are who can say, The Prince
of this World comes, and has nothing in me; Jo. 14.30. few to whom it may not
be said, How can ye believe, who receive Honor one of another, and seek not
the Honor that comes from God only? (Jo. 5.44.) few that regard those
important Admonitions. How hard is it for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, or the genuine state of Christianity: and few who take half so much
pains to purify their Souls by Mortification of Carnal and Worldly Affections,
as they do to feed and gratify those Affections.

The Heroic Virtues of the ancient Christians we reject as Popery, and leave
to the Cells, or neglect as peculiar to times of Persecution. Which we may
again pull down upon our selves, if we make it more necessary for us, than our
selves fit for enjoyment of such a deliverance as we formally profess to
acknowledge. These Affections we indulge not only in our liberal use of
Necessaries, but even in Superfluities; in the Pomps and Vanities of the World,
and in insatiable pursuit thereof, even often by indirect means, though most
solemnly renounced at our Baptism; and corrupt the Sense, and the most express
Doctrine of the Sacred Scripture, that we may do it with the more freedom. Nor
are these the faults of the grossly vicious and profane only, but such as it is
rare to find any of the best so free from, but the Prince of this World may
find something to take hold on, and make them too often subservient to his
Interest.

Though Pride was the occasion of the Fall of Angels, and is the very Diabolism
(if I may so say) of the Devils, who being in truth dependent Beings, would set
up for independent Deities, and be worshipped and adored and served by their
fellow Creatures (which was so well understood and considered by the ancient
Christians, that they reputed Humility one of the first, most necessary
fundamental Virtues, and declined all worldly Honor, and Applause of Men as
carefully and circumspectly as we see it now studiously and earnestly pursued,)
yet is there nothing more common among us than to see People, otherwise sober,
of good parts, and sincerely religious, yet so infatuated with Vainglory,
Ostentation, Formality and Affectation or Conceitedness, as even to render
themselves ridiculous and pitied by those of whom they seek Applause, or to be
admired; and so miserably enchanted and inslaved by this Devil, that neither
their own Experience, nor the Admonition of faithful Friends can reclaim them:
But they carry their own Rod at their Backs, and that as certain and smart as
one would wish. In others, who have escaped the grosness of this Folly, yet is
it often manifest by their Concern for the Honor of very Trifles; as some
Criticism, or new Discovery or Invention, or other Atchievment; and many times,
when in truth it is not due to them, but perhaps to some other more worthy
Person, who did little regard it. This also I have sometimes had occasion to
pity, and to wish that such dead Flies did not spoil a good Ointment. There are
others who have neither much of the Vanity of the first, nor the Industry to
give them any occasion for the last, in whom notwithstanding the same root may
be discovered, if they be but touched with some punctilio of Honor, or wherein
they suppose their Reputation concerned; or but affronted with some honest,
plain, friendly and free Admonition or Advice. This will certainly draw out the
very same Vanity, which only lay a little deeper concealed; for it shall be
resented to the loss not only of the Esteem of others, but of the good Offices
of the most faithful and cordial Friends, which they wilfully deprive
themselves of, by a greater Folly than the former. These are not only such
dead Flies as corrupt the Savor of their Civil Conversation; but such living
Flies as corrupt the very Essence of their best Actions, and diminish their
Treasure of Eternal Reward; and besides, expose such as are not very watchful
against them to become subservient in diverse respects to the Designs of that
Kingdom of Darkness. While they have so lively a Sense of Honor either paid or
neglected; in respect of themselves, or of other mortal men, which may be their
own ease, the impressions of that are apt to divert the mind from the due
apprehensions and regard of the far greater Honor to be given to God, when both
do concur in the same case, and the circumstances of the latter are not so
plain and obvious as those of the former. And whereas in some such cases there
may be just cause a little to neglect the former, out of respect to the latter:
yet cannot that be done without some Censure and Indignation proceeding from a
secret bias in such Minds (though otherwise well affected to Religion) which
may easily be heighthned to a direct Opposition of very good Works under an
appearance of Prudence, Discretion and Duty. And nothing is more common than
for men in such cases to quarrel at the Manner, when they have nothing to say
against the Matter. This is a subject which well deserves to be more largely
treated, but this is sufficient to be here briefly noted for my present
occasion. And therefore I will only admonish such persons to reflect upon
themselves whenever they are concerned for the Honor of Men, and consider well,
whether their concern for the Honor of God be proportionable.

Nor is it only from the Heroic Virtue of the Ancient Christians that we are
so degenerated, but even from the natural Genius of the English Nation. The one
we have rejected as Popery and Superstition; and the other as Moroseness and
Rusticity: And while we affected a more refined Courtship of the French, had
almost in effect courted our selves into a French Slavery. Nay, so base and
inconsiderate has been the Flattery of some men for their own Advantage, that
it has not only corrupted our Court, and endangered our Civil Constitution,
but even profaned our Churches and Sacred Offices, and brought great
difficulties upon our Clergy, but greatest of all upon our Princes. It is true,
it has been the Unhappiness of the Princes themselves to be so ill advised as
to give encouragement to such People, who are always most forward to obtrude
themselves, and so to raise up such an Evil Genius: But raised it has been,
and has so far prevailed, that any thing of the honest, plain, downright old
English Genius and Loyalty, which prefers the Honor and Safety of the King and
Kingdom before Favor and Preferments, or any private Respects, cannot but
appear like an uncouth thing, and little less than Madness to our refined
Frenchified Courtiers. But, Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurrit: And
though the true English Genius has withdrawn it self a while, it will appear
again with so much the greater vigor in due time. And that time, I doubt not,
is now come, or near at hand. For God himself, who always favors Sincerity and
downright Honesty, though he many times permits Evil men to expose themselves
and the Wickedness of their own Genius, that others beholding the same may so
much the more abhor it, has now raised us up a King according to our own
temper; and though he has hitherto permitted him to feel the Evil Consequences
of such men's Prudentials, will I hope henceforward make him sensible thereof,
and direct him to and by better Counsels.

But at present whoever shall be so hardy as to offer him his Service in such a
case as this, in honest and plain terms, must expect no mean Opposition,
Censures from all, and Calumnies, if no worse, from these last prescribed.
Wherefore since I am Debtor not only to the Wise, but to the Unwise also,
whose Good and Reformation, not hurt in the least, I heartily desire, I think
fit for their better Information, and to prevent mistake, and remove their
unjust Prejudice, to give some farther Account of my self and my Endeavors
hitherto in this matter. And then I shall add with the same Integrity and
Plainness what I think farther necessary to be said for the Service of the King
and my Country; and with the same Freedom I would use if I was now to bid
farewell to the World.

I have lived now near threescore years in the World, and, before this King
came to the Crown, have seen, besides the troublesome part of a former Reign,
and twelve years Interregnum, two Reigns full of great Miscarriages, of horrid
Imimpiety against God, and the highest Violations of Justice to Man, tending to
the Destruction of a Noble Constitution, and the Enslaving of my Country: And I
have been from my Youth a great Lover of my Country, and an industrious Student
of the Good of Mankind, even to the neglect and detriment of my private
Concerns: yet did I never attempt any such Service to either of those Kings, as
since the late happy Revolution, I have done to this. And this may serve to
satisfy such as know me not, that it is not any Humor, but some special Cause
and Consideration, which has moved me to what I have done of late. Again, I
soon had a great Family, and but a small Estate, and have met with great
Disappointments by persons I have dealt with; yet did I never count any
Preferment, though I have been much in Town, and have had such friends as
wanted neither good Will nor Opportunity to have given me Assistance. But I
have always abstained even from those common Courtships, which are in use with
many in my circumstances, and their principal Means to get into business: I have
abstained not only from Dishonest, but such common ways of Gain, as I thought
sordid and more unworthy than meanner Employments or a Mean Condition. And I
often remembered, The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; desiring to
approve my self to Him, and leave my Portion of those things to his Assignment.
By these means my Reputation has been fair, though my Estate but small, and I
have lived in good Esteem with the best people, and persons of good quality.
And this may ferve to satisfy the same persons, that, it is not any private
Concern that has been my Motive in these things.

But the plain truth in both these Cases is this: That I did not express my
Fidelity to the two last Princes in this manner, it was because I saw them not
capable of it: And when I have sometimes had it in my thoughts, I have sound as
great secret Restraints upon my Mind, as I have since, in what I have done,
found Freedom and Excitation. That I have since expressed my self in this
manner to their present Majesty's, it was, next to the Service of the Supreme
Majesty, first, my great Concern for them, and for their Prosperity, and for
the Success of a most noble Cause not a little concerned therein: and next, an
honorable Opinion of their Virtue, that they had both Wisdom to discern, at
least, the Honesty and integrity of my Intentions; and Piety to take well so
well-meant Admonitions in a case of so great Importance, without Indignation
for a little plain bluntness in the manner of it. And I was well satisfied of
the Truth and Importance of it; which appeared such to me, as made me have the
less regard to any thing else.

I looked upon the King as an Instrument raised up by the special Providence of
God for great matters in this Age: But I also considered that such are usually
lead to special Trials, wherein, if they be not very circumspect and resolved,
they are sometimes laid aside, but always involve themselves in greater
Difficulties. This I understood not only by study, but by my own Experience
also. And I farther considered, how little these things are in this Age
regarded in Princes Courts, or understood even by those whose Profession does
oblige them to be better acquainted with them: and what danger might hence
arise to the King, if he should acquiesce in such mistaken Counsels. Few Men
has more sincerely and heartily desired the Prosperity of their Majesty's: But
none, I doubt, have been so apprehensive of his Danger in this respect; none so
early, I verily believe. This made my Heart ache for him, when he had not been
long amongst us, which at last broke out in that plain Admonition which I first
put into his hands at Hampton Court, not long after his Access to the Throne.
This, when Observation of the Event had not a little confirmed my former
Opinion, provoked my Reflections upon the first years Occurrences: and upon
such farther Observation the next year, the Reflections upon the Engagement at
Sea. And this year again, very much fearing some considerable Disappointment at
least, (if not something worse, which the Goodness and Long-suffering of God
has at present restrained.) I proposed the Case in certain Questions to the
Divines of the Church of England, (which I had before proposed to some others,
but in writing only) that I might provoke, if possible, a due Consideration of
the matter, and of the proper Means to prevent the Mischiefs I feared. And with
this I thought I had done, and did not intend to write more upon this subject.
Yet was I again engaged in it beyond my intention, in a manner not unworthy to
be noted.

The Matter I had so earnestly contended for was the Reformation of the Manners
of my Country, exceedingly depraved in the late Reigns, and the Prosperity of
his Majesty, which I was confident depended very much upon his faithful
Exercise of his Royal Authority for that purpose. Which had he accordingly
performed, and not yielded to pernicious Counsels, which betrayed him, might
have been the Glory of his Reign, and the Foundation of an uninterrupted
Prosperity and Success. But from this he was unhapily diverted by such as were
most obliged to have advised and persuaded him better. Nor could any Public
Authority, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, be prevailed with to take this
Matter, though so necessary, and of so great importance, into consideration, so
as to do any thing to purpose in it. No Man regarding that severe Denunciation,
Cursed is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently; Jer. 48.10. When all
those Powers declined the Service, it pleased God that a few private Gentlemen
should readily embrace it; and her Majesty, upon the first Motion, most readily
heartily and happily, giving Encouragement to it, it presently had a very
hopeful beginning in Middlesex and London: and the Example thereof was by the
Industry and Charge of those few private Gentlemen soon after recommended to
all parts of the Nation, with very good Success in diverse places.

This hopeful beginning the Devil in Man could not endure, but first exciting
some to discourage it in private; when he found that would not do, but others
stepped in to help it on, he presently called a Council against it. And when
they could find no just Matter of Accusation, in great straits they resolved to
lay hold on the first most probable ground they could meet with; and though a
mere Calumny, dress it up as well as they could, and with all their Power and
Authority stifle this honest Undertaking under Color of Justice. And that the
Example of this might the more effectually enervate the Power of the other,
this must be done in the very same place, and at the next
General-Quarter-Sessions.

I had been more concerned for such Matters, than to be unconcerned at, or
insensible of such an Effort of the Enemy against this so honest and hopeful a
Beginning; and I was not unacquainted with his Wiles: Besides, though neither
my Hand nor my Purse was employed in those worthy and commendable Actions, yet
had I perfect Knowledge of all from the beginning: And therefore having been
very plain with their Betters, for promoting of so good and necessary a Cause,
I could not let so Foul, so Injustice-like, nay so Ungentle-man-like an
Opposition, by some unworthy Persons, who apparently wanted either Law or
Integrity to qualify them for such an Employment, pass without some
Animadversion; which I thought the most speedy way, to check the Effects of
their Venom, the Poison of the Serpent, before it had transfused it self over
the whole Body of the Nation.

This was no sooner printed, and comunicated to some Friends in private before
Publication, but I soon perceived another Effort, to stifle it in the Birth;
not by the Violence or Projects of real Enemies, but by means of the Errors and
Mistakes of deceived, well-meaning Friends. Her Majesty's Letter had so great a
share in these things, that it could not be passed by in Silence, without
Ingratitude to her Piety, and Injury to the Relation. Nor could it be mentioned
without taking notice of that special Favor of God, which so closely and
remarkably attend it, unless I should have neglected the most sacred and
necessary part of History: Nor could that be noted without as remarkable an
Observation upon Success of His Majesty's Affairs now again this third Summer;
but I must have committed the same Fault in this Particular also, and been
unfaithful to the great and important Cause in which I was engaged. And the
concurrence of these two Observables this Year, and their Agreement with what I
had again and again observed before, and the Importance thereof to His Majesty
for the future, provoked me to represent those few necessary things unto him
with that Freedom and Plainness, which diverse Circumstances required, and was
most like to excite his most serious Consideration of them. Which was as great
an Act of Fidelity and Good Will to him, I think, as a mortal Man could well
express. And yet for these and these only, which come so close to the point of
the great business of all, have I been encountered with no small oppsition to
the Publication by very good Friends, and Persons otherwise very well affected
to the Work in hand; not only by friendly Admonitions and gentle Persuasions,
but little less than Denunciation of no small Disappointment by a Divine Power.
These things I took as they were intended, in a friendly manner, and again and
again perused what I had written; but the more I considered, the more was I
confirmed and satisfied in what I had done: And perceiving the Temptation, and
how it entered upon them, and so assaulted me, without more of do I ordered the
Publication, leaving the Success to him, whose Work it is; but thought fit, for
the satisfaction of such good People, to recommend some few things to further
Consideration.

And the first is, How apt an Overvaluation of Ceremonies, and of the Pomp and
Vanities of the World, and of Honors and Respect to Men (which is one of the
Corruptions of this Age, and a great Degeneracy from the Manly Primitive
Christianity) is to dazzle our Eyes, and make us less regardful of that Honor
and Respect we owe to the Supreme Majesty of God: And what Advantage the Enemy
thereby gain to impose upon us to the neglect of so great a Duty, for which we
ought to be very jealous upon all Occasions: For those are plainly his Engines,
wherewith he assaulted even our Savior himself. And in this Case the Question
was concerning the Honor of God and the Honor of the King: Whether I should
give to God the Honor of his remarkable Providence, and for the King's real
Benefit; or neglect that to save the Honor of the King, though in so doing I
should be unfaithful to God, to the King, and to my own Soul? This was plainly
the Case. And suppose I have not Certainty on my side; yet where there is so
vast a Difference, as between the immortal God and a mortal, and besides sinful
Man, so fair a Probability, I am certain ought to determine the Question.

The next may be, How apt such an Over-valuation is to dazzle the Eyes, and make
even good Men less regardful of more substantial and necessary Duties even to
Men, and to give the Enemy the like Advantage to impose upon them in such Case
also. For here the Question is between a little point of Honor to be saved,
but with danger of greater Mischief, and the Safety of the Person and Success
of his Affairs, to be secured by a reasonable Humiliation and Self-abasement,
out of a just Respect to a far greater Majesty. And here again though I have
not Certainty; yet the Difference is so great, and the Probability so great,
that I may be certain it ought to determine it on my side.

A third may be this, How unsafe it is for Princes to rely altogether upon
such fine Gentlemen, and cautious, complaisant, respectful Courtiers, without
some of deeper Consideration, and more faithful Resolution for their Service
about them. They May serve to treat Strangers, but certainly they had need of
other kind of Courtiers near their own Persons, and in their Councils.

I might here observe how great Mischief this unobserved and indulged
Corruption does to the Persons themselves in whom it prevails, and what
Advantages it affords their Enemy against them; how his Engines and
Machinations are thereby strengthened and made more effectual; and so show the
Reasons of the ancient Christians Abhorrence of it: But that I suppose not so
proper for this place. Yet to show what great Mischief is thereby done to the
Nation, the Good of which is the King's great Business and proper Duty, I
conceive it not beside my Scope, but well worth the Consideration of his
Majesty and the Parliament; of which more hereafter in proper place.

And these Considerations, without more saying, I conceive may satisfy all who
have any serious Sense of the Honor of God, and of the real Service of his
Majesty, for my inserting that Observation. As for such Expressions as may be
thought too plain and indecent to be used to a Prince: If a Man perceiving, or
strongly apprehending his Prince to be in any great Danger, use such Means for
his Preservation, as he thinks necessary for that Exigence, though otherwise
rude and indecent; yet in such Case, no wise Man would censure it as Rudeness
or Indecency, but approve it as sincere Fidelity. But I say plainly that he was
not only in Danger, but actually damnified already, and in further Danger in
the ways wherein he has been misled; and a softer Voice, at such distance as I
stand, was not like to be so taken notice of, as was necessary for him to
perceive the Mistake.

Besides, if well considered, it does not savor of Insolence or Indiscretion,
as may seem to vulgar Apprehensions, but of Honor; being a plain Argument of
an Honorable Opinion of his Virtue: Of his Generosity, to take well so much
Old English, Plain Dealing, being mixed with so much manifest Fidelity and
Affection: And of his Prudence and Discretion, to apprehend it aright. Whereas
to a Person of less Generosity and Prudence, it had indeed been great
Indiscretion to have used it. But this is not all; there is a greater Honor
yet done him in this Treatment, by an Honorable Opinion of greater Virtue than
all this residing in him; and of a more Honorable Estate to which he is
raised, than barely that of a King: That is, of his serious Apprehension of the
Excellence of that Majesty, whose special Service is the greatest Honor that
any Creature is capable of; and that he has been raised and conducted to such
a special Service. Other Treatment had been below the Excellency of that
Majesty whose Cause it is, and inconsistent with that Fidelity which ought to
be performed to such a special Instrument of his, and not well becoming a
faithful Servant of both. Had I been concerned in a Cause for my Prince,
wherein the greatest Person in the Nation was questioned for some Offense or
Default, I might and ought to have used all Freedom and Plainness necessary to
have convinced him of his Fault; nor had I well consulted the Honor of my
Prince if I had done otherwise: Much more is this allowable, and a Duty, in the
Case of the Supreme Majesty, though a King be concerned in it; and doubly so,
when it is for his Safety and Advantage. Besiedes it gives the King a Noble
Opportunity, both to exercise and to demonstrate his Virtue, and to give Glory
to God, by accepting of a faithful Admonition from the meanest of his Subjects,
with all due Respect to the Supreme Majesty.

After all this, if any be yet so enchanted with Vanity, as not to be
satisfied, and yet believe a Deity, that Reges in ipses Imperium est Jovis, (to
speak to Infidels in the Language of Heathens.) For the Conviction of such, I
will here only say again, in relation to that Paper, what I had before said in
the conclusion of another.

Possibly, in the perusal of that Paper, some, who are most attentive to the
Importance of the Matter, may overlook other things, and think it very good
and honest: But these must be Men who have some relish of such things. But
others, who are not much affected with that, will be apt the more to regard the
Form, and censure it for rude and insolent; and that I am well pleased they
should do, and as severely as they will, For I know no better way to convince
them of a Fault of their own, than to make them judge themselves in the Person
of another. For if I be rude by plain-dealing with my Fellow Creatures for
their Good, who are perhaps, but a little above me in some petty, accidental,
transitory Advantage, what are they who are not only more rude toward the
State, but impious against they Creater, or can behold such Rudeness and
Impiety without any Censure, or Endeavor to restrain it? Must I be censured
for breaking the Laws of Man, or but of Civility, and out of a good Design? And
is it equal then that others shall be permitted in impudent Contempt of the
Religion of the State, and impious violation of the Laws of Almighty God?
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge; for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self. And think thou, O
Man that judge, -- and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of
God?

And thus much for my Old English Loyalty, which none, who understand both, can
deny to be very agreeable to the genuine Primitive Christianity. I come now to
my Old English Policy. A brave People they were, who seated themselves here,
and they Found a Climate very agreeable to their own Genius. Two Assaults they
have received in their own Territories from their Neighbors of Normandy and
France; the first with their Arms, the last with their Vices and Treachery:
Both prevailed upon degenerate and imprudent Princes, and by that Means a
little shog'd the People; but they after the first soon returned again to their
own Genius; and so I doubt not will again now, though the Powers of Vice be
more enslaving than that of Arms. But the Divine Power, which nothing can
withstand, has so far favored us, as to raise us up a Prince according to our
own Genius. Only he has been at first exposed to the Assaults of the Adverse
Powers, reigning in the dregs of the Corruptions of the late Reigns. And though
he has suffered much thereby, and perhaps lost those Advantages he can never
regain; yet has he been preserved, and gained, though at a dear rate, that
Experience thereby, which if well considered and improved, may be of as great
Advantage to him another way. Nor will a Divine Power yet be wanting to assist
him, if he be not wanting to it and to himself. I was at first brought to him
by little less than a Miracle, when the Week before I could hardly endure a Two
Miles Journey in a Coach, or to make a hasty step across a Chanel; yet the
next Week was carried on with that Vigor and Spirit, that I rode every day
considerable Journeys for a whole Week together. I then performed that little
Service, in which I was entrusted, with all Fidelity and good Success, only a
Torrent of greater unexpected Success made it needless. And I gave a true and
impartial Account of all to one near him, which I believe was never truly
represented to him. And now I am resolved by the Grace and Assistance of
Almighty God, to perform such a Service, and make things so plain, as shall
have a good Effect, or leave all that shall oppose or neglect it, inexcusable
even in the sight of Men, if there be any true Manhood left in the Nation; If
there be such a thing as a secret Divine Designation of Men to certain
Employments in this Life, as is believed by wise and knowing Men; certain I am
that there is nothing in my Life, that has so much, or any such Evidence of it
as this has. And therefore I shall endeavor to keep back nothing that may be
profitable to be observed; but declare all that I think necessary without
regard to any Person or Thing, but the Service of God, the King, and my
Country; for which no good Man can be offended with me: And for the Malice of
Evil Men, the Protection of them for whose Service I act, is sufficient for me;
and I have Reason to expect it.

The greatest Emperor in the World, in his own Nature, is a poor weak Mortal as
other Men are, and subject to the like Infirmities. All his Power which he has
more than others, consists in the joint, voluntary Subjection of other Men to
him, who are all like himself, dependent Beings upon a far more excellent
Being, in whose Hand is their Breath and Life, and who inspirits or dispirits,
and turns their Hearts as he pleases. He who believes this indeed will easily
perceive that his principal Concern and Wisdom, is to secure first the Favor
of that Supreme Being, and next the Good Will and Affections of all those, who
being naturally his Equals, may thereby become subject to him, and so continue.

The former cannot be expected, but by an entire Conformity and absolute
Subjection of the Will, Designs, and Actions, to the Will of that Supreme
Being. If therefore King William believes this, and that he is indeed an
Instrument raised up by that Excellent Majesty for his Special Service, and by
his Providence exalted to the Throne for that purpose: This he must intend and
preser above all things, or else he must act like a Brute, which follows its
sensual or animal Propensions; or like a Fool or a Madman; not like a rational
Creature, upon good Deliberation and Judgment.

But first he must endeavor to know, and be well acquainted with his Master,
and with his Will, and to understand it by the least Intimation; be precisely
observant of it, to follow it fully; and very watchful against any the least
Transgression; knowing assuredly that it will certainly turn to Ten times a
greater Disadvantage to him, than the Advantage he expected by it. And he must
study to know himself well; that he is a dependent Creature; has no Power of
himself; is so easily overpowered by other Creatures, that he has not the
Command of his own Faculties or Thoughts for a moment, without the Favor of
his Master upon whom he depends; and therefore be very careful to walk humbly
before him, that his Heart be not at any time lifted up above himself, or above
his Fellow Creatures, unless in the Case of his great Master; but in his Cause
he must be as cautious not to fail of the greatest Generosity and Magnanimity
possible, without Fear of Men or Devils. And these things he must endeavor to
know, not by a superficial, speculative Knowledge, but by so effectual a
Practical Knowledge as may equal an Experimental, lest he be sent to the common
Mistress to learn in better, as I have been for a more effectual Knowledge of
what I studied and desired to have acquired at a cheaper rate. But now I know
indeed from whence my Strength comes, and how little I am able to do even at
home, if destitute of that Aid.

These things being well known, it is farther to be considered; that the
Service of God, in relation to the present business, is twofold; the principal
the Good of his Creatures; but by accident (it may be) the destruction of some.
And for these he has his different proper Instruments: For the latter
ordinarily Devils and Wicked Men; but his Glorious Instruments are principally
employed for the Good of Men, their Real Good, whereby they are made better.
And this is the proper Service and Business of a King. And in this is his
Fidelity, Generosity, and Virtue, principally to be exercised. If it fail or
flag in this; it must needs degenerate in all the rest, and make him more like
a Butcher, Executioner, or Sergeant, than a Pastor, Governor or Tutor. And if
he neglect this, though he may notwithstanding be an Instrument of some
Drudgery, yet a Glorious Instrument he cannot be. This therefore is the first
and principal thing to be intended, and most vigorously prosecuted, and that
not only as a Common Duty upon all occasions, but in this Nation, at this time,
by K. William, upon very considerable special Occasions and Obligations. The
great Corruption of the Manners of the Nation, and the Impudence of Impiety are
such as make it a special Obligation, and a special Provocation to a Generous
Mind, to check and subdue it. And the extraordinary Providence, which has
raised him to the Throne, for this very purpose, undoubtedly as much as for
any, is another special Obligation: And the Providential Admonitions and
Corrections of his Neglect hitherto, which he has since met with, a farther.
The Judgments denounced in the Gospel against Fear, Shame, Negligence,
Unprofitableness in the Cause of Christ and Work of the Lord are very severe;
and these being aggravated by such special Obligations, must needs make the
Case very dangerous indeed. And here by the way it is very fit that all those,
who are called to the Office of Watchmen, whether Ordinary or Extraordinary, or
upon any special Occasion, should be minded of their own Danger in case of
neglect of their Duty in that respect.

This great and fundamental Service is to be perfomed by earnest recommending
the enacting of such new Laws, as are necessary for supply of those that are
wanting or defective; by commanding and strictly requiring and enforcing the
Execution of such as we have already; and by notable Examples of good
Discipline: Of all which I have said so much already, more than once, that I
shall need to say no more here.

As the Foundation and Stability of Regal Power depends upon the Favor of God,
and the Affections of the Subjects, so each does require continual
Demonstration of Virtue in them, who are invested with it. God who is the
Searcher of Hearts, does not withstanding require it, and frequently leads them
to occasions of Trial; and much more may Men, who cannot otherwise judge of the
Heart, expect it. God does require it not only in matters of Religion for his
Honor, but also in matters of Justice to Men, wherein the Honor of his
Supreme Authority also is concerned. And Men expect it not only in matters of
Justice and Benefit to themselves, but also in matters of Religion and Honor
to God. So that what I have hitherto said concerning the Means of acquiring and
securing the Favor of God, has a farther consideration also in respect of
Men; which even Aristotle has taken notice of; whose Politics have more of
that Right Reason, which Christianity recommends, than most of the Politics of
our Modern Statists. And that this was a principal part of our old English
Policy, as is very manifest in our old Laws and Historians.

But to come to our Civil Politics, It has been observed by Wise Men, that
there is a certain Natural Disposition in most Nations, and in many very
apparent, to some certain Form of Government peculior to their own Genius, by
which they are more easily to be governed than by any other. And if the
Governors act suitable to that disposition of the People, it usually makes all
very happy. We have now a Prince very agreeable to the Natural English Genius;
but he may easily be mistaken by reason of the Corruptions of the last Reigns,
which as they began at the Court, so have they most infected those who most
resort thither. So that I know nothing of greater importance to him, than good
information and due consideration of the Natural Genius of the Body of this
People, and how to distinguish that from the Degenerate Dispositions of those
who have most access to him.

Their Natural Genius is Honest, Plain-dealing, yet considerate and very
Provident, (as manifestly appears in our Constitution of Government and Common
Law, if rightly considered,) Industrious, Courageous, Constant, and Faithful;
and, which I will mention as the great commendation of all, addicted to sincere
and substantial Religion; but abhorring Dishonest, despising Tricks and Craft,
and disdaining Violence and Oppression; and accordingly in matters of Religion,
equally abhoring Hypocricy and Formality, and despising Superstition. This
might many ways be proved, but would require a particular Tract to do it as it
should be: And though it might seem otherwise to such as converse most with the
most degenerate part of the Nation, yet even in them may be discerned the
Natural Principles of these Dispositions not totally extirpated, which makes
them in many things more easy to be cured. And these Natural Dispositions are
so agreeable to uncorrupted Reason and to Genuine Primitive Christianity, that
it is not only Civil Prudence, but an indispensible Duty to God to treat such a
People accordingly, and to endeavor not only the Restitution but Exaltation of
this natural Temper, according to the most excellent Means of our most Holy and
Admirable Religion, and no less imprudence and indiscretion than Impiety to do
otherwise.

But there are two Temptations, to which a Prince naturally Magnanimous and
Prudent, may be obnoxious, which would certainly make his Government of such a
People very uneasy, and therefore ought to be avoided with great Caution, and
a pious and prudent Resolution. The one is an Obstinate Wilfulness, which often
runs, and especially by opposition, into a Gygantick Insolence, without due
regard to Reason, Justice, or Religion; that is, without due regard either to
God or Man: Which is not true Magnanimity; for that is apt to exert it self on
all occasions, in a generous and Free Submission to Reason, Justice, and
Moderation, and rather to part with its own than usurp upon another's Right:
But the other is a mere Brutish Resolution, odious both to God and Man, as
inconsistent with Prudence as different from true Magnanimity, and ordinarily
of most pernicious Consequence; of which England in this last Age has had very
remarkable Examples. And for this purpose it is absolutely necessary to beware
of Flattarers and Parasites, and abandon them, or keep them at a great distance
when they are once perceived for ever after, as most dangerous and pernicious
Persons.

The other is a Subtle Craft, which often imposes upon Men under the
appearance of Prudence; but in truth is as far different from genuine Prudence,
as it is inconsistent with true Generosity of Mind: This likewise is very
odious both to God and Man; and however it may prevail for sometime, yet
usually proves of pernicious Consequence at last; as by Experience in the last
Race of our Kings is easily observable in these Nations. Nothing is more
necessary to a good Accord between a Prince and People, and for the Prosperity
of both, than Mutual Confidence. And nothing does more destroy or debilitate
such a mutual Confidence, than such crafty Projects and Practices; which are
the more carefully to be avoided by how much the more they have been practiced
here, and with such unhappy Success: And no less are the Instruments thereof to
be avoided and abandoned.

Both these as they are carefully to be avoided by a truly Magnanimous and
Prudent Prince, upon the General Considerations aforesaid, so are they much
more upon this special Consideration of their Contrariety and Disagreement with
the natural Genious of this People. Such violent and unnatural Means can never
produce any durable Effect of Prosperity and Happiness; but sooner or later
will be disappointed, and make the Memory of those who use them odious and
dishonorable with all Posterity.

And besides all this, there is a farther special Consideration of great
moment, in relation to the Prince hmiself, upon their Inconsistence with his
own Declaration, and the Gratitude (I will be bold to say it) which he owes
the People of these Nations (though I deny not in the least his Merit) for the
Honor they have done him. And upon this occasion, I cannot but take notice of
that late Emblem at the Hague, of a Balance with a Sword preponderating Three
Crowns, and Praemia non aequant for a Motto, as a piece of mean pedantick
Flattery, below the Gravity and Prudence of such a State, and too light a
Complement for real Worth and Merit.

As it is our Happiness to have a Prince so agreeable to our narural Genius, so
its some Unhappiness to him to meet with so many among us so much degenerated
from it. But then nothing can make him a more Glorious Instrument, than to
restore us to our ancient Virtue; nor any thing give him greater Advantage for
farther Honor. And this being so Fundamental a Matter, both for the Honor of
the King, and the Good and Happiness of the Nation (besides that it is a
principal End of Government) no Man, who is well affected to either, can be
offended, if I consider it with that Freedom and Plainness, which a Matter of
such Importance does deserve; But if any be, I suppose he will think it too
great an Evidence against himself that he is not such, to discover it. This
certainly is no more than necessary, since so subtle and powerful is the Venom
of this Corruption, that there is danger otherwise lest it should invade even
the Prince himself ever he be aware, and has already approached him with very
evil Effects. It began apparently soon after the Decease of Q. Elizabeth, by
her supposed wise, but in truth, weak Successor, who being a timorous Person,
and (as is natural to such) addicted much to Craft (wherein he gloried, though
it often failed him, and indeed fooled him) attracted most of that Temper to
him, and tainted others: And Prince Henry, who was of another Spirit, being
unhappily taken off by an untimely Death, this kind or Courtiers and
Politicians most easily insinuated themselves into the naturaly disposed Humor
of his Successor; who, had he been directed by Persons of the right English
Genius, might have been more happy. The same Spirit, though cast out for a
while, returned again, and with greater Force possessed his next Successor; and
from thence has this sort of Policy greatly prevailed, but with such Issue as
the World has seen. Nor is it yet extinct, but offers fair to re assume its
former Place and Power: So that were not this King a Person of more Generosity
and Virtue, he would certainly be carried away with the Stream of our
degenerate Politics. But besides those Virtues natural to him, he has had
Three years Experience of notorious Disappointments, to warn him of the Danger
of their Counsels: Only having been so little resident amongst us, it cannot be
expected he should presently be sensible of the secret Causes of his
Disappointments, or the pernicious Effects of their Counsels; and therefore no
greater Service can be done him, and by Consequence, to the whole Kingdom, than
by laying these things as plain and naked before him as possible; and to detect
or sufficiently point out the principal Agents: For it concerns him little less
to beware of this Generation and their Policies, than it did the Israelites to
avoid the Canaanites and their Manners.

But first it may be fit to explain the Nature of this Degeneracy; and of the
Humors by which it is fed and nourished. Which are plainly a Composition of
Atheism, Infidelity, Covetousness and Ambition, with some other such kind of
Ingredients, which make up that Corrupt and Diabolical Humor called Self, the
very Sperm and Spirit of the Serpent. The Propensions and Motions of all things
in Nature, as has been well observed by that great Philosopher, Sir Fra.
Bacon, are more strong and vigorous to the Common Good, than to the Private
Good of Self. And it is apparent that no Sect, Religion, or Philosophy of Men,
does so much exalt the Common Good above the Private Good of particular Men, as
the Christian: Whence, as that subtle observant Philosopher does well infer,
it plainly appears that it was the same Author, who so wisely and powerfully
ordered and disposed the Course of Nature, that instituted the Christian
Religion. The Primitive Christians were conformable to the Integrity of their
Institution. The true English Spirit, retaining much of the Integrity of Nature
in that respect, and kindly receiving the Christian Institution with much
Simplicity and Devotion, was accordingly very Courageous and Resolute to prefer
the Good and Service of its Country before all private Respects. Nay, the very
Heathens in all parts of the World have left Noble Examples of the same
Generous Disposition. But we have had a generation in this last Age sprung up
amongst us, of such degenerate greedy Souls, as make no scruple to expose the
Rights and Liberties of their Country, and the Honor and Safety of their
Princes for their own insatiable Avarice and Ambition; and of such degenerate
narrow Souls as will see all run into Consusion before they will expose any
thing of their private Interest to hazard to prevent it.

The Principal Ingredient is some kind of Atheism and Infidelity, at least an
unnatural and brutish Stupidity and Insensibility of the most Excellent Being
in the World, of the admirable Excellence of the Christian Religion, and of the
proper End of Man's Being and Business upon Earth. These of this humor are a
kind of Brutes, and little better, but like to end in much worse. But besides
these there are a kind of Monsters, who Glory in their shame, cum ratione
insanire; and in truth are Insani quod ad hoc, though in other matters rational
and ingenious; which is a common case. Their Minds are corrupted, their Wills
and Affections first by some unhappy accident perverted, and that is such a
Bias and Prejudice upon the Judgment that no Reason can be offered, but the
Invention shall immediately be excited and employed to return an Answer, and
the Judgment thereby presently distracted from all sound and impartial
Deliberation. Besides many having sinned themselves into a State of
Desperation, and being once past hope of Benefit by Religion, to endeavor to
convince them is to argue against their Interest (which may often be perceived
by their Heat and Concern,) as is to no more purpose than to cast Pearls before
Swine. An Opinion it is unnatural, absurd, and monstrous; and as it well
deserves, will ever long become infamous. In the mean time if any out of Piety
and Charity have a desire to relieve any such unhappy Creature, his application
must be to that part, which was first debauched, to the Will and Affections, by
raising of Hope that the Case is not desperate; make him willing to hear
Reason, and consider it impartially; and to do but in this Case what a wise Man
would do in any other of great Moment. But this by the by.

When Men are once fallen into this Unhappiness either through Infensibility or
Prejudice, that they cease to prosecute the proper End of their Life and Being,
they presently set up some Idol instead thereof; and adoring and courting that
with the Affections proper for a more Excellent End, they become exorbitant and
infatiable. And hence proceed those other Ingredients, of insatiable
Covetousness and Ambition; while true Riches and true Honor are neither
esteemed nor understood, but empty and vain Shadows are pursued instead of the
Substance by indirect and wicked Means. The proper Means of acquiring of
Wealth, are honest Industry and Frugality: And the proper Means of acquiring
Honor are Honesty, Justice, and Generous Actions, for the Good and Benefit of
other Men, and of ones Country. For real Honor is only the Approbation of a
Man's Integrity, Virtue and Generous Actions, by God, Angels and Men. Titles are
only Ensigns of this, which if it be wanting, they are a Lie and an Imposture.
Yet have they in this Age been conferred upon so many without either actual
Merit or real Worth; that they are become in a great measure insignificant:
Nay, so frequently for base, dishonest, and unworthy Services, that they are in
danger of what has happened to some Words, which though originally of a good
Signification, have by Abuse become in time to signify the quite contrary.

And for Riches, how little is the true Use thereof understood by those who use
such indirect Means to obtain them! They sell their Country, their Prince, and
their own Souls to Purchase them; and when they have them, either prodigally
spend them upon Luxury and Wickedness; or employ them to corrupt themselves
with Pride and Vanity; or hoard them up to make Fools of their Posterity. And
while these things are so little understood, and yet so much admired, Virtue,
and the true Excellence of Man is neither regarded nor understood. We
complement insignificant Titles, Fine Clothes, and Footmen: But should any of
the Ancient Sages, or even Christ himself, appear amongst us in their own
Apparel, they would certainly be despised, not only by the Hectors, Boes, and
Fops of the Town, by our Complemental Courtiers, and Pharisaical Doctors, but
by most of our well-bred Gentlemen, and many, who appear to others, and believe
themselves to be very religious. They should be kept at a distance, and taught
better Manners than to call Herod a Fox, or a Scribe or a Pharisee an
Hypocrite; nay, be reputed Mad, at least be gravely censured as too hot and
imprudent by such as have little better Heat in their Heart than of a Dunghill,
or Light in their Head than of an Ignis Fatuus. Nor can it be otherwise while
Men's Eyes are dazeled with the Pomps and Vanities, and their Minds tinctured or
infected with the false Wisdom of the World.

This is the true Nature of that Degeneracy which has debased the Ancient
Glory of this Kingdom, and of those corrupt Humors by which it is fed and
nourished. Its Age and Growth is also easy to be proved; for which I will
offer but one Consideration. Let any one compare but the Knights of Queen
Elizabeth with the Peers of her Successors, and he may soon perceive what
Difference there has been of Prudence in the Princes, and of Virtue in their
Subjects. Both she and her Subjects better understood the Nature of True Honon,
the Difference between the Substance and the Titles, and the true Use of the
latter. She had more Prudence than to debase and vilify those Noble Ensigns by
Prodigality or Abuse: And they more Sense of Virtue and Merit, which are the
Essence of Honor, than to be fond of the Titles, well knowing that the Glory of
Virtue is more Sincere and Illustrious without them, and that its Reward should
he more like it self, Real and Substantial. Nor were Riches then so commonly
covetted with such insatiable Greediness, nor prosecuted by such indirect
Means, nor abused so unworthily, or sordidly hoarded up: but either very much
neglected in respect of our Times, or employed in the Service of the Public:
in so much that Sir Francis Walsingham, the famous Secretary of State, who had
few equals in Merit of Virtue, had no greater Title than of a Knight, died
Poor, and left little or no Estate, but a most honorable Memory behind him. Our
Nobility then were of the Old English Stock, and it was their Glory then as in
ancient Times, with a generous Emulation to venture their Persons, and employ
their Estates for the Service of their King and Country. And our Commons then,
and in ancient Times, thought it matter of Duty and Fidelity, as well as their
Right, to take notice of the Miscarriages even of our Kings themselves, and to
inform them thereof, and assert the Rights of their Country against all
Invasions and Encroachments. The base dishonest no less than dishonorable Arts
of packing of Parliaments, and corrupting the Public Trustees of the Nation,
and false Pretenses for cheating the People of their Money, were then unknown.
But what was freely given, was as freely remitted if the Occasion ceased. Nor
was the Public Revenue then wasted upon Parasites and Flatterers, insatiable
Cormorants, or in excessive Salaries and Pensions to maintain Luxury and
Impiety. Nor was the Trade then known of Purchasing the Votes of the Rabble
with Ale and Roast-Beef, and then exposing them for Sale for Pensions, Offices,
or other Gratuities. But the Public Good, the Honor and Honorable Service of
the Prince, and the Honor, Service, and Prosperity of their Country, was the
common Study and Ambition of all, and the Favor and Blessing of God was with
them.

But her Successors being Persons of mean Spirit, forsaking their Dependence
upon the Supreme Governor of the World, and flying to and taking up with no
less deceitful than dishonest Tricks of Craft, instead of the more manly and
more christian Prudence of the most Generous and most Prosperous of their
Predecessors, attracted People of agreeable Dispositions from all parts of the
Nation; and filled the Court first, and at last our Parliaments too, with this
base and degenerate Brood, no less pernicious to the Kings themselves, than to
the People and whole Kingdom: Whose Loyalty is only Flattery, and Tricks and
Knavery their greatest Policy; having little Sense of Providence, and as little
of true Humanity, will sell their Country to serve their Prince, and their
Prince to serve themselves: A generation more ambitious of empty Titles, than
industrious in the direct ways of true Honor; and more ready to devour the
Supplies of their Country raised for Public Service, than to serve their
Prince either with their Persons or their Purses after the rate of ancient
Times; more concerned at a little Breach of their own Privilege than at a
gross Violation of the Rights of their Country; and more apt to desert the
Honor or Service of the Prince for fear of a Potent Person, or to serve a Turn,
than to encounter the displeasure of either by any generous Act of Fidelity for
the Service of their Country, or of their Prince himself.

This is that Wicked Cananitish Generation, and these their corrupt Manners,
which the King of necessity must first cast out or subdue, if ever he will be a
Glorious Instrument in the Service of the God of Israel. His Declaration was
Just and Honorable, his Undertakings Successful and Glorious, and his Proposals
to the Convention reasonable and worthy of himself, and of his Undertakings:
But it was, as I said, his Unhappiness (and ours too) that he met at first with
such degenerate Persons before he well understood them: yet will it be forhis
greater Honor to extricate himself and the Nation out of the Snares and
Intanglements of their pernicious Policies: To which the unhappy Examples of
his immediate Predecessors, and his own Experience are great and special
Obligations, besides the Obligations of his own Declaration and Undertakings;
and such as undoubtedly would make his neglect inexcusable, and such a Neglect
his End unsuccessful and inglorious. Never was the Treasure of the Nation more,
or so much exhausted in three Years time: Never had we greater Losses in our
Trade, nor greater Losses of Men both at Land and Sea without Fighting; never
braver Fleets, nor ever any so baffled and unsuccessful: Never a braver Army
than this last Campain, and a more Courageous and Industrious Prince to Lead
them, and yet never less effected. And what can all this be imputed to, but the
Displeasure of Providence and Evil Counsels? I am for the use of Means as well
as others: but they must be proper Means, and all necessary Means must be well
used. Armies are necessary, and Fleets necessary, and Money necessary for all
these: But if we think nothing else necessary, and will still overlook other
Necessaries, and greater Necessaries, we connot rationally expect any better
Success this Year than we had the last: And of that what other Consequence can
we expect, but that the People of this Nation will grow weary of their Burden?
and the Consequence of that expected, and possibly designed by some too far
entrusted in Counsels or Affairs, that they should also grow weary of their
King. So much Mischief already sustained, and so great danger of more for the
future, does certainly deserve to be well considered, and that good enquiry be
made into the Causes and proper Remedies thereof. Experience and the Judgment
of all Wise Men in all Ages of the World, abundantly prove that it is in vain
to expect any great matters from Force of Men and Armies in the Field, if the
Counsels at home be either unfound or betrayed: For his Majesty's Courage and
Conduct in the Field, it is, for ought I can find, so far above all Exceptions,
that it seems to be the greatest Difficulty that his Enemies have to encounter;
so that the only things to be enquired of are whether there be not some
Treachery, Unfaithfulness, or other great Fault in our Counsels and Managements
at home? And whether there may not be something which may have provoked the
Displeasure and Disfavor of the Divine Providence?

And to begin at the Root of all, I may be bold to affirm that the King has
been betrayed in the principal Point of all, that is, of his special Duty to
God in his Place and Circumstances, by some of his Clergy; and to offer it to
any of them all to answer with a good Conscience, and as in the Presence of God
my Questions Theological in Relation to his Case, so as to clear that Point. If
he has not done for the Honor and Service of God what is Circumstances and the
Duty of his Place under the Obligation of a Solemn Oath do require, though it
be principally through the Fault of another, how can he expect the Favor and
Blessing of the Providence of God to be with him for his own Honor? And though
I believe there are but few who are actually guilty of this Unfaithfulness, yet
must all, who at any time stand in the place of Watchmen, answer for his Blood,
if he dye in his Sin, and they do not faithfully discharge their Duty by plain,
and timely Warning in the Name of God, and with the Authority becoming the
Ministers of the Divine Majesty. They hold the Place of Prophets, and the Duty
of Prophets is incumbent upon them; and if they have not the Light and
Discerning of Prophets, it is their own Fault, who encumber themselves so much
with the Pomps and Vanities, and the unnecessary Superfluities of the World. If
they know not in this their Day the things which belong to their Duty and their
Peace, but suffer this Prince also to miscarry through Evil Counsels, which
have been the Bain of so many of his Predecessors in this Nation, what can they
expect but to be spewed out as unprofitable Servents? -- to be thrown out with
Scorn, that Gospel Angels may our Church Adorn.

But I hope better things from such as are now in Place.

This unhappy Error in the Service of God has, I doubt, exposed him to the
Mischief of Unfaithfulness in such as he has employed and entrusted in his
Service, the Divine Providence permitting him to feel the Inconveniences of
such Polices for Conviction of this Error. The Effects of our Management are
visible to the World; the Persons employed are likewise known; and the
Management it self is much complained of; too much perhaps when and as it
should not, and as much too little, if there be just Cause, when and as it
should. If the Management be ill, and the Persons employed unskilful and
unable, the Fault is in the Choice principally, and the Remedy is to put them
out and choose better; but if the Persons be able, and the Management ill, the
Fault then is in the Persons employed and entrusted; and they are not only to
be turned out, but farther punished as their Misdemeanors deserve, and the
Damage requires: And if this be not done as it ought, the Fault rests upon them
who ought to do it, and yet neglect their Duty. And because for Misdemeanors of
all great Officers, the House of Commons are the general Inquisitors for the
whole Kingdom, if there be any such ill Management, as is believed and talked
on, it must be a great Fault of Unfaithfulness to God, to the King, and to the
Kingdom, if they should not impartially inquire into it, and faithfully use the
most proper Parliamentary Means to have it effectually and speedily redressed.

And this is the Duty, not only of the whole House, but of every particular
Member of it. They are Inquisitors for the whole Kingdom, as the Grand Jury of
each County are for their respective Counties. And as every Grand Jury-man, who
knows any thing Presentable, and does not Present it, does violate his Oath and
Duty to his Country, so does every Member of Parliament, who knows any thing
necessary to be considered there, and does not honestly acquaint the House with
it, and earnestly move to have it considered, no less violate his Trust and
Duty of Fidelity both to his King and Country. Was it certain that the whole
House would oppose him, an Honest and a Wise Man would notwithstanding be
careful to discharge his Duty faithfully; nay, so much the more careful to do
it to clear himself, that he might not be guilty, so much as by Silence, of any
defect in Duty to his Prince or to his Country. And was this weighty Duty well
considered as it deserves, we should have less Scuffling to get into the House,
and more honest and honorable Behavior there than we too often have had. But
that which for many Ages has been the Root of Remedy, for all our Maladies,
has in this been so corrupted, that it has most of all needed Remedy, and yet
has most obstinately resisted it. But of all I have most admired at those whom
I took to be the best, Men of Sobriety, Religion, Conscience, Fidelity to their
Prince, and Affection to their Country, to see such frighted, nay even laughed
and shamed out of all these. I wish such may receive this Admonion, and better
consider their Duty in time, and do works meet for Repentance, that is, give
Glory to God by so much greater Acts of Fidelity by how much they have at any
time failed therein: For otherwise they will be called to a strict Account,
wherein their little Prudentials will little avail them. And for this purpose
to such as desire to discharge their Conscience well, I shall recommend the
Account of the Good Steward in Sir Mat. Hale, as a good Pattern how to treat it.

But in the mean time there is another Account, that such Public Trustees are
to be imminded of; and that is an Account of their Actions, if ill, or not
faithful according to the Trust reposed in them, which the Commons of England,
who entrust them, or any one of them may call any of them to. The meanest
Commoner in England may maintain a Suit against the King himself, if he have
just Cause, and the ordinary Judges ought to give Judgment for him and do him
Right. He may likewise complain in Parliament, if he have Cause proper for
that, of any Grievance by the King or his Ministers, or of any Misdemeanor by
any Member or Members of Parliament, or if it be the Speaker himself. And what
one may do, more may do, the Mariners may do it, the Merchants may do it, the
Judges, Sergeants and other Lawyers may do it, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council of London and the other Cities may do it, the Counties may do
it, and all may do it; there is no Limitation of the Numbers, but only of those
who present the Petition, and that only by a late Act of Parliament. It is an
Ancient, and a Fundamental Right of the Commons of England, and whoever should
dare to speak against it, as some base Abhorrors did some Years since, though
it were in Parliament, ought to be questioned for it, as a Betrayer of the
Rights of his Country. For though Freedom of Debate be a necessary Privilege of
Parliament, yet are there certain Bounds to it that may not be transgressed.
Nor is the Power of the House of Commons, or of the whole Parliament, so
boundless or unlimited as some may imagine.

This, as it is an Ancient and a Fudamental Right, so is it a Right as needful
to be understood and put in Practice now as ever. This, if any thing that I can
see, under God, must save both King and Kingdom: For the Lords, I can say
nothing to them. But for the Representatives of the Commons, I find many of
them so afraid of Great Men, if not otherwise corrupted, that they avoid the
Motion of a Petition against their Speaker, or a Lord-Commissioner of the Great
Seal, though for the Honor of the Royal Authority, and the Execution of the
Laws, (the Care of which is their special Duty) nay for the Honor of their own
House, and seek Evasions as from some dangerous Matter. So that I see not
whence we can expect Effectual Remedy for the Mischiefs and Dangers so much
complained of, but next under God from the Virtue of their Majesty's and the
Great Body of the People, (comprehending I hope the greatest part of the Lords)
who are generally entire for the present Settlement. We have lately had a good
Choice of Bishops, most of them as good as our Clergy does afford; and before
that, a good Choice of Judges, most of them as good as the Profession of the
Law does afford: And we have likewise I hope, as good a Choice of Sheriffs as
could be expected. And what now remains, as things stand at present, to perfect
all, and make both King and Kingdom happy, but

First, On their Majesty's part, That they resolvedly endeavor, first to
secure the Favor and Blessing of Almighty God by some generous Acts for his
Service, in the Reformation of the great Corruption of the Manners of the
People; and for that purpose strictly charge both some of the best of these
Bishops to be Faithful to God, and to their Majesty's, and to the Nation, in
acquainting their Majesty's fully and plainly with their Duty in that respect,
and what Almighty God requires of them under their Circumstances; and likewise
the Judges, to inform them of their Duty, and what they may and ought to do in
that respect by the Laws of the Land, and then act accordingly: And Secondly,
to confirm and secure the Confidence of the People in them, for a Just,
Prudent, and Honorable Government: Which is to be done by generous and
constant acts of Justice, such as may demonstrate the Accomplishment of the
Ancient Prophecy in his Majesty's Person, Vt Sponsus Sponsae sic Justitia
associetur ei; that he should espouse Justice as inseperably and cordially as a
Bridegroom his Bride; and that in respect of the Common Rights of the People,
and public Justice against Potent Offenders, as the Private Rights of
particular Persons; for which purpose the Judges are to be Advised with: And by
like Acts of true Prudence; as 1. By Intrusting such only as are reputed
Faithful, and without question entire and hearty for the present Settlement,
and of undoubted Ability for their Employment in the Navy, for which purpose
the Merchants and Mariners and Experienced Masters are fit to be advised with,
rather than such who have hitherto been very unhappy in their Recommendations;
likewise in the Militia of the Kingdom, and in Lieutenancy in the City; but
especially in the Great Offices of Trust, in which the great Disappointments we
have had without other Visible Cause than Unfaithfulness of Persons Employed,
seem to require a Change, in point of Reputation as well as of common Prudence:
I may add, and in the Commission of the Peace; and that special care be taken
that they be principally men of Sobriety, Virtue and Religion: And 2. By a
frugal and provident Management of the Public Revenue and great Supplies of
the Nation, retrenching all unnessary Expenses, especially when so great are
necessary, and reducing excessive Salaries to Moderation.

And next on the part of the Commons. That some Principal men of unquestionable
Affection to their Majesty's and the Government, and of Spotless Reputation,
make an honest Enquiry into the Behavior of their Representatives, and of
others entrusted in the management of Public Affairs, and then in an open
Legal way represent what they find amiss, both to the King and Council, and to
the Parliament or the Committee of Greivances, so as that all the Commons of
England may take notice of it. Half the number of the House of Commons of
Honest, Able and Courageous Gentlemen of good Interest in their Country, might
do greater Service, though out of the Parliament, to their Majesty's and the
Kingdom by this means than is imagined.

And this is not only Lawful, but the Duty of every Loyal and Faithful Subject
to promote it what he can: And provided they take good Advice and keep within
the compass of the Law, will be not only Safe, but highly Honorable. Princes
must see with other Men's Eyes, and hear with other Men's Ears: If they be not
well informed, or misinformed, especially in matters of great Concern, it is
their Unhappiness more than their Fault, unless they will not hear, and matter
of Duty and Fidelity in any Subject, who knows it, to endeavor faithfully all
he can that they be rightly informed: And whoever does not this, does not the
part of a Loyal and Faithful Subject to his Prince, and of an Honest Man to his
Country. The Honor of the King, is for the Honor of the Kingdom; and the true
Service of the King, is the Service of the Kingdom, and both, if really such,
are for the Honor and Service of God: So that whoever wilfully neglects this
Duty, is guilty of Unfaithfulness not only to the King, but also to his
Country, and to God himself, and must Answer for it not only to Men, but to
God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and is not to be imposed upon with
pretended Prudentials and superficial Evasions. Nor can it be Offensive to any
Honest Person, who means well, in either House of Parliament: But those who are
really such in either, will be ready to encourage and promote it: And I doubt
not but the Blessing of God will be with them. Besides, it is for the Honor,
Safety and Strength of any Government, that mutual Confidence and good
Agreement be maintained between all Parties, which cannot possibly be, unless
Public Grievances be duly redressed, and notorious Criminals duly Punished, or
at least Convicted, and then Pardoned if there be good reason for it: And that
such who are Suspected be fairly Tried, and all reasonable Satisfaction given
to such as Complain. To deny this, is Imprudence and Childishness, and was the
fatal Error of Rehoboam and of our last Race of Kings. But we hope, we have
Princes now of more Prudence and Virtue.

That any Man, who may be questioned for Treason or Felony, may likewise be
questioned for matter of Misdemeanour; and that whoever may enquire or complain
of the former, may likewise enquire and complain of the latter, is I think,
without doubt. But what I mentioned of an Enquiry into the Behavior of the
Representatives of the Commons of England, may seem strange at first to such as
have not well considered it; but if well considered, it will appear not only
Lawful, but Necessary and Commendable. That the Corruption of the Manners of
the People of England in general, has been designedly and industriously
promoted, is by observing and considering Men believed upon very good grounds:
And it is likewise believed upon as good, that no part of the Nation has been
more attempted than the Public Trustees, though the greatest and most
detestable Wickedness that could be practiced, and probably with a farther
wicked Prospect of begetting an Odium in the People against Parliaments. This
in the late Reigns was so Notorious, that it would be a high piece of Impudence
to deny it now, especially since his Majesty has taken notice of it in his
Declaration. And whether any Reformation of so foul an Abuse, and of the
Corruption then introduced among our Trustees, has since been made, is
certainly an Enquiry not only fit, but necessary; especially considering the
notorious Practice still used in Elections, and manifest by the many Petitions
upon that occasion; the late Opposition in this very Parliament to a Bill but
for restraining false Returns, thrown out after a second Reading; the many
Complaints of Abuses in the Management of the Public Affairs every where out
of the House, and the little notice taken thereof in the House; the Prevalence
of Parties, and such Practices in the House, that a Petition of no mean Public
concern, the Contents being known to most of the Members, was lately rejected,
by a party of the House, taking a special Advantage of the Absence of many
others, to the Abuse of the House, the denial of an undoubted Fundamental Right
of the Commons of England, tending to the Subversion, thereof, and Disrespect
to the Royal Authority: To say nothing of other Matters worthy of Consideration.

As this is greatly Necessary, so is it no less Lawful. The Law of Nature
allows all Men to enquire into the Actions and Behavior of their Trustees: And
of all Trustees, such are most to be suspected and looked after, who being most
Entrusted, do most oppose or decline any such Enquiry. Nor does any Law of the
Land make it Unlawful. Nay, the Laws and Constitution of our Government allow
it, and are not destitute of various means for Redress, as the Case may
require, for any Unfaithfulness or Breach of Trust, whether by the whole House,
or some part, or Member thereof. In Matters Discretionary, if the whole House,
or Major part prevail to do any thing amiss without any Corruption, but
sincerely, intending it for the best, they are to be Excused, and the Commons
who did not Choose better, must be content to bear the Inconveniences of their
own ill advised Choice, and take care to mend it another time. But even in such
Matters, if there be apparent Corruption in the leading Men of the House, they
ought to be questioned for it. And in Matters of undoubted Right of the
Commons, or Duty of the Members, if they act contrary thereunto, though no
other Corruption be proved in particular, that is a manifest Breach of Trust,
for which the Leading Men at least are to be questioned. In like manner any
particular Member, if he do any thing amiss through Corruption, or oppose, or
disrespectfully slight, or contemn any undoubted Right of the Commons, or
refuse or wilfully neglect any certain Duty incumbent upon him as a Member,
and more especially if either, with any disrespect to the King or Queens
Majesty, he ought to be questioned for it. And as to this matter of
Unfaithfulness by Neglect, whatever Member has any knowledge of any matter of
Moment proper to be complained of, or moved in the House, and either for fear
of Reproach, or of the Displeasure of any great Man, or that it will be
rejected, or for any private respect to himself, or his Friends, does not what
in him lies, that it may be complained of or moved in the most preper and
likely manner to take effect, is by his Concealment or Silence, guilty of
breach of Trust, and therein a Betrayer of his Country: Whereas by the faithful
discharge of his Duty he might either succeed at first, or however give
occasion to detect diverse evil Members, and to have them questioned, and at
last perform his Trust with greater Advantage. Nor is this so small a matter as
most imagine. For all the Unhappiness of the Nation is plainly reducible to
this, and must lie upon the Account of the Men professing Sobriety, Religion
and Concern for their Country, who by this Unfaithfulness betray all. They
first fail in their Fidelity to God through Fear of Men, and then by a just
Judgment are given up to betray their King, Country, and their own Concerns by
a base Fear, whatever pretenses they make to cover it, where in truth no Fear
is, that is, no just cause of Fear.

Now for Redress in such Cases, if the Question be concerning the Misdemeanour
of one or two, or a small Party of the Members, there is no question but this
may be redressed by the Major part in the House, who, though all the rest were
culpable, yet may, if they please, only make Examples of the Principal; and it
may be done upon Motion of any Member in the House, or upon Petition of any
Commoner out of the House, if there be Evidence to prove the Complaint; and
especially if the Misdemeanor be committed out of the House.

But the greatest Difficulty is in case of Corruption, and notorious
Unfaithfulness and Breach of Trust by the greatest or prevailing part of the
House; which no Man, who has observed the Occurrences of our Time, can think
impossible. And as to this we have Precedents of whole Parliaments and their
Acts reversed by succeeding Parliaments: But suppose we have neither Act nor
Precedent in an extraordinary case, are we therefore without Remedy? Have
Lawyers no other Topicts to prove Law from? No Man, who has read and
considered the Doctor and Student, or Littleton, can think so. And in such a
Case as this, if the Laws and Constitution of our Government be well
considered, why may not any great Body of the Commons, as the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of London, or a considerable number of Gentlemen
of clear Reputation and good Interest, petition the King, and setting out first
the Right, then the Violation and Breach of Trust, and by whom, expressing and
charging the principal Leaders, pray that that Parliament may be dissolved, and
another summoned to enquire concerning that Matter? I see not what can be said
against this with any color, but for what I see substantial Matter to answer
it. Let us look well into our Laws and Constitution, and we shall not find them
so Defective as some through Ignorance have thought them, and therefore to
supply Imaginary Defects, have sometimes introduced very defective Remedies,
and neglected better.

As for the other Unfaithfulness and breach of Trust, which is committed, not
by Acting or Speaking, but by Neglect and Silence: If any Member has any
special knowledge of any matter of Moment proper and necessary to be complained
of in the House, and does not his Duty therein, that is such a Concealment as
makes him particeps criminis, and he may be questioned for it, as for any other
Misdemeanor by fact: But if he has no other knowledge but what is common to
the rest or most of the Members, and does not his Duty, whether the rest do or
not, he cannot be questioned for it in the House, in particular: yet they who
chose him ought to take notice of it, and mend their Choice another time: for
otherwise they wrong not only themselves, but the King and Kingdom, in sending
an unfaithful or unfit Man, who is not able or not willing to do his part in so
weighty a Business of Public Concern; and besides, he is guilty of
Unfaithfulness before God, to whom he must account for his Actions toward Men.

And of this Unfaithfulness I doubt there are but few, who can acquit
themselves before God, or Men either, while so many things are so much
complained of elsewhere, and even by Members themselves, and yet so little
thereof is examined or complained of in the House. I will mention but two
Instances of it in particular; in which whoever can clear himself to have
honestly discharged his Duty, may with the more Confidence and better
Conscience question me for what I write, if he see Cause, and I shall as
confidently submit to his Sentence.

The first I have mentioned before, a great Misdemeanon, of two Magistrates,
Great Officers, and Members of the House, contrary to the Duty of Magistrates,
to a special Duty of the House, to a known express Command of her Majesty, and
that in discharge of her Duty by the Laws both of God and of the Land; and this
done not in the Absence of his Majesty beyond Sea, but as it were in his
Presence, and the Parliament sitting; and so notorious, that it was done in the
presence of many other considerable Persons, and no less than Seven Reverend
Prelates, who came on purpose to hear the Cause, being of great Consequence,
and concerning the most necessary Reformation of the abominable Corruption of
the Manners of the People. And t^h being so, who could acquit himself of
Unfaithfulness, by his Silence and Neglect of such a Cause as this, if no Man
out of the House had taken notice of it? But that a Petition for such a Cause
as this, after Copies thereof delivered to many of the Members, and the
Contents thereof known to most, being offered to the House, and put to the
Vote, to be received or not, it should be carried in the Negative, how can this
be answered to God, to their Majesty's, and to the Commons of England? and what
can such Members, as believe a Divine Providence, and have deserted their Duty
in such a Case, expect but some severe Judgment upon themselves and the Nation,
if some effectual Course, proportionable to the Offense, be not taken in time
to prevent it?

The other is this, That Management alone, though uncertain whether through
Corruption, Inability or Negligence, and reasonable Suspicion, being proper and
sufficient Causes of Complaint against Persons employed in great Offices of
Trust, (wherein the Public Service is principally to be regarded, not the
Honor or private Advantage of any particular Person) our Affairs have been so
unhappily managed for three Years together; and yet there have been no more
Complaints in the House, or care taken to have Matters of so great Concern for
the Honor of the Government, and Benefit, or even Safety of the Nation
enquired into. Is nothing to be regarded but Money? Is it not of much greater
Concernment, and even for the saving of our Money at last, to have Persons
employed in other Places besides the Treasury, who are unquestionably Faithful,
Able and Active? And what can this Neglect be imputed to but a strange
degenerate Fear of Men, whatever Prudentials are pretended, notwithstanding the
advantage of the Laws, and a good Cause to support and encourage the faithful
discharge of Duty.

Indeed, so epidemical is this Disease now become among our Gentry, that the
Honest Performance of Duty, of Fidelity to God, to one's King and Country,
seems to many no other than Heat, Indiscretion, and Madness, as to me that
Motto Pestis Patriae Pigrities, seems never to have been more plainly verified
then now in this Nation. And when I consider the Causes of it, reflecting upon
the gross and impudent Impiety, Profaneness, and Debauchery of the one part,
and the want of Christian Courage and true Magnanimity in the rest, to check
it, either in Common Conversation, or by Authority in Parliament, I cannot but
think it a Special Judgment of God upon the whole Nation, That they should be
deprived of Courage in things necessary for themselves, who have showed so
little for the Honor and Service of God, notwithstanding the Advantage of the
Laws to back them in the one Case as well as in the other. Nor do I believe
that either Prince or People can prosper until their Radical Fault be amended;
but rather that vile Abuse even in, and to the Parliament it self, will
certainly produce some severe Judgment upon both, if connived at and suffered
to pass without due Correction.

If Persons Unfaithful and of Skill be employed with Persons of undoubted
Fidelity but Unskilful, this gives a notable Advantage to the one sort to
betray all with the more Security under the cover of the others. And whether
this be not so in some Places of great Trust and Moment, I leave to them to
enquire, to whom it most properly belongs, having mentioned something to this
purpose elsewhere. I shall therefore only take notice of some Persons of
undoubted Fidelity and Ability; who seem to be purposely kept out. Some
Noblemen thus qualified we see are out, while others not equally qualified in
both respects are employed. But that I also leave to the Consideration of
others.

Captain Dorrel, is a Person well known to be thus qualified; (...) he gave
very eminent Demonstrations of it in that Engagement with the French, wherein
few did the like: yet found he no better Reward or Encouragement than to be
offered a Third Rate Ship the last Summer instead of a First Rate, which he
commanded before; and being thus put off, has engaged in a Voyage to the
East Indies, to the no lest Dishonor of our Management, than Disservice to
Their Majesty's and the Nation.

Captain Breholt had so sign^^'d his Courage and Conduct in two Engagements,
the one with an Algerine, and the other with a Dutch Man of War, which I have
seen certify (...) the hands of three Members of Parliament, and are, though
imperfectly, mentioned in the Gazets, that K. Charles II. gave him a Gold Chain
and Medal for it: and tho, he offered his Service by Petition to this King,
which was referred to the Admiralty, yet could he obtain no Answer, for above a
Twelve Month after, and then was told there was no Vacancy; and at last was
asked if he would accept of a Fireship.

But it would be too long to name all the Worthy Persons, that (...) even
offered their Service in the Fleet, besides more (...) ready to accept it.

(...) generous withstanding the Arbitrary Practices of the late Reigns, it is
believed saved the Lives of some of the Lords; to the great hazard of his own,
and almost ruin of his Family and Estate; yet can be not obtain any suitable
Employment, so much as in the other (...) the West Indies.

Laurance Braddon, for his generous undertaking to detest a most barbarous
Murder, as it is believed, suffered Imprisonment during the ^ate Reigns, and is
suffered to want Necessaries in this, and can get no Employment.

And to conclude, such is the Condition of Mr. Richad Bevat, who had taken
great pains to detect the Unfaithfulness ^^ne who is now in Custody, for other
Acts of Unfaithfulness (...); and to detect (...) dangerous Practices here, and
the like now at Jersey.

These (...) Pity moved me to mention now; to whom many others might he ^^led,
no mean Instances of what sort of Persons are most kept or cast out of
Employment.

FINIS.

