A DISCOURSE OF EPISCOPACY AND SACRILEGE. By way of LETTER.

Written in 1646.

By Richard Steward, D. D. Clerk of the Closet to King Charles the First.

Never before Printed.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Harrow next Chancery Lane End in
Fleet Street. 1683.

The PREFACE.
HE that will Reflect upon the last four Years, will scarce believe a Prefatory
Apology needful for Printing this Discourse: If at present the Madness of the
People be in some Measure stilled, I think it not ill-timed, for I have taken
the Advantage of a lucid Interval, and have offered them Reason when they have
Recovered their Senses, though not their Temper. It is with them as it is with
the restless Ocean, Posito flatu inquietum Mare. So now, though the Popular
Breath of a pretended Patriot does not blow hard upon the Nation, yet the giddy
Multitude remain unsettled, and are in great danger of a Relaps into the like
Lunacy. This Letter was writ, it is true, in 46, but it is exactly Calculated
for 82. For of late we have only Transcribed those Times, as if we intended to
Copy out the Iniquities of our Forefathers. We are now full of Murmurings and
Repinings, the Natural Product of Ease and Plenty, being almost tired with too
long a Happiness, as if we had deflowred our Felicity: For though we cry out so
loud of Grievances, they are most like that of the Effeminate Sybarite, who,
Seneca says, Saepius questus est quod foliis Rosae duplicatis incubuisset. We
do not complain because we are really hurt, but because we are too delicate. I
may boldly Challenge the tenderest Person of the Discontented Party to show me
one Princes Reign since the Conquest, in which the People of England have sat
under the shadow of their own Vines with less Disturbance: But they that make
the greatest noise are Men that have been rejected by the Government, or else
Persons that would be silenced by Preferment, and would willingly lose their
Tongues with a silver Quinzy. There is a pleasant Story in the History of Great
Britain of Gondemar the Spanish Ambassador and a Lady, very applicable to our
Times.

In those Days there were some Ladies (who pretended to be Wits) had fair
Nieces, or Daughters, which drew great Resort to their Houses; and where
Company meet, the Discourse is commonly of the Times. These Ladies Gondemar
sweetened with Presents that were too sour in their Expressions. He Lived at
Ely-House in Holborn; his Passage to the Court was ordinarily through
Drury Lane, and that Lane and the Strand were the Places where most of the
Gentry Lived; and the Ladies as he went knowing his Times, would not be wanting
to appear at their Balconies or Windows to Present him their Civilities, and he
would watch for it; and as he was carried in his Litter, or bottomless Chair
(the easiest Seat for his Fistula) he would strain himself as much as an Old
Man could do to the Humblest Posture of Respect. One day passing by the Lady
Jacobs House in Drury Lane, she exposing her self for a Salutaion, he was not
wanting to her, but she moved nothing but her Mouth, gaping wide open upon him.
He wondered at the Ladys Incivility, but thought it might be happily a Yawning
fit took her at that time, for trial whereof the next day he finds her in the
same place, and his Courtesies were again accosted with no better Expressions
than an extended Mouth. Whereupon he sent a Gentleman to her to let her know,
that the Ladies of England were more Gracious to him than to Encounter his
Respects with such Affronts. She Answered, it was true, he had Purchased some
of their Favors at a dear Rate; And she had a Mouth to be stopped as well as
others. Gondemar finding the Cause of the emotion of her Mouth, sent her a
Present, which Cured her of that Distemper.

We find this Gaping-Sickness is broke out afresh in our Times, but it is grown
much worse; for we are not only troubled with a silent extension of the Jaws,
but it is attended with horrid Yellings against Evil Counselors, when under
that Appellation we would extort from our King his dearest Friends. Neither has
the King only been remotely Attacqued in his Ministers of State, but the
Mercenary Scriblers of the Age have Blasphemed him in their Prints. What swarms
of written Lampoons besides have crept abroad, some writ by Wretches Cursed
with a Wit too good, since they employ their Talents only to commit an
Ingenious Iniquity. Alexander thought it too great at Privilege for every
Common Hand to Pourtraict Majesty, and therefore established that Liberty by a
Law to none but Famed Apelles: Had he Lived in our Days, when Princes sit to
every drunken Poet, who purposely deforms his Sovereign, he had been impatient
of so high an Indignity: But now Treason is uttered under the strong Protection
of a Rhyme, and he passes for the greatest Wit, whose Talent it is to fling the
filthiest Dirt in the Face of Gods Anointed. My Blood has often grown warm at the
repetition of a Modish Libel, to see how it has tickled the Conceits of empty
Fops, whose Parts could reach no higher, than to understand the fulsome
Ribaldry: For if there chanced to be any quaint Conceit, that was but lost to
their pert dullness, and passed by with an Ignorant silence. He that will
Burlesque his Prince, and suits Reproaches to the Genius of the Age, must
please by a gross and naked Obscenity: For Men are come to that Unnatural
Dyscrasie as to relish or digest nothing but Poison, and Keck, and Vomit when
you offer to their filthy Stomachs a wholesome and a cleanly Banquet. The
Strumpet-Muse of these our Modish Poets was bred up in Stews, and Brothels, and
by her Language she betrays her Education. They know not how to reach the Noble
heights of a Civil well writ Poem, but grow weary of unaccustomed Goodness if
once they dare to undertake that Task, for then their Parts are overcome, being
not befriended, with those baser Helps of speaking those things that most Men
blush to hear. Unhappy is that State where Princes Faults are made the Pastime
of Buffoons; they are the common Calamities of the Nation, and every Subject
should become a Penitent when the King's a Sinner, for they provoke Heavens
Vengeance by their Representative, and often feel the Punishments that result
from his Iniquities.

Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi. But if this Consideration cannot
restrain this Incontinency of Rhiming, but their Debauched Fancies will still
make Majesty the Subject of their Droll, Public Authority, it is to be hoped,
will Correct these Poetical Traitors; and if they cannot be taught better
Religion, they will be forced to better Manners. I must confess I have ventured
to Censure this as an Immortality, and as an innovated Crime of latter Ages;
but I find in a Modern Author, it is a Christian Liberty of great Antiquity;
for he has run it up so high, that I was in great dread that he would have
proved it of Apostolical Institution. But it seems it was certainly in Practice
amongst the Primitive Christians at Antioch, whose Example he does allege for
its Justification; for he says, They Lampoon'd the Beard of the Emperor
Julian, and Burlesqued his Princely Whiskers. Surely this Instance serves much
better to prove the Lawfulness of Reviling the King, than to Confute the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience. But yet this Revolted Divine would pass for a
true Son of the Church of England, though he Renounces her Doctrine and
Practice; for he is very Angry she will furnish her Magazines with no other
Weapons than Tears and Prayers, for he thinks he could manage a Carnal Sword
for Preferment much better than a Spiritual, and for that Reason likes the
Alcoran beyond the Gospel. I know he blames our Savior in's Heart for
commanding St. Peter to put up his Sword, and for not making use of those many
Legions of Angels that would gladly have Rescued him from the Jews. But Alas!
this Son lies in his Mothers Bosom only to Betray her, and stays in the
Vineyard, for the same Reason the Boar does, that he may have the better
Convenience of Rooting of it up. I know how unpalatable a Doctrine is
maintained in this Discourse, but though, like the best Physic, it be bitter,
it is wholesome, and will certainly Cure the Divisions of the Church, for they
can have no pretense to Quarrel Episcopacy, if once they be persuaded that the
Government by Bishops is Iure Divino. Neither do I believe the Notion of
Sacrilege will have a better Taste in their Mouths; for it will not be worth
while to pull down the Bishops if the Church Lands cannot be shared, God
Almighty being the real Proprietor. I hope this little Book may convince some
of their Errors, but if not, I am sure it will confirm those that have embraced
the Truth.

SIR,
YOU have put an odd task upon Me, in commanding my judgment on a Letter lately
sent to a Doctor in Oxon, with a Commission to show it to my Lord Dorset, and
to as many more as own Reason and Honesty; for thus it is in the Postscript,
and many like passages more in the Letter: As, That the more Wise and Honest
Party would make use of that Reason, etc. And I know you to be too great a
Master of Reason to be unsatisfied, which makes me fear, if perhaps I should
dissent in opinion from this Epistler, I might be thought (at least in his
conceit) to incur a sharp Censure both of Reason and Honesty; which (I confess)
at first somewhat troubled me, till I remembered you were wont to say, That when
once Vessels make such noises as these, it was a shrewd sign they were empty.
He who wrote the Letter seems most desirous of Peace, and truly so am I.
Besides, we agree in this, That we must not commit sin for a good Cause: So
that if peace it self cannot be obtained without that guilt, we must be content
with a worse Estate. But you very well know, with how many several deceits our
Affections can mislead our Reason; you remember who it was that said it to the
very face of a Prophet, I have kept the Commandments of the Lord: and yet his
sin remained a great sin still, and much the worse because he excused it; for
his guilt is less, that commits a sin only, than his that undertakes to defend
it; because this cuts off all Repentance, nay, it makes a sin grow up to that
more wicked height of a scandal; and so it is not only a snare to the sinner
himself, but it warrants many more to be sinful.

Whether this Oxford-Londoner (for so I take this Epistler to be) has not
defended or made Apologies for sin, and has not in that sense done Evil, that
Good may come thereof, I am now to make enquiry; and I shall follow him in his
two Generals.

1. The Delivering up of the Kings friends, whom they above call Evil
Counselors. And,

2. In the business of the Church.

1. For the Kings friends he says. I know not how you can with Reason gainsay
the bringing of an Offender to Justice. Indeed nor I neither, but what if they
be not offenders? What if they be brought to Injustice? I know no man will
refuse to be Judged by a Parliament, whose undoubted Head, is the King sitting
there with an unquestioned Negative; nay, for His Majesty to refer Deliquents
to be judged by the House of Peers sitting in a Parliament, and judging
according to the know Laws of the Realm, is that at least which in my opinion
will be stuck at. But the Parliaments Prerogative which this Letter speaks of,
being now so extended, we have cause to think it is a doubt in this case;
Whether not only in point of Honor, but in point of Justice and Conscience,
the King for His own peace, can leave his Friends to such men, whom he is bound
by so many grand Ties to protect.

But this, Sir, I shall commit to you to determine; and if you return me a
Negative, I shall not presume to question either your Reason or Honesty. Nor
shall I persuade the Kings Friends that they should banish themselves, unless
it were to do that great favor to the two Houses of Westminster, as to keep
them from some future inhumane Act of Oppression and Blood, because they shall
have none left to Act them on.

2. For the business of the Church, which he again divides into two parts.

1. That of Episcopacy. 2. That of Sacrilege.
In those, Sir, I shall speak with less Hesitation, and clearly tell you the
Epistler is quite out; And though you know me a great honourer of your
Profession, yet I cannot hold it fit for you to decide cases of Conscience, or
in humane Actions to tell us, what is sin, or not sin: And I am confident, Sir,
you will not take this ill at my hands.

1. For Episcopacy, his words are, if I mistake not (and if I do, I pray you
inform me) The Opinion, that the Government by Bishops is Jure Divino, has but
lately been Countenanced in the Church of England, and that but by some few of
the more Lordly Clergy. These last words makes me suspect some passion in the
writer, as being in scorn heretofore taken up by men, who for a long time were
Schismatics in Heart, and are now Rebels in their Actions. And since the Laws
of the Land makes some Churchmen Lords, I do the more marvel, that the
Epistler, who seems so Zealous for the Laws, should be angry at that. So that
though his profession be that he has undergone labors and hazards for the
Episcopal Government; Yet truly Sir, I must think that it is then only fit for
the Church to give him thanks, when she has done all her other business.

But grant the Tenent to be but of late countenanced, it thence follows not,
that it is any whit the less true: For in respect of the many hundred years of
abuse, the Reformation was but lately countenanced, and yet I take it for an
unquestionable truth, that the Laity ought to have the Cup; And though I was
not desired to reform the Epistlers Errors, yet in charity I shall tell him he
is out, when he affirms, that this opinion was but of late countenanced in the
Church, as I could show out of Archbishop Whitgift, by Bishop Bilson, and
diverse others. And since perhaps he might think these to be men of the more
Lordly Clergy, I shall name one more who may stand for many, and who wrote
forty years since, that most excellent man Mr. Hooker (a Person of incomparable
learning, and of as much modesty, who, I dare be bold to say, never once
dreamed of a Rochet) he avers in clear terms. There are at this day in the
Church of England, no other than the same degrees of Ecclesiastical Order;
Namely Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, who had their beginning from Christ and
his Blessed Apostles themselves; or as he expounds himself, Bishops and
Presbyters are, and by Christ himself in the Apostles, and Seventy, and then
Deacons by the Apostles. I may add Bucer too (no man I am sure of the Lordly
Clergy) who though he was not English born, yet he was Professor here in King
Edwards time, and wrote, and dyed in this Kingdom. Bishops (says he) are ex
perpetua Ecclesiarum ordinatione ab ipsis jam Apostolis; and more, visum est
Spiritui sancto; and surely, if Bishops be from the Apostles, and from the holy
Spirit himself, they are by Divine Ordination. Nay, what think you, if this
Tenent be approved by a plain Act of Parliament? I hope then it wants no
Countenancer England can give it, and it needs not fly for shelter under the
wings of the Lordly Clergy. You have these words in the Books of Consecration
of Archbishops and Bishops, which is confirmed by Parliament: It is evident to
all men reading holy Scripture and Ancient Authors, that from the Apostles
time, there have been these orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons. And again, the prayer in the form of Consecrating Bishops
-- Almighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy holy Spirit have
appointed diverse Orders of Ministers in thy Church; Mercifully behold this thy
Servant now called to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop.

And in the Question to the Person to be consecrated Bishop, Are you persuaded
you be called truly to this Ministration, according to the will of the Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. I beseech you Sir, consider, whether these words, or the
Prayer, could fall from any man not possessed with this Tenent, that Episcopacy
is of Divine Right: For if the three Orders may be found by reading Scripture,
together with ancient Authors; if men are taught to pray, That God by his
Spirit has appointed diverse Orders in his Church, and this made the ground of
praying for the present Bishop; If the Person to be consecrated must profess,
that he is called according to the Will of our Lord Jesus Christ: either all
this must be nothing but pure pageantry, and then the Parliament mocked God by
their Confirmation; or else Episcopacy is grounded on Scripture, is appointed
by the Spirit of God, is according to the Will of our Lord Jesus, and all this
has not been said of late, and countenanced only by some, etc. And we have the
less reason to doubt, that this Tenent was countenanced in this Church of ours,
because we find it desired in those parts that have lost Episcopacy. For we are
told by Doctor Charelton (after Bishop of Chichester, one that writ against the
Arminians) more than twenty-five years since, That sitting at Dort, he there
protested in open Synod, that Christ ordained no Parity, but made twelve
Apostles the Chief; so under them the Seventy Disciples, then Bishops succeeded
the Twelve, and Presbyters the Seventy Disciples. He affirmed this order had
still been maintained in the Church, and then challenged the Judgment of any
learned man that could speak to the Contrary: Their answer was silence, which
was approbation enough. But after (says he) discoursing with diverse of the
best learned of the Synod, He told them how necessary Bishops were to suppress
the then rising Schisms. Their answers were, That they did Honor and much
Reverence that good Order and Discipline of the Church of England, and with all
their hearts would be glad to have it established amongst them, but that could
not be hoped for in their Estate; their hope was, that seeing they could not be
what they desired, God would be merciful to them that did what they could. If
they hoped for mercy to pardon what they did, sure they must suppose that what
they did was sinful; nay, they thought their necessity it self could not
totally excuse that sin; for then in that particular there had been no need of
mercy. Nor could they well think otherwise, for being pressed, they denied not
but that Episcopacy was of Christ's own Institution, and yet they were not
Lordly Clergy. Nor do I well see how either by charitable or civil men, they
can at all be taxed either for want of Reason or Honesty.

But this Londoner goes on, and proves this Tenent, could not be here
countenanced; for we always allowed the Protestants of Germany, the Low
Countries, etc. part of the Reformed Catholick-Church, though they had no
Bishops.

The Reformed Catholic Protestant-Church, a pretty expression, just like that
so well known, the Roman Catholic Church, which we were wont to call a Popish
Solecisme, an Universal particular. But we will forgive him this Slip: Suppose
his Sense be well worded, yet he has as ill luck in his Argument as his
Expression. For though we do maintain, that Episcopacy is of Divine Right ( i.
e.) of divine Institution; does it then follow, That Germany and the Low
Countries are no Protestant Churches, or no part of the Catholic Church. I
could almost believe, that the Author of this Letter writ from London indeed,
for sure Oxford makes no such Arguments. No, it must be a Crime of most horrid
Nature, that makes a Church run in non Ecclesiam: For though that of the Jews
was bad, Idolatrically bad; yet God seriously professes, He had sent Her no
Bill of Divorce. Nay, no Learned Man of Judgment durst ever yet affirm, That
the Romaen Church her self; was become no true part of the Church- Catholic;
and yet She breaks a flat Precept of Christ's; Drink ye all of this. And shall
we be thought to deny the same right unto Christians without Bishops, when they
brake but Christ's Institutions? No! Churches they are, true parts of the
Catholic Church, but in point of Ordination and Apostolical Government they
are not: And to affirm this, will (I hope) he thought (I am assured by Learned
Men) neither irrational nor unhonest.

He goes on -- I am certain the King would never have have way for Extirpation
of Bishops in Scotland, had he conceived them to be Jure Divino. Grant it were
so; yet of all mankind, are Kings only bound that they must not change their
opinions? or if perhaps they have done ill, must they for their Repentance be
far more reproached than Subjects for their Crimes?

The King would not have given way to Presbyterians and Independents to
exercise Religion here in their own way (as by his late Engagement) when such a
Toleration in the face of a divine Law must needs be sinful. There is a great
mistake in this Argument; for, to Tolerate, does not at all signify either to
approve or commend Factions; neither of which the King could at all do to gross
Schismatiques without sin: But it merely implies not to punish, which Kings may
forbear upon just reason of State, as David forbear the punishing of Ioabs
Murder (I say, in Person he forbear, though he bequeathed it to his Son): And
we our selves in our English State, have no punishment for all kind of liars,
and yet their sin is against a flat Law divine; and we should not be still
vexed with so much Poetical-News, had we Sanction made that might prohibit and
punish them. And now Sir, I conceive, you think that what the Londoner has
said, in this point, amounts to just nothing; yet, since you would needs enjoin
me, to acquaint you with the state and grounds of the Tenent he is pleased to
deride, I shall readily obey you; For truly Sir, I have ever held you a
Gentleman of a pious Inclination, and am confident you will welcome Truth for
his sake who is Truth, though it should cross both your gain and peace. Indeed,
this Tenent of Divine right of Episcopacy has been long since, and of late
much years opposed; as on the one side by the Pope and his party in the Council
of Trent, and after that by some warmer Jesuits; so on the other side by
Schismatiques and Sectaries, that call themselves of the Reformation. And I
remember You and I were often wont to say, that commonly the truth (our English
Churches Tenants) lay in the midst between those, and did seem the more
Christian, because they were Crucified often between two such kind of Thieves. We
affirm then, Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, ( i. e.) of Divine Institution,
and that must needs imply a Divine Precept too; for to what end are things
instituted by God, but that it is presumed it is our part to use them? To what
end should some men be appointed to teach and to govern, but that it is clearly
employed there are other men too, who ought both to hear and obey them? He that
erects a Bridge over a broad swelling Stream, needs not (you will think) add
any express command, that men should not hazard drowning by going into the
water. Thus when our Blessed Savior made his Institution of that great
Sacrament the Eucharist, he gave command indeed concerning the Bread, Do this
in remembrance, etc. And concerning the Cup, Drink ye all of this; but he gave
no express command to do both these together, and yet his Institution has been
ever held to have the Nature of a Command: and so for One Thousand Years the
whole Christian Church did ever practice it, save only in some few cases, in
which men supposed a kind of necessity. I say then, Episcopacy is of Divine
Right, Instituted by Christ in his Apostles; who, since they took upon them to
Ordain and Govern Churches, you need not doubt they received from their Master
an Authority to do both; for sure men will not think they will break their own
Rules: No man takes this upon him, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron.

Episcopacy then was Instituted in the Apostles, who were Bishops, and aliquid
amplius, and distinguished by Christ himself from the Seventy, who were the
Presbyters, so the most ancient Fathers generally: Or, if you will take St.
Ieroms opinion (who neither was a Bishop, nor in his angry mood any good friend
to that order) they were Instituted by the Apostles, who being Episcopi and
Amplius did in the latter time formalize, and bound out that Power which we do
still call Episcopacy, and so these received opinions may well stand together;
for Episcopatus being in Apostulatu, tanquam Consulatus in Dictatura, as the
latter and Subordinate Power is always in the greater; we may truly say, it
was instituted by Christ in his Apostles, who had Episcopal Power and more, and
then formalized, and bounded by the Apostles themselves, in the Persons of
Timothy, Titus, and others; so that call the Episcopal Order either of Divine
Right or Apostolical Institution, and I shall not at all quarrel with it, for
Apostolical (I hope) will seem Divine enough to Christians: I am sure Claudius
Salmasius thinks so (a sharp Enemy to the Episcopal Order) If (says he) it be
from the Apostles, it is of Divine Right. Thus we find the Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction, to be given to those men alone, for then that Power is
properly Episcopal, when one man alone may execute it. So St. Paul to Timothy,
Lay hands, etc. in the singular Number, Against an Elder receive not an
accusation under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19. And then the Text is
plain, he and he alone might do it. So to Titus, For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou (and thou alone) should set in order the things that are
wanting, and Ordain Elders in every City. Where plainly these two Powers are
given to one Man of Government and Ordination, so St. John to the Seven
Churches of Asia, Rev. 14. where he presumes all the Governing Power to reside
in the Angels of those Churches, and in them alone, as all the Ancients
understand it. And hence it is plain that though we should yield, that the
Apostles only did institute Bishops; Yet in this Revelation Christ himself
immediately in his own Person, and the Holy Spirit withal did both Approve and
Confirm them: And the Bishops of those Sees are called Angels by St. John who
was born a Jew, because in Palestine their Chief Priests were there called
their Angels, and so this Appellation was taken up by the Apostle in that
place, because those were the Chief of those Churches. This truth appears not
only from clear Texts, but from the Universal Consent and Practice of more
than One thousand five hundred Years space of all the Christian Churches; So
that neither St. Ierom nor any other Ancient did either hold Orders lawfully
given, which were not given by a Bishop, nor any Church-Jurisdiction to be
lawfully Administered, which was not either done by their hands, or (at least)
by their Deputation. I know there are men lately risen up especially in the
last Century, who have collected and spread abroad far other Conclusions, and
that from the Authority of Text it self: But as it is a Maxim in Humane Laws,
Consuetudo optima legum interpres; So no rational man but will easily yield, it
as well holds in Laws Divine. For I would gladly ask, what better way there
can be for interpreting Texts, than that very same means whereby I know Text to
be Text, to wit, The Consent of the Church. Shall I believe, and yet disbelieve
that self-same Consent, which is the best ground of my belief? This is as
'twere to say, that I believe such a tale for the Authors sake, who has told
it, and yet now I do hold the self-same man to be a Liar. Men do believe the
Testimony of Universal Consent, in the sense it gives of Singular terms, and
why not in the sense it gives of Sentences and Propositions? Without the help
of this Consent (which indeed is the ground of our Dictionaries) how shall we
know that (...) signifies the Resurrection of the Body, which the Socinians at
this day deny? And I know no such way to confute their Error as by the
Authority of this Consent. Admit then of that Rule that Consent Universal is
the best interpreter of the Text, and then I am sure, that it is as clear as
true, that Episcopacy is of Divine or Apostolical Right. And that Proposition,
There can be no Ordination without the hands of a Bishop, will clearly appear
to be as well grounded as this. There can be no Baptism without a Lawful
Minister, which yet is good Divinity amongst our new Masters in Scotland, and
antiquity allowed it, Extra casum necessitatis; For I ask upon what Text do
they ground this Rule? I suppose they will say upon our Saviors Words, Go
teach all Nations and Baptize them; but in the Institution of the Eucharist, he
spoke those words too, but only to the Twelve, Drink, etc. Mat. 26. I demand
then, how shall we know that when our Savior spoke those words to the Eleven,
he spoke them only as to Lawful Ministers, but when he spoke the other to the
Twelve, he spoke them at large as to them that did represent all Christian men?
So that though only Ministers may Baptize, yet all Christians may receive the
Cup? Perhaps theyl say, that this general receiving the Cup is manifest from
the 1 Cor. 11. (and I think so too) where St. Paul seems to chide the whole
Church for their irreverence at the Sacrament: But if a quarreller should
reply, that he there speaks but of the Presbitery only, whereof many were at
that time at Corinth, as when in Chap. 5. he seems to chide the whole Church
for not Excommunicating the Incestuous Person; yet it is plain, that he means
none but the men in Government (as sure all Presbyterians will allow me.) I
know not what could be said, but to make it appear out of the Fathers and
others, that the whole Christian Church never took the words in that sense. And
if to stop the mouth of the contentious, we must be constrained to quote the
Authority of Universal Consent, and of the common practice of Christ's Church,
then you will easily see, that those two Propositions named, do stand fast on the
same bottom. There can be no Baptism without a lawful Minister extra casum
necessitatis, for so the Practice and Consent of Universal Church have still
interpreted that Text. And again, it is true there can be no Ordination without
the hands of a Bishop, for so those Texts out of Timothy and Titus have been
understood and practiced for One thousand five hundred Years together, by the
Consent of the whole Church of Christ.

It Is true that this precept of Christ, Go ye, teach all Nations, and baptize
them, runs not in exclusive words, ye Apostles, or ye lawful Ministers, and
none else; yet extra casum necessitatis, none was allowed but a lawful
Minister: so that though those commands, Lay hands suddenly on no Man, and do
thou Ordain Elders in every City, run not in Verbis exclusivis, thou and none
but thou, or men of thine Order only, yet the Church understanding, and
Preaching them in an exclusive sense, no man for One thousand and five hundred
Years in any settled Church, was held rightly Ordained without, the hands of a
Bishop.

Nay, that there is something Divine in the Episcopal Order, will appear
clearly by this; That immediately from the times of Christ and his Apostles,
yea within the reach of those times, it was Universally spread throughout the
whole Church; so that no man can name a Nation, that was once converted to the
Christian Faith, but he shall soon find there were Bishops. So that there must
needs have been an Universal Cause for an Effect that was so Universal. General
Council there was none about it, at which all Christians might have met, and
might thence have obeyed their directions: Nor can any name a Power to which
all Christians would submit (for they were soon fallen into factions) but
either the Authority of Christ or his Apostles; from them then must needs flow
the Episcopal Order, and at that Fountain I shall leave it: I say within the
reach of the Apostles times, for before St. John dyed, there are upon good
Church Records above Twenty-eight Bishops appointed to their several Sees, as
at Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, Ephesus, Crete, Athens, Colosse, and
diverse others, a Catalogue whereof I shall be ready to attend you with, when
you shall be pleased to command it.

And hence it will be plain, how great a Corruption, nay how flat a sin is
brought into Christ's Church, when Episcopacy is thrown down, and so where
Ordination is performed by any hands without theirs, it is as gross as if the
Laymen should be allowed to baptize where a Presbyter stands by. Nay more, it is
as bad, as if the Order of Presbytery should be thrown down, that Laymen might
Baptize. What is this but wilfully to run into necessity, which may thence
create an Apology? It Is a Corruption far worse, than if a Church should
audaciously attempt to put down the Lords day, since the Observation of that
time is neither built on so clear a Text, nor on the help of so Universal
consent as is the Order of Episcopacy. So that if men can think it sinful to
part with the Lords day, though the Institution of it be merely Apostolical;
they must needs confess, that there is at least as much sin (nay indeed more)
in parting with their Bishops: And then the Oxford Doctrine he abuses, and
talks of as Transmitted for Orthodox Truth, will (it seems) prove no less in
earnest.

Secondly, For the point of Sacrilege; and the better to clear this, I must
premise these directions.

1. That God accepts of things given Him, and so holds a Propriety as well in
the New as Old Testament.

2. That God gets that Propriety in those things He holds, as well by an
Acceptance of what is voluntarily given, as by a Command that such things
should be presented unto Him.

3. To invade those things, be they moveable or unmovable, is expressly the Sin
of Sacrilege.

4. That this Sin is not only against Gods positive, but plainly against the
Moral-Law.

For the First, I quote this Text, I hangred, and ye gave me Meat, I thirsted,
etc. Mat. 25. If Christ do not Accept of these things, He might say indeed,
That you offered Me Meat; but He cannot say, that you gave it, for a Present,
is then only to be called a Gift, when it is Accepted as his own that takes it.
And does He thus accept of Meat and Clothing, and does he not accept of those
kind of Endowments, that bring both those to Perpetuity? Will He take Meat, and
refuse Revenues? Does He like (can you imagine) to be Fed and Clothed to day,
and in danger to be Starved to morrow? The Men thus provided for, He calls no
less than His Brethren, In as much as you have done it, etc. Whether those were
of those Brethren which He enjoined to Teach others, or of those He would have
instructed, the Text then does not decide: Without doubt it must be meant of
both, for 'twere a strange thing to Affirm, That Christ likes it extreme well,
to be Fed and Clothed in all those He calls His, but only in the Twelve and
Seventy. But to put it out of doubt, That what is done to these, is done to Him
too, His own words are very clear, He that receives you, receives Me (you
Teaching Disciples) in the work of the Gospel, when He sends them forth to
Preach; and that Reception implys all such kind of Provision, as is apparent
throughout the whole Tenor of that Chapter. And again, I quote that so well
known passage of Ananias, and Saphira his Wife, Acts 5. His Sin was, he kept
part of the Price of those Lands he had given to God, for the public use of
Christ's Church; they were given to God, and it is as plain God did accept them.
For St. Peter (you know) thus reproves him, why have thou Lied, or why have
thou deceived the Holy Ghost? For so (...) does properly import; why do thou
so cheat him of what is now his proper Right? And again, Thou have not Lied
unto Men, but unto God, ver. 4. And is this so strange a thing? Are our Lies to
be accounted Sins before God? Yes, All against God, as a Witness and a Judge,
but not all as a Party: And so this is a more remarkable, a more signal Lie.
Thou have not Lied to Man, a Negative of Comparison, not so much to Man, as to
God; what is done to them is scarce worth the naming: But thou have Lied to God
as a Witness, and a Judge, and a Party too: Thou have Lied, and robbed God by
Lying, and so run thy self into a most horrible Sin, and it shall appear in
God's judgment: So the Fathers generally expound the place, both of the Greek
and Latin Church; and affirm, his Crime was a robbing of God of that Wealth,
which by Vow or Promise was now become God's Propriety; so the modern
interpreters; so Calvin, Sacrum esse Deo profitebatur; and Beza, Praedium Dco
consecrassent; and he that will not believe so universal Consent in the
Interpreting of a place of Scripture, should do well to consider, whether on
the same Ground (as I told you before) he may not be brought to doubt of his
Dictionary (for that is but universal Consent) he may as well almost doubt,
whether (...) signify God, and altogether as well, whether (...) signify the
Gospel.

The New Testament will afford more places for that purpose, Romans 2. 22. Thou
that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? It Is true, these words are
spoken, as to the Person of an unconverted Jew; and may be therefore thought to
Aim only at those Sins which were against the Law of Moses: But do but view St.
Paul's way of Arguing, and you shall find quickly they come home to us too. He
there tells the Jew, that he Taught others those things which yet he would not
do himself; and he strives to make this good, by three several Instances:
First, Thou that Preachest a Man should not steal, do thou steal? Secondly,
Not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? In both which, it is plain, that
the Jew he dealt with, did the same thing he reprehended; and straitway the
Third comes, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? So that
hence will follow (if St. Paul's words have any Logic in them) that these two
Sins are of the self-same nature too; and that to commit Sacrilege, is a
breach of the same Law as to commit Idolatry: So that this Crime will appear
without all doubt, a plain Robbing of God. For he that Steals from Men, yea,
though a whole Community of Men; yet he Sins but against his Neighbor, it is
but an offense against the second Table of the Law: But Sacrilege lays hold
on those things which the Latin Laws call Bona nullius, it strikes down right
immediately at God; and in that regard no Idolatry can can do it; it is a breach
of the first Table of the Law; and both these Crimes are equally built on the
self-same contempt of God. The Offender in both kinds, the Idolater, and the
Sacrilegious Person both think meanly of Him. The first conceives He will
Patiently look on, while His Honor is shared to an Idol; the other imagines He
will be as unconcerned, though His Goods be stolen to His Face. This was,
without doubt, the Sense of all the ancient Church; for upon what Grounds could
they profess they gave Gifts to God, but only that they presumed, That God was
pleased to Accept them. So says Irenaeus, We offer unto God our Goods, in
token of Thankfulness. So Origin, By Gifts to God, we acknowledge him Lord of
All. So the Fathers generally: So Emperors and Kings: So CHARLES the Great, To
God we offer, which we deliver to his Church, in his well known Capitulary; and
our own Kings have still spoken in this good Old Christian Language; We have
Granted to God, for us, and our Heirs for ever, that the Church of England
shall be free, and have Her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable: They are the
first words of our Magna Charta; Her whole Rights and Liberties; words of a
very large Extent, that imply far more than Her Substance, and yet these, and
all these Lands, Honors, and Jurisdictions, all these have been given to God;
yea, and frequently confirmed by the public Acts of this Kingdom. And if
Ananias might thus promise, and yet Rob God; I beseech you Sir consider,
whether England may not do so too.

For the Second, it is plain in the Text, That God did as much take the Temple
to be His, as He did the Jews Tithes and Offerings; these last indeed were His
by special and express Law and Command, 2 Samuel 7. but the Temple was the
voluntary design of King David, and the voluntary work of King Solomon. Nay,
God expressly tells David, That He had been so far from Commanding that House,
that He had not so much as asked this Service. And therefore St. Paul, in his
Apology, tells the Jews, Neither against the Laws of the Jews, nor against the
Temple, have I offended any thing, Act. 25. 8

For he might in some cause offend against the Temple, and yet not against the
Law: Notwithstanding God pleads as much for his Temple in the Prophet Haggai,
as he does in Malachi, for his Tithes and Offerings. In this, his words are --
Ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings. M. I. 3. 8.
In the other -- Is it time for you, Hagg. 1 4. and 6. Mat. 25.
O ye, to dwell in cieled houses, and this house lie waste? Therefore ye have
sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough. And to affirm
in the New Testament, that God does accept of meat, drink, and clothing as is
plain; of money, for which the Land was sold, as in the case of Ananias: And
yet he does not accept of Land it self, is so contrary to all reason, so
contrary to the practice not only of the Christian, but of the Heathen world;
so contrary to what God himself has expressed in the Old Testament, and no
where recalled in the New; that he which can quiet Conscience with such
Conceits as these, may (I doubt not) attain to the discovery of some Evasions,
which, in his Conceit, may palliate Murder or Adultery; or to think those
Possessions are indeed Gods which he commands, but not those which he accepts,
is to use God so, as we would neither use our selves, nor our Neighbors: For
no Man doubts, but that is as properly mine which I accept, as what I attain to
by my own personal Acquisition, be it by a just way, by Study, by Merchandise,
etc.

For the Third: Sacrilege is then committed, (say the Schools and Casuists,
and they speak in their own Profession) Quando reverentia rei Sacrae debita
violatur; Aquin. 22. Acts 1.
when we violate the Reverence due to a thing Sacred, by turning it into a
thing Profane, so that this Violation may be committed either per furtum,
strictly so taken, by stealing a thing moveable; or, per plagium, by stealing
of a Man; or, per invasionem, by spoiling Men of Lands or things immovable:
For as any one of these done against our Neighbor, is, no doubt, in Scripture
phrase Theft, a Sin against the Eighth Precept; so done against God, it is no
doubt a Sacrilege, and a breach of the Table, be it against the First or
Second Commandment, I stand not now to dispute. Thus the word in the New
Testament to express this Sin, is (...), from (...), praeda, or spolium so that
Sacrilege is not only to be defined by Stealth strictly taken, but it is a
depredation, a spoliation of Things consecrated; and so the word extends it
self as properly (it not more) to Lands, as to Things moveable. And hence
Aquinas is plain, That Sacrilege reaches out its proper sense -- Ad ea quae
deputata sunt ad sustentationem ministrorum, sive mobilia, sive immobilia: For
'twould be very strange to affirm, That in the sacking of Jerusalem,
Nebuchadnezzar was sacrilegious, when he transported the holy Vessels; but not
at all, when he burnt the Temple.

For the Fourth: Common Reason has taught all, even the Pagan Nations, to hold
Sacrilege a Sin; so that Lactantius observes, (and he was well read in humane
Learning) and therefore chosen Tutor to a Son of Constantine the Great: In omni
Religione nihil tale sine vindicta; God will remarkably revenge this Sin, not
only in the true, but amongst Men of the most false Religions. And 'twere easy
to show, That no Nation did ever yet adore a God, but they thought he did
accept them, and possess himself of some substance; I omit those Proofs that
would be thought too tedious, it is enough to quote the Prophet's words which he
speaks to the Jews. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me, Malachi 3. 8. A
Man, any man, though an Amorite, or a mere Philistine, a Pagan, (that must be
the sense) will not do that to his god, which you Jews do to Me: For the Law
written in his heart, (and he can go by no other) that Law controlleth this
Offense, and so plainly tells him, that because his God may be robbed, or
despoiled, he may therefore have a Property. And if Sacrilege be a Sin against
the Law Moral, 'twill follow, That what we read in the Old Testament against
that Sin, must be as Moral (and that whereby we Christians are as much obliged)
as what we read against Theft or Adultery: save only these passages which are
peculiarly proper unto the policy of the Jews, and we may let them go for
Judicial.

These Directions premised, I return to this Epistler, who conceives it no
Sacrilege to take away Church Lands.

-- Nor do I ( says he) ground my Opinion barely upon the frequent practice of
former Times not only upon Acts of Parliament, (in the Times of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, if you have not forgotten the exchange
of Durham-house, as well as Hen. 8.) but even by the Bishops themselves, etc.

He will not ground his Opinion upon bare practice, and indeed he has little
reason for it; for if from a frequent practice of sin, we might conclude it
were no sin, we might take our leaves of the Decalogue and (as our New Masters
do) put it out of our Directory, because our intent is to sin it down. And
therefore I shall say no more of such Laws of Hen. 8. than I would of David's
Adultery, that it is no ground at all to make Men bold with other Men's Wives.
Queen Elizabeth made a Law, (so you have told me, Sir for I speak nothing in
this kind but from you) That Bishops might not alienate their Castles, Manors,
etc. but only to the Crown: But if she sometimes took order that Churchmen
should not be Bishops, till they had first made such Alienations, (as I have
often heard you say she did) I know not how to defend it, but must withal tell
you, That if Prince or Subjects resolve to sell the Church Preferments, it is
great odds but in a Clergy consisting of Ten thousand Persons, they shall have
Chapmen for them. For King James, I must highly commend that most Christian
Prince, you say amongst his first Laws took away that of Queen Elizabeth. Nor
can I well tell when this Epistler does quote King Charles for this purpose,
unless it were only for the Alienation of York-house; but I must inform him
that that Act was lawful, because it was for the advantage of that
Archiepiscopal See, there being clear Text for it, that the Levites themselves
might change that which was theirs by Divine Law, so they gained by
Permutation; and this Answer will serve for what King Charles did about
Durham-house.

But he thinks it an Argument -- That by the Bishops themselves, Deans and
Chapters, such things were done, Alienations were made, long Leases were
granted.

True, Sir, for these Clergymen were but Men, and their sins can no more
abrogate Law, than can the Sins of the Layety; yet I could name you Churchmen
of great Note, who totally refused to be preferred by that Queen to any
Bishopric at all, because they would by no means submit their Conscience to
the base Act of such Alienations, and one of them was Bishop Andrews. I could
tell you too, that those long Leases he speaks of, had one cause more than the
Marriage of the Clergy; for when they saw a Stool of Wickedness set up, of
sacrilegious Wickedness, that imagined Mischief by a Law; some, not the most
Men, thought it fit to make those long Leases, that the Estate of the Church
might appear more poor, and so the less subject unto Harpies, and then their
hope was, that at the length (at least after many Years spent) it might return
whole unto the Successors.

He goes on -- But to deal clearly with you, Sir, I do not understand how there
can be any Sacrilege, (properly so called) which is not a Theft, and more,
viz. a Theft of something dedicated to Holy Use, (a Communion Cup, for
instance, or the like) and Theft, you know, must be of things moveable, even by
the Civil Law; and how Theft can be of Lands or Sacrilege by alienating
Church Lands, I pray ask your Friend Holborne, and his Fellow-Lawyers, for ours
here deride us for the Question? --

It seems they are very merry at London, or at least this Epistler thinks so;
for being Winners, he might perhaps conceive they make themselves pleasant with
a Feather; and that this Argument is as light a thing, appeared before by my 3d
Answer. For can any man think (in earnest) that it is Sacrilege (and so a Sin)
to take away a Cup from a Church, but it is none to take away a Manor? As if
Ahab had been indeed a Thief, had he robbed Naboth of his Grapes? But Elijah
was too harsh when he talked to that good King, because he only took away his
Vineyards. Indeed there is such a Nicety in the Civil Law, that Actio Facti
lies only against him that has stolen Rem Mobilem; for Justinian (it seems) in
the Composition of his Digests, (which he took from the writing of the old
Iuris Prudentis) thought it fit to follow Vlpian's judgment; and yet Sabinus in
his Book de Furtis, (a Man of Note amongst those Men) was known to be of
another Opinion -- Non tantum rerum moventium. Gell. l. 11. l. ult.
Sed fundi and aedium fieri Furtum. I would gladly know of this Epistler,
whether he thinks all Men, both Divines and others, bound to frame all the
Phrases of their Speech, according to the Criticisms of the Civil Law, as it is
now put out by Justinian? If not, why may not some use the word Furtum in
Sabinus's sense, as well as others may in Vlpian's, and then Sacrilege may be
properly a Theft, and as properly in immoveables; or if we must needs speak in
your sense whom Justinian has approved, I do not well see how a Man can spoil
the Church of her Lands, and at the Civil Law 'scape an Action of Theft; for it
lies against him that takes the Trees, F. l. v. 1.
Fruits, and Stones. And I am confident there is no Church-Robber, but he
intends to make use of those kind of Movables; otherwise, what good will his
Church-Land do him? And if he make this use, a Thief he is in the Civil Law
Phrase; and then in the sense of this Epistler himself, he is without doubt a
sacrilegious Person.

But where (I wonder) did the Londoner learn that Furtum stricte Sumptum, was
that genus of Sacrilege? So that where there is no Theft in the Civil Law
sense, there is none of this kind of Sin. I am sure it is neither intimated by
the Greek, nor Latin word, nor (I believe) delivered by any learned Author on
this Subject: So that I must set down an Assertion, and (I conceive well
grounded too) point blank against this Londoner, and affirm there may be a
Sacrilege properly so called, whch is not a Theft in the Civil Law sense;
which has been proved in the 3d Affertion, and need not trouble Sir R.
Holborne, (that learned Gentleman may have other business) nor his
Fellow-Lawyers: For I doubt not there are enough besides who will here smile at
this passage, and will think that this Epistler has met with a Civil Law
Quirk, which he knew not well how to wield: But, to say truth, he deals clearly
with the Doctor, and tells him, that for his particular, he does not yet
understand, which for my part I do believe, and do only wonder, that he would
laugh at another, in a Point he could no better satisfy him in.

He goes on -- The hyre of a Labourer at most as sitting maintenance, is all
that can be challenged.

But the Maintenance must be honorable, or else we Christians, use God like no
other Men, far worse, I am sure, than do Pagans. And when such a Maintenance
has been once given in Lands, the Acceptance of it will soon make the Gift
immovable; so that it signifies little, to say the Apostle had no Lands, for
they who had the Money for Lands sold, might (no Man will doubt) have still
kept the Lands, had they liked them: But the Church being in Her Persecution,
the Disciples were to fly, and Lands, we know, are no movables. And 'twere
very strange, if not ridiculous, to affirm, that Ananias and his Wife sinned,
in taking back what they had promised; but if in Specie they had given those
Lands, they might have revoked that Gift without Sacrilege.

He proceeds -- Which I mention, to avoid the groundless Arguments upon the
Lands and Portions allotted to the Tribe of Levi by God's appointment, to whom
our Ministers have no Succession.

Our Ministers challenge nothing which belonged to the Tribe by Levitical
Right, but where things are once given to God for the use of his Ministers,
they there get a moral interest; and what we read of this kind in the Old
Testament, does as much oblige Christians, as if it were in the New.

And then 'twill follow, that they enjoy your Lands by the same Law of the
State as others do, and must be subject to that Law which alone gives strength
to their Title. Out toto Coelo! Have Churchmen no Title to those Possessions
they enjoy, but by the Law of this Land alone? Yes, besides these, they have
Christ's Acceptance, and so they are become theirs by Law Evangelical; their
Lands are God's own Propriety, and so they hold them from him by the Law moral
too. And therefore though by the new Constitution of the Laws of the Land, they
hold Estates in Fee simply, and so may alienate, without punishment from the
Law of England; yet they cannot do it without guilt of Sin, as being a breach
of the Law Evangelical and Moral, except then only when they better themselves
by some gainful, at least not hurtful Permutation. Besides, were this Argument
good, it would only follow, that the Clergy by their own, yet might alienate
their Lands, but none else without their consent. And I conceive it would not
now prove so easy a task to bring Churchmen to such an Alienation: But the
Parliament may do it.

-- For ( says he) I am sure it will be granted, that (by the Laws of this
Nation) whosoever has Lands or Goods, has them with this unseparable
condition of limitation, ( viz.) that the Parliament may dispose of them, or
any part of them, at their pleasure.

This you have told me, Sir, is strange Doctrine: For neither the Parliament (I
hope he means the King in Parliament) does this, as being the Supreme Power, or
as being Representative, and so including the consent of the whole People of
England. If as being the Supreme Power, it will follow that any absolute Prince
may as lawfully do the like; and yet this has ever been held Tyrannical in the
Great Turk, as being against the Rules of all Justice and Humanity. Indeed
Samuel tells the Israelites, That since they would needs change their
Theocracy, the immediate Government of God himself, though it were into a
Monarchy, the best of all humane Governments. Their Kings should take your
Sons, and your Daughters, their Fields and their Vineyards, etc. and they shall
cry, and find no help. Yet the best Divines think this would be most sinful and
most unjust in those Kings, and expressly against the Law of Moses, who grants
to every Man his Propriety: only the Prophet avers it should not be punishable
in him, they should have no remedy, since being the Supreme Power, it was in no
Subjects hands to judge him. So if the Kings in Parliament should take away the
Church Lands, there is (I confess) no resistance to be made, though the Act
were inhumanely sinful: or else the Parliament does this, as representing the
whole People, so including their consent: (For they who do consent, can receive
no injury.) And then I understand not which way it can now at all touch the
Clergy, who are neither to be there by themselves, nor yet (God knows) by
Representation. Or if again they were there, I would gladly know what Burgess,
or what Knight of a Shire, nay, what Clerk or Bishop do represent Christ,
(whose Lands these are) and by virtue of what Deputation? Or do I believe that
any Subject intends to give that Power to him that represents him in
Parliament, as to destroy his whole Estate, except then only when the known
Laws of the Land make him liable to so high a Censure?

But grant this Doctrine were true in Men's Lands, yet sure it will not hold in
Gods: For since in Magna Charta (that has received by Parliament at least
Thirty Confirmations) the Lands we now speak of are given to God, and promise
there made, that the Church, Her whole Right and Liberties should be held
inviolable. Surely the Kingdom must keep what she has thus promised to God,
and must not now think to tell Him of implied Conditions or Limitations. For
'twere a strange scorn put upon Him, that Men should make this grand promise to
their Maker, and then tell Him, after so many hundred years, that their meaning
was, to take it back at their pleasure. I believe there is no good Pagan that
will not blush at this dealing, and conclude, That if Christians may thus use
their God, without doubt he is no God at all.

Hence it is ( says he) they sometimes dispose some part in Subsidies, and
other Taxes, the Parliament disposes part of Men's Estate in Subsidy, and
without their consent, Ergo it may dispose of all the Church Lands, though the
Churchmen themselves should in downright terms contradict it.

Surely, Sir, this Account is neither worth an Answer, nor a Smile: For I am
sure you have often told me, That the Parliament in Justice can destroy no Man's
Estate, though private; or if upon necessity it may need this or that Man's
Lands for some Public Use, yet the Court is bound in Justice to make that Man
amends. Subsidies, you say, were imposed Salvo contenento; so that a Duke may
still live like a Duke, and a Gentleman like a Gentleman. Is It not so with the
Clergy too? By your own consent indeed, and not otherwise, they are often
imposed, and paid by them; but if they are burdens, which they may bear Salvo
contenento, they are paid not out of God's Propriety, by alienating his Lands,
but out of the Vsus Fructus they received from God, and so the Name does go on
to their Successors. So that to infer from any of these Usages, that the Lands
of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, may be wholly alienated from the Church, is an
Inference that will prevail with none but those, who being led by strong
passions that it should be so, make very little use of the Reason.

He proceeds -- Now hence comes the mistake, by reason there is not such an
express Condition or Limitation in the Deed of Donation, (which should silence
all dispute) wherein it is as clear as truth, that where any thing is
necessarily by Law implied, it is as much as if in plain terms expressed, etc.

No marvel if such Conditions be not expressed in Benefactors Deeds of
Donation, because it will make such pious Deeds most impiously ridiculous: For
who would not blush to tell God, that indeed he gives him such Lands but yet
with very clear intent to revoke them? And what Christian will say, that such
an intent is tacitly there, which were Impiety to express? Nay, it is
apparently clear, by the Curses added by such Donors upon those who shall
attempt to make void their Gifts, that their meaning was plain, that such Lands
should remain Gods. For ever by Magna Charta these Gifts are confirmed unto the
Church of England, (She shall have all Her whole Rights and Liberties
inviolable) and yet is there a tacit condition in that self-same Law that they
may be violated? No marvel if with us, Men cannot trust Men, if God himself
must not trust our Laws; and if that Charter, or any else made by succeeding
Princes, do indeed confirm such Donations, (as without all doubt they do) sure
they must confirm them in the same Sense wherein the Donors made them, for so
do all other Confirmations. I say in this case of a total Disinherison, there
cannot be in Law any such tacit Conditions, or Limitations, as the Epistler
speaks of; for I have showed you such to be tyrannical and unjust in a private
Subject's Estate, therefore in Gods they are much more unjust, because we are
sure he cannot offend, and the tyrannical and unjust meaning cannot be called
the meaning of the Law.

The Letter goes on -- Besides, it were somewhat strange, that the Donors of
the Land should preserve them in the hands of the Bishops from the power of the
Parliament, which they could not do in their own, and give them to a greater
and surer Right than they had themselves.

The Lay-Donor might preserve them thus in his own hands, suppose him but an
honest Person; for though a Parliament may Impune disinherit such an innocent
Man, yet they cannot do it justly, and so in this regard, both the Donor and
they are (you see) in the very same condition. Besides, it is no such very
strange thing for the self-same Right (as a Right suppose a Fee-simple) to
become more sure in his hand that takes it, than it ever was in his hand that
gave it. For though the Right it self be still the same Right, (for Nemo dat
quod non habet) yet by Gift it may come into a stronger hand, and so by this
means that self-same Right may become the stronger. And sure with us, God's
hands should be more stronger than Man's: Nay hence, as some think, Lands given
to the Church, were said to come in manum mortuam, as 'twere a dead hand, that
parts with nothing it has once closed upon.

And why the Epistler should call this a strange thing, I do not yet see the
reason, because it is always so when any one Benefactor does by virtue of a
Mortmayne, convey his Lands to any kind of Corporation.

Again -- Nor do I understand their meaning, who term God the Proprietary of
the Bishops Lands, and the Bishops the Usu Fructuarii.

I conceive I have made this plain, because such Lands were first offered to
God, and become his own Propriety, by his own Divine Acceptance. And if the
Dominiam ad rectum of Kings do once rest in God, the Dominum utile, the Vsa
fructus only is left a Patrimony to the Clergy.

But he adds a Reason -- For I know not how (in propriety of speech) God is
more entitled to their Lands, than to his whole Creation.

Here the Epistler speaks out; for truly, Sir, I fear this Lawyer, your Friend,
is little better than an Independent: For has God no more Title (in propriety
of speech) to one piece of ground than another? No more to a Church, no more to
a place where a Church is built, that where Men have placed a Stable? Our
English Homilies, which are confirmed by Law, cry down this gross piece of
Anabaptism. It Is true, God made all things, and so the whole World is most
justly his, by that great work of Creation: But yet the Psalmist's words are as
true, The earth has he given to the children of men. So as that great God is
well content to receive back what Men will give him, and this acceptance of his
must needs in all reason make those things his more particularly. Thus Christ
calls the Temple, My Father's House: 'Twas Gods, and Gods more peculiarly; not
only by the right of Creation, but of Donation. Thus Lands given to God are
his, and his more peculiarly; so that his Priests and his Poor being sustained
by them, he calls it in a more peculiar manner, his meat, and his drink, and
his clothing. And then, if in point of acceptance with God, there be a great
difference betwixt feeding his Priests, and feeding them that do him no
service, there must needs be as much difference betwixt Lands set out to that
Sacred Use, and Lands of a mere common employment.

He gives a second Reason -- Were Clergymen the Usu Fructuarii, how come they
to change, dispose, and alter the propriety of any thing, which an Usu
Fructuarii cannot do, and yet is done by them daily?

Yes, they may change or dispose, or alter many kinds of things, (for so,
without doubt, may an Vsa Fructuarii do) so that he wrong not his Lord, by an
Abuse done to his Propriety. Thus he may change his Corn into Clothing, or his
Wool into Books. Nay, he may alter the very Propriety of his Possessions too,
if he have express leave of his Lord. And God himself did tell Levi, Lev. 27.
13.
that he was well content that men should alter some things that belonged unto
him, so that it were to that Tribes advantage.

The Letter goes on -- Ask then by what Divine Law St. Mary's Church in Oxon
may not be equally employed for Temporal Uses, as for holding the
Vicechancellor's Court, the University, Convocation, or the yearly Acts?

He might as well have asked, Why not for Temporal Uses as for Temporal Uses;
for if these he means be not so, his Argument is naught; and if they be so, it
is not well put down. His meaning surely was, for other Temporal Uses, as well
as for these. And truly, Sir, to put a Church to any such kind of use, is not
to be defended; and therefore I excuse not the University, especially She
having had at least for a good time so many large places for these meetings:
Yet something may be said for the Vicehancellor's Court, because it is partly
Episcopal; something for the Act, at least in Comitiis, because it is partly
Divinity; but I had rather it should receive an amendment, than an excuse,
though it follow not neither, that because this Church is sometimes for some
few hours abused, therefore it may be always so; as if because sometimes it is
made a profane Church, therefore fit 'twere no Church at all.

He proceeds -- And for the Curses, (those bugbear words) I could never yet
learn, that an unlawful Curse was any prejudice but to the Author, of which
sort these Curses must be, which restrain the Parliament, or any other, from
exercising a lawful and undeniable Power, which in instances would seem very
ridiculous, if any Curse should prejudice another lawful Right; I am sure such
Curses have no warrant from the Law of God, or this Nation.

No warrant from the Law of God? I conceive there is a very clear one, and Our
Mother the Church commends it to the use of Her Sons, in the express words of
the Commination, Cursed be he that removes the marks of his Neighbors Lands,
Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
and all the People shall say, Amen. If he be accursed that wrongs his
Neighbor in his Lands, what shall he be, that injures his God? If a Curse
light on him, and a public Curse, (confirmed by Amen, made by all the People)
who removes but the mark whereby his Neighbors Lands are distinguished, sure a
private Curse may be annexed by a Benefactor unto his Deed of Donation, in case
Men should rob the very Lands themselves that have been given to their Maker.

That such Curses restrain the Parliament in their undeniable Right, is (you
have told me) but a great mistake: For though the Parliament may impune (which
in some case is called lawful) take away Church Lands, yet the Church it self
cannot do it justly without a Sin, and that a greater Sin, than removing a
Landmark, and then a higher may follow it. Let the Epistler then take heed of
those more than Bugbear words, for believe it, Sir, in such Curses as these,
there is much more than Shows or Vizards, and if you will give trust to any
Stories at all, many great men have sadly felt it.

His last Argument is -- Ask your Bishops, Whether Church Lands may not
lawfully (the Law of the States not prohibiting) be transferred from one Church
to another, upon emergent Occasions, which I think they will not deny; if so,
who knows that the Parliament will transfer them to Lay-Lands? They profess no
such thing, and I hope they will not, but continue them for the maintenance of
the Ministry.

I conceive the Bishops Answer would be, That it is no Sacrilege to transfer
Land from one Church to another, but yet there may be much Rapine and
Injustice, the Will of the Dead may be violated, and so Sin enough in the
Action. Men may be injuriously put from the Estates, in which they have as good
Title by the Law of the Land, as these same Men that put them out. To say then
that the Church Lands may be totally given up, because the Epistler hopes the
Parliament will commit no Sacrilege, is a pretty way of persuasion, and may
equally work on him to give up his own Lands, because he may as well hope to be
re-estated again, in that the Parliament will do no Injustice.

And now, Sir, having thus observed your Commands, yet one thing more I shall
adventure to crave your Patience in, and it is to let you know, That if this
Epistler had been right in both his Conclusions -- That Episcopacy is not of
Divine Right, and that Sacrilege is no Sin; yet if you cast your Eyes upon His
Majesty's Coronation Oath, wherein He is so strictly sworn to defend both the
Episcopal Order, and the Church Lands and Possessions, you would easily
acknowledge, That the King cannot yield to what this Letter aims at. And though
I must needs guess, and that the Epistler knew well enough his Juratory Tie,
yet you will the less blame him for his concealment in this kind, because he
was not retained of the Churches Council.

His Majesty's Oath you may find published by Himself, in an Answer to the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, 1646.
26 May. It runs thus:

Episcopus.] Sir, Will You grant and keep, and by Your Oath confirm unto the
People of England, the Lavs and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, Your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; and namely, the Laws, Customs
and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King Edward Your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm?


REX.] I grant and promise to keep them.


Episcopus.] Sir, Will You keep Peace and godly Agreement entirely (according
to Your Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?


REX.] I will keep it.


Episcopus.] Sir, Will You (to Your Power) couse Law, Justice and Discretion,
in Mercy and Truth to be exeruted in all Your Judgments?


REX.] I will.


Episcopus.] Will You grant to hold and keep the Laws, and rightful Customs
which the Commonalty of this Your Kingdom have? And will You defend and uphold
them, to the Honor of God, as much as in You lies?


REX. I grant and promise so to do.


Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King before the People,
with a loud voice:

Our Lord and King, we beseech You to pardon, and grant and preserve unto us,
and to the Churches committed to our Charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due
Law and Justice: And that You would protect and defend us, as every good King
in His Kingdom ought to be Protector and Defender of the Bishops, and the
Churches under their Government.

Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table, where He makes a
Solemn Oath in the sight of all His People, to observe the Promises, and laying
His Hand upon the Book, says --

The Things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep. So help me
God, and the Contents of the Book.

In the first Clause (it is plain) He makes a promissory Oath to the whole
People of England, (a word that includes both Nobility, Clergy, and Commons)
That He will keep and confirm their Laws and Customs.

And in the second, He swears a particular Promise to the Clergy, That He will
keep the Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the Glorious
King Edward.

And again (more plain in the fifth Clause) he makes the like promissory Oath
to the Bishops alone, in behalf of themselves, and their Churches, That He will
preserve and maintain to them all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and
Justice: And that He will be their Protector and Defender. Where since He
swears Protection to the Bishops by Name, it is plain He swears to maintain
their Orders: For he that swears he will take care, that Bishops be preserved
in such and such Rights, must needs swear to take care, that Bishops shall
first be, for their Rights must needs suppose their Essence.

And where the King swears Defense, it must needs be in a Royal Kingly way: Tu
defend Me Gladio, and Ego defendam Te Calamo, is the well known Speech of a
worthy Churchman to his Prince. For sure where Kings swear defense to Bishops,
I do not think they swear to write Books in their behalf, or to attempt to make
it clear to their People, That Episcopacy is Iure Divino: But a King (whose
Propriety it is to bear the Sword) swears to bear it in defense of Bishops. For
though it be against the very Principles of Christian Faith, that Religion
should be planted and reformed by Blood, yet when Christian Kings have by Law
settled this Religion, and sworn defense of those Persons that should preach it,
he ought sure to bear his Sword to defend his Laws, and to keep his Soul free
from Perjury, as well to them, as the rest of his Subjects.

And as by Canonical Privilege that belong to them and their Churches, there
must needs be implied the Honor of their several Orders, (as that Bishops
should be above Presbyters, etc.) together with all the due Rights and
Jurisdictions. And the words, Due Law and Justice, cannot but import, That His
Majesty binds Himself to see that Justice be done to them and their Churches,
according to Law then in force when He took that Oath. And the King swears
Protection and Defense, that Clause must needs reach not only to their Persons,
but to their Rights and Estates; for He swears not only to Men, but to Men in
such a condition, to Bishops of their Churches. And whereas He swears to be
their Protector and Defender, to His Power, in the Assistance of God; those
words, To His Power, may seem to acquit Him of all the rest, if He fall into a
condition wherein all Power is taken from Him. But, Sir, I will prove that a
mistake for one of the greatest Powers of the King of England; Is His Negative
in Parliament so, that without Him no Law can be Enacted there, since it is only
the Power Royal that can make a Law to be Law? So So that if the King should
pass a Statute to take away the Churches Lands, He protects it not to His
Power: since it is plain, so long as a Man lives and speaks, he has still power
to say No: For it cannot be said in this Case, that the Church may be (as it
were) ravished from the King, and then He may be no more guilty of the Crime,
than Lucretia was in her Rape; for though a chaste Body may suffer Ravishment,
yet the strength of a Tarquin cannot possibly reach to Man's Will or Assent.

Now in all promissory Oaths made for the benefit of that Party to whom we
swear, it is a Rule with Divines, That they (of all others) do most strictly
bind, except then allow when Remission is made -- Consensu illius cui facta est
promissio. So although the King swear to the People of England, That He will
keep and preserve their Laws, yet if upon their common desires these Laws be
either abrogated, or altered, it is clear that Oath binds no farther, because a
Remission is made by their own consent who desired that Promise from Him. And
upon this ground it is true, the King swears to observe the Laws only in Sensu
composito, so long as they are Laws; but should this desire either to alter or
abrogate either Law or Privilege, proceed from any other but from them alone
to whose benefit He was sworn, it is plain by the Rules of all Justice, that by
such an Act or Desire, His Oath receives no remission; for the foundation of
this Promissory is the Oath He was sworn to, and it cannot be remitted but by
them alone for whose sakes it was taken; so that when (in the second Part of
the first Clause, and more plainly in the fifth) He swears a benefit unto the
Bishops alone in behalf of them and their Churches, it is apparent this Oath
must perpetually bind, except a remission can be obtained from the Bishops
themselves, and their Churches He was sworn to.

This then must be confessed to be the sense of the Oath, that when the King
has first sworn in general, to grant, keep and confirm the Laws and Customs of
the People of England, He farther yet swears to the Clergy, to preserve their
Laws and Privileges, and since these are not able to make a Negative in
Parliament, so that the Clergy may be easily swallowed up by the People, and by
the Lords; therefore in a more particular manner, they have obtained an Oath to
be made unto them by the King, which being for their particular benefit, it
cannot be remitted without their express Consent: So that although an Act of
Parliament being once passed by the Votes of the King, and both Houses, it does
(Sir, as you have told me our Lawyers say) bind the whole People of England,
yea, the whole People, as it includes the Clergy too; yet it concerns the King,
by virtue of His Oath, to give His Vote to no such Act as shall prejudice what
He has formerly sworn unto them, except He can first obtain their express
Consent, that He may be thereby freed from His Juratory Obligation.

It may be said, perhaps, That in the Consent given by both Houses of
Parliament, the Consent of the Clergy is tacitly implied, and so it is (say our
Lawyers, as you have told me Sir) in respect of the Powers obligatory, which an
Act so passed obtains upon them; for they affirm, That it shall strongly bind
the Clergy, as if they themselves had in express terms consented to it,
although Bishops being debarred from the Votes in Parliament, and neither they
nor their inferior Clergy having made choice of any to represent them in that
great Council, their Consent can be in no fair sense said to be involved in
such Acts as are done, as well without their Representative Presence, as their
Personal. But the Question is, Whether such tacit Consent (though it be indeed
against their express Wills) can have a Power remissory to the King, to absolve
Him of His Oath? He that affirms it must resolve to meet with this great
Absurdity, that although besides His general Oath to all the People of England,
His Majesty be in particular sworn ot the Rights of the Clergy, yet they obtain
no more benefit by this, than if He had sworn only in general; which is as much
as to say, that in this little Draught, Oaths are multiplied without necessity;
nay, without signification at all: And that the greatest part of the first, and
the whole fourth Clause, are nothing else but a more painful Draught of
superfluous Tautologies.

For His yielding to the two first Lines, swears Him to keep and to confirm the
Laws and Customs of the whole People of England; which word People, includes
those of the Clergy too, and so in general their Laws and Customs are confirmed
(no doubt) in these words, and so confirmed, that they cannot be shaken, but at
least by their tacit Consent in Parliamentary way: And since the King
condescends to afford to their Rights a more particular Juratory Tie, there is
no doubt but it binds in a way too that is more particular; so that His Majesty
cannot expect a remission of this Oath, without the Consent clearly expressed.

For as when the King swears to keep the Laws of the whole People in general,
He can by no means acquire a remission of this Oath, but by the express Consent
of the People. So when in particular He swears unto the Laws and Customs of the
Clergy, this Oath must needs bind, until it be remitted in an express Form,
either by the whole Clergy themselves, or by some Body of Men (at least) that
represents the Clergy, quatenus a Clergy, and not only as they are involved in
that great Body of the People. So that he that presumes to persuade His Majesty
to pass any Act in prejudice of the Ecclesiastical Body, (to whom He is thus
sworn) without their express Consent first obtained, counsels Him that which is
both injurious to his Fellow Subjects; nay, which is indeed a most damnable
wickedness against the very Soul of the King.

SIR, As I conceive, it is now plain enough, That if the Parliament should
destroy the Episcopal Order, and take away the Lands of the Church, the Houses
in that Act will run themselves into two Sins, and His Majesty into three. And
upon this Supposition the Epistler and I have agreed; I do not think, says he,
that Convenience or Necessity will excuse Conscience in a thing in it self
unlawful: And before that, he calls the contrary, the Tenent of the Romanist,
or Iesuited Puritan; only I will beseech him for his own Souls sake, to
consider how great a Scandal he has given to Mankind, in defense of such Sins
as these: For, I conceive, that Durand offended more, in holding that
Fornication was no Sin against the Law natural, than Sechem did (who was only
under that Law) in his lust upon old Jacob's Daughter; for Fraudem legi facere,
(says the Civilian) is worse than Legem violare. It argues a more
unsubject-like disposition, for a Man to put Tricks and Fallacies upon his
Princes Laws, than to run himself into a downright Violation: And God (we know)
is a King; I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and a King in whose
hands is a vengeance.

It Is true, SIR, we are thus put into a very sad Condition, when the only
Option that seems left us now, is either to choose Sin or Ruin; but yet (if
well used) it is a Condition glorious, a Condition in which all that Noble Army
of Martyrs stood, before they could come at Martyrdom. And if in preparation of
mind, we thus lay our Lives down at the Feet of Christ, I am undoubtedly
persuaded it is the only way to preserve them; for this Word of God is the
Lord of Hosts too, and for his Glories sake, he often effects to save them who
have lost both their strength and hopes: But to you, Sir, whom I know so well,
such Persuasions as these are needless. I rest

Your very Faithful Servant.

FINIS.

