THE ENGLISH CASE, Exactly set down by HEZEKIAH's REFORMATION: IN A Court
Sermon AT PARIS.

By Dr. Steward, then Dean of Westminster, and of His Majesty's Chapel.

Now published for the brief, but full Vindication of the Church of ENGLAND
from the Romanists Charge of Schism.

LONDON: Printed for William Canning, at his Shop in the Temple-Cloysters. M DC
LXXX VII.

A PREFACE.
SOme Truths, as some Excellencies, are so much beholding to their own Light,
that the shortest and most transient glimps can command our Assent to the one,
and give us a sufficient knowledge of the other. Such is that of the inward
worth of this Author, who as he was many ways qualified for that piece of
ancient character, (...), Eunap de Alypio in vit. Iambl. p. 29. (nature and
austerity afforded him so small a portion of body, and God's blessing on great
faculties and equal diligence, so rich endowments of Mind, that he approached
to some nearness to be all Soul) so will he be most fully pourtrayed on the
least Table. Any thing that was truly his, that past under his last hand in his
maturer Age, carries those Signatures on it, whereby being dead he yet
speaks, articulately to those that knew him, and intelligibly, if they please
to believe it, to those which knew him not. And this single Sermon of his,
which is here offered the Reader, undertakes to make good what has been said.
Others have been willing to gather up all his Relics, which they can retrieve
from any Coast, that nothing which is so well qualified to receive, may want
its due veneration; And the public is much obliged to this their diligence.
But for the complete Image of this true Son of the English Church, his temper,
and the reasons of his unmoved constancy to our Persecuted Mother, it will be
competently drawn from this one appearance of him.

Conformable is the frame of the English Reformation, so strongly guarded and
secured inwardly from its own Principles, Antiquity and Purity, of so straight
and so clean, so plain and unintricate a making, so clear and chrystalline both
in its spring and streams, that the simplest colors and the quickest hand will
give us the justest prospect, the vitallest picture of it. This one parallel of
Hezekiah's taking away the high places, etc. (being here perspicuously brought
home by an uniform concurrence of suitable circumstances to the English
Platform) superceeding the Readers solicitude, by supplying the want of any
larger collection of discourses and vindications in the point of Schism, or
Heresy, or Non-Communion with the Catholic Church.

Thus much was useful to he premised of the intrinsic value of this (...), to
engage the indifferent Readers survey, not to anticipate his judgment of it.
But the more extrinsick circumstances of the Place, and Preacher, and Auditory,
and Design of it, may deserve some farther reflection, in order to those which
were not foreseen, nor consequently at all considered by the designer. The
Scene was Paris, and if I mistake not, L' Hostel de Blinville there, the place
whither the most Illustrious, then Prince of Wales his Highness, with his
Family, assembled for the Divine Offices of the Lords day. The avowed Design,
for the fortifying of all his English Auditors, against the infusions, to which
that Clime (not the remoter of Rome or Madrid) might possibly subject them. The
Preacher, as great a Prelatist as any whom unkind or jealous Brethren have ever
blasted under that title.

His love and desire of the Peace of the Church so ardent, and his
Intercessions so constant for the Return of it, that he was unwilling to be
known to posterity by any other monument than this, that He daily prayed for
the peace of the Church.

2 Kings XVIII. 22. But if ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God: is not
that he whose high places, and whose Altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has
said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this Altar in Jerusalem?
YOU may please to observe, that Detraction sometimes mistakes her aim, and by
a weak assault commends that good which it intends to villisie. Thus this
Commander was here sent to rail down Hezekiah, that his cruel Tongue might
make, as 'twere, the Preface unto his Master's Sword. But so fond was his
attempt, that no studied Parasite could have more flattered him. So that
methinks this Prince's Worth never seems more fair, than in the mouth of
Rabshakeh. He Is there taxed for demolishing the High Places, and for the
Subversion of so many Altars; Actions that were enjoined him by Moses: as if a
Man should accuse Henoch of Godliness, or Abraham of his Belief: who would not
take such Accusations as these for no less than artificial Praises, as if some
Orator had labored to commend these by an Irony: H^noch a good man, but godly;
Abraham holy no doubt, but that he was faithful; and Hezekiah a virtuous
gallant Prince, were not he is so Religious?

I could in Charity thus interpret these Words of Robshakeh, were he not a
Servant unto the King of Ashur: but to speak truth, His Commission makes it
plain that he came to Rail: only his more friendly malice objects goodness
instead of Sin, as if here Detraction had been suborned to commend an Enemy.
You may thus far trust Rabshakeh: for in my Text he speaks exact Truth, to
spite the poor King of Judah. This you will easily find in the precedent parts of
this Chapter: and withal you will there see the Hebrews in a lamentable estate,
and yet indeed not so sad as ours. Their fenced Cities all taken by the Arms of
Assyria, verse. 13. The Treasures of the King, and of the Temple too, all
consumed, verse. 15. Jerusalem it self, the City Royal, besieged ('it was not yet
lost, 'twas not so bad here), verse. 17. and now Rabshakeh is sent to persuade
the King into Chains. He tells him, there was no hope in his own strength: for
though Assyria it self should be so kind as to lend him Horses, yet (so low was
he brought) he could scarce find so many Troopers. No hope in Egypt; his old
known Confederates, they were a mere broken Reed. Nay, he dares add more, No
hope at all in God neither: for though Hezekiah had indeed but reformed the Old
Church, yet in Rabshakeh's sense he had set up a New one, he had forsaken God,
and thrown down his Altars, and removed his High Glorious Places: and upon this
false Supposition, what a Rise is here taken by this fighting Orator? But if ye
say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God, is not this he? etc.

You see then it is no strange thing at all to find a Reformed Church oppressed
by Arms, or by Orators. But since my Text here is a part of Rabshakeh's speech,
I shall leave the Soldier, and only follow him in this part of his Oration.
Where, for my more clear proceeding, I shall a little invert the order of the
words, and shall beseech you to observe with me these Particulars.

First, You may behold the Church of Judah corrupted, in these words, High
places and altars, (i. e.) Altars in high places: Secondly, these Corruptions
reformed, whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and
has said to Judah, etc. Thirdly, the Reformation censured; But if ye say unto
me, We trust in the Lord our God, is not that he, etc. Where it is silently
taxed of Novelty and of Schism, indeed of no less than Apostasy it self, and
that for this cause they had no hope at all left in God. Of these in their
order. First, of the Corruptions, [ High places and altars.]

Were bare Reason put to visit the Church of Judah, her Obliquities in the
conceit of most men, might well perhaps pass for Trifles. For so God have his
due Worship, a man would think, what great matter is it where't be done: The
High Places may be as serviceable as the Court of the Temple: and why may not
his Sacrifice be slain as well at Hebron as Jerusalem? But Israel must be
judged by the Laws; and in Points of so high coneernment must learn to do, not
what she fancies, but what that Text has enjoined; Take heed thou offer not,
etc. Deuteronomy. 12. at the 13. Thus Moses words were plain, That God has enjoined
but One only Altar, but only one for Burnt Sacrifice And lest the violation of
that Sacred Law should seem some slight trivial thing, do but hear the Tenor of
those severe words in the 17th of Levit. What man soever there be of the house
of Isroel, that kills an Ox or a Lamb, etc. and brings it not to the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, unto the altar that is before the
Tabernacle, to offer an offering unto the Lord, before the Tabernacle of the
Lord, Blood shall be imputed unto that man; he has shed blood, and that man
shall be cut off from among his people, in the 4th verse. of that Chapter. And
in the same place, verse. 9. it is again repeated, and extended too, that it may
gain the more hold and reverence: Whatsoever man there be of the house of
Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, (it must extend to Jews
and Proselytes) that offers a burnt offering, or sacrifice, and brings is not
to the door of the Tabernacle, even that man shall be cut off from among his
people. A Law sharp and terrible, fit indeed for Mount Sinai, and to be
delivered in the voice of a Thunder: who would not tremble at that Offense, in
the Revenge whereof Beasts shall be esteemed as Men; to kill a Lamb, as to
commit a Murder: that man shall be cut off from among his People; such
Devotions are no less than Capital, nor will God be satisfied for such Offenses
as these, till both People and Priest become a Sacrifice.

If you ask the Ground of this severe Edict, I might well reply, That to yield
a Reason, does not still befit the Majesty of a Law. Yet Josephus tells us,
That God therefore enjoined one only Altar, that thence it might become the
Sacred Emblem both of his Churches Unity, and his own. We have, says he, but
one altar, (...). For our great God is but One, and our twelve Tribes make but
one People only. There are Interpreters more home, that plainly tell us, this
Law was made for two Reasons: First, to prevent Schism; and Secondly, to
prevent Idolatry. First, Schism: For had leave been given to this heady
wrangling People, to do Sacrifice in many several places, the Diversity of
Rites such men would have soon fallen into, might ere long have brought them
into more several Factions, than at that time they had Tribes. Secondly, to
prevent Idolatry, a Sin which for a long time seemed natural to the Jews; and
what so fit course to keep it off, as to admit of Sacrifice, but only in that
Place where the High Priest himself must look on, whom it so much concerned
both in point of Conscience, and of Interest too, to serve no God at all but
the true One.

And it is worth observing with what height of Zeal this strict Law was kept
whilst the Hebrew Church remained yet Primitive. You may read the Story in the
22d of Joshua. An Altar was set up on the other side Jordan by the Reubenites,
and the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses, their lot falling in those
parts. News of this strange structure is soon brought to Shiloh, where it found
at once both the Tabernacle, and the High Priest: The People murmur, the Army
is straight drawn together; so that the Forces prepared against Cananitish
strangers, are now designed to defend Moses Law against more than Two Tribes of
Israel. But prudently first an Embassy is designed, Phineas is sent, and with
him Ten Princes more to expostulate with these men, with what intent they had
set up such an Altar as this, which must needs lie so openly exposed unto that
great height of Misconstruction. Their answer you may find, verse 22. The Lord
God of Gods, The Lord God of Gods he knows, and Israel shall know, we have not
built it in Rebellion, to offer there any Sacrifice, but only to be a Witness
betwixt us and you, that though divided by Jordan, we have yet a share in the
self same Altar with you. For God forbid, say they, that we should Rebel
against the Lord, and turn this day from following the Lord, to build an altar
for Burnt-offering, or Sacrifice, besides the altar of the Lord our God which
is before the Tabernacle, in the 29th verse of that Chapter. You see of so foul
a Nature was this Offense then esteemed, that by more than Nine Tribes 'twas
held cause enough of a War, and that a Civil War too, wherein Jews were to
fight with Jews: and, but to take off the suspicion where no such crime was, it
brought more than Two Tribes to the Apology you have heard, so high, and so
pathetical.

And yet in succeeding times how constantly did they violate this most severe
Sacred Law? Mountains, and Woods, and Plains, they would needs turn each place
into a Tabernacle. 'Twas then you would think the Holy Land without doubt,
whose more frequent Buildings were Altars: but Palestine indeed was then
farthest from God, when she all thus seemed a Temple; and there was no greater
sign of Judah's Apostasy, than too many such signs of Religion. Nay, so largely
spread was this grand Corruption, that you will easily find there was scarce a Man
did avoid it. Kings, and Priests, and People; some were Agents, others
Spectators, and all bore a part in this forbidden Sacrifice. Thus Solomon, and
the whole People are taxed, 1 Kings 3. 2, 3. And you need not doubt the Priests
were there too; for be the place where it would, none by Moses Law could
sacrifice but the Priests. Nay, not only Solomon's, but the succeeding Records
of all their good Kings still runs with this abatement; He walked in the ways of
David his Father, but the High Places were not taken away, the People still
offered Sacrifice in the tops of the High Places. It Is thus said of no less
than Seven: Solomon, and Asa, Iehosaphat, Iehoash, Amaziah, Azariah, and
Iothan. Cardinal Cajetan thinks this gross Corruption was as general, as if the
Jews resolved to make null Moses Law by an Hebrew Custom to the contrary: and
they had don't without doubt, were our Sins as well able to abrogate a Law, as
we well know they are to break it. This is plain, that the Cardinal conceived
this Abuse was grown into a Custom National, which had there spread it self
over all sorts and kind of Persons: So that it found no open, no constant
Opposition at all from any body of men then considerable: Had it, it is clear
enough, That Customs thus opposed, can put Humane Laws in no danger. But I need
not quote such Authorities, the very word there used, where the Text speaks of
those Kings, infers this Truth strongly enough. But the High places were not
taken away, the People still offered Sacrifice in the High Places. For that
Word, the People, when it is put singly, and without opposition, implies,
without doubt, the whole Nation which it points at. Thus when God commands
Moses; Speak now in the ears of the people: Or in those Words to Pharaoh, Let
my people go: No doubt but that Word did point at each several Jew; and though
sometime it may well bear a sense less general, yet it then implies so much the
far greater Number, that commonly what remains, is neither a part eminent nor
considerable. Nay, to go no farther than my Text, it is plain enough from these
Words of Rabshakeh (who having taken so many Cities, had now spent some good
time in Iewry,) that this Corruption was so universally spread, without any
visible, any noted part to oppose it, that he conceived it the only true
Service of the God of Israel: With what Face else could He have told the Jews,
They had no hopes in their God, because their King had quite overturned his
Religion? Had there indeed been any Number of Note that had opposed this
Corruption, is it at all probable it would have been concealed in these Hebrew
Histories? Their Pen men, we know, were all Zealous enough to preserve the
Honor of Judea; and yet in this particular we find a still total silence: And
if any man will needs hold the contrary, they who call so much for Catalogue of
Names, might in Justice demand of this grand Undertaker, to show a List of
those Jews, who from Age to Age, whilst this Corruption held, did not at all
worship in High Places.

But you will demand perhaps, For how long a time was the Hebrew Church thus
corrupted? And indeed Learned Men differ here. Some think this abuse began in
the times of Othoniel and Ehud, Judges: Others placed it in the days of Gideon;
admit either of these conjectures, and 'twill be plain in Chronology, that this
forbidden worship held no less than six hundred Years; for all agree, Hezekiah
was the first who durst be so good, in those bad times, as to reform this
corruption. But grant we do abate of this, since great Clerks conceive, that
from the time that the Ark was parted from the Tabernacle, which was no less
than ninety years, from the days of Eli the Priest, when the Ark went Captive
to Philistia, until they both met again in the Temple of Solomon, 'twas lawful
to sacrifice at more than one only altar, because God had promised his more
immediate Presence as well before the Ark, as before the Tabernacle. For this
reason I say (though perhaps it hold not) grant we abate of that time; what I
find established by common consent, will prove large enough to support all my
whole intention. For no man dares deny, the Text is so plain, in that Catalogue
of Kings I related, that this corruption held from the days of Solomon unto the
Reign of King Hezekiah, and so no less than upon the Point of three hundred
years, as is plain, by the computation of Arias Montanus, and by the most exact
in Chronology.

So then, three things are here very considerable; first, the Nature of this
Corruption, 'twas in the Censure of Gods Law no less than the sin of Murder;
and in the Censure of the Jews, it deserved no less than the Revenge of a plain
Civil War. Secondly, the Extent of this Corruption; it had spread it self
throughout the whole face of Judea; so that all that was at that time, God's
Visible Church, was at once involved in this Error. For I need not now speak of
the Ten Tribes; their high places were made waste, as is plain enough from the
Calves of Dan, and of Bethel. Thirdly, the Continuance of this Corruption; it
held probably for six, but no man can deny, that it remained in the Church of
Iewry upon the point of three Centuries of years.

Hence 'twill follow clearly; the whole Visible Church may be so far corrupted,
that though she forsake not God, and so run in Non Ecclesiam, to be no Church
at all, yet for a long time she may do Public Worship in a most gross
forbidden manner; and this kind of Abuse may be so dangerous, that upon its
full discovery, both Prince and People may be in conscience bound to embrace
Reformation.

Has God's Church of the Law been so foully blemished, and may that of the
Gosyel boast of a more constant Beauty? Are the Promises of this kind more
large to us, than they were to that Church wherein God's own Son was born? She
in as plain Terms was then called the Spouse of God: I will betroath thee unto
me for ever, says the Lord, Hos. 2. His People and his Flock: We are the
people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands, Psalm. 95. Yea, his Sons and
his Daughters; Thou shall call me, my Father, says the Lord, and shall not
depart from me, (Jer. 3. 19.) True: the Gates of Hell shall not so prevail, but
Christ will still have a Church; and could the Gates of Hell prevail against
her that was betrothed God's own Spouse for ever? That is, at least till Christ
came. No, they could not prevail to make her run in non Ecclesiam, to become no
true Church at all; and yet they might prevail to make her run in Corruptam
Ecclesiam, into a Church so much corrupt in her Public Worship, that she might
much need a Reformation. And indeed, it is a strange thing that any Christian
Church which God has placed among Gentiles, should be so puffed up with a
thought of her own strength, that she cannot fail in this particular. For it is
a Truth clear in the Text, that there is no Church of Gentiles, but like a
Branch from the Vine, it may be quite cut from Christianity. And which is worth
observing, St. Paul has indicted this self-same Truth to the Romans, in the 11th
chap. verse 21. Be not high minded, but fear; for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he spare not thee. And that this Text implies the
Christian Gentiles may be all cut off quite from Christ, is here the Conclusion
of Stapleton, and of the Remists Notes on that Text, and of diverse of their way.

And to say the plain truth, that Text I named can well bear no other comment,
unless we will fondly affirm, that St. Paul warns the Gentiles to take heed of
that mischance, which yet indeed could not possibly fall out. And then I
beseech you observe, if that same Church which boasts most of strength, may yet
run in Non Ecclesiam, may become no Church at all, she may much more run in
Corruptam Ecclesiam, into a Church so corrupt in her Public Worship, that she
may now need a Reformation.

I say, she may run into a corrupt Church: and do but consider her new claim of
Infallibility, and you will easily yield, it is a Victory to prove, that Rome may
be conquered: to make this appear, She may err, is enough to convince her of no
little part of her Errors. If you ask me to show more, I shall beg leave to
reply, That' it is an Argument I affect not; for I had much rather be employed in
discourses of good life, than in these of controversies; as holding that, in
all kind of Contentions, to be the most fit Christian Prayer, Give peace in our
time, O Lord. Yet since I here meet with such Disputes and Waverings; in some
I Will think out of Conscience; in others, either out of Vanity, to entertain
their time, or that under pretense of searching Christian Truths, they may
indeed drive a Trade; I must hence hold it a Duty I owe unto most of those that
now hear me; yea, a Duty I owe to that venerable Church that baptized us all,
though our now poor afflicted Mother, to keep the Fruit of her own Womb from
thus trampling on her; to keep them, as much as in me lies, from being gulled
and cheated from her Unity, and withal from communicating too deeply in sin
with those who have now cast her on the ground.

If you ask then for the corruptions of the Western Church: suppose I instance
but in one alone, She took the Cup from the People: An Abuse set up against as
clear Text as e're the High Places were. Drink ye all of this, says our
Savior, St. Mat. 26. And again (as they interpret that Text), Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, in
that 6th chap. ^o St. John. Mark [ye have no life in you]; I know they defend
this, and make no question at all, but some witty Scribe might have been as
well able to defend the Jews; who, for ought I know, might have said, as they
do, That the Hebrew Church had power over the Sacraments, (and Sacrifices are
no more) or by their new Doctrine of Concomitance, they might maintain much
more probably, that their High Places and Altars were but only used as Parts,
as Appurtenances, as Concomitants of the Tabernacle, than these, that
Shed-blood lies in the Host. For Shed-blood it must be; This is my very Blood
which is shed for you: So that to tell us of Blood in the Body, of Blood
running in the Veins, is indeed to show forth the Lord's Life, but not, as he
commands, to show forth his death till he comes. Nay, admit the Doctrine of
Concomitance, (which yet in this point is but a mere perfect fiction) yet
Christ enjoins, Drink ye all of this. And I appeal to your own Senses
themselves, whether to eat Christ's Blood, be to drink it. Their Public
Service in an unknown Tongue, is it not as clearly against the Doctrine of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14. How, says he, shall the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? in the 16th verse of that
chapter. Two things you see the Apostle there takes for granted; first, that
the unlearned ought to say Amen at God's Public Service: Secondly, they cannot
join that consent of theirs, but to those words they understand.

I might instance in many more particulars; as in the Adoration of Images, of
Saints, of the Eucharist, in the Doctrine of Purgatory, and those other
Articles of the New Creed of Trent; whereof some are of dangerous practice;
nay, (as Learned men amongst themselves have confessed, Gerson, Espensaeus, and
many others) they are of practice, among the Vulgar at least (some doubt not to
add, and among the Learned too) no less than Idololatrical. Others again are
made Articles of Faith, which yet for ought appears either in the Text, or in
Antiquity, are indeed not so much as probable Opinions: So that to say truth,
there are store of men who have not Ignorance enough to believe such Articles.
And yet the Western Church has forced many Souls into the Faith of this New
Creed, both by the Prison and the Stake: And in this Tyranny has showed her
self far worse than e're old Judah did. For though we read of no visible
conspicuous number that did avoid the High Places, yet in Charity we may think
there were some few that did so, and yet in this regard we read not so much as
one either punished, or disgraced by an Hebrew Magistrate.

It Is true then, that God's Church, yea, his Christian Church, may be stained
with some gross foul Corruptions. But what? Because she may thus err, shall
each giddy Brain be allowed to control, or each private Hand to reform her?
Admit this Disorder once, and let a Church be indeed most Apostolic, yet you
may be assured she shall never want Reformers, if she have either Sons to be
employed in Rebellion, or Lands to be enjoyed by Sacrilege. A Corah then will
dare to tell Moses to his face, That all the Congregation is holy, as holy as
himself, or the best employed in the Tabernacle; all Kings and Priests then;
and all this stir is raised, not so much that he dislikes the Order of Aaron,
but that indeed he likes his Revenue. And therefore in my Text there is care had
of this. A Reformation follows; but you will find it brought in by no less than by
the Power Royal, whose high places, and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away,
and has said to Judah, etc.

This part affords Varieties; and I must therefore divide it. Here Is then first
the Prime Agent in this Reformation I named, Hezekiah the King. Secondly, the
Extent of the Reformation, 'twas only brought into his own Territories, Judah
and Jerusalem. Thirdly, the manner how he settled it; 'twas done as well by
teaching truth, as by reforming corruptions: He took away the High Places, and
he said, Ye shall worship before this altar at Jerusalem. First, of the Prime
Agent, Hezekiah the King.

But to remove these Abuses here, did not this Prince first abuse himself, to
fit his hands for this work? Did Hezekiah the King make his Person no less than
plain Head of the Church of Judah? Were some Modern Tongues to have supplied
Rabshakeh's place, this is the Theme, and this is the Phrase they would have
chosen. And yet I assure my self this pious Prince would have stood to it, that
he was supreme Governor, in all Causes, and over all Persons; so that upon
provocation given, he could no doubt have deposed the High Priest, as Solomon
once did Abiathar. But yet (I beseech you observe) it is one thing to burn
Incense, anoaher to enjoin that this Service be still duly done: One thing to
offer Sacrifice, another to command that no Sacrifice be offered, but on that
one Altar at Jerusalem; The first of these belonged unto Aaron's Sons, the
other to the Heirs of David. To bar Hezekiah this Power in the Church, were to
impair his Royalties, and to deny that to the Crown of Judah which all Princes
have still challenged; yea, those without the Church, the Kings of Nineveh, and
Monarchs of Assyria; Their Swords were Ecclesiastical. Thus that King proclaims
a Religious Fast, Ion. 3. And Nebuchad* Dan. 3. 29. Thus from the beginning
Christian Princes have still done the like, and have let us see by their Laws,
that in point of Coercive Power they still kept the Church-supremacy, as
clearly appears in the Theodosian Code, and in that of Justinian in the
Capitulars of Charles the great, and such other collections. Justinian, in an
Ecclesiastical Novel, comes fully home in this point; Iubemus beatissimos
Archiepiscopos and Patriarchas, (i.) Senioris Romae, and Constatinopoleos Novae
Romae; We command, says he, (and as some Copies have it under the pain of
Deposition too) the most blessed Archbishop, and Patriarchs (i.) of Old Rome,
and of Constantinople, then called New Rome, etc. If that Emperor might command
all the Patriarchs themselves, and that in a business Ecclesiastical too, where
then lay the Church-supremacy? And these Novels of his were in so high esteem
with St. Gregory the great, that it is plain in his Epistles, he decides
Church-causes by them, and that with an Ita decrevit Dominus noster Imperator;
Our Lord the Emperor has thus ruled it in his Laws.

Besides, most plain it is, that the Old Hebrew Kings held the Work in my Text
to belong to them as in chief. And this Opinion God himself confirmed; for
throughout their whole story you will find, that Kings only are checked when the
Church was corrupt, and they only praised when she mended. In those Scriptures
we read but of Three Noted Reformations, and they were all done by their Kings.
By King Asa, by this King in my Text, and the last by King Josiah. Those High
Places alone were pulled down by Asa which were set up to the worship of a
false God. Hezekiah goes farther, and destroys them too, which were set up for
the false worship, though of the true only Deity. Josiah goes on, and removes
the Groves, and such devices as those which Solomon, and other Kings, having of
old set up, they were again renewed in the wicked Reign of Manasseh.

But grant a Christian Church to be indeed corrupt, or that really men think it
is so, is it not allowed by Christ's Law, either for Subjects, or others,
against the Will of the King, into whose care she is put, by force of Arms, to
constrain, or beat her to a Purity? A case of conscience you will find, whereby to
resolve this, decided by our Savior's own Mouth, in the 9th chap. of St. Luke;
where entering, says the Text, into a Village of Samaria, the Inhabitants were
so far from receiving the Doctrine he intended to preach, that indeed they
endured not his Person. Hence James and John, the Two Sons of Thunder, begin
straight to show their Temper; What! not receive Christ, nor the Christian
Faith! Master, shall we command fire from heaven? For if Persuasion will not
draw men unto the Gospel thou bring'st, it must be done by Fire, or by Sword.
Our Savior replies, Ye know not of what spirit ye are: Ye understand not at
all what thing it is to be a Christian. I came not to destroy men's Lives, but to
save them; I came not to plant a Religion in Blood; no, I leave that to Turks,
and to Mahomet: Had that been my Intent, you James and John had been no
Apostles for me: I would then have made choice of Commanders from an Army, not
of Fishermen from their Nets. And yet in these times have not we the like Sons
of Thunder? What I will they not receive the New Holy Discipline, the very
Scepter of Christ, the Throne of his Mediatorship (and indeed they could do
little, if they knew not how to cloth their new Fancies in good Words), Lord,
shall we command Fire from Heaven? or if you will, Fire from Hell? Shall we
raise a Rebellion? Shall we by a Covenant swear Christ into his Throne, or
forswear the King out of his? What think ye will be replied to these, and the
like kind of men, but ye know not of what spirit ye are? It Is not lawful by
Blood to bring in Christian Faith; and is it lawful by Blood to bring in that
thing which they of late call a Christian Government? It Is not lawful to plant
a Church by such Force; and is it lawful thus to reform it? They who think it
is, truly for my part, I neither at all know of what spirit they are, no, nor
of what reason neither; This I well know, of what spirit they are not; they are
of no spirit Evangelical.

So then, to attempt to reform a Church in despite of the Prince whom God has
now placed her under, is to invade Royal Power, and can be indeed called but a
more zealous kind of Rebellion; since to cure a Church by such drenches as
these, is, no doubt, at the same time to give Poison to a Kingdom: and 'twas
therefore decreed in that most ancient Council of Eliberis (twenty years before
that of Nice,) That if in hatred to Idolatry it self, a private man would needs
pull down Images, he should by no means be esteemed a Martyr, if he lost his
life in that service. And the Fathers there give their Reason, because we have
no example for this either from Prophets or Apostles. No, 'twas their part to
preach down High Places, or Idols, but they well knew 'twas the Duty of Kings,
of Supreme Powers to remove them: And he can be no Martyr for the first Table
of the Law, who is in the same deed a Transgressor of the second: nor will God
at all thank him as a Reformer of his Church, who in the selfsame Act is no
less than a plain Traitor to his Deputy. So that as for Subjects to take up
Arms against their Kings, is by the Doctrine of St. Peter and St. Paul, in all
cases damnable: so specially to do this in point of our Religion, which so much
commends and blesses Patience, and Sufferings, and Martyrdom, either upon
pretense to plant it where it now is not, or to reform it where it has been
planted, is of all other kinds of Contentions or Wars, the most Turkishly
Antichristian.

And therefore to avoid Quarrels and Blood, 'twas Hezekiah the King who here
reforms the Church of Judea; But yet, durst he adventure alone upon an attempt
so sacred and so great? No, you will easily find in the circumstances of the Text,
that he had both a Council, and withal a Rule to direct him; for if you read
the 30, and the 31, of the 2d of Chron. you will see this Reformation was made in
the time of a most solemn Passover, where the Priests and Levites, the Princes
and the People met; and when, Says the Text, chap. 30. ver. 30. Hezekiah had
spoke comfortable words to all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the
Lord. Yea, Josephus seems to put into this Kings mouth a Synodical Oration in
the ninth of his Antiquities. I say, when upon the Kings encouragement the
Levites had once taught that good Knowledge, then upon such counsel, such
direction as this, then came the Reformation; For so Moses was plain in the
blessing he gave upon the whole Tribe of Levi: They shall teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy Law, Deuteronomy. 33. at the 10. And as he had a Council, so
it is as plain by the self-same words he had a Rule too to go by, 'twas the good
Knowledge of the Lord, which is in Moses phrase his Judgments and his Law: And
lest he should perhaps err in the Interpretation of that sacred Text, he had
the help of the best Comment too, as you but now heard from the 22d of Joshua,
'twas the sense and practice of the Hebrew Church, whilst she was yet Primitive.

That the Church of England was reformed by the Power Royal, by a Power that
made use of the like Counsel, and like Rule* is a truth I think none here
doubts of; if any do, 'twill be soon cleared both from our Stories and our
Laws; that first Our Liturgy which Reformed Gods Public Service, was composed
by Bishops and others of great Knowledge in Antiquity, many whereof attained the
Honor of Martyrdom: And then the Book of our Articles which reformed the
Theological Tenets, the common Doctrines of our Church, were Compiled by
Synods, by Convocations, by the two Solemn Provincial Councils of London, or if
you will, the two National, because both our Provinces concurred in the same
truth, in the years 52 and 62. And that our Rule was the same they here used in
Iewry, Gods word interpreted by the Sense and Practice of the Ancient Church,
appears in the next Synod after, where it is decreed in plain words, That
whosoever undertakes to teach any truth as necessary to salvation, which he is
not able to make good by Text, as 'twas understood by the Fathers, and the
Ancient Church, shall be exposed to Ecclesiastical Censure, and Canonical
Correction. And we cannot think our Church would enjoin a Rule to her Sons,
which yet she had not kept her self. In this Point then we are hand in hand
with Judah; the same Power, the same Council, the same Rule. I go to the next
following, The Extent of the Reformation: 'twas only set up in his own
Territories, Judah and Jerusalem.

Indeed Hezekiah wrote Letters, and sent to the remains of the Ten Tribes, to
join in this great Action with him; but they, for the most part, contemned his
Message, and slighted his Attempt, 2 Chronicles. 30. The King did exceeding well:
For 'twas to be much wished, that in a Design so highly pious as this, all
Israel would have been unanimous: But yet if Ephraim, and others, will refuse
to hear, Judah must mend alone. How generally a Reformation was desired in
these parts of Christendom, by men of the choicest Note, both for Learning and
Piety, 'twere no hard Task at all to show you. Nay, in the very Council of
Trent, Ten several Kingdoms and States desired the Cup for the People, both by
their Ambassadors, and their Prelates: Many pressed for a Redress of Service in
an unknown Tongue; many for many other particulars: All were refused, and the
Reason plain; Order was there taken (you may guess by whom), that there were
more Italian Prelates, sometimes by Twenty, sometimes by an Hundred, than there
were of all the World besides; so that in effect all this Christendom would
have reformed her self, had not Italy opposed it. Nor can that be called a
General Council, ('it was but Patriarchal at the largest) since the Bishops of
the East, and other great Churches, were not there, no, nor those Three long
since so most famous Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Alexandria, and Antioch,
who though they may be deceived in that Tenet of the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, yet whatever Error they are in, in that point, they are in no Heresy,
as is confessed by P. Lombard himself, and has been often made unanswerably good,
by Men as well versed in controversal Points, as any Christendom has bred. But
it is the Artifice of the Western Church, to persuade the World, that those
ancient parts are now fallen from the Church, that so within the Curtains of
their own Patriarchate she may have General Councils, and an universal Church;
and so though she now make not near a Third part of the Christian World, yet
with the Donatist, she dares profess her self the only Catholic Church, and so
damns all Mankind without her. Neither yet do I deny, nay, I affirm it rather,
That a true General Council could best prescribe Remedies unto so large a
Disease; but to convoke that, was extremely difficult, and we are all sure
'twas not done. For what Christian Princes can now give safe conduct to the
Bishops and Patriarchs of those remoter parts of the Church? So then, if
neither a true General Council, nor free Patriarchal, could be had, were it not
strange Imprudence to refuse a Cure, because we could not use the best
Physicians? In this case no doubt it unquestionably holds, what Gerson, the
Learned Chancellor of Paris, has spoken out without Limitation, and he (as
Bell. affirms) was, Vir doctus and pius; he was a learned and a good man too;
and you shall hear that good man's words; Nolo tamen dicere, etc. I will not
say, faith he, but the Church may be reformed by parts; yea, this is necessary,
and to effect it Provincial Councils may suffice, and in some things Diocesan:
it is in his Tract. de Genesis Con. unius obed. And indeed Particular Churches have
gone farther in this kind than our dear Mother e're dreamed of. For four things
there are chiefly of Synodical Cognizance, Articles of Faith, Forms of Divine
Worship, Theological Conclusions for the Peace of each Church, and the points
of Ceremony. Only these Three last were the Subject of our Reformation, we
still adhering unto the Three Creeds, which are the Faith of the Church
Catholic. But whence came Filioque in Two of these Three Creeds, if not in a
Provincial Synod? In a General, no man thinks it did: And some Learned men
ascribe that Addition of Faith to the Eighth Synod of Toledo. And if a
Provincial of Spain may thus decide Points of Faith, I understand not why a
National of England may not be heard in far less matters. Nay, in the Fourth of
Toledo 'twas challenged by the Fathers, as the proper Right of a National
Synod, that it might decide Points of Faith, as clearly appears in the 3. Can.
of that Council.

You see then the Parallel still holds; Hezekiah reformed but his Two Tribes,
and our English Princes but their own Territories. I come to the last of this
Second General. The manner of the Reformation; He did as well teach the truth,
as reform the corruptions: He took away the high places, and he said, Ye shall,
etc.

Ye shall worship before one altar; so his words are set down, 2 Chronicles. 32. at
the 12th. He did not only remove their Errors, as if that past Triumph might
suffice them; but for the future he enjoined the People to employ their
Devotion according to God's sacred Law. And did not we so too? Witness our
Catechisms, and our Liturgy, our many Forms of Devotion to God, and our many
enlargements of those Moral Duties we owe to the several ranks of our
Neighbors. It Is then but a Calumny, and a fond one too, to call our Faith a
Negative Religion, as if to believe that some Men are erroneous, were the sole
Article of all our Churches Creed. Truth is, we may thank them for it, that
it is with us as with Judah; our Profession must needs now contain some
Negatives: High places are not allowable, maimed Sacraments must not be
suffered, nor Images adored; but yet they may soon see our Positive Tracts are
more large than our Polemicks, and that we have taken more pains to make men
good, than to make them Learned or Judicious.

I heartily wish I could in this regard as well defend some Sons of our Church,
as I am sure I can our Church it self. For many men's ill carriage seem to
divide the two clauses here, which are so nearly joined in my Text. They, like
well to remove High Places and Altars, in this regard, none shall show more
Zeal than they; nay, under pretenses of such corruptions as these, if you
please, remove Church and all. But when we once come to this, Ye shall worship
before one altar; ye shall bow down, ye shall bend your selves (for so the word
here imports), ye shall be devout, and religious; and this not only in your
inmost thoughts, but in your outward Forms of Deportment; they like no such
Reformation; it is enough to save them, that they have learned to hate Rome, and
that they are no superstitious Persons. Let not such men deceive themselves. 'T
will one day rise up in Judgment, 'twill plead against them, and severely too,
that they have been bred Members of such a reformed Church, and yet neither in
their Devotions, nor their Lives themselves, have they showed the least
Reformation: What good will it do these to have been so Christianly allowed the
Blessed Cup in the Sacrament, when yet either they come not at all, or come in
their sins to receive it? What will it avail thee to have God's Service
performed in a Language thou understand'st, when either very seldom thou
hear it read, or do not heed at all, though thou hear it? How will that
poor man, whom perhaps thou now pitiest, plead against thee at that Last Bar of
Christ's Judgment? I indeed came seldom, and with small Devotion to that
Sacrament, because I was there robbed of that sacred Cup which I know Thou thy
self had left me. I seldom came to God's Public Service; and being there, I
fixed my Mind on some secular Lusts, because I could not understand it: And in
punishment shall I be equaled to him who was allowed the Cup, and in Divine
Service might have understood both all Hymns and Prayers? Believe it, the
Reformation was made not to boast of, but to use: And he who shall declare,
that he likes the thing, and yet is no whit the better for it, runs at the best
but into a kind of Covetousness, (a sin St. Paul called Idolatry) for, with
such miserable Churls, he loves indeed to have the power of this great Wealth,
and yet he does never mean to use it. But we ought to know, that when Hezekiah
has once removed these High Places here, it is to this great end especially,
that thenceforth we should be the more carefully devout before that allowed
Altar at Jerusalem: And yet when we have done this, we must look for Scorns and
Reproaches; For if Judah, or any Child of hers, be grown good, you may surely
expect there will be straight work for Rabshakeh, as you will see in my last part,
The Reformation censured, it is taxed of Novelty, and Schism, and the like. But
if ye say, We trust in the Lord our God, is not that he, etc.

'Twas in St. Hierom's time, an Hebrew Traditon, that this Rabshakeh was born a
Jew; so that Father upon the 36th of Esaias. Indeed so it often falls out, that
Judah has no man a more bitter Enemy, than when one of the Circumcision becomes
a Fugitive. Nor has our MotherChurch been by any more violently opposed, than
by the hands who have left her, by the hands of those sicklemen, whose persons
she did once baptize.

But leave the Man, come to his Words; If ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord,
etc. You see Rabshakeh himself was grown so much a Divine, as to aver openly,
That he who puts his Hand to overturn that Religion he professes; yea, that
puts his Hand to overturn it too at the same time while he likes it, pretend
what he will, he trusts not in God, he trusts perhaps in the Syrians, or in
Egypt.

He goes on, Is not this he whose altars, etc. He, Judah's old God; and
therefore 'twas no less than plain Novelty to leave him: These High Places and
Altars, as he conceived, were his too: And to leave off to communicate in that
Service they once used, what can this be less than a Schism? And have not we
been long since; nay, are we not reproached even unto this day with the very
self-same Imputations? They have set up a new Church; they are wicked
Schismatics: So that should the most modest man entertain that Dream of
Pythagoras, of the transmigration of Souls from one body to another, he would
not stick at all to affirm, that he who was once Rabshakeh, was since some tart
Penman of this latter Century.

I Will speak first of that Tax, the reproach of Novelty: And I beseech you mark
how Rabshakeh has here framed his Words. He strives to lay all upon this
Present King; Hezekiah took away, and Hezekiah said; No mention that this Fact
was enjoined by Moses; and practiced too by the Hebrew Church, whilst she was
the Primitive. Thus let but Rabshakeh once tell the tale, and a Church larely
reformed shall indeed appear to be but a late founded Church. Ignorance may
perhaps excuse this Commander here in my Text; but some Learned men in our
times are more extremely to blame: for you will soon see how fond are their main
Exceptions, do but suppose their Words put into the Mouth of Rabshakeh, when as
here in my Text, at Jerusalem he be-spake the besieged men upon the Wall; Hear,
O ye Jews, will your aged Synagogue at length turn Novelist? Your Fathers
worshipped in these High Mountains; but ye now say, Ierusalem's the place;
where was the Church before Hezekiah? Was It no where, or invisible? Were your
Predecessors blinded with one joint consent? Or are ye only become more clear
of sight, what! than Solomon the wise, or Asa the religious? Does your God
sometime forsake his Church, or will for Hundreds of Years suffer it to be so
constantly obscured? Let not this pure Prince deceive you still with these fond
upstart toys; for it is your Judah's greatest Fame that she is thought very
Ancient.

What Jew, I wonder, could this speech move, unless 'twere to laughter? Where
was their Church before Hezekiah? In the same place, and among the same People,
and 'twas still the very self-same Church: I say, the same in truth of essence
(for so's a Thief a True man) but not in condition or in quality: for formerly
it was corrupt, now reformed by the Law of Moses; formerly it had heen
dangerously diseased, but 'twas now cured by Hezekiah. Let them ask Naaman too,
where was he before Elisha had healed him? Would he not divide the Question, He
was long before, but he was withal Leprous: And Palestine had still a Church,
but God knows 'twas a corrupt one. So then he who calls a reformed Church new,
because it is newly reformed, might as well call Naaman a child too, because
after his cure the Text plainly says his flesh came again like a child's. But
in earnest, is our Age to be accounted from our recovery? Or is a man no Older
than his Health? By this Philosophy they might persuade the Leper, that he bore
Office in the Syrian Court before he was a Year Old. Let therefore the Modern
Rabshakeh's cease to upbraid us with such known petty Cavils, our Church was no
more invisible than that of Judah, and might as well be before Luther was, as
theirs before Hezekiah.

Secondly, They tax us of Schism; which is questionless a great sin, being in
frequent Texts very sharply condemned in Scripture. It Is then committed when
there is a Scissure, a Breach, an uncharitable Division made, betwixt those men
especially, which in point of Religion were once joined and linkt together. So
that were this Rupture is, there is sin without doubt; all the Question is, on
which side the Crime must lie; sometimes it may lie on both, but it ever lies
on him that gives just cause of Division, not ever on him that divides. Abraham
did divide from his Idolatrous Kindred, and so did St. Paul from his old
friends the Jews. The Orthodox Christians were forced to do the like when
Arrianism did prevail: and yet in the opinon of these Rabshakehs themselves,
neither Abraham, not St. Paul, nor those old Christians were Schismatical. Thus
when Hezekiah once had reformed the Church of Judea, no man can think a
Conscientious Jew would at all communicate in the service of these High Places;
he did divide from it without doubt, although before, either by custom or
ignorance, or the like, he did it frequently without Scruple. And yet might
such a Jew be held guilty of Schism? no more sure than Hezekiah, who both did
and enjoined the like* and yet the Holy Ghost in this History here does in
express terms commend him; in the fourth verse of this Chapter he commends him
as much for reforming the Church as he does for being like David. So that to
tax him, were indeed to affirm, that the Spirit of God commends a Schismatic
himself for the very act of his schism.

Thus then they are not still they who divide, but they who give or continue
the just cause of Division, who are guilty of that sin we speak of. But yet
since in Church-controversies it is not so easy to judge what makes that just
cause I named, and that no wise man can think it fit it should be left to each
private judgment: since in such divisions as these, men are extremely apt to
forget all bonds of Peace, and for possession sometimes of a little supposed
truth, quit indeed their whole Estate of Charity: therefore the Ancients do often
define schism by these two grand notes or Characters.

First, when men make Divisions in point of Religion against the consent of
their lawful Pastors: it is so defined by St. Cyprian, and St. Ierom, and
others. Secondly, when men cast out of the Church Catholic, and so damn to
Hell all that hold not their opinions. And this St. Austin does often times call
schism in the Donatists.

And now take Schism in what sense, under what note you please, our Mother
Church is guiltless of that imputation. First take it for a Division in Gods
public Service; She did no more in that point than what was here done by
Hezekiah: since she had as clear Text, and so as just cause, To give the Cup to
the People; to turn their Devotions into a language they understood, as this
King here had, to bring the Jews from their Old Mass in high places, unto that
one Altar at Jerusalem. Nay the cause we had, was more just than that of Judah:
because the corruptions of the Western Church were all backed by Tyranny, Men
were constrained into Errors; when yet we read not at all that if a pious Jew
would have kept himself unto that one Altar at Jerusalem, he was either checked
by their Kings, or oppressed by their Priests, or condemned to Tophet by their
Sanhedrim.

Secondly, Take Schism for an opposition made against our lawful Pastors: and
our Church you will find was not guilty in this matter neither. For at that time
when the Reformation was made, we were under our own Synods only, and with what
readiness they joined in this grand Work, you have heard in my second General.
It Is true, that for some hundreds of years we had been under a known Foreign
Power (but yet such a Power as came not amongst us but by the breach of a great
General Council, as is clear from the last Canon of the first of Ephesus) A
Power, I say, Patriarchal, and so merely of Ecclesiastical Right, not of Divine
Institution. A Power which in the Ancient Church had been set up by Emperors,
as that of Iustiniana prima by Justinian in his 11th Novel: Nay 'twas openly
maintained in the great Council of Chalcedon, that all the Patriarchs had
gained their Power merely by Custom, and by Imperial Countenance: So that it is
a Power that may be taken away, without all doubt taken away, otherwise Gerson
the wise Chancellor of Paris would not have written in France, De
au^eribilitate Papae. England went f^rther, and did indeed remove that, which
others did but say was removable: but removed it was before the Reformation;
that removed it not, as men well know that know our Laws; and so we were left
but under our own Synods only; to that now besides a General Council which we
are willing to hear, we can resist no lawful Pastors but our own.

Lastly, Take Schism for that monstrous height of uncharitableness, when with
the Donatists those men who are but a part of the Church, dare call themselves
the Church Catholic, and so dare damn all the rest of Mankind, who refuse to
embrace their opinions; I could name you those who are guilty of this, but I am
sure our Dear Mother is not, who has been so mild to those that have most
highly opposed Her, that besides the Reproaches of Novelty and Schism, you all
well know she has been long reproached for her Charity. And yet when St.
Cyprian being Primate of Carthage, did in his full Synod against the sense of
the whole Church set up plain Rebaptization, St. Austin defends him from the
Tax of Schism, only because he began that Provincial Council with this
charitable Clause, Nemineni damnantes, nec a jure Communionis quempiam, si
diversum senserit, removentes, We decree this, says he, but yet we damn no
man, nor do we bar any from the Communion of Africa though he think the quite
contrary. And how punctually have we observed this Rule of good old St.
Cyprian? In these late Church-Controversies, Opinions indeed, and Actions we
condemn (and so did that Father too) but yet we damn no man's Person. For it is
he Tenor of God Laws, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, his Person, as thy self;
but it is not said, Thou shall love his Deeds or Opinions. For though what men
act or opine may be in it self damnable, yet (where they are not wilfully
perverse) customary breeding joined with ignorance or the like, may excuse the
men from damnation. And how far we have been, in such differences as these,
from debatring any Man or Communion, yea, even those that heretofore did
oppose, and now perhaps do disdain us, I appeal to the first twelve years of
Queen Elizabeth, where men apparently known to have kept their old opinions,
were not only received into the Service of our Church, but were admitted to the
Eucharist it self, the very highest act of Communion.

And now I have gone through my Text, and shall only add, That I scarce know
any Scruple, any Query they make, that may not well be solved from this
Parallel. They ask why their opinions should be condemned for Errors, if we
know not the precise time when they rose? yes, the High Places here were gross
Errors, and yet the most learned dare not say, whether they rose in the time of
the Judges, or in the days of King Solomon. They ask whether our Forefathers
were damned, who, we grant, dyed in their Religion? And we demand, whether for
so many hundred years were all the Jews damned that did worship God in High
Places? I think they were not, if they lived pious lives, and kept themselves
from all wilful ignorance. For then, tho the Errors of both Churches, the
Hebrew and the Christian too, were in themselves no less than damnable; yet by
ignorance, or by the like Apology with this, tho they made no express
repentance for a sin they knew not; yet by the ordinary dispensation of Divine
Grace, the men, we think, escaped damnation. But I have one Query more, a Case
of Conscience to leave with you. Suppose a Jew that had been rightly bred in
the Reformation of King Hezekiah, should at length fall back to do Sacrifice in
the High Places, upon confidence that his Forefathers might well be saved in
that Service, whether were not this man indeed guilty of murder, ( Lev. 17.
4.) and so not in state of Salvation, unless by express Repentance he turn back
to God, for this very Apostasy? The Resolution is easy, it scarce needs Levi's
help: and I beseech you let it be thought on, and then I hope, to turn Apostate
from a true Reformed Church will be held no slight trivial matter.

All this is to let you see the great Likeness betwixt the two Churches I have
named, Judah and England, both, were reformed, by a Power, by a Council and
Rule most approvable, without Schism, without Rebellion; in both the Ceremonies
remained decent, the Service of God daily, and honorable, and which is more
than this, tho they both removed the forbidden Altars, yet both kept the old
Priesthood too. And since God in so clear Text did approve the one, why should
any man ever doubt the other? And yet Judah in my Text was almost eaten out by
the Sword: Alas, we are in this but too like her: Although perhaps we are more
like this poor Church, when she was yet more miserable, when she mixed her
tears with the sad tenor of those words: Ps. 13. 7. By the waters of Babylon we
sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Sion. For let me assure you, 'twas
a distressed reformed Church they there remembered, and no marvel then if that
memorial were in tears: either in tears of Repentance, that their own foul sins
had brought on this great Desolation: or else in tears of longing to see that
famous Church once restored, to see God again served in the beauty of holiness,
that their Ravished Souls might once more ascend in Prayers and Hymns, or
Hallelujahs, in one of the Old Songs of Sion. Let us but sow in such tears as
these, and I should certainly hope we should e're long reap in joy; in joy
temporal, to see our King and our selves in Peace, and in joy spiritual, to see
that Church of God re-established Which God, etc.

FINIS.
^
