AN ADMONITION CONCERNING A Public FAST.

The Just CAUSES we have for it, from the full Growth of Sin, and the near
Approaches of God's Judgments;

AND The MANNER of Performance, to obtain the desired Effects thereof;

Which ought to be other than our Common Forms; and with stricter Acts of
Mortification than is usual amongst us.

With an ABSTRACT of Mr. Chillingworth's Judgment of the State of Religion in
this Na^^on in his time.

And of a Letter from the Hague concerning two Sermons Preached there in the
Fr^nch Church, at which were present diverse of the English Nobility.

LONDON, Printed in the Year M DC XCI.

To the Queen.
Madam,
SInce the Authority of your Majesty has appeared so particularly in a most
Necessary Appointment of a Public Fast and Humiliation to be Observed in most
Devout and Solemn manner for Supplicating Almighty God for Pardon of our Sins,
and Imploring his Blessing, etc. not once, but every Month during the War. It
may be presumed, that what is sincerely endeavored, that so Necessary and
Pious a Command may happily obtain its desired Effects, cannot fail of a
Favorable and Benign Construction with a person of so much Piety and Sense of
Religion: though to those Naturals or Animals, in whom the God of this World
has blinded their Minds, it cannot but seem Foolishness and Canting, as must
all Truth to those, who are both Ignorant and yet Conceited: and though to such
as are Big with the Wisdom of the World (which is Foolishness with God) ^ome
things in it may seem Rude and Presumptuous: For true Piety could bear even the
Railing of a Shimei in a time of Humiliation; and Christian Wisdom can easily
discern and distinguish between Height of Fidelity and Affection in the plain
Words of Truth and Soberness, and that Malice and Falsehood, which are always
ingredients of Railing and Presumption. Even Civil Prudence, considering the
irreparable Mischiefs, which are daily wrought in the Courts and Councils of
Princes by Treacherous Flattery, will not only permit and allow, but favor and
encourage Serious Liberty and Freedom of Speech upon just and necessary
occasion in persons of unspotted and undoubted Fidelity and Affection: But
Christian Wisdom much more; and especially in Times of Account, which call for
Humiliation, Repentance, Reformation, and Judging our Selves; and for Public
Humiliation, and particular Confession of Public and known Sins and Offenses,
with their Circumstances of Aggravation, and careful Search to discover them.
Which is the only way to lay a sure Foundation, and to be raised up by the
Mighty Hand of God.

Wherefore, Madam, presuming that I write to a person more Illustrious by such
Great Virtues, than any fading, earthly Honor or Majesty can make you, besides
what I have said in Common to all, I shall out of Fidelity and great Affection
humbly represent to your Royal Consideration some few things more particularly
relating to your self.

I will not here recount the Great Things which God has done for the Gradual
raising of your Glory, nor tell you that the Eyes of all the World are upon
you, and what Great Things they Hope and Expect from you: But this I may say in
the Name of God, That his Eyes are upon you; the Eyes of the Lord, (which) run
to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of
them, whose Heart is perfect toward Him: (2 Chronicles. 16. 8.) That to whom much
is given of them, much shall be required; and, That if you justly expect from
your fellow Creatures, whom You employ, Fidelity, Zeal, and Activity,
proportionable to the Favors You confer, and the Trusts You repose in them;
much more are You obliged to perform all these to the Sovereign Lord of all in
the full Improvement of all t^ose Greater Talents of Honor, Authority and
other Advantages, which he has conferred upon You, for His Honor and Service;
and with so much the more Vigor and Resolution, by how much the greater are the
Difficulties which occur. The Highest pitch of all is the least Sacrifice that
you can offer to Him.

And therefore I will not, I may not tell you, That the Leisure, as well as the
Calm of Peace, will be necessary for this: or, That your Resolving on it
Inwardly before God, will be accepted by Him, though you defer the Actual
Performance till that Leisure and Calm, which you may never see, nor are ever
like to see, while Difficult Duties are declined, neglected or deferred. For
this would be to deceive You after the manner of the False Prophets of old? and
to expose You and Your Affairs to the Treacheries and Abuses of Dissolute and
Depraved men, who be always truer to their Vices than to their Masters. But on
the contrary, this I may be bold to affirm, that when by actual
Discountenancing and Disgracing of Vice, and Encouraging of Virtue by
distinguishing Marks of your Favor; and by a visible beginning of Reforming
your Court and your People, and particularly that Body, which of all others
should need it least, it is once understood that you are settled in those Noble
Purposes, this will make the Execution of them Easy to you, and detect the
Falsity of such dilatory Doctrines: and would have done so sooner if more
Faithful Advice had not been withstood by such as perverted the Right Ways of
the Lord, and misled those they should have directed therein. For God has
wrought in the midst of us a Mighty Deliverance; and was ready to perfect and
stablish that which he has wrought for us. But it is now apparent that
something there is, which does stop that Course of Blessings that, seems I
cannot now say, but once did seem, ready to flow in upon us. And we have now
another Count to cast up. We may and ought to recount the Mercies and Favors
of God to us: But we have now, also an Account of his Judgments and Frowns to
reflect upon: And this should lead us back to enter into another Account, viz.
of Our Sins and Provocations. For that Course of Blessings, which for some time
was only stopped, was afterward turned to a Course of Crosses and
Disappointments, or of a Mixture of Mercy and Judgment, and is now at last
turning, it may be feared, to severe Judgment, Confusion, and Destruction,
unless very speedily prevented, by strict and impartial Inquiry into the
Causes, by truly Noble and Heroic Resolutions thereupon, and by a vigilant and
vigorous Execution. For the King himself, if I, and many others, be not
mistaken, has already suffered some Diminution in some Essentials of his
Majesty, Honor, and most Prevalent Powers and is in Danger to fall lower, from
being a Glorious Instrument of God for Good and Happiness to this and many
other Nations, into the deplorable and despicable condition of being an
occasion of Confusion and Misery: only there seems a door of Hope still open
for him, upon one Consideration, if the Opportunity be not neglected; of which
more presently: but first I think fit to say something briefly concerning The
present State of Things in the World, and what may be expected from it.

In matters of Prudence, none but weak and dull, or depraved Souls will expect
Mathematical Demonstrations and Sensible Evidences, for all their Actions: God
by his Providence has purposely so ordered the Course of things, that his
Rational Creatures, Mankind, should be often necessitated to a Close
Application of their Minds, and a kind of Spiritual Discerning, in the
Management of their own Affairs. This Faculty, as may be perceived by
Experience, if well disposed, and carefully observed, extends much farther in
many-things than men are able easily to demonstrate to others, and yet even in
those often discerns very right. But such Indications may sometimes be observed
from a concurrence of various Circumstances as are Sufficient Principles of a
Moral Demonstration. My pre-apprehensions of our own Occurrences have hitherto
proved true in the Event; and I have now some Indications to help me.

It is very apparent that there have been very few Princes or Great Men in the
World for some years, or rather Ages, who have manifested in their Course of
Life any great and just apprehension of the Business of Man upon Earth, much
less of the Proper Business of Princes, and Persons under their Circumstances;
But have generally both by their Example and their Management, been more
subservient to the Kingdom of Darkness, than to the Kingdom of Light; And their
Courts, Armies, Navies, and all their great Meetings, generally little other
than Seminaries and Nurseries of Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Injustice,
Oppression, Luxury, Impiety, Profaneness, and all manner of Vice and
Wickedness; where Souls in great numbers have been trained up and habituated to
all the Diabolical Qualities of that dismal crew: and so deceived and abused
have they been by False Prophets and other Instruments of that Kingdom,
appearing great in the World in pomp and grandeur, magnifick Names and Titles,
the superficial Ornaments of Literature and Wisdom of the World, (all directly
contrary to the Simplicity of the Gospel) that they have believed it must be
so, and cannot be otherwise; we must not expect Armies of Saints; and so have
plainly given over all Care of Reformation of those things, as Impracticable,
Platonic or Phanatick-Phansies.

It is likewise apparent that the People in all places, even where has been,
or still is the greatest Profession of Religion, (both Laity and Clergy) are
most grievously degenerated and corrupted; a great part with the most gross
Vices, and scandalous Sins; others of more consideration and sense of
Reputation, some with Atheism and Infidelity; others with Formality or
Superstition; some with Hypocrisy and Faction; and most of the very best with
over-valuation of the things of the World, and with Pride of some Worldly
Advantage, of Birth, of Estate, Favor with Great Men, Wit, Learning, Apparel,
Attendance, or some such Hobbyhorse or other, over-looking diverse necessary
Christian Virtues, and even to despise and be ashamed of Christ himself in his
Members, if appearing in the genuine form of their Master; so that a Genuine
Complete Christian is rare to be found in the World, especially among those who
have the greatest share of it: and the Sins both of Princes and of People seem
to have overgrown all the Methods of the Divine Providence for their Amendment.

And it is also apparent that such are the Posture and Motions of Humane
Affairs at this time in Europe, as are plain Indications that Almighty God by
his Providence is producing some Great Alteration in this part of the World
very suddenly. And what this is like to be is well and carefully to be
considered. Nor is it any presumption to do this soberly; but so far from that,
that to discern the Signs of the Times is a plain and necessary Duty; the
Neglect or Non-observance whereof is condemned in the Jews in the like case, by
our Savior, and before by the Prophets.

The present Posture of Affairs is a State of War, which is one of God's
Judgments, for the Punishment of Princes and Nations, and such as the present
Sinful State both of Princes and People has justly deserved, and we may
therefore reasonably conclude has provoked. This War is between two great
Parties, the French and Turk on the one side, and the Emperor and the
Confederates on the other: And most Princes and States are concerned in it. And
if we consider the Motions of this War, it was begun by the French King in
secret Confederacy with the Turk and the late Kings of England, without any
Color of Justice, merely to gratify a Proud, Haughty, Insolent, Luciserian,
Domineering Humor, and carried on with barbarous Cruelty, even upon his own
Subjects, and Devastation abroad. But the Divine Providence at last interposed,
and put a Hook in his Nostrils, deprived him of the Assistance of both his
Confedarates, and turned the Strength of one of them against him; and thereby
gave an offer of Mercy, and a fair Opportunity to the Confederates to have been
the Instruments of his Judgments against that Wicked Insolent Invader, had they
wisely improved that Divine Favor, for the Service of God and the Reformation
and Good of the People.

But they have all been insensible of, and unhappily neglected their Duty; and
have likewise in a great measure lost that fair opportunity put into their
hands; so that the Favor of the Divine Providence seems in some sort to have
forsaken them, and gone over to their Enemies for the Punishment of this and all
their former Sins and Miscarriages, and Unprofitableness for his Service. And
indeed whether we consider the Provocations of God's Judgments by this Neglect
under such Circumstances, or the present State of Affairs (which I cannot here
particularly observe) both present us with too just reasons for some
apprehensions, That that cruel and barbarous Tyrant may now be made the
Terrible Instrument of the Divine Vengeance, for purging these Countries of
that Wickedness, which they would not reform; and for casting out such
unprofitable Servants; unless it be prevented immediately by some extraordinary
and vigorous Means of Reformation.

For, as all the Judgments of God are for Punishment of Sin, and Reformation of
Manners; so the Common Sinful State of all Nations in these parts, and the
General Commotions of all, are a plain Indication of some Great Judgment coming
upon all, who do not prevent it by speedy Repentance, and some notable
Reformation. And because the Judgments of God are frequently executed not only
upon Persons, but in a special manner also upon such Things, as have been much
abused to his dishonor or disservice, the Great Work, which all these
Commotions overruled by the Holy Providence of God tend to, may in all
probability be, not only the Punishment of the Persons of all degrees, but the
putting down or abolishing of all that Rule, Authority and Power in the World,
which has been so abused, unprofitable and disserviceable to their Great and
proper Master, to make way for that Glorious Kingdom and Blessed Theocracy,
which shall never be destroyed. This was begun, and should have been done by
the Confederates against that Insolent Tyrant and common Oppressor, had they
well considered their Business and subjected their Power to Their Sovereign,
and used their Authority in subservience to this Great Work, first by
Reformation of themselves and of the People subjected to them. But they not
considering, but neglecting this principal Part, the present Posture of things
seems to theraten, That they may be first suppressed and the Sins and
Wickedness of themselves and their People punished, by Him, and Himself at last
for all his Insolence and Wickedness by some extraordinary Judgment. Yet
possibly there is not any of them all, but if they shall in time open their
Eyes, and without any sinister Designs to set up themselves, apply their Power
sincerely and by direct and proper Means to promote the Service of GOD in this
Great Work, they may be received and well rewarded, both with Honor here, and
Happiness hereafter.

Of all the Confederates, none has been more highly favored by an
Extraordinary Providence than King William; but in my apprehension, none has
more failed than he, considering his circumstances, in the Duty incumbent upon
him; nor is any in greater danger both in that respect, and in respect of the
present State of his Affairs, which I take to be in all respects the
Consequence of that. Only there seems to be yet, as I said, a door of Mercy
and Favor open for him, in as much as it is now apparent, that it was not
wholly his Fault, but partly his Unhappiness, in that he had no better Guides
to direct and admonish him; and if he yet be careful and resolute to do what
he ought, though now more difficult, and therefore to be performed with so much
the greater Resolution, possibly he may recover in a great measure his former
Prosperous Condition; though I doubt that He may suffer such loss, as may be
just matter for a longer Sorrow and Repentance; and that he that has troubled
both Him and us shall bear his Judgment, whoever he be, unless he prevent it by
some proper and eminent Works of Repentance.

Many things more I had to have said: but this first Work is of so great
Importance, that unless it be instantly and effectually provided for, it will
be in vain to think of farther applications. Nay our very Fasting and
Humiliation, and all the Prayers in the World, will avail nothing, unless the
Troublers of Israel be brought forth, and the Accursed thing be removed. If
this were once well resolved upon and concluded, it would not be hard to detect
greater Troublers of our Israel, than those who are now in danger of their
Lives; and soon to put things into such a posture of Security, as the King need
not fear Confusions in his Absence, which otherwise may be feared.

Yet one thing there is most peculiar to your self that however ought not to be
omitted upon this oceasion; and that is the manifest Judgments of God upon your
own Royal Family, and upon so near a Relation as a Father; and Judgments both
Spiritual, of strong Delusions; and Temporal, of just and deserved Exclusion
from the Government of these Nations. The due Consideration whereof will easily
discover several Obligations upon you. 1. The Consideration of such Unhappiness
of so near a Relation (which is matter not only of particular Humiliation, but
of continual Grief and Mourning) requires great Seriousness in all your
behavior, and Circumspection lest Prosperity make you forget it, and thereby
offend God, and so bring Evil upon your self. 2. The Consideration of the
Provoking Causes requires, first, your Humiliation under them, and that you be
content and willing, and desirous that they may be plainly and fully detected:
first, that you may avoid them, and all participation in them, lest you be
overtaken and involved in the Judgments of God upon them: but, secondly and
principally, for the Glory of God, and manifestation of the Righteousness of
his Judgments: for should you offer to hinder this, as it would tend to the
Scandal of his Righteous Judgments, so it would certainly provoke him to detect
all some other way to your greater Shame and Confusion, and bring the same
Judgments upon your self. Secondly, It requires your utmost Care and
Circumspection all your life long to avoid them, that you abhor them, come not
near them, lest they lay hold on you: for of all they are the most dangerous
for You, by reason of the Participation in so great a Store of Guilt, and the
Warning given you by such Judgments, and the special Temptations you are like
to meet with.

There is an Iniquity in that Family, which might be traced a great way back
into Scotland; but King James I, came into England by the Favor of Providence,
in a State of Mercy. And therefore we need look no farther back for this
purpose. By and under the same Favor have all his Successors come to the
Throne, and your self in particular: but they all forseited it, and that You
may not, is this plain Advice written. His great Sins, which have most ensnared
his Posterity were, 1. Great Injustice, and a very wicked Design by a Mystery
of Iniquity to subvert a Noble Constitution of Government, which God had
entrusted him with, and he had sworn to mainian; and, 2. Abuse and Profanation
of Religion to serve his Unrighteous Design. To give a particular account of
each of these would be too long for this place. But there are two Effects
thereof which have ever since been very pernicious to his Posterity and to the
Kingdom, and at the present are the greatest occasions of Trouble and Danger to
Your Government, above all other. The one is, False Notions concerning the
Constitution of this Government, Prerogative, and the Rights of the People,
which cost your Grandfather his Head, and your Father his Crown, and at present
mislead many worthy and honest Persons, to be your Adversaries, who would
otherwise have been your loyal and faithful Subjects; and would be much more
mischievous to you, if you should by that Faction, Flattery, or any Temptation
be once possessed with them. They are in their original, a Mystery of Iniquity,
a wicked Imposture, and such as the Vengeance of the Righteous God has pursued,
and still will, till they be eradicated; and it concerns you much to be very
careful to avoid them, and that the Occasions and Stumbling-stones be removed
by some deliberate Acts of King and Parliament, and of a Convocation: for they
will otherwise prove a Root of Bitterness to the whole race of the Author.
Your Government is Just and Rightful, let but the Execution of it be so too,
and God's Blessing will be upon it. The other is, the Overspreading of
Profaneness and Formality, which all Governors are obliged to use their
utmost Care and Endeavors to reform, but You doubly, that you may also
discharge your self of the Guilt of your Ancestors; I might say trebly, viz.
also out of Gratitude for the special Mercies and Favors you have received.
Nay it is your special Business, as much to suppress that, as to cast out
Popery, without which you cannot prosper.

That God will bless your Majesty, and that you may be faithful to him, and to
the Trust reposed in You, and may flourish in all Grace and Virtue and
Prosperity, is the hearty Prayer of,

Your Loyal and Faithful Subject,

AN ADMONITION Concerning A PUBLIC FAST, TO Implore the Mercy and Favor of
GOD for the Averting of his Judgments, and the Recovering of his Blessing.
BEcause I have heard that we are like to have a Proclamation for a Public
Fast; or however, because I am certain we have great need to have one, at least
for the use of those who desire to be found Mourners in secret for the
Abominations that be done in the Land; I have thought fit, as an Act of Duty to
God, and Charity to my Country, to publish this brief Admonition concerning the
present just Causes we have for it, and that manner of Performance of it, which
must be observed if we expect any good effect thereof. I did formerly, upon
occasion of the Fast, Jun. 5. 1689. publish a Paper Of Humiliation, of which
one of the Scoffers of the latter Times, at a Coffee-House scoffingly said, He
supposed that would do more Service than 20000 Men in Ireland. But how long did
we afterward see more than 20000 Men lie near the Enemy there, and do nothing
at all! Not dare to attack them, though one would think encouraged enough with
so great and easy Success then so lately in England! But of the Invisible
Powers, which attend and interpose in the Affairs of Men, such brutish Animals
have little Sense or Apprehension. And therefore it is not unlikely that this
may meet with the like Entertainment: But I am persuaded that they shall
proceed no further, and that their Impiety will very shortly meet with a due
Correction, if not before by the Hand of Governors, by the Hand of Providence
and the Sword of an Enemy in the midst of them.

And therefore, leaving them to their own severe Mistress, to proceed, There
are two great Causes to provoke us to an extraordinary Humiliation at this
time. 1. The Fullness and Ripeness of Sin. 2. The near Approaches of a terrible
Judgment. Concerning the former to say nothing of other Evidences of its
Maturity, this one I think is sufficient, When it is become past Remedy by
Humane Means, it must needs be ripe for the Judgments of God. And then
certainly is it past all Humane Means, when it has either so infected the
Governors and Ministers that they will not, or is become so prevalent that they
cannot or dare not correct it, or punish it as it ought. And this is plainly
our Case. Rarely has any Prince been more plainly admonished of a Special
Duty, and of the dangerous Consequence of the Neglect of it than King William
has been, and in due Time: And as rarely any more plainly admonished of his
Fault when committed, and of the Mischiefs thereby incurred, than he bath been
again and again. Never was Parliament more plainly admonished of a foul Fault
in the beginning of so great a Work, than our Convention was of that-in their
Order for the Thanksgiving, (which has proved a Root of Bitterness ever since)
but so senseless in such matters is this Generation grown, that I doubt we have
some Doctors, who do not understand it to this Day. Nor ever were Parliaments
more provoked to their Duty by plain-dealing than ours have been again and
again. Lastly, never were Bishops more honestly and plainly told of their Duty,
nor more justly and homely reproved for their most shameful Neglect, than ours
have been. But alas! here is the Root of all our Evil. Their Unfaithfulness to
God, whose special Service was their proper business; Unfaithfulness to Kings,
whom they have magnified above measure, and more slattered for their own
Advantage, than faithfully admonished for the Service of God, and been more
forward to conspire with to subvert the Rights of their Country, than to
admonish them of their Duty both to God and Man, to be Protectors of the Right
of the meanest Subject. Their Neglect of their Episcopal Authority for Reproof
and Correction of the Scandalous Sins, especially of Great Men, against the
Laws of God; and on the contrary, Abuse of it for punishment of Sober and
Conscientious People with the utmost Severity for any breach of their own
Canons, or Laws made for their Advantage; has been the greatest Inlet of all
our Mischief, of the Brutish and Carnal Sins of the Nation: And again, their
earnest and endless pursuit of Preferments, and mis-imployment of what they
get, has been the great Incentive to those Animal Sins of Covetousness and
Ambition, which have betrayed the Nation, and been the immediate Means to bring
the Judgments of God so near to us, as they are at this time. Nor is this all:
But besides their Unprositableness in that great Place and Advantage, which
they had to have done good in the Parliament, they have not only heretofore
been the Principal Obstructors of many good things, which have been proposed
and begun in the House of Commons, but have of late laid aside a Bill for the
necessary Reformation of Manners, and preventing the approaching Judgments of
God, which was drawn at the Request of some of them, without offering any other
in the place of it. And besides, some of them have not only in private
obstructed the good Effect of those faithful Admonitions, which have been given
to the King, by misrepresenting the Person to him who sent them, as if the
Truth and Weight of the Admonitions had not been the only thing to be regarded,
whoever was the Instrument; but have at last even from the Pulpit, in the Face
of the World, encouraged the King to Security in Neglect of that great Duty,
which had been so earnestly pressed in those Admonitions for his own Good; and
done it in such a manner, as never any of the false Prophets of old, (except
only their Pretense of special revelation or the great Enemy of Mankind could
have done more subtily and plausibly: Which though of sad Consideration in
other respects, yet may give the more hope of the Kings Case, that there is in
it so much the less of Fault as there is more of Unhappiness, in that he has
been so unfaithfully dealt with by those about him. And if with this we take.
into the Consideration the Bishops Excuse, why they did not offer the Bill in
the House of Lords, viz. Lest a thing of that Nature should be ridicaled and
contemned, and Religion with it. I suppose no serious Man but will acknowledge
all this to be sufficient Evidence of the Prevalence and full Maturity of Sin
and Wickedness in this Nation.

And now concerning the near Approaches of God's Judgments upon the Nation.
Every Affliction or Calamity upon a Person or Nation is not presently to be
reputed a Judgment or Punishment of Sin. Some may be for the Glory of God, and
some for Exercise of his Creatures. But when we see notorious and provoking
Sins followed with proportionable Calamities and Afflictions, then we may
safely conclude them Judgments; especially when we see Afflictions after
Afflictions, or Interchanges of Afflictions and Mercies, and the Afflictions
more and more increasing, but the Provocations no whit abated, but either still
increasing, or Men more and more hardened in them, and insensible of God's
Judgments, that is a dangerous Sign that some terrible Judgment is not far off.
But when in such Case a particular Calamity is as visible as a Cloud in the
Air, and as likely to fall upon a Nation, as such a Cloud to break into a
Storm, (as when you see Jerusalem encompassed with Armies) then the Approaches
of that Judgment are very near. And whether this be not the Case of this Nation
at this time, deserves our very serious Consideration speedily. Of the Ripeness
and Maturity of the Sins of the Nation I have given sufficient Evidence before:
It remains thereof only to consider what Prospect there is of any particular
Calamity visible, which may probably or possibly be approaching this Nation.
And if we look back for most part of these Thirty Years last past, there has
been a Storm in brewing, often ready to break out very terribly both upon these
and some Neighbor Nations; but it has pleased God that it has as often blown
over, and served only for so many Warnings. And it was within these three years
that we were in very great Danger, we and our Neighbors too; and it pleased
God to give us as great, and a very extraordinary Deliverance. But how little
good Effect it has had upon us, may be understood by what is said already; to
which I will add only this, that as we profaned our Thanksgiving for our
Deliverance with a frothy Complement to the Instrument, so do we now make a
sport and a Trade of the Approaches of God's Judgments; a matter that has more
of Sin and Provocation in it, than this Sensual Generation is apprehensive of
and a very ill Sign of a dangerous Condition. Certainly God, after so great a
Manifestation of his Providence in our Deliverance, expected other and more
substantial Returns than such a Formality; and when we notwithstanding
neglected our Duty, he was graciously pleased the first year to correct our
Neglect only with a Suspension of his Blessing; all things were at a stand with
us, nothing prosper'd or succeeded: But when we still continued our Neglect, he
proceeded one degree further, to a smarter Chastisement by a shameful Bafflle
of our Fleet at Sea, through the Unfaithfulness or Fearfulness (so suitable a
Punishment) of some employed in that Service; to say nothing of other
Misfortunes elsewhere. And now we are come to the third year without any
Amendment, and with a bolder and brisker Attempt of a Powerful and Active
Adversary, very early, and with good Success, in the View, in a manner, of the
King himself; and perhaps not without some Error committed through Fearfulness,
if not Unfaithfulness in some of his Council of War. And if we well consider
how Powerful, Active and Forward our Adversary is, how distracted our Allies
are abroad, how divided we our selves are at home; how unfaithfully, or
unwisely, or unsuccessfully our Affairs are managed both at home and abroad, we
have reason to fear the Approaches of a very terrible Judgment very near. And
if things be well examined, we may apprehend not only a Proportionable but a
Suitable Judgment in all, Unfaithfulness, Fearfulness of God's Enemies, and
adhering to Dilatory wicked Councils, punished with like Unfaithfulness,
Fearfulness of our Enemies, and like Dilatory Counsels in those we employ. And
for the nearness of the Approaches of Judgments, at the very instant, while I
am writing this, are we alarmed with a terrible beginning of a Fire breaking
out in the Royal Palace at Whitehal. Certainly, we have great Reason to believe
that the Accomplishment of Bishop Usher's Prediction is very near, and that we
may soon be taught what Monsieur St. Jean's Thunder under Ground did import, by
a sudden Resurrection and Eruption of the Plots, which the Unsaithfulness and
Deceitfulness of some have so politickly buried, if not prevented by a very
speedy Alteration of our Ordering of things so as may be both more for the
Honor and Service of God, that we may recover his Favor and Blessing, and
better for the Security of the Nation, which his Favor and Blessing alone can
help and lead us to.

For the Recovery of which, (which is my next business) we must

1. First consider the Majesty of God, with whom we have to do, in respect of
which the greatest Majesty upon Earth is Ten Thousand times less than the
faintest Shadow we can behold, and the greatest Monarch but a Butterfly; nay,
less than the meanest and most despicable Animal. He is a God of infinite Mercy
indeed, but withal of absolute Justice and Holiness, and very terrible in his
Judgments against obstinate and incorrigible Sinners.

2. We must next consider the sinful State and Condition of the Nation; the
Universality of it, having overspread all Orders, our Kings, our Nobles, our
Priests and our Prophets, and all Ranks and Degrees of our People. The Growth
and long Continuance of it, and the Impudence and Obstinacy of it, out-facing
all Humane Authority, and standing out without Remorse against the various
repeated Divine Methods, both of Judgments and Mercies, to bring us to
Repentance and Reformation: And the great Danger, it is now again fallen into
by reason of our unprofitableness upon so late and great a Mercy and
Deliverance as our last was.

3. And when with such Considerations we are affected with such a sense of our
Condition as is meet, and a sincere internal Contrition, we must speedily apply
our selves to give Glory to God, by serious and solemn External Actions of
Humiliation; appointing of Days for the purpose, afflicting our Souls in strict
Fasting and Mortification, confessing the Sins of the Nation, of our Kings, and
our Priests, and our Prophets, and all sorts amongst us, plainly and truly with
great Seriousness and sense of the Evil of them, and the Justice of all the
Judgments we either feel or fear, with humble and earnest Supplications and
Deprecations. But this, if it be done to purpose, had need be done in another
manner than is usual in the Forms of the Church of England, and with more
strictness in the Acts of Mortification than is usual amongst u.

When Public Sins and manifest Judgments require Public Humiliation, then to
neglect it is a great Aggravation of the Sin and Provocation of Judgment: To
appoint a Day, and not to observe it with the greatest Seriousness, Solemnity
and Strictness, is to lose our Labor, profane a Sacred Duty, and add a
greater Aggravation and Provocation.

4. But if all thus far be performed never so well and exactly, yet there
remains one thing more, which if neglected, will certainly not only frustrate
the Effect of all the rest, but convert it to the highest Aggravation and
Provocation. And that is the Removal of the Accursed Thing, whatever it be, and
Reformation of what is amiss, instantly, if it be such as may be done
instantly. However, to set about it, and do what may be done toward it;
instantly, and then pursue it with great Resolution and Constancy till it be
thoroughly accomplished; Banish all false Prophets, who have deceived us into
Neglect and Procrastination of so important and necessary a Duty, and thereby
brought us into so much Mischief and Danger; and make Examples of Notorious
Scandalous Persons; and by doing all that can be for the present, declare both
to God and Man a firm Resolution to go thorough with it, by the Blessing of
God, whatever Difficulties occur in the way. No Difficulties or Dangers must
stop or stay us: It is for our Life And there is no greater Danger than in the
Neglect or Delay of so indispensable a Duty. We must remember in this case, as
well as in many others, that Warning of our Savior, He who will lose his Life,
(or what else is most valuable) for my sake, shall save it: But he who will
save it (thinks to secure it by neglect or transgression of his Duty or Respect
to me) shall lose it, and certainly find himself mightily mistaken in his
Policy. Nor must we rest in an ordinary Performance of this part of our Duty:
For the Judgments which threaten both the King and the Nation at this time, if
I mistake not, are very great, and require the Zeal of Phinehas to avert them,
and pacify the Wrath of God.

And here I must take notice of a matter, which deserves to be well considered,
though I doubt few ever think of it, and that is of Giving Glory to God in
respect of his former Judgments, and doing what is necessary for cleansing of
the Nation from the Guilt and Pollution of the former Sins, of which it is not
yet purged as it ought to be. We have these thirty years past rather politickly
than religiously kept every year the 30th of January, as the Day of the
Martyrdom of King Charles the First: But it ought to be considered, Whether
ever we have taken care to give God the Glory of his Judgments in that very
thing. It was an extraordinary thing for a King to have his Head cut off, at
his own Door, by his own Subjects. But however, if we have had more regard to
the Dead King than to the Living God, and to his Hand and Judgments in it, that
will prove such a piece of Hypocrisy, as may concern the Church of England to
look to it in time, lest God by his Judgments set it out to their Shame or
Confusion. And for the late K. James, if we can satisfy our selves with our
Acquests, and take no care to manifest to the World the Justice of our own
Proceedings in the late Revolution, certainly we ought in Gratitude to God to
have given him the Glory of his Justice as well as his Mercy in it, by public
Examination and Justice upon some of the notorious Criminals. And I doubt not
but the Judgments of God will reach those Profane Politicians, who have
studiously smothered and covered such Works of Secrecy and Darkness, as ought
for the Glory of God to have been set in the Light, as well as obstructed
Justice upon more apparent Criminals. And besides, this is a thing that does so
greatly concern the King in respect of his Duty to God, that as it is a shame
to all his Bishops and Doctors and Chaplains about him, if they have been all
so unskilful in their own Profession, or so unfaithful to him, as that none of
them has admonished him, and endeavored to make him sensible of the
Importance of it; so I doubt it will be imputed to the filling up of the
measure.

But whatever be done by the Church and the State for the preventing of any
Public Judgment or Common Calamity, there is that which may be done by Private
and particular Persons, which may both help toward that, and may procure
Safety and Exemption to themselves out of it: Which I shall comprize in the
following Particulars.

The First is, to try and examine their own ways, and turn to the Lord by
Repentance and effectual Reformation of whatever is amiss, and be sure to cast
out every Root of Bitterness; leave no matter for the Fire of God's Judgments
to take hold of. If we will escape Eternal Judgments, we must beware of such
deadly Sins as procure them. And if we desire to escape Temporal Punishments,
we must be careful, and vigilant, and circumspect to avoid and cleanse our
selves from every Sin. For every Sin shall receive a just Recompense of Reward,
and the Sinner shall suffer Loss, though he himself may be saved, so as by
Fire. There is a Chastning of the Lord, by Weakness, and Sickness, and Death,
even of those who shall not be condemned with the World; and for that purpose
that they may not; which as we would avoid, we must carefully avoid all Sin;
or, if we fall into any, be careful speedily to cleanse our selves from it;
which is not to be done without Trouble. We must judge our selves, if we will
not be judged of the Lord. We must afflict our Souls. For though it be the
Blood of Christ and the Spirit of God only which can perfect our Cleansing, yet
is there something to be done by us in the use of Means, and Cooperation with
the Grace of God: As 1. Serious Consideration both of the Majesty, Holiness and
Justice of God, and of the Evil of Sin. 2. Serious use of the Means of
Humiliation, and of the External Expressions of it for the more Solemn
Acknowledgment of the Sin, and the Glory of God, in the sight of Men and
Angels. 3. Resolution and Actual Reformation, so as to abolish the Sin, as much
as may be, by Restitution, Reparation, Satisfaction, and Practice of contrary
Virtues. 4. Application to God by Supplication and Faith in our great
Propitiation, with Acts of Mercy and Charity to others. Th^^^ and such as these
We must do through the Grace of God for our Cleansing.

The next is to take great care to be of the number of those whom the good
Archbishop Usher has told us, God will hide in the Hollow of his Hand, and
under the Shadow of his Wings: And to that end often peruse and ruminate upon
that excellent Prophecy, and like excellent Description of Sanctification
printed with it; and study, and strive, and pray earnestly, and above all
things, to have that Holy Work wrought, and indelibly imprinted in their
Hearts; and to give it growth by continual Exercise and Labor of Love for the
Honor of God and Good of his Creatures, till that Noble Generous Christian
Property, of exerting our Faculties for the Common Good, make us almost forget
our selves, and carry us beyond all Private Respect: Which yet is no more than
we see imprinted in the Nature of a poor Animal; a fearful Hen, which will fly
at a Kite and a Mastiff for the safety of her Chickens, from which she would
otherwise fly as fast to save her self. What Brutes are we, who will not out of
our selves for the God of our Lives, and the Center of our Happiness!

The third is, to look out into the World; behold and consider well the
deplorable state and condition of this Nation; and indeed, of all the Reformed
Churches, by reason of the full Growth of Sin amongst them, and the Terrible
Judgments of God, which threaten them, and seem so near approaching after so
extraordinary a Mercy lately afforded them, and a Day of Salvation, which they
seem to have neglected, without any Sense of the Duties, which such a Divine
Favor and Opportunity required; that so they may become Mourners in secret, as
well for the Indignities offered to God and our Savior, and the Abuse of a
most Holy and Excellent Religion, as for the Calamities, which we have great
reason to fear are coming upon them, for Just Punishment of all that
Wickedness, which no Means could prevail with them to reform; and may be the
better fitted to perform their Part in a Public Humiliation.

The Fourth and Last is to do what they can for the Reformation of others, and
thereby for the averting or mitigating of the Judgments of God. The Zeal of one
Phinehas turned away the Wrath of God from the Children of Israel, that he did
not destroy them. And besides it was imputed to him for Righteousness; and he
obtained thereby a Blessing upon himself and his Posterity, Numb ^^^ 11, 13.
Psalm. 106. 31. and many such, tho private Persons, (...) even of the Lower
Ranks of Men, might do much Good to the Nation; and especially to themselves,
and their own Families. This may, and must be done by these Means.

1. By well ordering their own Families, if they have any; and that 1. By Daily
Prayers in their Families; for which purpose there are many good Books to be
had, to help them who need. 2. By Religious Observance of the Lord's Day,
taking care that all of their Family frequent and reverently attend to the
Public Worship of God, and employ the rest of the Day in Reading, and other
Religious Employment. 3. By Instructing, Admonishing, Reproving, and Correcting
such as may need or give occasion for it; and discharging from their Service
and Employment such as are incorrigibe. Of which more presently.

2. By Admonishing and Reproving their Familiar Friends and Relations, and such
at they converse with, as occasion may serve or require; Thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy Neighbor that thou bear not sin for him, Lev. 19. 17. and using
their best Endeavors, that the obstinate, who will not be reformed by such
means, may be punished and corrected by the Magistrates and Governors. Wherein
if they may seem to lose their Labor through the Unrighteousness of those in
Authority, yet their Labor will not be in vain in the Lord: And besides, if
they be constant and unmovable in the Work of the Lord, they will animate one
another; and the Importunity of many will by degrees, by God's Blessing,
prevail against the Unrighteousness of such Judges.

This is a Duty of greater Weight and Obligation than most Men are sensible of:
And the Neglect of it has given great Occasion to the Growth of Sin and
Wickedness amongst us to that Maturity and Fullness it is come to, and to the
present Unhappiness of the Nation: And therefore now under our Circumstances is
it so much the more to be put in Execution with Zeal and Vigor against all
(tho they be as thy Right Hand, or thy Right Eye) by whom the Offense comes,
they must not be spared; thine Eye shall not pity them, neither shall thou
spare them, neither shall thou conceal them; so shall thou put the Evil way
from the midst of thee; however from thy self, and deliver thine own Soul, if
it cannot longer be kept off from the Nation. But could such a Spirit of Zeal
be raised, but in the Despised People, it would be no little Ground of Hope
still. And why should it not? We see it in some Particulars upon occcasion; and
may see it in more, if they be but rightly informed. There is not less reason
for it against Debauchery than against Popery; it is not less injurious to our
Religion, nor less dangerous to our Nation; nay, it is believed by many Men of
Learning and Knowledge of Affairs, that it is one of the Bastard Brats of
Popery, and the most pernicious of all, produced by their Councils, and
faustred by their Agents, that they might unman us, and expose us to the Wrath
of God, and the Fury of our Enemies. All therefore who have any Zeal or
Indignation against Popery, ought to turn it mightily against this. First, to
resent the Abuse put upon them by the Midianites, and their own Folly and
Madness so easily to be led into the Snare, as at the same time that they are
so warm against the Papists, to be through want of Consideration, their very
Instruments to promote their Designs for the Destruction of this Nation; and at
the same time that they profess so much Zeal for the Protestant Religion, to
offer greater Indignities to it, than any Adversary possibly can: And upon such
Considerations bethinking themselves well, first deliberately and resolutely
with Indignation and Zeal breaking through those Enchantments, and mending
their own Manners; in the next place give their Zeal as full Vent against
Debauchery as they would against Popery; and against all such infatuated and
enchanted Tools of theirs, all debauched People, wherever they meet with them
in their Debaucheries, as they would do against any Priests or Jesuits, who
could never hurt us, were we not first weakened and exposed by our Sins and
Wickedness. Consider how they would take it, if a Man to their Face should
reproach their Father, or their Mother, their near Relation or intimate Friend,
their great Benefactor, or their Master, Lord, or Prince, or declare himself
ill affected to their Country; and know, that, if they have any thing of
Manhood or Generosity in them, the Indignities done to God, the Supreme Monarch
of the World, and, the Father, Lord, and great Benefactor to us all, and to our
most Holy and Excellent Religion, the only complete means of all Happiness both
here and hereafter, are Provocations Ten Thousand times greater and more
reasonable to exert it to the utmost, and to treat all Profane and wicked
People accordingly; that so that Impudent Profaneness and Leudness, which at
present fills all places, should not dare henceforward to appear abroad, or in
our Streets. This might, for ought I know, were it well considered and
encouraged, save the Nation.

3. By a general (tho implicit) Reproof of the corrupt Manners of the Age, and
a kind of bearing Witness against them, declaring a Disallowance and Abhorrence
of them, that is, by avoiding and abstaining from all Communication either with
the scandalous Persons, or with the corrupt manners thereof.

That we should avoid all Conversation with Evil and Scandalous Persons there
are diverse considerable Reasons: Because 1. It may be a Temptation to us to
corrupt our Manners in diverse respects. 2. It may give Advantage to the Evil
Powers, which reside and rule in them, to hurt us. For there is a secret
Spiritual Impression of Good or Evil in Company, such as it is, which few Men
observe, or are sensible of, 3. It may be scandalous to us, if it be intimate
or familiar, which is a thing we ought carefully to avoid. 4. Our Holy Religion
and Profession may be affronted by them in our Presence, of which we ought also
to avoid all occasions. 5. We ought to express and manifest our Resentment and
Indignation against their wicked and scandalous Actions and Practices, for the
Honor of our Religion, and to shame them into Repentance and Reformation: But
familiar Conversation with such is an implicit deserting of our Profession,
disowning of Christ, and prostituting our Religion in an unworthy Compliance,
and a means to make them secure in their Evil Courses. For these and the like
Reasons we ought at all times to avoid them, unless when we have any hope or
design of doing good to them, but more especially under such Circumstances,
lest we be Partakers in their Sin, or tainted by them; lest we be Partakers in
their Punishment, and suffer with them; and that we may assert and vindicate
the Honor of our Religion, and shame them into Repentancc and Reformation.

By this means may the meanest Person many times have opportunity to give a
tacit Reproof, and such as by the Blessing of God may prove very effectual, to
the greatest. And every one ought to do it as they have occasion, without
regard to their own worldly Interest or Benefit to be had by them, or to the
Worldly Dignity of the Person, without respect of Persons. For to neglect it
for Private Interest, is to prostitute Religion, and apply to the Devils
Instruments, instead of dependence upon God for Supplies, (if we really need
them) and his Blessing. And to do otherwise out of respect to any such Person,
be his Degree what it will, is to prefer a wicked Creature before our Creator
and Redeemer, to prefer external Temporal Honor, before real, intrinsic, and
eternal, and to show more respect to the Enemies of God, who dishonor him, and
despise his Laws, than to God himself upon whom we depend. Both which, whatever
Men think of them, are more wicked and profane than I can here set out as they
deserve, and are ready means to provoke God, whose Cause is thereby deserted,
to desert them who do so, and leave them to have their part with such Company,
with Insidels and Unbelievers. It is so in the meanest Christian, and therefore
let those of higher degree look to it, how they will answer the Transgression
of this Duty to God, when they are called to account for it, which may be
sooner than they expect. It is that which every one ought with great Care to
observe, who desires to be found faithful to God, and to be preserved in the
Common Calamity by his special Favor. The meanest Servants ought to avoid such
Masters and Families; and if by mistake they fall into them, to manifest their
Dissatisfaction, get leave to be gone; and if that cannot be had, to fly with
Moses into the Wilderness, rather than abide with such wicked Egyptians: Every
Tradesman to despise their Custom, and every Artist, Mechanic and Labourer
their Service or Employment, and all to avoid so much as to Salute them, or
show them any respect, which would be to be Partaker of their Evil Deeds: Be
they who they will, who have so little Discretion, or Command of themselves, as
to contemn and affront even the Laws, Government and Religion of the Nation,
and all the sober People of it, they ought to be slighted and despised by
the-very Footmen, Carmen, and all sorts of People; and if they offer to draw
their Sword, or injure any, to be trod in the Dirt, as the Pests of the Nation,
and Instruments of all our Unhappiness; only Magistrates, and Men in Authority,
which is God's Ordinance, must not be affronted, but left to the Judgments of
God, if those who have power over them will not regard it.

And for the Manners of the Age, besides those gross and scandalous sins, there
are diverse others, which must be avoided and reformed, and cleansed, if we
would endeavor to purpose to escape the Fire of God's Judgments. Such are 1.
All secret Sins, secret and mean in their Commitment, and concealed from the
View of Men. God will certainly find these out, and manifest his All-seeing
Providence in the severe Punishment of them, if not prevented by a timely and
thorough Repentance and Reformation. 2. Such as in their own Nature are not
apparent and distinguishable enough to be corrected by Humane Laws, Censure or
Cognizance; which are many and various: As, Abuse of Aliments in indulgence to
the Appetite, wherein a great part of the People of this plentiful Nation are
guilty of Excess to their own Hurt, but especially those brutish Epicures, who
glory in their shame, and turning their Paunches into Dunghils by a modish
Foolish Term, of eating Well, would recommend a beastly ravenous Action: Ease
and Luxury, Sports, and Idle and Unprofitable Employments, Loss of Time, and
diverse great Advantages, without Benefit to others, or to themselves: Abuse of
the Talents of Estates and Wealth, which ought to be employed for the Honor and
Service of God, and the Good of Men, to Vainglory and Ostentation in Apparel,
Buildings, Furniture, Attendants, and such like Pomps and Vanities, which the
ancient Christians solemnly renounced at their Baptism, and as carefully
avoided ever after; and, (which doubles the Sin) even to Emulations beyond
proportion, which draw many other Mischiefs after them, to themselves, their
Families, and many other, by the means next to be mentioned: Covetousness, and
Ambition, and insatiable Greediness and pursuit of things of the World, and the
cursed Fruits thereof, Frauds, Cheats, Exactions, Extortions, Oppressions,
Breach of Trust, Faction and Treacheries against King and Country, for Pensions
from Foreign Princes, and Preferments at home. 3. Such as are covered, and
palliated, and patronized by Modes, Fashions, Customs of the World, and
pretense of Necessity for the management and promotion of Trade, whereof diverse
are mentioned already in general, and need not be repeated.

These, though spread over this Nation, (to say nothing of other Protestant
Countries) are most rife and notorious in this Great City, which give great
Cause to fear some special Judgment upon it. And though I have always been a
Friend to it, yet I think my self obliged to bear my Testimony against the
Iniquity thereof in one notorious Part, and that is Abuse of Apprentices after
great Sums of Money received with them. I my self have had no less than four
Sons, as soberly Educated and as well esteemed as most, before they came to be
Apprentices, and who behaved themselves afterward without any great
Extravagancies, placed here to suitable Trades, with no little Pains and
Charge, yet after all ruined and undone by the Iniquity and Wickedness of their
Masters and their Partners. But I have seen the Judgments of God upon two of
them already; and to him I have committed my Cause with the other two. This I
write upon my own sad Experience, and could say as much of my own Knowledge in
the case of some others. Of which I have written heretofore in a Paper,
Entitled, Relief of Apprentices, and mention it now as a Common Cause worthy
of Consideration, amongst others, of the Magistrates for averting the Judgments
of God from the City.

And while I write this of a Case wherein I my self have been so much
concerned, I cannot but be sensible of the case of some others which I often
see and hear of, and in Faithfulness to God and to the State, and Charity to
the poor People, take notice of it upon this occasion: And that is the Pressing
of Men, and sending them out of the Realm, to Sea, or beyond Sea, by Force and
Violence against their Wills. I cannot find, or learn upon Enquiry, that there
is any Law or Statute, since those made in the Reign of King Charles I. are
expired, for the Pressing of Mariners and Sailers, much less of Land-Men, And
if there be not, I am sure it is contrary to a Principal Fundamental Right of
the People, whose Goods, much less their Persons or Liberty, cannot be touched
but by Order of Law and their own Consent in Parliament; and would frustrate
the principal Design and Reason of the Habeas Corpus Act, and render it
ridiculous and contemptible in Cases of greatest Exigence, and most needing its
Relief. The Rights of the Poor, ought to be preserved inviolable, as well as of
the Greatest: And they who can be content to see their own Rights violated in
the meanest of their Countrymen, while their own Persons and Estates are
untouched, do not deserve to have them preserved; and may expect that they or
their Posterity may, by the just Judgment of God, be deprived of them. Nor can
I see any Reason, why the Poor of the Land, who enjoy so little of it, should
be frighted from their Employments, and forced from their Families, Friends,
and the Trades and Labors to which they have been used, to hazard their Limbs
and their Lives against their own Wills, to defend and maintain the
Superfluities and Grandeur of the Rich? Or how the Death of such in the Service
being forced against their Will, tho by Law, unless they first forfeit their
Right by their own ill Behavior, can be excused from Murder in the sight of
God? Nor Lastly, How we can expect that either such should do any Great
Service, or that the Blessing of God should be with us in the use of such
unreasonable Means. If we enquire into the Methods of our Ancestors in such
Case, we shall find them more just and reasonable, more prudent and honorable,
and more prosperous and successful, when Men of Honor and Interest covenanted
with the King to bring in their several Numbers, raised them among their
Tenants and Neighbors, and led them themselves; so that there was a mutual
Love and Confidence between the Leaders and Soldiers. But this mode of
Pressing, if I be not much mistaken, is a novel Invention, a base Project of
the Authors of Ship-Mony, put on now, even while a Parliament is in being, to
the Prejudice of the King, as well as of the Nation, to furnish such Officers
with pressed involuntary Soldiers, who have little Interest of themselves to
raise Volunteers, and whom few are willing to serve under. And since it is done
while a Parliament is in being, which could have given Authority for it; it may
justly be looked upon as no ordinary Abuse to the King himself, but as one of
the Treacherous Policies of some Evil Persons to prejudice his Government and
Cause; make his Government offensive and suspected by the People, and his Cause
seem absurd, while his Authority is abused to violate the Rights of the People,
which he came to preserve, and in a Fundamental Point, and contrary to his
Coronation Oath; and thereby to justify or excuse the Miscarriages of his
Predecessor: For all this it plainly and directly tends to. It is true, there
is a Necessity that Men must be had: But Necessity will not excuse Injustice to
the Poor, with so great Violation of Common Right, and when without either it
may be supplied. Let not such be excluded from the Service, who are able and
willing to serve in their own Persons, and have Interest and Reputation to
bring in Seamen and Soldier Let the Salaries, Pay and Profits of Great
Officers, especially who sit at home, and are out of danger, be reduced to
Moderation, and those who venture all, have a proportionable Encouragement,
both by good Pay while in Service, and of Good Provision in case they be
disabled, and we shall want no Men, nor need any Pressing: And let but good
Discipline be exercised, as it ought to be, in respect of the Manners of
Officers as well as of Soldiers and Seamen, and we shall not want God's
Blessing.

But to leave these things to the Consideration of the Parliament and of the
City, of the Evil Manners before mentioned, those which are Secret Sins, only
by Secrecy in the Commitment, and as they are concealed from Men, but otherwise
are well enough known to all to be Sins, though they have not so much of
Scandal as those which are openly committed; yet may they have other
Aggravations, which may equal that, and require no less Severity of judging our
selves, if we would not be judged of God. As to the rest, which either in their
own Nature are not so palpable, or easily discernible from what is Lawful; or
by common Opinion and Usage of the World are reputed Lawful and Harmless, nay
commendable; and some perhaps excused and Patronized in opposition to Popery,
it is to be considered, 1. That some are condemned as wholly unlawful, not only
by the Judgment and Practice of all the ancient Christians for many Ages, and
comprehended in that ancient Solemn Renunciation required of all admitted into
the Society of Christians by Baptism, viz. Of the Devil and his Works, the
World and the Pomps, Glory and Vanity thereof, and the Flesh and its Lusts and
Desires; but also by the express Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, both under such
General Comprehensive Names, as the Flesh, Gal. 5. 17. Lusts of the Flesh, Gal.
5. 16: 2 Pet. 2. 18: 2 John 2. 16. The Old Man, Ephesians. 4. 24. The Natural Man, I
Cor. 2. 14. Desires of the Flesh, Ephesians. 2. 3. Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19.
Provision for the Flesh, Romans 13. 14. Minding the Flesh, and the things of the
Flesh, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7: Gal. 6. 8. Walking after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 2: 2
Pet. 2. 10. Minding earthly things, Phil. 3. 19: Col. 3. 2, 5: James 3. 15.
Being of the World, John 15. 19: 17. 14, 16. Love of the World, 1 John 2. 15:
5. 19. Ja. 4. 4. Lusts of the World, Tit. 2. 12. Wisdom of the World, 1 Cor. 3.
19. The Course of the World, Ephesians. 2. 2. Conformity to the World, Romans 12. 2.
Inordinate Affection, and Evil Concupiscence, etc. with weighty Admonitions of
their provoking the Wrath of God, and excluding from the Kingdom of God, etc.
and by more particular Characters, Directions and Injunctions, as against
Covetousness, which is again and again called Idolatry, and such as both brings
down the Wrath of God, and excludes from Heaven (which should make People more
cautious against it than usually they are) and diverse Branches of it, as
Defrauding, Exacting, Oppressing, etc. against Pride, Vainglory, Boasting,
Ostentation, Pride of Apparel, particularly that of Women, (in whom it is more
pardonable than in Men) prohibited in very express Terms by the two chief
Apostles severally, 1 Timothy 2. 9. and 1 Pet. 3. 3. and yet so agreeably, as
declares it to be a resolved Point and positive Injunction, which yet we see
frustrated in our Times by some, just as the Pharisees did by the Law in our
Saviors time; and against others, some of them noted before, but all too many
to be here more particularly noted.

2. That there are others, which being Lawful, or more excusable at other
times, are apt to be the less taken notice of, yet are not only unlawful and
inexcusable at such a time as this, but greatly offensive and abominable to
God, and highly provoking, as impious and Profane, under such Circumstances,
as may be perceived by the great Indignation expressed in the Prophet Isa. 22.
12. against such upon like occasion, as Iniquity, which should not be expiated
till they should die for it. And indeed, as it is a terrible thing to fall into
the Hands of the Living God; so there can hardly be a greater Provocation, than
such Behavior as dectares or Implies a Contempt or Neglect, Carelessness or
Unconcernedness at the Approaches or Appearance of the Judgments of God against
a Nation, by any particular Person. It is very like and the ready way to fix
the Decree against such a Person to be certainly involved in it.

Now therefore to prevent, and avert the Judgments of God from themselves, and,
as much as in them lies, from the Nation; all who in order thereunto desire
indeed to have no Fellowship with any such Evil Manners, Customs or Fashions,
and to keep themselves unspotted of the World, must apply themselves seriously
to such further Means as these, viz.

1. To abstain and withdraw themselves, as much as their Circumstances will
permit, from all unnecessary Diversions, Business and Employment in and about
the Matters, and Conversation with the Men, of the World; and retiring, apply
themselves to Prayer, Reading, Meditation and Watching; and frequent the
Public Worship of God with all Reverence as often as Opportunity may be had.

2. To abstain from all Acquest of the things of the World in any unfitting
manner or unreasonable measure, both which are very common; but be content with
just, and honest, and reasonable Gains, according to the real Worth, not
appearance of things, reasonable Rents as Times will bear, and moderate Fees,
according to the real Merit of Labor, Skill, and Time, without occasioning
more Expense than needs; and likewise, to pay to the full value of Commodities,
and Desert of Labor, Skill and Time: nay, to abstain from all Pursuit of some,
of Preferments, not only after the greedy and ambitious manner, and by the
indirect means, which are usual; but from all, considering more the Account,
which must be given, and the Encumbrance, than the Profit and Honor; unless
out of Charity to Men, and Love to our Country, to prevent the Intrusion of
Evil Men for their own Advantage, and to the Disservice of King and Country;
which is now so common as may justify that which otherwise would be
inexcusable. Out of which Case, for a Man to be well qualified and ready to
serve his Country when he is called to it, is sufficient. And lastly, to
abstain not only from Pursuit, but from Acceptance of others, of insignificant
(as our later Reigns have made them) and burdensome Titles of Honor. Which Men
of true Virtue and Wisdom will at no time seek; especially when by the
Prodigality of Princes they are thrown, and by the Vices of Nobility trodden in
the Dirt, and made rather Badges of Flattery, Servility, Treachery, Vanity and
Degeneracy, than Ensigns of Virtue, and of Merit by noble and generous Service
and Achievements, the only substantial Grounds of Honor: And Men of Great
Piety will not easily accept at such a time as this. Besides, I am persuaded
never any Man was made better by them, nor many who were not made some way
worse; and that the whole Nation at this time is much the worse, almost undone,
and in great Danger of Ruin and Confusion by some aspiring ambitious Persons,
if they be not speedily taken down: But sure I am they are unsuitable for Times
of Fasting and Humiliation, when they who have them, ought in a sort to depose
and lay 'em aside during such Circumstances. And since now a Public Fast and
Humiliation is appointed by the Queen to be observed Monthly, in most Devout
and Solemn manner, it is but fit and necessary that the House of Lords be
admonished of a Great Disrespect both to God and to the King upon the like
occasion the last year; (though touched before in the Reflections upon the then
late Action at Sea, where the unhappy state of our Clergy and Church was more
fully discoursed, and therefore is spared here:) For I believe it may concern
them not only to have more regard to the Eyes of Men that are upon them, for
their own Honor and Reputation, but to the all-seeing Eye of Him, who has
said, Them who honor me, I will honor; but they who despise me shall be
lightly esteemed, lest if through their Fault (amongst the rest) the Sun and
the Moon be darkened, the Stars also fall from Heaven; and lest he again shake
Heaven and Earth as he has formerly done, or more severely.

3. To abstain from the Use of unnecessary things of the World, as, Pleasures,
Vain Delights, Plays, Pomp, State, Grandeur and Finery, etc. which are at such
a time part of that Iniquity, against which we see so much Divine Indignation
expressed in the Prophet.

And here I must not, I ought not to forbear to take notice of that Undecent
Attire of our Women upon their Heads, at any time unbefitting Women professing
Godliness, but at such a time as this, when God by his Providence calls for
Baldness and Sackcloth, and when they should put their Mouths in the Dust, to
set up their Crests in that manner, cannot but be displeasing and abominable in
the sight of God and the good Angels, as it is in the sight of many of his
Faithful Servants upon Earth. And therefore I cannot but think it great Pity,
that a Lady of sincere Piety and Virtue, as I hope and believe, should be
betrayed, through the Unskilfulness in Divine matters of those about her, or
their Unfaithfulness to her, to prostitute Majesty to such a Compliance with a
vain Generation, who should rather have given the Law to them, and maintaining
her ground on the part of Virtue and Gravity, which is essential to Majesty, by
the Authority of so great an Example have given a tacit Reproof and Correction
to their Vanity, and taught them more consideration and regard to their own
Country, than to do such Honor to a Foreign Enemy, as to glory in a voluntary
imitating of their Example, even in Levity and Vanity, as if they would lick up
their Spittle; an unlucky presage, that we shall at last be delivered, by the
just Judgments of God, for Correction of our Error, to an involuntary
Subjection to their Will and Power, whose vain Humors we are so apt to follow,
if we speedily mend not our Manners.

Nor may I here pass by in silence another such unhappy Miscarriage or two: As
the Celebrating, or rather Profaning, of an Anniversary Solemnity, at a time
which at once called for both serious Thansgiving to God, and serious
Humiliation under his Mighty Hand, with a light and frothy Play; and sullying
an illustrious Consultation about matters of great seriousness and importance,
when the Eyes of all the World were upon them, with unchristian excessive
Drinking. These we may understand by what has been said already, to be
displeasing to God, and by the Dishonor, which soon after befell them, who had
first so dishonored themselves, viz that it was permitted as a just Judgment
from him. And these, as they are greater faults in Divinity, than the
generality of our Divines can believe; for they contract a Communication with
the common Guilt both of the Nation at present, and of the preceding Kings and
their Reigns, to say nothing of other Circumstances; so are they greater faults
in Civil Prudence, than our ordinary Statesmen and Politicians are sensible of;
for they tend greatly to weaken and abate a Man's Interest in the opinion and
esteem of People, making them doubtful both of his Sincerity in Religion, and
of his Prudence and Magnanimity, who will be prevailed on to be a Spectator or
Actor in either. It is not Insolence or ill Will, but very Faithfulness and
great good Will, which has induced me to to write this: And such a disposition
of Soul toward the Majesty of Heaven, and sense of things, as the present
Circumstances require, will make them be well taken from what ever hand they
come, with so much Integrity and Affection. And therefore now to return.

4. To abstain from the use even of the Necessary things of the World, as much
as Nature and Decency will permit, and particularly from the Delights and
Satiety of Natural Aliments; not only from the quality of Costly and Delicious
Meats and Drinks, but from such a quantity of those which are plain and simple,
as perhaps the Appetite might crave. This is the only way to avoid, that
Intemperance, which is not easy to be discerned by others, but is very common,
and very much impairs the Health, and shortens the Lives of many people of this
Nation, of all degrees, especially of such as are not much employed in hard
Labor; is of great benefit for Health, and of great Advantage for such
Retirements as I have mentioned; and is very proper and suitable for such
occasions. And to this I might with like reason add and recommend an abridgment
of Sleep, and use of Watching, which a spare Diet would render very easy, and
conducing to Health.

5. In all Conversation with others, to be very serious and grave; and by much
Affability, Sweetness, and good Admonitions, be always endeavoring to do good
to all; never speak of Religion to recommend themselves, nor forbear through
Shame, or for fear of Disparagement by it, a common, base and most dangerous
Fault; and be always ready to relieve and defend the Needy and Oppressed, and
to right the Injured, as far as Means, Ability, or Interest will extend; only
with this Caution, that it be done so as may not too much interrupt or disturb
the Retirement before mentioned, and the proper Employments thereof.

As this Method will redeem much Time for Retirements, so the retrenching so
much Expense, may both countervail the time subtracted from Business; and help
to supply what is employed in Works of Charity; in all which, regard must be
had to peoples different Circumstances. And they who shall seriously enter upon
it, and with care, diligence and constancy, keep to it, I doubt not but will
find Light in Obscurity, Comfort in Affliction, Confidence and Protection in
Danger, great Serenity and Satisfaction in this Life, and Eternal Happiness in
a better. Which, next to the Service of our great Lord, and the Preservation of
the Nation, is the only Design of this Discourse.

And for the same purpose, I shall here subjoin the following ABSTRACTS, viz.

1. An Abstract of Mr. Chillingworth 's Judgment of the State of Religion in
this Nation, in his time, which is much more decayed since.
LET us examine our ways, and consider impartially, What the Religion of most
Men is?

We are Baptized in our Infancy, that is, as I conceive, dedicated and devoted
to God's service, by our Parents and the Church, as young Samuel was by his
Mother Anna, and there we take a Solemn Vow, To forsake the Devil and all his
works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all the covetous desires of
it; to forsake also all the carnal desires of the Flesh, and not to follow nor
be led by them. This Vow we take when we be Children, and understand it not:
and, how many are there, who know, and consider, and regard what they have
Vowed, when they are become Men, almost as little as they did being Children.
Consider the Lives, and Public Actions of most Men of all Conditions, in
Court, City, and Country, and then deny it, if you can, that those three things
which we have renounced in our Baptism; the Profits, Honors, and Pleasures of
the World, are not the very Gods which divide the World amongst them; are not
served more devoutly, confided in more heartily, loved more affectionately,
than the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose Name we are Baptized? Deny, if
you can, the daily and constant Employment of all Men, to be either a violent
prosecution of the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, or of the Power, Riches,
and contemptible Profits of it, or of the momentary or unsatisfying Pleasures
of the Flesh, or else of the more Diabolical humors of Pride, Malice, Revenge,
and such like. etc.

When we are come to Years capable of Instruction, many, which is lamentable to
consider, are so little regarded by themselves or others, that they continue
little better than Pagans, in a Commonwealth of Christians, and know little
more of God, or of Christ, than if they had been bred in the Indies. A
lamentable Case, and which will one Day lie heavy upon their account, which
might have amended it and did not. But many, I confess, are taught to act over
this Play of Religion, and learned to say, Our Father which art in Heaven; and,
I believe in God the Father Almighty: But, Where are the Men that live so, as
if they did believe in earnest, that God is their Almighty Father? Where are
they that fear him, and trust him, and depend upon him only, for their whole
Happiness, and Love him, and Obey him, as in reason we ought to do to an
Almighty Father? Who, if he be our Father, and we be indeed his Children, will
do for us all the good he can; and if he be Almighty, can do for us all the
good he will; and yet, how few are there, who love him with half that affection
as Children usually do their Parents, or believe him with half that simplicity,
or serve him with half that diligence? And then for the Lords Prayer, the plain
truth is, we lie unto God for the most part clean through it, and for want of
desiring indeed, what in word we pray for, tell him to his Face as many false
Tales as we make Petitions. For who shows by his endeavors, that he desires
heartily that God's Name should be hallowed; that is, holily and religiously
Worshipped and Adored by all Men? That his Kingdom should be advanced and
enlarged? That his Blessed Will should be universally Obeyed? Who shows by his
forsaking sin that he desires so much as he should do the forgiveness of it?
Nay, who does not revenge, upon all occasions, the affronts, contempts, and
injuries put upon him, and so upon the matter Curse himself, as often as he
says, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us?
How few depend upon God only for their daily Bread, viz. the good things of
this Life, as upon the only giver of them, so as neither to get nor keep any of
them, by any means which they know or fear to be offensive unto God? How few
desire in earnest to avoid Temptation? Nay, who almost is there, that takes not
the Devil's Office out of his Hand, and is not himself a Tempter both to
himself and others? Lastly, Who almost is there that desires heartily and above
all things so much as the thing deserves, to be delivered from the greatest
Evil; Sin I mean, and the Anger of God? etc.

And this were ill enough, were it in private, but we abuse God Almighty also
with our Public and Solemn Formalities, we make the Church a Stage whereon to
act our parts, and play our Pageants; there we make a profession every Day of
Confessing our Sins with humble, lowly, and obedient Hearts, and yet when we
have talked after this manner, Twenty, Thirty, Forty Years together, our Hearts
for the most part continue proud, as impenitent, as disobedient, as they were
at the beginning. We make great Protestations, When we assemble and meet
together to render thanks to God Almighty, for the benefits received at his
Hands; and if this were to be performed with words, with Hosanna's, and
Hallelujahs, and Gloria Patri's, and Psalms, and Hymns, and such like outward
matters, peradventure we should do it very sufficiently: But in the mean time
with our Lives and Actions, we provoke the Almighty, and that to his Face, with
all variety of grievous and bitter Provocations; we do Daily and Hourly such
things as we know, and he has assured us, to be odious unto him; and contrary
to his nature; as any thing in the World is to the nature of any Man in the
World; and all this upon poor, trifling, trivial, no Temptations: etc. Our
Tongues ingeminate, and Cry aloud Hosanna, Hosanna, but the louder Voice of our
Lives and Actions is, Crucify him, Crucify him. etc.

If I should reckon up unto you, how many direct Lies every Wicked Man tells to
God Almighty, as often as he says Amen, to this Form of Godliness, which our
Church has prescribed; if I should present unto you all our acting of Piety,
and playing of Humiliation, and personating of Devotion in the Psalms, the
Litanies, the Collects, and generally in the whole Service, I should be
infinite, etc.

We profess, and indeed generally, because it is not safe to do otherwise, that
we believe the Scripture to be true, and that it contains the plain and only
way to infinite and eternal Happiness: But if we did generally believe what we
do profess, if this were the Language of our Hearts as well as our Tongues, How
comes it to pass that the Study of it is so generally neglected? etc. Seeing
therefore most of us are so strangely Careless, so grossly Negligent of it, is
there not great reason to fear, that though we have Professors and Protestors
in abundance; yet the Faithful, the truly and sincerely Faithful, are, in a
manner, failed from the Children of Men? What but this can be the cause that
Men are so commonly Ignorant of so many Articles, and particular Mandates of
it, which yet are as manifest in it, as if they were written with the Beams of
the Sun? for example;

How few of our Ladies and Gentlewomen, do or will understand, that a
Voluptuous Life, is Damnable and prohibited to them? Yet St. Paul faith so very
plainly, She that lives in Pleasure is dead while she lives. etc.

How few of the Gallants of our time, do or will understand, that it is not
lawful for them to be as Expensive and Costly in Apparel, as their Means, or
perhaps, their Credit will extend unto? Which is to Sacrifice unto Vanity,
that, which by the Law of Christ, is due unto Charity; and yet the same St.
Paul forbids plainly this Excess even to Women, -- Also let Women, (he would
have said it much rather to the Men) Array themselves in comely Apparel, with
Shamefacedness and Modesty, not with Embroidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
Costly Apparel; and to make our Ignorance the more inexcusable, the very same
Rule is delivered by St. Peter also 1 Epist. 3. 3.

How few Rich Men are or will be persuaded, That the Law of Christ permits them
not to heap up Riches for ever, nor perpetually to add House to House, and Land
to Land, though by lawful means, but requires of them thus much Charity at
least, that even while they are providing for their Wives and Children, they
should, out of the Increase wherewith God blesses their Industry, allot the
Poor a just and free proportion? And when they have provided for them in a
convenient manner, (such as they themselves shall judge sufficient-and
convenient in others) that then they should give over making Purchase after
Purchase, but, with the surplusage of their Revenue beyond their Expense,
procure, as much as lies in them, that no Christian remain Miserably Poor, etc.

Where almost are the Men that are or will be persuaded, The Gospel of Christ
requires of Men Humility, like to that of little Children, and that under the
highest pain of Damnation? etc.

Would it not be strange News to a great many, that not only Adultery and
Fornication, but even Uncleanness and Lasciviousness; not only Idolatry and
Witchcraft, but Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, and Contentions; not only
Murders, but Envying; not Drunkenness only, but Revelling, are things
prohibited to Christians, and such as if we forsake them not, we cannot Inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven? etc.

If I should tell you, That all Bitterness and Evil speaking (nay, such is the
Modesty and Gravity which Christianity requires of us) Foolish Talk and
Jesting, are things not allowed to Christians, would not many Cry out, These
are hard and strange sayings, who can hear them? etc.

To come a little nearer to the business of our Times, -- They that maintain
the King's Righteous Cause with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, but by
their Oaths and Curses, by their Drunkenness and Debauchery, by their
Irreligion and Profaneness, fight more powerfully against their Party, than by
all other means they do or can fight for it; are not, I fear, very well
acquainted with any part of the Bible: But that strict Caution which properly
concerns themselves in the Book of Leviticus, I much doubt they have scarce
ever heard of it, When thou go to War with thine Enemies, then take heed
there be no wicked thing in thee; not only no wickedness in the Cause thou
maintainest, nor no wickedness in the means by which thou maintainest it; but
no Personal Impieties in the Persons that maintain it, etc.

I cannot but fear, that the Goodness of our Cause may sink under the Burden of
our Sins: And that God in his Justice, because We will not suffer his Judgments
to atchieve their prime scope and intention, which is our Amendment and
Reformation, may either deliver us up to the blind Zeal and Fury of our
Enemies; or else, which I rather fear, make us Instruments of his Justice each
against other, and of our own Just and Deserved Confusion.

2. An Extract of a Letter from the Hague. Concerning two Sermons preached
there in the French -Church, 2/12 Mar. 90/1.
I Was yesterday in the French Church, where I heard two very good Sermons, and
such as would have given you great satisfaction; one was upon Jonah 1. 5. But
Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay, and was fast asleep.
The scope of what was said was to show, That the Church was in as great a storm
as ever she had been, and that greater security was never seen amongst
Professors of Religion, than was to be found at this day, which threatened
greater desolation than our Fathers had ever been witnesses to. The other was
preached by Monsieur Arnold, who is the chief Commander of the Waldenses, as
well as their Minister. There was a great Auditory, and, amongst others, the
Bishop of London, Earl of Nottingham, Earl of Monmouth and Mr. Wharton: his
Text was, 1 Cor. 1. 27. from thence he took occasion to tell us, that we were
not to expect fine language from him, it being that which God seldom made use
of for gaining the ends of the Gospel; that he was to discourse to us of plain
Truths, not valuing what should be our Censures of him, if he might approve
himself to his God; that we were not to think, that he was afraid before such
an Appearance of persons of all ranks, to reprove what was amiss; for if the
King himself were present, though he would give him that respect that was due
to his Character, yet he would speak the truth, as became a faithful Servant
of Christ: he did with great modesty, without mentioning of particulars, show
in general how by a few hundreds of the Waldenses, God had scattered thousands
of proud enemies; and from thence took occasion to exhort us, above all things,
to make it our business to have God on our side, because it was through his
choosing of them, that the foolish and weak things were able to confound the
wise and strong, and withal did show us, that we were not like persons chosen
of God to confound the designs and strength of our enemies, while irreligion,
vanity and debauchery did so much abound amongst us, and did particularly
insist upon the vain Attire of Women; and then, with great seriousness, did
exhort us to amend our ways and doings; assuring us (without taking upon him,
as he said, to be a Prophet) of victory over our enemies if we did sincerely
set about a Reformation. These things I thought would give you some
satisfaction, as they did not a little to me, which has made me the more
particular in my relation. I forgot to tell you that all heard him with great
attention, and particularly those of our Country, I mean Britain; and I did
observe that (...) could not withhold from tears.

3. An Abstract of Archbishop Usher 's Prediction, concerning a Great
Persecution to come upon the Protestant Church, to one who supposed it might
have been over in his Life time.
All you have yet seen has been but the beginning of Sorrows, to what is yet
to come upon the Protestant Churches of Christ; who will e're long fall under a
Sharper Persecution than ever yet has been upon them. And therefore look ye be
not found in the Outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Temple before the
Altar. For Christ will measure all those who profess his Name, and call
themselves his People; and the Outward Worshippers he will leave out to be
trodden down by the Gentiles. The Outward Court is the Formal Christian, whose
Religion lies in performing the Outside Duties of Christianity, without having
an Inward Life, and Power of Faith and Love Uniting them to Christ. And these
God will leave to be trodden down and swept away by the Gentiles. But the
Worshippers within the Temple and before the Altar, are those who do indeed
worship God in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is
honored and adored in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts; and they
sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him. And
these God will hide in the Hollow of his Hand, and under the Shadow of his
Wings. And this shall be one great Difference between this last and all the
other preceding Persecutions: For in the former, the most eminent and spiritual
Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently
fallen upon; but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God as a
Seed to partake of that Glory, which shall immediately follow and come upon the
Church, as soon as this Storm shall be over: For as it shall be the Sharpest,
so it shall be the Shortest Persecution of them all; and shall only take away
the gross Hypocrites and Formal Professors; but the true Spiritual Believers
shall be preserved till the Calamity be overpassed.

To this I think very pertinent that other Excellent Passage of his concerning
Sanctification, in these words.

We do not well understand what Sanctification and the New Creature are. It is
no less than for a Man to be brought to an entire Resignation of his Will to
the Will of God; and to live in the offering up of his Soul continually in the
flames of Love, as a whole Burnt-Offering to Christ. And how little are many of
those, who profess Christianity, experimentally acquainted with this Work on
their Souls!

FINIS.

