The CRANMERIAN LITURGY, Or, The Subtilty of the Serpent, In corrupting the
True English Liturgy, by Cranmer and a Faction of Calvinists.
THat there is in the most Solemn, Proper and Peculiar part of the Christian
Worship, anciently in all the Western Churches entitled the Mass, now in
English the H. Communion, as it has always been celebrated throughout the
whole Catholic Church, not a Sacrament only, but both a Sacrifice and a
Sacrament, has been the Doctrine not only of the Catholic Church in all Ages
received from the Apostles, and accordingly it was called Sacrificium
Quotidianum, but also of most of those of the Church of England, who Composed
the First Book of Ed. 6. and upon good Deliberation and special Consideration
of the Question fitted it for that purpose; and moreover of diverse of the most
eminent for Learning in England ever since; as Andrews, Field, Montague,
Cousens, Laud, Mede, Heylyn, Thorndike, Tailor, Sherlock, Hooper etc. As may be
seen or perceived in their Writings; besides others, who are known to have been
of the same Judgment, though they have left nothing in writing concerning it;
and others, who out of Fondness for the Church, whereof they were Members,
affecting a kind of Infallibility, and preferring the Honor of it, before the
Honor and Unity of the Catholic Church, and Peace of the World, have rather
cavilled at it, then could in their Conscience plainly and positively deny it.

But Cranmer with his Calvinists, who were amongst them, who composed that
Book, being unable to carry all in that work according to his own mind, in an
Honest, Plain, Orderly way, presently applied himself to do it by Craft and the
Secular Power, though in a Factious and Schismatical manner: And a Review of
that Book, though but just before declared by Act of Parliament to have been
composed by the Aid of the Holy Ghost, was soon presumptuously, if not
impiously, resolved upon, without any worthy cause, as the next Act says
expressly: And instead of an English Synod or Convocation of the English Clergy,
(not one of them it seems, but had either so much Conscience or so much
Caution, as not to appear in it,) Martin Bucer was sent for from beyond Sea,
and the Book was translated into Latin for him to consider and model according
to his own and Master Calvin's humor, ad Petitionem Archiepiscopi, as far as
was thought fit, and like to pass.

Bucer did what was desired, and presuming too much upon his own Judgment, and
perhaps the more through the over valuation of it by Cranmer and his Faction,
though he might mean well, dismembered, disordered and deformed it in the
principal part, as may be seen in his Scripta Anglicana; but was soon after
called to account for what he had done, in another World. though I do not find
that all the Corruptions and Abuses in it are chargeable upon him, and
particularly that, which was none of the least, the Defacing and Misplacing the
Prayer of Oblation, of which more hereafter. But he was farther employed to
promote the Work by writing to Mr Calvin, that by his Persuasions and
Authority, the Protector, and the King himself, and other great men might be
disposed for the passing it in Parliament, whether the Clergy would or not.

And so the New Book was approved by the King, the Young Head of the New Church
of England, and by him now grown up to fifteen, and sufficiently instructed in
the New Doctrine, recommended to the Parliament, so taken up with the Spoils of
the Monasteries, as left little leisure to think of Liturgies; and by them
imposed upon the Church and Nation, without any Synod or Convocation, or
declared Consent or Privity of any one of the Clergy of the Church of England,
who is known to have had any hand in the Alterations, besides Cranmer; and upon
mere Politic Considerations, without any other just Cause, as is declared by
the Act it self, by which it was established

And this is the true Generation of this spurious, supposititious, deformed
Cranmerian Changling; which has been hugged by a company of ignorant,
inconsiderate abused People, like a Bastard child by a silly abused Husband,
made a Bone of Dissension, and ridiculously contended for in several small
matters, by such as were shamefully imposed upon in the greatest of all, and
therein very tamely and weakly complied with such as had put the Abuse upon
them; an Abuse not easy to be digested, or thought on without some Motion of
Indignation by any intelligent person, who has any Sense of, and Concern for
the Honor of God, of our Savior, or of his Church, the true Catholic Church,
or any remainder of it in this Nation. But in short, this is matter of Fact,
not to be denied; and upon this matter of Fact two things are to be inquired:

1. By what Spirit this might be done? Whether by the Spirit of Christ, or the
Spirit of Antichrist?

2. How far, or Whether at all, one having Knowledge, or Notice of this Abuse
ought or may use this imperfect and disordered Form, or comply with it, by
reason of any Humane Law, or of his own Subscription before Notice or any
Knowledge of it?

To which may be added a third and fourth.

3. Whether the People may communicate in the use of it, and not be Partakers
in the Guilt?

4. Whether the Clergy in general, and every particular person of them ought
not to use in the Celebration of these Holy Mysteries a more Complete and
Perfect Form, notwithstanding any temporal Laws to the contrary, as they will
answer it to God upon the Salvation of their Souls at the last day?

The First of these Questions may easily be resolved upon a due Consideration
of the Alterations, which were made; of which there are 4 or 5 Very
Considerable, and notoriously Contrary to the Practice of the whole Catholic
Church in the three Principal parts of that Office: In the Prayer for the
Catholic Church, the Commemoration of the Saints, and Prayers for the Dead: In
the Prayer of Consecration that part, wherein the Greek Churches and all
Antiquity place the very Form of Consecration: And the whole Prayer of
Oblation: the three former expunged and the last not only maimed of a principal
part, but the remainder removed from its proper place, and most perversely
placed after the Communion.

In all these Alterations so Considerable in themselves, and moreover in
respect to the Reverence which ought to be used toward the Holy-Spirit of God,
and the regard to be had to the Honor of the State, if there appear no
Considerable Advantage to the State to excuse them, nor any thing really for
the Honor or Service of God, which required them, but much to the contrary,
with great and manifest Gratifications of the Adverse Powers, the Devil and his
Angels, it will not be unreasonable to believe that they were made by the
Importunity of Cranmer, Archbishop and Godfather to the King, and through the
Instigation and Energy of those Powers, by whom he was deluded.

That there was no such Advantage to the State appears by the very Act it self:
Nor have I ever yet known any thing alleged or pretended in them for the
Honor or Service of God, that had so much weight as deserved to be taken
notice of: But on the contrary in them all there is one Common Gratification of
the Spite and Malice of the Spirit of Antichrist against both the
Catholic-Church, by contempt of the Authority of it, and such a Breach and
Division in it; and against the Church of England in particular, by making it
Guilty of so execrable Schism and Separation from the whole Catholic-Church of
all Ages, with great Presumption and Indignity to it, by so insolently
rejecting, and by consequence condemning, so many such Solemn Acts of her
Worship: and this not merely against the Church Militant, but extending even to
the Church Triumphant, and Communion of Saints.

For besides all this, in the Expunging of the Commemoration of the Saints,
there was a Special Gratification of their Spite and Malice against Them, by
whom, and in whom, by Christ residing in them, they had been so often overcome;
and even against Christ their Head, and God, the Father himself: For the
Thanksgiving to God for the Grace communicated to them, which was a Principal
Fruit of Christ's Passion, being a Duty to God, and an Honor to Christ, in the
Honor done to them, and a most Solemn Act of Communion of Saints, answered by
them in their Prayers for the Church upon Earth; To have all this abolished was
undoubtedly matter of much Joy and Triumph in the whole Kingdom of Darkness.

And such another Special Gratification of their Spite and Malice was the
Expunging of the Common Prayers of this Office for the Souls of the rest
departed in the Faith of Christ and Communion of the Catholic Church, by the
Interruption of so Solemn an Act of the Church, of Charity to them and
Communion with them.

In the due Consecration of the Eucharist it has always been believed in the
Catholic Church that there is a Special Sanctification of the Elements of Bread
and Wine by the Descent of the Holy Spirit at the Prayers of the Church: In the
putting out therefore of that Prayer there is a double Gratification of that
Malicious Spirit, 1. By the Injury or Disrespect thereby done to the Holy
Spirit, by whom the Oblation should be Sanctified, and by whose Aid the former
book was declared to have been composed. (a special Instance of the Madness and
Inconsiderateness of Schismatics.) and 2. by depriving the Church of the
Benefit of that Prayer, and making the Consecration at least doubtful, but
none at all according to the Sentiments of the greatest part of Christians at
this day, and generally of all anciently as may be believed upon the Agreement
of all Ancient Liturgies in what is here put out; and that by Tradition from
the Apostles, as is affirmed by S. Basil. Nor is it much to be wondered to see
such Decay of Primitive Fervor and Vigor, when we see such Departure from
Primitive Institutions, and Orders, and such Neglect and Contempt of so Divine
Means of Spiritual Supplies.

Nor was it without some particular Gratification of the same wicked Spirit
that the use of the Sign of the Cross was also left off at the Consecration,
contrary to the Practice of the whole Catholic Church derived from the
Primitive times. The Victories obtained by Holy Christians over the Powers of
Darkness by the Use of that Sign (for which the English Reader may have
recourse to Dr. Caves Lives of the Fathers, and others) are an Evidence of
their Abhorance of it; and that of the true Original of the like Abhorance in
the minds of some men, from what Spirit it proceeds.

But the Subtilty of the Serpent, as well as his Malice is in none of the
Alterations more remarkable, then in those of the Prayer of Oblation, which
Bucer did not think fit to alter, yet were made and designed purposely to
abolish all that might import the Oblation of an Unbloody Sacrifice. And that
was done as affectually as could be, in this manner: 1. It must not be quite
taken away, lest that should give occasion for some contest about it. but 2. It
must be exenterated and the Heart taken out; and then 3. be placed after the
Communion, so that then the Memorials could not be offered or presented to God,
which were eaten and drunk by the people; whereby the business was efectually
done. And yet this was not enough, but 4. Another Prayer must be added to be
used, the one or the other, at discretion, that so none might be obliged to the
use of so much as that; and they who understood the Mystery of it, needed not
to be troubled with any relick of it, or the Spirit, which inspired them, with
the Memory of a thing so offensive to him. And yet was not all this enough, but
after all even the Lords Prayer it self must also be displaced, contrary to the
use of the Catholic Church in all Ages, that so all the Prayers of this Church
might be Schismatically separated, and set at a Distance from the Memorials of
our Saviors Sacrifice upon the Cross, through which alone they have
Acceptance. And if from the beginning of this Service we do but take notice how
the Special Confessions in use in the Greek as well as Latin Churches are by a
very formal General Confession and Absolution superseded and brought into
disuse, we may observe the same Subtilty from end to end throughout. Such is
the Subtilty of Schismatical Superstition inspired by a Spirit of Delusion, and
imposed upon inconsiderate People, under a false Cover of Zeal for God against
Superstition.

Nor are the Gratifications less remarkable than the Subtilty. The Matter of
Fact is plain in the Books; and the Design not only easily perceivable in the
Alterations, but moreover owned and expressly affirmed in the Charge and
Allegations of the Scottish and English Calvinists (who better understood the
Mystery of all, than the Clergy of the Church of England did, or were willing
for shame to acknowledge) against Archbishop Laud for restoring it. And had it
been a Fault, he had been really guilty of it; but was really guilty of
Preferring the Honor of his particular Church before the Honor of our Lord
and his Catholic Church; and not faithfully and plainly setting out the Truth,
and endeavoring in the proper and regular way of a National Synod to have it
restored at home. And therefore while he thought to do the Work and save his
Life in the Cranmerian way of a Crafty Trick, he was suffered to lose both his
Design and it too. It is not a light matter to corrupt the Solemn Worship of
God; or for those in place of Authority knowingly to connive at such
Corruptions. Nor are matters of true Religion to be promoted by Tricks and
underhand Dealings. I know none of the known Actors in the Cranmerian
Corruptions, who lived long after, or came not to unhappy ends. And the present
Governors of this Church have had sufficient warning to have restored the
Honor of God, and prevented the exposing of so much of their own Shame. Sins
of Omission in places of great Trust are dangerous and damnable: And such is
frequently the State of such as join with them. And this undoubtedly has been a
continual Gratification to the Powers of darkness to have held this Nation in
such Fetters so long.

But because the Gratifications of those Apostate Spirits arise from their
Success in their attempts upon Men, to involve them in Sin and Disobedience and
Indignities to God, and so engage them in their own state of Apostasy, they
cannot be well understood, unless the Wickedness of what was done in this
matter be farther detected and explained, than is commonly apprehended. For
which purpose it is to be noted, that it was usual with Mankind from the
beginning to perform their most Solemn Transactions with all the external
Declarations of their Minds that they could; that is, not only with Audible,
but also with Visible Signs and Significations; not with Words only, but with
the conjuction of Actions and Things; and the Omission of those was interpreted
to be a Slight or Contempt. Accordingly it was usual to make their Addresses to
God, and even to Princes and Prophets, with Presents in Recognition of
Superiority. And the chief Aliments of their Lives, Bread and Wine, were
usually part of their Offerings, even at their Sacrifices. This was retained by
the Jews, who at all their Festivals consecrated a Cake of Bread, and a Chalice
of Wine with Water, and over it gave Thanks to God, for his Creation of the
World, and his special Mercies to Mankind, and to themselves, particularly
mentioned, and more largly for that Celebrated at that time. This is what God
foretold by the Prophet, Mal. 1.11. should be done by the Gentiles; and this is
the import of our Saviors words, as often as ye do this, do it in
Commemoration of me, whereby he appropriates this, which was used before in
Commemoration of several other Divine Favors, to be done always from thence
forward in Commemoration of his Sacrifice upon the Cross, as the Compendium of
all. And from this Institution the Apostles, and from them the Churches founded
by them received it, and have ever since used it, as an Antitype, as effectual
for them to all intents and purposes, as were all the Types and Sacrifices of
the Jews for them before his Passion.

But more particularly therein may be observed, 1. A solemn Recognition of the
Sovereignty of God by right of Creation, in the Oblation of the chief Aliments
of our Lives, with Thanksgivings for it, and all his Divine Favors. 2. The
Sanctification of those Creatures by the Descent of the Holy Spirit at the
Prayers of the Church. 3. The Oblation of the Creatures Sanctified in
Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, the great Propitiation
for the Sins of the World, by which alone we have Access unto, and Acceptance
with the Father, with Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions for all Men,
according to the Apostles Exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.1. So that the Oblation of the
Memorials of his Son's Passion, is a Solemn Actual Allegation of his Covenant,
( v. Genesis 9.13.17. And therein is employed. 4. A Solemn Recognition of our
Redemption by him, Subjection to him, and Obligation to lay down our Lives in
Obedience to him, as he did his for us in obedience to his Father; and a Solemn
Act of Confederation with him. And lastly, the Communion and Participation of
these Sanctified Creatures for the Sanctification of our Souls and Bodies, and
Augmentation of Spiritual Life and Vigor, and Special Application of all the
Benefits of his Holy Sacrifice unto us.

And now, what could be either more honorable for our Savior, or a more Solemn
Engagement with him on the one side, or more offensive and grievous to that
Envious and Malicious Spirit on the other, than to see that Passion, which he
had most maliciously procured to be so honored, and applied to the Honor of
the Holy Trinity, and the Benefit and Advantage of Men, and turned to his own
Confusion, and his quondam Vassals and their Posterity thus confederating and
fortified against him? And what could be a greater Gratification to him, then
to see all this, which was so offensive and grievous, and done weekly at least
in all Churches, and daily in all great Churches, to be thus Abolished, and
even what remained of it, soon after almost every where neglected?

And this is what their Grandfather Cranmer, or rather this wicked Spirit by
him, and in him, was so subtle and industrious to abolish: And this is what the
present Cranmerians, his Posterity, have so obstinately opposed, and refuse to
restore, notwithstanding the Public Admonition, raised and conducted by the
hand of God undoubtedly, into the very heart of the Chief City of the Nation,
notwithstanding the Fortifications of Humane Laws against it; and although
diverse learned men have declared their Convictions of the truth of the Case in
print; but to no other effect, than their own self Condemnation, and
Condemnation of the rest, and plain Manifestation of what Spirit they are. And
here we may plainly perceive the Reason of what Mr. Mede has well observed in
fact, That the Devil has exercised and vented more Malice and Spite against
this Holy Rite, than against any other part of the Christian Religion, except
the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. And from hence alone it is abundantly
manifest, that it was the same Spirit, or of the same party, which secretly
inspired and instigated Cranmar, and which more openly disputed with Luther
before, against it. And this I think is sufficient for Satisfaction to the
First Question.

But we have not yet seen all the inveterate Spite and Malice of this
Antichristian Spirit against this Holy Solemnity: That could not satisfy it
thus to have depraved and abolished it, and deprived God, the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit of the Honor, and the Christian People of the Benefit, of it,
unless he could prevail also to have a piece of Mockery set up in the place of
it: Such another as was heretofore introduced in France, called Missa Sicca,
but soon exploded there, as a dry, empty, barren thing; but set up here, upon
some occasion taken from the first Book of Ed. 6. very formally in the latter,
enlarged with the Priests Rehearsal of the Ten Commandments, and a supplicatory
Respons for the People, at the end of each; and commonly called the Second
Service. The Subtilty of the Serpent is remarkable enough in it, having nothing
but what is innocent and good and well accomodated to deceive the people, and
make them believe it as good as what they had before; but being performed at
the Altar, and in the place of that August, Venerable, and as S. Chrysostom
calls it Tremendous Sacrifice, it was an Abominable Abuse both to God and Man.
As if a Tenant should with great formality present to his Lord at a great Feast
at his own Table, for a Basket of choice Fruit, an Empty Basket. And yet is
this Abuse of a shadow continued very formally in most Churches in England, and
the Substance neglected: A very pleasant Spectacle undoubtedly to Troops of
Apostate Spirits, and a special Invitation and Gratification to them to come
and attend such a Service in the place of the Good Angels, who offended at such
an Abuse are most likely to withdraw their Presence. The Indignity done to God,
and to our Savior, in this, is greater than I think fit to enlarge upon: but
there is one thing I think fit the People should be admonished of: The
Christian Church, as I take it, has always looked upon this Holy Solemnity, as
a Representation upon Earth, in the best manner Mortals can perform it, of what
our Great High Priest does for us in Heaven, in a Divine and Spiritual manner.
And how can they expect the Complete, or indeed any Benefit of what he does
there, who set up such a lame Service and Abuse of it here? I do much suspect
that both the Greek and Latin Churches for 1200 years last past have suffered
much for their Curtelling a Considerable part of this Office; as may easily be
perceived by comparing all their Liturgies now in use, with that most ancient
Form in the Constitutions, and the most ancient Usages of the Jews: And what
these incorrigible Cranmerians have farther to expect, they may do well to
consider.

There remains still a Considerable part of the Subtilty of the Serpent for
Securing, by the Power of the Beast, the Advantages he has gotten by the
Treachery of the False Prophet and Unfaithfulness of the Whore: but what has
been observed already being abundantly sufficient for a ground of Answer to the
remaining Questions, the Consideration of this may be more seasonable upon
another occasion: as the Cranmerian Heresy. or etc.

Since therefore both the Subtilty and the Malice of the Adversary, the Devil,
is so manifest in the Alterations aforesaid, against this Holy Ordinance, and
there in against the Holy Trinity, the Sacrifice of our Savior upon the Cross,
the Communion of Saints, the Holy Catholic Church; and the Church of England in
particular, the Answers to all the remaining Questions are very easy, plain,
full, and yet Short: That all, who have any regard to their Baptismal Covenant
and the Renunciation therein of the Devil and all his works, to the most
tremendous Denounciations of our Savior, the Admonitions of his Apostles after
his Ascension, or the Salvation of their own Souls, must abstain from all
Communion or Participation in these Corruptions and Abuses, after Notice of
them, be they of the Clergy or Laity: And if they be Priests, must celebrate
this Holy Sacrifice, as often as they can have a competent number of qualified
Communicants in the compleatest Form, they can procure; such as The first book
of Ed. 6. The Scotch Liturgy, The Liturgy of the Ancients represented in
English Forms, or some Translation out of the Ancient Forms, or Composure
according to them, Notwithstanding any temporal Laws, Cannons or Subscription
to the contrary: And if of the Laity, have recourse to such as do so; and
abstain in the mean time, and employ so much the more time in Prayer to God,
who is not tied to his own Ordinances, to supply by his Grace their want of
Opportunity, and to restore his H. Worship to its due Integrity and Frequency
in Public; and to provide for them at least in private in the mean time.

FINIS.

