The CASE of the Church of England By Law Established, Necessary to be
considered, in Order to a more firm and full Settlement of Peace both at Home
and Abroad.
In a Letter to a Bishop of the present Constitution, by an English Catholic.
My LORD,
WHEN you desired to discourse with me, I was very glad of it; for I know none
of your Order I should more gladly have discoursed with than your self: But my
Expectations were greatly disappointed, when after I had walked more than five
Miles for that purpose, you first permitted much of my time to be lost by
ordinary Discourse, not so much as of any Business; and, at last, as soon as I
moved any thing toward it, took such occasion to prevent any farther
Proceedings in Conference, either then, or at any time else, as looked as if
you in truth declined what you before seemed to desire. I expected to have
received from you the Subject of our Discourse; but since you was not pleased
to vouchsafe me that Favor, I shall to you, and (for reasons which will appear
hereafter) to all, give a plain Account of what I think may reasonably be
expected from me.

I have from my Youth been disposed to Retirement, and yet for all that always
so heartily affected to the Service of God and my Country, that upon any just
Occasion I have been as ready to appear in Public as any, and without any
respect to any private Interest. This is manifest by what I have Printed since
the Revolution, (not to mention other Matters:) And soon after I had received
my Quietus from that Service, (as I apprehended it) I was, by a Secret Conduct
of Providence, engaged in another, which had been much in my Heart for many
Years, for the more immediate Service of our Great Sovereign; and, by several
Steps unforeseen by any Mortal, necessitated to enter into the most Sacred
Employment, unless I would desert that Service, and let it fall; and to proceed
from a private Room to a public Church, and from one to another, till I and my
little Company were brought into the very Heart of the City: and then I began
to be more sensible of the Divine Hand in it, and what our Business was; viz.
to bear a Public, but tacit Testimony against the Corruptions and Neglect of
the most Solemn part of the Christian Worship. And that I continued for above
Two Years daily with a Liturgy restored in the principal Matters to the
Primitive Integrity, which I printed, and presented to the Arch Bishop, and
Bishop of London, and others, and let it be published; and in the Preface gave
sufficient Admonition of those Faults I have mentioned. But when I found it so
neglected by those, who were most obliged to take Notice of it, I began to fear
it might be but the Exposing of so Sacred a thing to Contempt, if we continued
in that public manner; yet did not think fit to desert that Post till I had
either a Prohibition to proceed, or an Invitation to depart to some other
Station; and such I soon had, a very extraordinary one, to a very convenient
Retirement. After I came thither, the Scandals I had before received from the
Unfaithfulness, Tepedity, and Unconcernedness of such, as of all men I thought
most obliged to take Care of the Service of God, and the Peace and Welfare of
the Nation, were so often by Letters I received from London recalled to my
Remembrance, that at last I resolved upon a farther and more exact Review of
what is called the Reformation, which seems to have been the special Business
of that Retirement. When I had satisfied my self in that matter, I gave a plain
Account of the things of most Importance, both to the State, and to the Church,
which I had observed, to Two of His Majesty's Privy Council, and resolved for
my self to do what I could to extricate my self out of all that Guilt and
Wickedness I found this Nation involved in, and to make my own Cause good,
whatever others would do. And for that purpose I could not think of any
Expedient more proper, than to draw up a plain Profession of my Faith, and to
make an Offer thereof, and of Communion to the next Catholic Church, which I
take to be that of France; and a little kind of Overture I then made of it to a
private Friend in London. When I had done this, we soon had Occasion to think
of removing thence, and upon our Removal, Opportunity to make some stay at
Oxford, and to peruse what Books and Manuscripts I thought fit there; and when
I had done that, a fair Invitation to come nearer London. And then I thought
fit to write to the Bishop of the Diocese whence I came, and where I was
concerned, to the Bishop of the Diocese to which I came, and to the Archbishop
of the Province, concerning these matters, who were all I thought my self
obliged to for any account of what I did; but I desired an Opportunity to
represent them to a Synod: For I could not satisfy my self to secure my own
Interest, unless I did what I could for the Service of my Country also,
especially since we have a Peace so happily concluded by so many States,
without any great Danger of any thing than what is like to be revived by
Dissentions in the Church, and the secret Guilt of Sacrilege and Schism, both
in this and other Nations. And therefore when I found no hopes of any
Opportunity of representing these matters before the Church Collective in a
Synod, there was no other way for me of doing it at all but before the Church
Diffusive by the Press. And for diverse Reasons I thought nothing more proper to
begin with than a Discourse of Prayers for the Dead, with a Preface concerning
the Necessity and Advantage of a Review of these matters by the State, since
the present Governors of the Church would not trouble themselves about them.
And this, my Lord, I hope, will fully answer part of your mistake concerning
me. I shall next tell you plainly, What were the Scandals which principally
moved me to this Review, so far as is sufficient for my purpose; and then, What
were the principal Matters which I observed in it, and think most necessary for
a farther Consideration at present.

Of those Scandals, there is one of which I have long since, and often
complained, both in private and public, but with so little Success, as does
not a little aggravate the Sin and Scandal to me: It is, that, having so great
Encouragement for Learning, such Numbers of Learned Men, such Abundance of
Shipping, and all Necessaries, such Commerce, Footing, and Plantations in so
many Foreign Parts among Infidels, there has been no Care taken by the
Governors of this Reformed Church for the Propagation of Religion among the
Infidels, or the Promotion of sincere Piety in our own Plantations, but,
instead of sending Missioners of the Gospel, suffering them to be filled with
the Ministers of Satan, the most scandalous People of the Nation; and for
Relief of the poor Negroes, whom their worse than Infidel Masters will not
suffer to be instructed in Christianity, and to be baptized, least they should
lose their Service, not so much as a Bill brought in, or one Motion made in
Parliament, where they sit, and are many times as busy, as Solicitors, in
private Cases of temporal Concern.

This is not a little aggravated by the cold Entertainment which Doctor Bray's
good Proposal had in this Nation, not only among the Gentry and People in the
Country, but among the Citizens and Traders, and even those very Pesons who
approved and recommended it to the Charitable Contributions of others; and
after it had been thus sent on begging for so inconsiderable a Sum as Three
Thousand Pounds, which was as much as it required, has been held in Suspense
for some Years before it could be raised, if it be raised yet. And this, if I
mistake not, is the greatest matter that ever was attempted by any of this
Church. What Multitudes of Souls must have died in Ignorance and Infidelity,
and in scandalous Sins, through the Unfaithfulness and Neglect of this Glorious
Reformed Church? Can any Man in great Place in this Church think of this
without Horror and Amazement for the Account they must one day give for it, if
they have any thing of true and sincere Christianity in them? Could such a Man
reproach another for commending Xavier, or so much as think of that glorious
Saint, his admirable Virtues and Works, confessed and commended even by
Protestants themselves, and not be confounded at the Thought of it? Are not he,
and many others of the Popes Missioners, the Shame and Reproach of such
Persons, and of such a Reformation, in this World, and like to rise up in
Judgment against them in the next? And who can believe that such a Reformation
as this was of God, or is endowed with an Apostolical Spirit?

I need not mention Particulars of the like Unfaithfulness and Neglect at home:
If public Records be examined, and the Good promoted, or but proposed in
Parliament by this Order be compared with what they have hindered or opposed, I
doubt it will be found upon Record that this Reformed Order have been very
insignificant Instruments for the Good of the Nation, if not much more
instrumental to hinder it. But we need not be at so much trouble as that of
Searching Records; if the visible State of the Nation be considered, it is
manifest and undeniable of what Communion the most Scandalous part of the
Nation are, and under whose Discipline, if that may be called Discipline, which
was once wished, 140 years since, but never practiced to this day. Another
great part of the Nation, who have little more of Religion than a bare
Profession, and going to Church on Sundays, such as the greatest part of most
Country Parishes in England are, are of the same Communion, and under the Care
and Instruction of the same Persons. And if we enquire into the Occasions of so
great Increase of Atheism, Deism, and Infidelity, I have not in 30 years last
past discovered any more common and effectual, than the Scandal of the
Unconcernedness of the Clergy for the Promotion of the Religion they profess,
and their eager pursuit of their own Promotion and Preferment in the Church.
Nor do I think there is any more common and effectual Occasion of so great
numbers of Dissenters, than that Coldness, Formality, and Emptiness of a true
Spiritual Life and Power which they observed in the Generality of the Clergy,
of all Ranks and Degrees; and thereupon wander to seek for it where they can
find it. For there is a certain Spiritual Sensation, as a learned Man of your
own calls it, by which devout experienced Souls can perceive such a secret
Power and Life in some Persons and Books, as that of the Imitation of Christ,
which have but a mean, simple, outward Appearance, as they perceive to be
really wanting in others sufficiently furnished with Learning and Humane Reason
to recommend them to those, whose Religion is more superficial or notional. And
such I believe are many among the Dissenters, who would never have sought for
what they wanted abroad, if they could have found it at home.

Besides all this, there is another very notorious, which I shall not mention
here, having a more special Occasion to take notice of it presently: and I
shall but mention what was not a little Scandalous to me, because not so
notorious to others; the obstinate and wilful Neglect of these two great Parts
of our Religion, the Peculiar Solemnity of the Worship, (of which I have said
enough in the Preface to the Liturgy) and of the Discipline.

These things, I presume, will not be denied to be sufficient Motives to a
considerate Man to examine the Root of a Religion, which brings forth such
Fruits: and now I shall tell you (not all that I observed in my Review; that
would be too much for what I now design, but) so much as is necessary and
sufficient for the Conclusions I make upon it. Three things, I believe, will go
near to determine all Questions needful concerning the Reformation: What were
the Causes, for which? What the Authority, by which, it was done? And what the
Fruits and Effects? Of the moving Causes enough is said for the present in the
late Letter and Answer to the Young Man, p. 2, 3. And much of the Fruits I have
here noted already; but there is one so natural to the Root, and so remarkable,
and of so spreading and pestiferous a nature, that I thought fit to reserve the
mentioning of it for this place.

The very Root of the present Reformation, which was at last Established by Act
of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 1. was Cranmer, from whom the Consecrators of Matt.
Parker, the Principal of the present Succession of Legal Bishops in this
Nation, received their Authority; so that he is the Common Ancestor of all.
What his Principles were, and to what Excesses his Flattery of the Civil
Magistrate proceeded, may be seen in the late Abstract of the Vindication of
the Rights of the Church, c. 8. even to the betraying of those Sacred and
Divine Rights, and censuring even the Apostles themselves: And it is no wonder
if from such an Ancestor, and such Principles, have proceeded a Progeny of
Flatterers of Princes for their own temporal Interest, to the Disturbance of
all mutual Confidence between them and the People, and Destruction of whole
Royal Families. For this, though notorious before, we need look no farther than
the last of the second Race of Kings since the Reformation, plainly betrayed
into those illegal Actions (justifiable indeed by those Principles, but not by
the Fundamental Laws of the English Government) which are the In the Charters
were the Rights of the People invaded; in the Ecclesiastical Commissions the
Rights of the Church also. It was touching the Accursed thing.
principal things evident against him, by those false Principles, and the
deceitful Flattery of such as preached up and pretended as much to Loyalty,
Non-resistance, and passive Obedience, as any; but soon discovered what was in
the bottom of those Pretenses when there was occasion. But admirable is the
Providence of God, who has not only given us at last occasion to see the
Decitfulness and Treacherousness of those Principles; and brought things to
that State, that neither can King James excuse his Actions, but by those
Principles, which yet he has special reason to abhor; nor King William and the
Nation justify theirs, but by Both the Usurpation and the Oath of Supremacy
seem Heretical, Sacrilegious, Schismatical, and Perjury, to cause Flattery in
the Clergy, subvert the Laws, justify K. James, and be a Reproach to the
present Government: and not excused, but aggravated by Qu. Elizabeth's
Injunction.
disowning and disclaiming those, and asserting and adhering to those of the
true English Government; but besides, by a new Division and Contention in the
Church, has extorted a just Assertion of that Truth, (with a plain Conviction
of the contrary Heresy) which few or none before would so much as own or
confess. The Erastian Heresy you know I mean; and the Conviction may be seen
in the Abstract. But no Conviction, though never so clear, will ever free this
Nation from a continual Succession of such a pestiferous Brood, till the State
it self cast out the accursed thing, which that Sacrilegious, Treacherous Achan
brought into it. And such it is indeed; for if his Principles be Heresy, the
Practice in the State is certainly Sacrilege, and Sacrilege of no ordinary
Nature or degree. And how cursed a thing that is may be seen in Sir Henry
Spelman's two Treatises, one but lately printed. Such cursed Fruit proceeding
from this Root, all may see, and many have felt, and more may, if they take not
warning.

The Authority by which this Reformation was Established, as aforesaid, was
merely and entirely Lay: the Bishops in the House made Speeches against it; the
Convocation of the Clergy sent up a Remonstrance against it; and the
Universities declared against it. This Authority therefore was incompetent; and
that Authority, which by it was introduced into the Church, when the other
Bishops were turned out, Schismatical, and null; and besides, merely Political,
even in its Original, (as is briefly noted in the Letter to the Vindicator) and
nothing truly Apostolical in it: for that Cranmer had implicitly renounced and
disowned, and wickedly, heretically, and treacherously introduced one merely
Political into the Church in the place of it, by his This the History of the
Reformation falsely charges upon Bonner, who was not so much as Bishop then.
strange Project of Commissions; and the They both accepted Commissions, and
were consecrated (if at all) by such as had.
Consecrators of Mat. Parker were both Intruders and Commission-Officers, and
such as the Queen would not make use of in her Coronation, though she was hard
put to it to get any other. Nor has this Fundamental Fault ever been rectified,
though there was once a fair Opportunity, by a true Archbishop some time
resident in the Nation, had the Opportunity been wisely improved, and the
Person treated as his real Dignity and great Learning justly deserved. So that
you have neither any clear Commission from Christ, nor Unity with the Catholic
Church, nor Integrity of his Worship, nor Authority or Use of his Discipline,
nor Evidence or any Demonstration of the Presence or Power of his Spirit: And
in all these the Dissenters seem to be equal with you, or in a better and safer
Condition; and though They betray not the Rights of Christ's Kingdom; their
Separation is from Schismatics; their Non-observance of Humane Laws for
Observance of Divine, and justifiable or excusable by the Principles of their
Adversaries. v. Hammond of Schism, c. 2.. 5, 7,
guilty of Schism too, yet more innocently guilty, and more cordial and
industrious for promoting the Spirit and Power of Religion in the Nation, which
may be accepted in Mitigation of the Guilt, especially if after notice they
proceed cautiously, and presume not beyond their Authority, and such things as
are lawful and commendable in all Christians, as Prayer, and Instruction of
their Neigbours, if done in due manner. And this I think sufficient for the
present to justify to a Man of Learning and Understanding in these matters,
both my refusal of your Communion, and what I told you I am ready to answer for
in my Preface to the Discourse Of prayers for the Dead. And if this be not
enough, more I have to say.

These things I was willing to have discoursed with your Lordship in private,
but, it seems, it was not the Will of God that I should, but rather offer them
publicly to the Consideration of all. Nor do I see any Inconvenience at all in
it: For if I be mistaken in any thing, I shall be glad to be better informed,
and as concerned and careful to do right to the Truth, as any one concerned can
desire. But if these things be so, as I have said, certainly they are not to be
neglected; nor can any Man, who has any Sense of his Duty to God, or any Love
to his Country, see it in such a Case, and be silent, or not so much as give
Notice to all, and especially to such as are obliged to take care, not only of
themselves, but of the rest also. Nor can Your Lordship, or any of Your Order,
be offended at it, if it be truth: for if so, it is in effect but what you your
selves ought to do, as you will answer it to Almighty God. If your Prince and
the State be guilty of Sacrilege, by Usurping the Sacred Rights of the Church,
you ought to admonish them, to persuade them, to oppose and withstand it, and
not to comply with it: for that is to make your selves Partakers in the Sin, to
betray their Souls, and your own too. If all be guilty of Schism, you ought to
consider how Bp. Bramhell acknowledges Separation from the Catholic Church to
be Separation from Christ, and all his holy Ordinances, and from the Benefit of
his Passion, and all Hope of Salvation. Vindic. c 9 p. 126. v Hammond of
Schism, c. 1. Sect 5.6 7, 8. Stillingfleet of Separation Par. 2. Sect. 27, 28.
Dodwell of Schism, c. 13, 14 Abstract, c. 4. p. 16.
great a Sin that is, give Warning, advise what is to be done, and not conceal
so great an Evil, either for your own private Interest, or for the sake of a
Party: that is to let them die in their Sin, and their Blood be required of
you, over and besides your own Personal Guilt. If the Authority of Christ's
Commission be not duly and sufficiently conveyed to you, you ought not to
pretend to any such thing, or to act as if it was; that is, to counterfeit your
Sovereign's Commission, to be Impostors, and the greatest Cheats and Deceivers
that can be. And all this is no less a Sin than that great Sin of disowning
Christ, and his Word, being ashamed or afraid to attest it; but rather so much
greater, by how much the Temptation is lesser. So that it is a matter which
deserves as great Consideration as any in the World; and not to be resolved but
upon very great and clear Grounds and Reasons. And if you your selves will not
be sensible of it, others ought, at least every one for themselves. And so I
leave it.

FINIS.

