A TRUE RELATION OF THE Ceremonies At the CREATING of the KNIGHTS Of the
Honorable ORDER of the BATH, the 18, and 19. April 1661.

With a Perfect LIST of their Names, in the same Order as they were Knighted by
His MAJESTY.

In uno tria juncta. LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens, at the Kings-Armes
over against the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street.

Advertisement.
THe Reader may please to take notice, That the Manner of Creating the Knights
of the Ancient and Honorable Order of the Bath, lately Printed by Philemon
Stephens, was neither False nor Erroneous, (as some would have it) but was
Verbatim taken out of Mr. Dugdales learned Description of Warwickshire, (fo.
531.) and only wanted this Advertisement, That that was the Ancient manner
used before the Reformation, which is now in many particulars altered, and in
some abrogated.

Since that Pamphlet was published, the News-Book (which came out the 25 of
April) Pretends to tell you the Formalities; but is both Defective in many
particulars, and Erroneous in others. As that the Knights met on Thursday 10 of
April, And that the next day they Dined in the Painted-Chamber, etc.

This Paper therefore offers you an Exact Account of all the Formalities and
Ceremonies, from diligent Observers, present at them All; And a perfect List of
the Knights, in such Order as his Majesty was pleased to Confer that Honor
upon them.

Philemon Stephens

The Ceremonies at Installing the Knights of the Honorable Order of the BATH,
19 April 1661.
ON Thursday (18 April 1661) those Lords and Gentlemen, who were by his
Majesty's Command, called by the Lord Chamberlains Letter, to be Knights of the
Bath, met about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, at the Court of Requests at
Westminster, where the Duke of Ormond, the Earls of Northumberland, Suffolk,
Lindsey, and Manchester, His Majesty's Commissioners for that purpose, Sat,
attended by Sir Edward Walker, Garter, Principal King at Arms, and other
Heralds, and by Sir John Eaton, Huissier of the Black Rod, and called over a
List of the Names of those Persons, in such order as they had been Rancked by
the said Lords Commissioners, which was for the most part according to their
proper places.

Of the whole Number in the List, only 3 or 4 were absent, so that 68 only
Appeared and Answered to their Names, and were Directed by the Heralds to
proceed orderly toward Henry the 7ths Chapel, the Junior Knights first, each
between his two Esquires, and the Page following him; both Knights and Esquires
were then in their ordinary Habits, most Regularly in Black, some of the
Heralds going before them, with their Coats of Office upon their Arms.

When they came to the Chapel, every Knight made the wonted Reverence to the
Altar, and so took his Seat; Evening Song being done, they were again called
in order by the Heralds, the Junior Knight first, did like Reverence, and went
back in like order to the Painted Chamber and Rooms adjoining, where they
Reposed themselves till Supper was ready, which consisted of at least 200
dishes of meat, besides a noble Service of Sweetmeats at his Majesty's Charges.

This Supper was in Court of Requests, where a continued long Table was set up
all along one side of the Room, an Escutcheon of the Knights Arms affixed upon
the Hangings in order as they were first called, which was a perfect Index to
direct the Knights to their proper places, and a means for the Esquires and
Pages to find their Knights, the crowd of people being great.

The Knights being placed on the Wall side, each under his Escutcheon of Arms,
the Esquires stood opposite to them on the other side the Table; the Ancient
Custom it seems was, that the Knights should sit demurely for some time with
the meat before them and eat nothing, but retire and leave it to their
Esquires, but that Custom having formerly been broken, it was so now also.

The Esquires stood bare for a short time, till the Knights had begun to eat,
and then the Esquires (either by Right, or by their Permission) were covered,
and did eat also, but stood all Supper time.

About one of the clock in the morning, Supper being ended, the Lord Cornwallis
and Sir Charles Berkley, the Treasurer and Comptroler of his Majesty's
Household, bade them Welcome in his Majesty's Name, and then conducted them to
the Painted Chamber, where, and in the Lords House, and other Rooms adjoining,
their Bathing Tubs and Beds (which were Pallets, with Canopies) were prepared;
which Canopies were of Red Say, and the Vessels were covered with the same, and
at the Tester of every Bed alike Escutcheon of the Knights Arms was set up
severally, which directed each of them to his several Appartiment or Stall.

The Linen (which was 24 Else of Holland for every Bathing-Tub,) was provided
by his Majesty's Barber, (at the Knights charge) and is part of his Fee; and
after the Knights had bathed themselves more or less, as they pleased, they
went to bed, and early in the morning were bid Good Morrow by his Majesty's
Music of several kinds. Then arising and Apparelling themselves in a Hermit
or Cordeliers habit, (being a long Russed Gown with wide Sleeves and Hoods tied
close about the middle with a Cordon of Ash colored and Russed Silk, reaching
down almost to the Knees, and a Handkerchef hanging thereat) they proceeded to
King Henry the sevenths Chapel in the same order as on the Night before; and
then doing the same Reverence, where they heard Divine Service, and took this
Oath, which was read to them by Sir Edward Walker, before the said Lord
Commissioners who were seated in the midst of the Chapel near the Altar.

The Oath.
Right Dear Brethren,
GReat worship be this Order to every one of you; you shall Honor God above
all things, you shall be steadfast in the Faith of Christ, and the same
Maintain, and Defend to your Power. You shall love your Sovereign above all
earthly things, and for your Sovereign Right and Dignity, Live and Dye: You
shall defend Maidens, Widows and Orphans in their Rights; you shall suffer no
Extortion, as far as you may, nor sit in place where any wrong judgment shall
be given to your knowledge; and as Great Honor, be this Order to you, as every
it was to any of your Progenitors, or Others.

This done, and the Bible kissed, they returned in the same order they came to
the Painted Chamber, and there put off their Hermits Weed, and were then roab'd
with the habit of their Order, which was a Mantle and Surcoat of red Taffaty
lined and edged with white Sarcenet, and thereto fastened two long strings of
white silk, with Buttons and Tassels of red Silk and Gold, and a pair of White
Gloves tied to them, a White Hat, and White Feather: Thus attired, they came to
the Court of Requests, where a noble dinner was prepared for them at his
Majesty's charge also, served up by his Majesty's Servants and Yeomen of the
Guard, the Kings Kettle-Drum and Trumpets sounding.

Dinner being done, each Knight had a Sword, the Pummell whereof and Cross-Hilt
were gilt, a Scabbard of White Leather, a Girdle and Belt of the like and gilt
Spurs carried by their Pages, then they proceeded to the Old Palace-Yard, where
they took Horse, the Senior first, and the Heralds before them in their Coats,
they Rode round the New Palace-Yard, and so thorough Kings-Street round about
where Charing Cross stood, and then back again to White Hall, where they
alighted, and after they had gone about the first Court, they were conducted by
the Heralds up to the Banqueting House, where his Majesty sat under a Cloth of
State to receive them, they were brought up six by six, each between his two
Esquires, with his Page carrying his Sword and Spurs before him. In their
Approaches before his Majesty they made three Obeysances, and each Knight being
presented by his Esquire upon their knees to his Majesty, the Lord Chamberlain of
his Majesty's Household received the Knights Sword from the Page, and delivered
it to his Majesty, who then with the Sword of State (ready drawn) conferred
upon them their respective Knighthoods by laying the Sword upon their
Shoulders, and putting the presented Sword about the Knights neck in such sort
that it might hang on his left side, and then his Majesty put the Red Ribband,
with the Order hanging at it, over the Knights head; which Order has three
Crowns of Gold Enamelled with Green, and Encompassed with this Motto, In uno
tria juncta. Which done, the Knight made his Obeysances of Gratitude to his
Majesty; And falling back the rest were Knighted in like manner. The premier
Knight had his Spurs put on by an Earl, according the Ancient Custom, which
was omitted in the rest for Brevity-Sake.

After they were all Knighted, they went down through the Privy Gallery into
his Majesty's Chapel, and there heard Divine Service, with Music and Anthems,
and then went up six at a time to the Altar, and offered up their Swords, where
the Lord Bishop of London, Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal received them,
and laid them upon the Altar, and afterward restored them with this admonition.

By the Oath which you have taken this day, I Exhort and Admonish you, to use
these Swords to the Glory of God, and Defense of the Gospel, to the Maintenance
of your Sovereigns Right and Honor, and to the upholding of Justice and Equity
to your Power; So help you God.

Whilst the Bishop laid the Swords upon the Altar, each Knight presented an
Angel of Gold into a Gold Basin held by a Divine of his Majesty's Chapel, who
stood on the left hand of the Bishop to Receive them.

This done, the Knights returned from the Chapel; but at the door, the Kings
Master Cook stood with his Apron on, and Chopping Knife in his hand, and as
every Knight passed by, Said thus;

Noble Knight, You know what a great Oath you have taken, which if you keep, it
will be great Honor to you; but if you break it, I must back off your Spurrs
at your Heels, as unworthy of this Dignity, which God forbid.

And for Redemption of his Spurrs, each Knight gave the Cook a Noble for his
Fee. When they came to the great Hall, the Officers at Arms acquainted them,
that on Monday following they were to attend his Majesty from the Tower to
White Hall on Horseback, in the same Robes wherein they were Knighted.

Both the Knights, and Esquires, to ride in distinct bodies by themselves: And
on Tuesday the Knights to meet early in the Painted Chamber, in their Purple
Satin Habits, thence to proceed before his Majesty to the Coronation at
Westminster-Abby, and to attend him at Dinner in Westminster Hall: All which
was performed accordingly.

A perfect LIST of the Knights of the Honorable Order of the Bath.
Sir Edward Fiennes, Lord Clinton, Eldest son to the Earl of Lincoln. Sir John
Egerton, Lord Brackley, Eldest son to John Earl of Bridgwater. Sir Philip
Herbert, second son to the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery. Sir William
Egerton, second son to John Earl of Bridgwater. Sir Vere Fane, second son to
the Earl of Westmerland. Sir Charles Berkely, eldest son to the Lord Berkeley.
Sir Henry Bellasis, eldest son to John Lord Bellasis. Sir Henry Hyde, (now
Vicount Cornberry) eldest Son to Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor
of England. Sir Rowland Bellasis, Brother to the Lord Viscount Falconberge. Sir
Henry Capel, son to the late Lord Capel, and Brother to the now Earl of Essex.
Sir John Vaughan, second Son to Richard Earl of Carbury. Sir Charles Stanley,
Grandchild to William late Earl of Derby. Grandchildren to the late Earl of
Westmerland.
Sir Francis Fane Sir Henry Fane
Sir William Portman Baronet. Sir Richard Temple Baronet. Sir William Ducy
Baronet. Sir Thomas Trevor Knight and Baronet. Sir John Scudamore Baronet. Sir
William Gardner Baronet. Sir Charles Cornwallis, son to Frederick Lord
Cornwallis Treasurer of his MAJESTY'S Household. Sir John Nicholas, eldest son
to Sir Edward Nicholas, His MAJESTY'S Principal Secretary of State. Sir John
Monson, son to Sir John Monson. Sir Bourchier Wrey, son of Sir Chichester Wrey.
Sir John Coventry, Grandchild to the Lord Coventry. Sir Edward Hungerford. Sir
John Knevet. Sir Philip Boteler Sir Adrian Scroop, son of Sir Gervas Scroop,
who received nineteen wounds at Edghill battle for His late MAJESTY. Sir
Richard Knightley. Sir Henry Heron, son of Sir Edward Heron. Sir John Lewknor.
Sir George Brown. Sir William Tirringham. Sir Francis Godolphin. Sir Edward
Bainton. Sir Grevil Verney. Sir Edward Harley, son of the late Sir Robert
Harley. Sir Edward Walpoole. Sir Francis Popham. Sir Edward Wise. Sir
Christopher Calthrop. Sir Richard Edgcombe. Sir William Bromley. Sir Tho.
Bridges. Sir Tho. Fanshaw, son of Sir Tho. Fanshaw. Sir John Denham, his
MAJESTY'S Surveyor General, son of Sir John Denham, Lord Justice of Ireland,
and Baron of his MAJESTY'S Exchequer in England. Sir Nicholas Bacon. Sir James
Altham. Sir Thomas Wendy. Sir John Bramston, eldest son of Sir John Bramston
late Lord chief Justice of England. Sir George Freeman, son of Sir Ralph
Freeman, one of his MAJESTY'S Masters of Requests. Sir Nicholas Slanning, son
to Sir Nicholas Slanning slain in his late MAJESTY'S service at Bristow. Sir
^ichard Ingoldsby. Sir John Roll. Sir Edward Heath, son to Sir Edward Heath,
lat^ Lord chief Justice of England. Sir William Morley. Sir John Bennet. Sir
Hugh Smith. Sir Simon Leech. Sir Henry Chester. Sir Robert Atkins, son to
Sir..... Atkins one of the Barons of his MAJESTY'S Exchequer. Sir Robert Gaier.
Sir Richard Powle. Sir Hugh Ducy. Sir Stephen Hales. Sir Ralph Bash. Sir Tho.
Whitmore.
FINIS.

