Thoughts about promoting the Interest of Christ's Universal Church.
THE Interest of the Universal Church lies doubtless in the raising, enlarging
and adorning of that mystical building, which is called the City of God,
Christ's Spouse, and Christ's Body. As this Body is made up of such members, as
are animated by the vital Spirit, which Flows from the Head, and linkes them
together with one another as well, as with their Head, Christ, so real
Christianity is without doubt the main point of the Universal Church, and as
real Christianity spreads and improves, or shrinks and decays, the Universal
Church must be looked upon as flourishing or declining. Real Christianity
consisting in following the steps of our Savior, and expressing by our life
his pattern, as far as Divine Grace inables every one of us, we may term it, a
ressemblance to Christ, the restorer of Gods image in the soul of man, the
Beginner and Fullfiller of our Faith. Now the nearer we ressemble unto Christ,
and the more there is of those that ressemble him, the more fully the glorious
ends of his Gospel are answered and the Universal Church advanced.

As absurd as it is to think that Christ dyed for this or that sect, and that
heaven must be stocked only out of one particular Church, nevertheless notions
of Christianity run so low, that the greatest part fancy, Christian Religion is
the performing of divine Worship after this or that form, and houlding such or
such opinions.

Which false supposition has betrayed some into Unchristian courses against
those that differ from them, and occasioned doleful effects. Wherefore diverse
pious Souls have endeavored to heal the wounds of the Church, by reconciling
the aforesaid differences. It is but too much known how fruitless hitherto such
endeavors have proved. Nor can it be otherwise, as long as that poisonous root
of all dissension remains in the Soul, namely the rebellious selfish tincture,
contracted by the first man, in listening to te serpent, and so declining from
God to Satan, the Prince of Pride. It would not signify much neither, if all
the men in the world resolved upon using the same expressions, and the same
Church service, continuing all the while slaves to te Kingdom of darkness.
Whereas holiness or real Christianity, sincerily pursued in the several
particular Churches, would approach people to that heavenly temper, to which
jarring and disquiet is a perfect stranger. Wherefore I am of opinion, that
instead of studying for confessions to be received by all partys, or arguing
against one another's tenets, the differing partys should vye with one another,
who could produce most instances of such as have in their Church arrived at the
glorious renovation of Gods image in the Soul; which is the sign and effect of
that Faith, which 1 John V. 4.
overcomes the world, Ephesians. III. 17.
and by which Christ lives in us, inabling those that receive him Joh. I. 12.
to become childern of God. Those that 2 Cor. V. 17.
are in Christ become such new Creatures, and united with him, need not study
for a confession, whereby thy might be united, all of them together living as
it were by one common Soul. Though the number of such is very small,
nevertheless God has some here and there, which in his infinite mercy he has
left as the salt of the earth. These Few ought to be the more thank-full to
that goodness, which has snatched them out of the inundation of the Universal
Corruption. The greatest thankfulness to the great Donor of all good and
perfect gifts consists in benefitting others by what we have received out of
the unexhaustible divine treasure, to the glory of the Liberal Giver. Wherefore
the aforesaid proficients in real Christianity will hardly make here on earth a
better return to heavens Favors, than if they heartily bestir themselves, to
communicate unto others that divine nature, whereof in the new Creature they
are made partakers.

After these premises I infer, that the Interest of the Universal Church might
be promoted, if the following points were heeded.

(1.) Those that are in authority should study all possible means to provide
such Guides for the people, as have an experimental knowledge of the
abovementioned real Christianity, and can say with St. Paul: Follow me, as you
see me follow Christ. At least ut-most care ought to be taken that a Preacher
my not bring a reproach or disparagement upon his doctrine by his bad example.
Persons that have not themselves recovered life by Christ, will hardly be able
duly to lay before their hearers, what is the Ephesians. IV. 22.
Old man depraved according to the desires of the Deceit, and the Ephesians. IV. 24.
New man, who is created after God in Righteousness and holiness of the truth;
what it is to be dead in sin, and to be resuscitated with Christ. Wherein
nevertheless consists preaching repentance and Faith, which two heads Act. XX.
21.
St. Paul rekones the chief toward the saving of Souls. Without this
foundation, the learnedest discourses will avail little toward the enlarging
of Gods Kingdom; though they tickle the ears, get credit and esteem to the
Preacher, and fill the minds of the hearers with never so fine notions. Nay
though they should convince the auditory of the advantages of a good moral
life, little will be practiced, as long as the principle of disobedience,
selflove, and own will continues the spring of the heart. At the best a good
moral life is not yet Gods Righteousness, 2 Cor. V. 21.
which is the Scope of the Gospel. Moral men are some times fallen into a
conceit of themselves, setting up their own righteousness, for want of due
instruction about the deplorable state of corrupted nature, and the glorious
advantage of a new birth from above, Phil. III 9.
which forms Christ in us, and begetts at this rate Gods Righteousness, which
is by Faith.

(2.) For the breeding many Guides duly qualifyed, it would be requisite to
order the Schools so, that a solid foundation for true wisdom might be laid
there, by inuring youth betimes to a sincere regard to him, who is the fountain
of true understanding. For want hereof we find so many Scholars, that aim
rather at fame, by being versed in many hard authors, than at the glorifying of
God, and advantaging their Neighbor by an experimental knowledge of the vast
difference between Living to God and Living to ourselves. I have met with some
that took more delight in giving an account of an old manuscript, than in
turning of a Soul from the world to heaven. Nor is it probable Heavens interest
should be heartily espoused by those, with whom the Love of the world bears the
chief sway. Though Providence has contrived it so wisely, that some smart for
their vanity in desiring the reputation of vast Scholars, because oftentimes
they become unfit for thinking right themselves, by wasting their lives in
cramming other men's notions into their brains.

(3.) If, instead of railing at one another and preaching at this rate hatred
rather than charity, the Clergy of all the particular Churches made it their
only business, to preach Repentance and Faith, according to the first Article,
they would show the more of an Apostolic Spirit, and reap the more fruit from
their labors. I have often wondered at their taking more pleasure in the making
of Proselytes to their Church, than in turning their own flock, from the world
to heaven, and from the Slavery of the Prince of the world, to the glorious
liberty of the Kingdom of God. He that has a tenderness for the persuasion, he
professes, should not encourage vicious worldlings to come into it, since a
great many well disposed Souls, ground their esteem of a Church upon the number
of good patterns, which that Church affords. So that it is the Interest of
those that would bring their own persuasion into request, to contribute what
they are able, that Christian Virtues might shine brighter in their Church than
in any other,

(4.) If people of differing persuasions fell into Company, they should avoid
all controversy, the handling whereof seldom betters men, but often inflames
animosities. And most men do think it a lessening of their own reputation, and
that of their masters, if they should yield one tittle of their Systeme of
Divinity. Whereas some have done good even upon men of a differing persuasion,
by declining controverted points, and grounding their discourse upon those
subjects, which as essential to salvation are owned by all partys, though put
in execution by a very few of them,

(5.) Those few that know Christ really, 1 Cor. I. 24.
as the Power of God in the faithful, and feel by this knowledge Joh. XVII. 3.
eternal life in them, having attained to the blessed experience of 1 Cor. VI.
17.
being one Spirit with Christ, may endeavor to get acquainted and settle a
correspondence with one another, though Providence has placed them in
different Provinces of the Lords Vineyard. Such a correspondence would not only
prove of comfort and encouragement to themselves, but they might confer with
one another about carrying on the common interest, against the Kingdom of
darkness, that all along so miserably deludes the Slaves of its Dominions, and
thwarts the heirs of Gods Kingdom. In the mean while every one making it his
main business to strengthen the weak of his own persuasion, and to rescue them
from perishing.

If the following of this method should by Gods blessing prove successful, and
Christ's meek, peaceable, heavenly Spirit dethrone the haughty, broilsome,
worldly spirit of Satan in most peoples minds, they would soon hasten to
brotherly embraces. But the turbulent opposers of Love and Union would be left
to fret away by their so much beloved sowrness.

Macarius Homil. XXXII.
As the Sun inlightens the whole earth, so God is every where. If you look for
him in heaven, there he is in the thoughts of the Angels. If you seek him on
earth, there he is to be met with in the hearts of men. But of a great many
there is but few such Christians as please him.

Homil. V.
There is a great difference between real Christians and the rest of mankind.
Real Christians have their mind and understanding all ways in a heavenly
disposition, eternal blessings are all ways in their sight by reason of the
communion and participation of the holy Ghost. They are born of God from above;
they are dignifyed to be Gods Children in Truth and Power; after much labor,
sweat and time, they are arrived at settlednesse, steadiness, tranquillity and
comfort, ceasing to be sifted and tossed by fickle and vain thoughts; In this
they are better and greater than the world, because their mind and
understanding rests in the Peace of Christ, and the love of the holy Ghost; as
the Lord speaking of such says: They are past from death unto life. Wherefore
the difference of Christians (from the rest of men) does not consist in form
and outward appearance.

For by the renovation of the mind, by the tranquillity of the thoughts, by the
Love of the Lord, and by a heavenly longing, differs the New Creature of
Christians, from all the men of the World.

Homil. XXV.
We have not yet obtained the exultation of Christ's salvation, because the
sting of death sticks still in us. We have not yet put on the new man, which is
created after God in holiness, because we have not yet put of the old man
corrupted according to the desires of the Deceit. We do no yet wear the
heavenly image, nor are made resembling to the glory thereof; because in our
mortal body sin bears the sway still. We have not yet beheld the glory of what
is incorruptible, because we are still under a dark moonless night. We have not
yet put on the armor of light, because we have the weapons and works of
darkness still about us. We are not yet transformed by the renovation of our
mind, because we continue in conformity to the world by the vanity of our mind.
We are not glorified with Christ, because we do not suffer with him. We carry
not his marks in our body about us, entered into the mystery of the Cross of
Christ; for we are still wedded to our carnal passions and lusts. We are not
yet become Gods Heirs and Coheirs of Christ, because the Spirit of Servitude
and not of adoption reigns in us. We are not yet become a Temple of God and a
habitation of the holy Ghost, because we are still a temple of Idols, and a
lurking place of wicked spirits, by the strong bent of our Soul to passion.

FINIS.

