A Profession of FAITH COMPRIZING The Ancient FORMS OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH,
With other Articles relating to The Terms of Communion WITH THE Present Church
of ROME.

By E. S. an English Catholic.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE our Savior has so affectionately expressed and so admirably
demonstrated his Love to his Church, and has so effectually recommended and
injoined to all his Disciples, the Members of it, Mutual Charity one to
another: and his Blessed Apostle has so earnestly and obligingly both dehorted
from all Divisions and Dissentions, and exhorted all to Unity and Unanimity:
And since such terrible Judgment is denounced both against such as cause
Scandal and Offenses, and against such as resist the Ordinance of God in the
Powers that be (in Church or State:) It is not to be questioned but this Great
Schism, which after many Complaints of Pious and Judicious Persons, and diverse
Warnings by the poor Waldenses, the Albigenses, by Wicliff, by John Huss, and
Hierome of Prague, was at last begun by Martin Luther, about 180 Years since,
and is continued with much Unchristian Hatred and Abhorrence of one another to
this day, in the principal part of his Church, is greatly displeasing to our
Savior, who has done and suffered so much for it; and very pernicious to his
Church; and upon both Considerations just matter of Grief and Trouble to all
sincere, considerate Christians, and such as is not only an effectual Motive,
but a strict Obligation to avoid all Participation in either the Scandals of
the one side, or other Miscarriages on the other, or the Animosities between
both, and to be ready to contribute what may be toward a good Accommodation,
upon true Christian and Catholic Terms.

This is certainly the Duty of all; but few are sensible of it: The greatest
part are so affected to the peculiar Principles of their own Party, that they
are more concerned for them and their particular Interest, than for the Common
Interest of Christianity: Some in Simplicity, in fact supposing, if not
expressly asserting, an Infallibility in their own Party; and others no less
biased by temporal Interest: and amongst those of most Understanding and
Candor, rarely any so clear and free from all Secret Partiality, but they are
apt to vindicate their own Party in matters in difference beyond due regard to
so desirable an Accommodation, and deceive themselves with Pretenses of
Obedience, Peace and Charity in so doing, though thereby ^hey make themselves
more specially accessory to the continuance of the Schism, which is contrary to
both, Peace and Charity, without which their pretended Obedience may be only a
sinful Compliance.

Of all this I have been long sensible: and therefore, though in the Church, to
which I thought my self first and principally obliged, I saw diverse things
amiss; yet I thought them not sufficient to justify my Separation from it: and
besides, I saw so much every where else amiss, that I knew not whither to go
for the better. I was for Universal Charity to all Men, Catholic Communion
with all Christians, unless where I saw special Cause for the contrary, and for
Perfect Obedience to all Superiors according to their Authority, and consistent
with Duties of Prior and Superior Obligation. And then while I lived in a Civil
State I acted in all things with good Satisfaction: But when I was, beyond my
Expectation, suddenly engaged in Holy Orders, for a special Service, unto which
I had been long much affected and devoted, and was then led by a secret
surprising Conduct of Divine Providence, I soon discovered what I had not
sufficiently considered before, in the most Solemn and Peculiar part of the
Christian Worship of God, which I was to perform, such a Departure from the
Practice of the Holy Catholic Church, that I could not perform the Obedience I
would to this Particular Church, without Disrespect to that, and Participation
therein with notorious Sectaries and Schismatics, who had shamefully abused
and imposed upon this. For this Sore I had prepared an effectual Plaster to
have healed it, without exposing the Shame, might it have been applied: But
when I saw nothing could prevail, I thought it time to withdraw; and when I
could not help others, to look to my self; and more particularly, that I live
not in Schism while I seek to avoid it: For which purpose I could think of no
better Expedient for my Security, than, according to Ancient Practice, to send
a Profession of my Faith to such Persons as I thought most proper both at Home
and Abroad.

In the Church of Rome, and all the Churches in Communion with it, I
acknowledge a true Apostolical Authority: and so far I do heartily embrace it,
and submit to it. If they abuse it, they must answer for it, not I: I must pity
them, deplore the Abuses, pray for them, and, as a dutiful Child, do what I can
for them without partaking in or encouraging any thing amiss. But in those who
pretend to be Reformed, and particularly here in England, I can discover no
such Authority neither in the Root, nor in the Fruit: but they seem to me like
Branches separated from the Body, deprived of the true Sap, and nourished only
by the common Air, and a peculiar Juice of another kind, according to the
different Soils they are planted in. Yet do I not think fit to remit any thing
of my Charity and Good Will to any of them, or readiness to serve them. Nor do
I know how better to express it than by such plain dealing as I have here used.
It is but the effect of that Fidelity which I owe to God, and to his Church,
and to themselves also. Even in that very Respect with which I treat the
Authority of Christ in the Church of Rome, though it may appear to them like
Partiality at the first, I do intend a Kindness to them in an exemplary
Admonition, to distinguish between the Authority of Christ committed to Man,
and the Faults of Men entrusted with it; and not to desire the Destruction of
the Field of our Lord because the Enemy has sowed Tares in it. And that they
may perceive, if they observe and consider well, what Care I take not to betray
any Truth of God, which I believe to be such, by any false Colors, or unfit
Compliance. For I have not written any thing but what I believe to be true; yet
if I be mistaken in any thing shall be glad to be better informed: and though I
think I cannot better approve my Respect to our Savior, than by much Concern
for his Church; yet I think I cannot better demonstrate the Sincerity of my
Affection to it, than by not complying with such things as, I fear, will
provoke farther Displeasure of our Lord against it, if the Warnings and
Admonitions of more gentle Corrections be not answered as they ought, with a
due Humiliation, giving Glory to God, and Amendment. For as whole Societies of
Men are apt to fall into as great Sins as particular Persons, and such as
provoke as great Judgments, though longer before they come to the height; so
ought the like Means of Humiliation, Self-Condemnation, giving Glory to God,
and Amendment, be used by them to prevent greater Severities of his Judgments.

If the true State and Dignity of that Church, amongst all the Churches,
according to the Ordinance of God, was better considered on all sides, it would
soon make all more sensible of their Duties, and of their Transgressions of it,
for which they have much to answer. For as that Church is the Principal in the
Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, and has always been so esteemed, so ought all
true and considerate Christians to have a special concern for so eminent a part
of the Body of Christ, and to pray for and seek the Peace and Prosperity of
this our Jerusalem, even to the last, after the great Example of our Savior.
And, on the other side, they who hold so eminent a place in the Kingdom of
Christ, ought not, like Men of the World, to think too highly of themselves for
the Dignity of the Place, but, like true Christians, be humbled in themselves
through a due sense of the Importance of the Duty, and a proportionable Concern
for the faithful Discharge of it, according to the special Caution of one of
their Founders to themselves, Romans 11.18, 20, 21, 22. and the necessary
Admonition of the other, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. as he himself had been admonished by
his Master, Jo. 21.15, 16, 17. and according to the most excellent
Instructions, Directions, Admonitions and Example of that great and most
excellent Master of all to all; who treated all with all the Mildness,
Gentleness, Condescension, and Tenderness that could be, instructing and
speaking unto them as they were able to hear it, Mark 4.33. and forbearing many
things till his Disciples could bear them, Jo. 16.12. and forbad the forbidding
of such as of good Will promoted his Service, and were not against them, though
not yet in their Company, Mar. 9.38, 39, 40. and of such as brought but little
Children unto him, Mar. 10.14. and was amongst his own, not as a Lord, but as
one that serves, Luke 22.24, -- 27. But all ought to consider well the Nature
of this Kingdom, and what is the true Interest of it: that it is a Spiritual
Kingdom, not imaginary, but real, and most powerful; and to know whence, and
how, that Power is to be attained, and how to be retained and used: and to
consider well and understand not only the general Rules and Instructions given
at first by our Lord, but the special Notices of his Pleasure signified in the
several Acts of his Providential Discipline; and what all this does require of
them in their respective Stations, and wisely apply themselves to the
Performance of it. This would soon detect and rectify all that is amiss. But
it is not for me, nor for this place to proceed farther in discourse of these
things.

Some are offended, or think it strange, that I should offer to communicate
with the Church of France, where such terrible Persecutions are executed
against Protestants. I confess, I pity them as Sufferers, and more as Sufferers
for Conscience, though perhaps mistaken Conscience in many things; but I do not
think ever the better of them for being Protestants: Nor do I know that the
Church of France is concerned in it; but believe it proceeds from Reasons of
State; and very good reason I am well satisfied there is, that the King should
desire, and use all just and reasonable means, that his Subjects may all agree
in the same Religion: The Disturbances in that Kingdom heretofore, by bringing
in Foreigners, and the Indignities that have been done by some of the principal
of their Ministers, with the Approbation and Applause of too many others, to
the Primitive Christians, and the Catholic Church, and in them to Christianity
it self, are things which I think deserve a sharp Penance. But I wish on each
side it was well considered what is necessary to make their own Cause good in
the sight of God and Man: for I am sure then there would soon be an end of
their Differences. The People ought to consider, that diverse points heretofore
as confidently asserted by their Leaders as any, have since been detected by
learned Men amongst themselves to have been much mistaken: and that may
reasonably make them less to presume upon any of the rest: and because
Obedience to Civil Magistrates in omnib^^, licitis and honestis is a certain
Duty; they ought to go as far in Obedience as they can, without any Exception,
but such as they can assure themselves will be allowed by Almighty God, and, if
it may be, by all moderate and judicious Christians. Such a Tender as this I
should hope might move the King's Clemency to consider of his Terms of
Conformity, that there may be nothing in them but what is truly Catholic, as
to Matters of Religion, and such as he can assuredly expect the Approbation of
God, and his Blessing in his Proceedings upon them; and to remove all Scandals
out of the way; which I think as Glorious a Work as any thing he can undertake.
For those unhappy Divisions are undoubtedly a Judgment of God; and Scandals a
special Cause of it.

Of how great Concern it is to this Nation that these matters of Religion be
taken into better Consideration I have lately already in the Preface to my
Discourse Of Prayers for the Dead, said as much as I thought necessary; and
therefore forbear to say any more of it here.

A Profession of Faith, Comprizing the Ancient Forms of the Catholic Church,
With other Articles relating to The Terms of Communion With the present CHURCH
OF ROME.
By E. S. an English Catholic.
I Believe in One GOD, the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
of all things Visible and Invisible:

And in One LORD, Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of his
Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten, not made, consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things were
made; who for us Men, and for our Salvation, descended from Heaven, and was
conceived and incarnate by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and made
Man, and also suffered for us under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, descended into Tho we have no word of an adequate signification with
this, yet must this here signify more than Dead; for that is a tautology, not
fit for a Summary.
Hades, and the third day rose again from the Dead, according to the
Scriptures; and having forty days frequently conversed with his Apostles,
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, [the Church] and given
them Commands, [special secret Instructions] ascended into Heaven, and sits
on the right Hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again
with Glory to judge both the Living and the Dead: Whose Kingdom shall have no
End.

And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son; who with the Father and the Son is together Worshipped and
Glorified; who spoke by the Prophets.

And I believe One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; the Communion of
Saints; One Baptism for Remission of Sins; and Remission of Sins after Baptism
by the Discipline of the Church duly executed; the Resurrection of the Dead,
and Life Everlasting in the World to come.

Moreover, I believe, That the Article of the Belief of the Holy Catholic
Church was put into the Ancient Creeds, and placed immediately after those of
the Holy Trinity, for special Reasons, and as a Matter of the next greatest
Note. It is the Kingdom of Christ in this World, though not of this World; a
great Favor deigned to Mankind; a great Obligation to Unity, Unanimity, and
Charity: for all Schismatics are Mutiniers and Rebels: and all in a State of
Schism, in a State of Rebellion: and the Sin of Schism in the Church is a
greater Sin than the Sin of Rebellion in a Civil State, though both may much vary
according to several Circumstances.
Importance to be believed, confessed and observed in Order to the rest.

2. That this Holy Catholic Church is a Sacred Society, formed into One Body,
by the Ministry of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
according to a General Commission and Special Instructions received from Him,
under the Conduct of his Spirit, and Special Providence, who promised to be
with them always, even to the end of the World; that is, with them, and their
Successors regularly Succeeding in their Seats, the Churches founded by them,
and others constituted by their Successors; and that the Gates of Hell should
never prevail against it.

3. That the Form and Government of this Great Body, the Holy Catholic Church,
by Presbyters, Bishops, Archbishops, or Metropolitans, Primates, and
Patriarchs, was not any Humane Project or Invention, or Casual thing, but what
was designed by the Wisdom of God, as necessary for the Constitution,
Preservation, and Government of it, in and as One Entire Body; and was so
formed by the Apostles and their Successors, by the Special Instructions and
Directions of our Savior, and under the Conduct of the Spirit and Special
Providence of God, who had prepared the Roman Empire for a kind of Mould to
form it in; and wherein it received its complete Formation by degrees, in a
very Natural manner.

4. That there was some This is granted by Dr. Barrow upon Conviction of
Scripture, diverse Reasons, and Authority of Fathers, who generally seem to
countenance it. Tr. of Supr. Land. 1680. p. 46, 48.
Special Privilege, at least of a Primacy, partly given to St. Peter, and which
he held under our Savior, among the rest of the Apostles in our Savior's
Lifetime; and partly designed for him afterward; as is very observable in
various Instances in the Histories of the Gospel, and in diverse Speeches and
Actions, many of them Mystical, of our Savior; and was commonly believed by
the Ancient Christians: And that the like Privilege, as that which he held
among the Apostles, was by the Design and Order of Almighty God to continue in
his Successors in the Church Note. Those glorious Predictions concerning the
Church of Christ, viz. Conversion of Nations, and Subjection of Secular Powers,
have in no part of the Catholic Church been so eminently and even literally
fulfilled, as in the particular Church of Rome.
of Rome, among the rest of the Bishops; that Place being ordered by the Divine
Wisdom, as most fit for the Chief Seat in our Savior's Kingdom, the Church,
which had been occupied by the Enemy as the chief Seat in the Empire, who was
then to be cast out, and Possession to be taken for our Savior by his two
chief Apostles, as his Deputies: And that such Privilege of the chief Seat has
been acknowledged by the Ancient Christians, and in all after-Ages; and was
never denied or questioned, but upon Claim or Usurpation of more than due.

5. That this Sacred Society, being of Special Divine Institution, the
Government thereof is much more the Ordinance of God, than any Civil Authority
in the World whatever: and Disobedience thereunto a greater Sin: and the
Coercive Power of the Church by Excommunication duly exercised a greater
Punishment than any the Civil Authority can inflict.

6. That though both, the Sacred and the Civil Power, be the Ordinance of God;
yet the Sacred is the more Excellent, in respect of the Author of its
Constitution and Specification; of its more immediate relation to Him, who is
the Supreme Being; of its End; of the Subject being a Sacred Society; and of
the Amplitude of the Society, being Catholic, diffused over all the World; and
in respect of the Extent of its Coercive Power, to exclude out of the Kingdom
of Christ, and from the Privileges thereof: And that all civil Authority ought
to be Subject and Subservient to it, both being very consistent, and each
having Means proper and sufficient to maintain its own Rights: but they both
ought to be mutually assistent to the Service of the Supreme Lord of all, and
to each other in order thereunto.

7. That if any Civil Authority presume to oppress any part of this Sacred
Society by Persecution, Usurpation, or any Restraint or Impediment of the Free
Exercise of the Right or Authority belonging to it, or Duty incumbent upon it;
all such Presumption is Sacrilege and Impiety against God, and just Cause for
any other civil Authority to engage for the Relief of it: And upon Complaint to
the Metropolitan, Primate, or Patriarch, as Occasion may be, He, with a
competent Number of others, upon What Qu. Eliz. did by Advice of her Privy
Council in assisting the Scotch, French, and Dutch, against their respective
Sovereigns, may much more be done by any others upon so Solemn, Sacred
Consultation and Resolution, by open War on behalf of the Oppressed.
Consultation in Synod, or by Letters, may proceed to Sentence against the
Offender, and that justly and solemnly declared, and signified to other
Metropolitants and Bishops, they may either leave it so to the Judgment of
Almighty God, or admonish other civil Authorities of it, as may be judged most
proper or necessary, according to the Circumstances of the Case.

8. That because nothing is more destructive to certain Right than Misuse, Such
is that Doctrine, which Dr. Barrow says he contests against, p. 30.. 13, 14.
But in the next. he says there are great store of Divines of the Roman
Communion, who contract that Power into a narrower compass: So that though he
strains as much as he can, the Reader is deceived who thinks he has confuted,
or opposes all Supremacy in the Pope.
Claim of more than is due, or by a wrong Title, and false or insufficient
Proofs, possibly ill Use and ill Defense may have so obscured the Luster of
this Right in the Church, that Ignorance and Error may be some Excuse for
diverse actual Usurpations of the Civil Authority, yet is all such Usurpation in
it self more or less Sacrilegious and Impious, and what may provoke some Secret
Curse upon the Guilty, though through Ignorance or Error, especially if continued
after Notice: And for the Clergy to comply with it, is to betray the Rights of
the Church, and of Christ himself: But for any one to assert and maintain any
such, as Lawful, or the Right of the Magistrate, Heresy, and a Betraying both
of Church and State; the one to Oppression, the other into Sin, and Divine
Vengeance the Punishment thereof.

9. That the Christian Religion was instituted, and the Word of God taught and
delivered to the World by our Savior, and by his Apostles by his express
Command, by Preaching and Teaching viva voce, and Orders settled in the Church
by the Apostles by Word and Deed, and continued by Observation in Fact without
Writing: And whatever has equal Evidence of Apostolical Authority is of Equal
Authority, whether Written, as the Holy Scriptures; or Unwritten; the Writing
adding nothing of Authority, but only of Evidence; as St. Paul himself
exhorting the Thessalonians to stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye
have learned, whether by Word, or by our Epistle, makes no difference, unless
it be in preferring the Word before the Epistle: And therefore since the Wisdom
of God has provided a double Evidence of things concerning the Christian
Religion, it is not true Piety, but Impiety, The Faith, which Christians are
eatnestly to contend for, is that which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud.
3 whether by Word, or Writing. v. 1 Cor. 11.2, 23: 15.3. 2 Pet. 2.21.
to reject either, or set them one against the other, and the common Practice
of all Heretics and Schismatics, even from the Apostles times, as appears by
Irenaeus, and in all after-Ages, to oppose the one, and then pervert the other
to their own purpose.

10. That in Matters of common Faith and Manners, and necessary Orders and
Observances, wherein the Churches, founded by the several Apostles, were by
them ordinarily instructed and ordered viva voce, and not by Instructions and
Orders in Writing, it is unreasonable to interpret the Scriptures contrary to
the Sense and Practice of the Catholic Church, and the approved Rule of
Vincensius Lirinensis: And in such extraordinary Matters as were not commonl^
taught or ordered by the Apostles, after the common Faith, Tit. 1.4. or Matters
of lesser moment, to raise or maintain any Contention in the Church, especially
against the Authority, is immodest, uncharitable and unchristian, The most
questioned is Matrimony, which being of so much Importance to Mankind,
instituted by God, celebrated Solemnly in the Church with Imposition of Hands
and Benediction of the Priest, often by St. Augustine expresaly called a
Sacrament, might reasonably be allowed that Title; at least by those who
contend so much for Enjoyments of it.
contrary to the Custom of the Apostles, and of the Churches of God. v. 1 Cor.
11.16.

11. That though there be no Catholic Tradition, for any Difinite Number of
Sacraments; yet since by the Latin Churches it has been declared that there are
Seven, which are properly so called, and it cannot be denied that they are all
Means used with visible Signs, or Significant Actions, by Divine Authority, to
confer or obtain some special Grace; it is great Insolence, Uncharitableness,
and Indecency unbecoming the Profession of Christianity, to raise or maintain a
Contention against such Authority about the Number, which may be differently
computed to be either more or fewer, by reason that Imposition of Hands and
Unction, two very considerable Signs, and of Divine Institution, may be, and
are used for diverse purposes: But because there is no Evidence either of Holy
Scripture, or of Catholic Tradition, that they were all particularly
instituted by our Savior, I cannot believe that I could with a good
Conscience, and safely, either swear or profess that they were, or that such an
Article can be made one of the Terms of Communion with any Church, without
exposing the Authority of that Church, obstructing the Increase of the Kingdom
of Christ, and administering Occasion of Dissentions among his Subjects, and
incurring his Displeasure, by an Act so unfuitable to his Example and
Directions.

12. That it is great Presumption and Impiety to reject or censure the received
and approved Ceremonies of the Catholic Church used in the Administration of
the Sacraments, though they may not be generally understood: For as Origin
rightly observes, In the Observations of the Church there are some of such
sort, that it is necessary that all observe them, though the Reason of them be
not apparent to all: And God injoined the Observation of such Ceremonies even
to Moses in doing of Miracles, as few know the Reason of, to this Day: and yet
had he not observed them, undoubtedly the Effect had not followed. Also that
ordinarily all Rites, Ceremonies, Observations and Constitutions, not only of
the Catholic Church, but of National, Provincial, and particular Diocesian
Churches, not disallowed by superior Authority, ought reverently and
religiously to be observed, till they be regularly altered. But special Care
ought to be taken that the Divine Institutions, which only are Essential and
absolutely necessary, be not confounded eclipsed, or obscured by Multiplicity
or Formality of any Additions of Humane Invention: though it be very probable
that in the Institution of them in so great Simplicity, and the Records of them
with so much Brevity, there might be a Divine Design to leave Circumstantials
and Matters of Indifference to the Ordering of the Church, both to express her
Devotion, and to exercise her Authority, and the Peoples Humility, Submission,
and Obedience, Graces very necessary to qualify Souls for the Celestial
State, and not so naturally improved as by Exercise under Creatures of the same
Rank and Order.

13. That the Word Missa, (in English, The Mass) was in the Latin Churches in
the times of St. Augustine and St. Ambrose, and before commonly used for what in
the Greek Churches was called Liturgia: that the Canon of the Mass, which is
the principal part, is the most Ancient Form for the Celebration of the Holy
Eucharist, that is known to have been used in any of the Latin Churches, more
ancient than the times aforesaid, and in common use in all or in most of the
Latin Churches, without any considerable Variations in all Ages since, though
there were diverse Variations in other parts: And that in the due Celebration of
the Blessed Eucharist there is not only a Sacrament, but also a In this have
with me, besides the Authority of the Catholic Church in all Ages, which Mr.
Jos. Mede has sufficiently produced to my hand, the concurrent Judgment of the
most learned English Clergy ever since the first English Liturgy was composed.
Sacrifice commemorative of our Savior's Passion and Sacrifice of Himself upon
the Cross, as effectual to all Intents and Purposes for Christians, as were any
or all the Sacrifices of the Jews for them: that therein is performed the most
Solemn and Peculiar part of the true Christian Worship: that accordingly it
has been held in great Veneration, and much frequented with great Reverence
and Devotion by a great Number of Saints, and all the most Holy Christians in
all Ages: that the Opposition, which has been raised against both Name and
Thing, has been raised through the Malice and by the subtle Energy or
Operation of the Devil: and that to deny the same is Heresy; and to abolish
out of the Public Liturgy of any Church what does import any thing of an
unbloody Sacrifice, Sacrilege, and Antichristian Impiety. v. Dan. 8.31.

14. That the Commemoration of the Saints in the most Solemn Christian Worship
is a common Practice of the whole Catholic Church, of great Antiquity and
immemorial Prescription, without any known Beginning, of very commendable
Observation for the Communion of Saints, which we profess to believe; an Act of
Charity, Honor, and Respect to them, well-pleasing to God, and beneficial ^^
our selves, in rendering Thanks to God for them, with Prayers for our selves
that we may follow their Example, and have Communion, Part and Society with
them, and a part in the Benefit of their Prayers: and that to put that out of
the Service savours of a Complication of very evil Humors; as Superstition,
Arrogance, Contempt of the Authority of the Catholic Church, Affectation of
Reformation, Contention, and malicious Reflection of Odium upon others, and
Separation from the Mystical Body of Christ, of which they were most
illustrious Members, through the Delusion and Instigation of the wicked
Antichristian Spirit, who being overcome by them, through Christ dwelling in
them, abhor all Acts of Affection and Respect to them, and that their Triumphs
should be celebrated to the Honor of Christ, who is honored in them, and for
whose Sake all is performed to them.

15. Of this I have lately printed a Discourse dedicated to the Lord
Chancellor and Judges.
That Prayers for the Dead departed in the Communion of the Church in this
Solemn Worship, is also a Practice of the whole Catholic Church, of as great
Evidence of Apostolical Authority, as part of the Holy Scripture it self, and
other things believed and observed by those who oppose it; Innocent,
Inoffensive, Charitable, Desirable; opposed only upon the same Principles,
Motives, Humors, and Instigations, with that last mentioned.

16. That in the Holy Eucharist there is a Divine Change of the Elements from
common Bread and common Wine, by the Descent of the Holy Spirit at the Prayer
of the Church, whereby they are consecrated, not by a mere Separation for a
Sacred use, but by an actual Sanctification, and made the Body and Blood of
Christ, enriched with a Divine Power and Virtue for the Sanctification of the
duly disposed Communicants: But I cannot say a Transubstantiation, because I
find no Catholic Tradition for that in the vulgar Sense; but rather the
contrary, as appears by that of Ireaeus, duabus rebus constans, coelesti and
terrena, and the like in Theodoret and others; nor does it seem necessary, or
necessarily employed in any words of our Savior recorded in the Gospel; though
Cyril of Jerusalem, Nyssen, and some others may seem to favor it: But if
there be any proper Explication of it to a Sense truly Catholic, I conceive it
becomes not any private Person to contend with Authority about a Word; only the
vulgar sense of Transubstantiation I cannot subscribe to, and doubt it is
Scandalous, and prejudicial to the Interest of the Kingdom of Christ,
especially to make it a Term of Communion.

17. That for Communion in one kind in public Assemblies, and denial of the
Cup to the Laity, there is no Appearance of ^^y Catholic Authority, but the
quite contrary for above 1000 years, even in the Latin Church, and in all other
Churches to this Day: Nor was it introduced at first upon any good Deliberation
and Consultation of the Clergy, but as evil Customs, and Abuses crep in
insensibly: That for any part of the Church to presume to impose it upon all
National and Provincial Churches, who have Authority to order such things as
are lawful in themselves, as they see most expedient for their own People,
seems to savor of great Arrogance, unjust Usurpation, and an Occasion of
Disturbance in the Peaceful Kingdom of Christ. Men of Wit and Parts may say
much for any thing: But in such matters it is good to consider whom we have to
do with, lest we betray our own Souls, and the Church too, which we pretend to
serve, by our Unfaithfulness to it, as well as to our Lord, to some Divine
Judgment. It is fit the Church it self should give Example to all, if there be
Occasion, of Humiliation and giving Glory to God. I can submit, for Peace sake,
and out of respect to Authority, to what I cannot approve: but that will
aggravate the Sin of those who abuse the Authority committed to them.

18. That the Custom of attending at Mass without Communicating, is not of any
truly Catholic Usage or Authority, but contrary to the most ancient Canons of
the Church; to the common Practice of the first Ages, and to the earnest
Exhortations of most Eminent Persons, It is very remarkable that the great
Confusions in the Greek Churches, and Decays of true Piety in the Latin, soon
issued after their Neglect of frequent Communion began, as if by a special and
appropriated Judgment of God. To be prelent and not communicate, was anciently
one so^t of Penance.
both of the Greek and Latin Churches; proceeded from Decays of Devotion at
first, and has produced greater; seems to savor of Disrespect to our Savior,
and to be very prejudicial to his People; being an implicit refusal of
Communion and Confirmation of the Holy Covenant with him, which is implicitly
comprehended in the Act of Communion; and an inconsiderate and ungrateful
Neglect of a most Holy and effectual Means of Grace, most graciously offered to
them: so that as by what was last mentioned they are deprived of part, by this
they are defrauded of the whole: And in both the Subtilty of the Serpent is
much to be suspected.

19. Nothing seems more likely to have provoked so severe a Judgment of God
upon this Church by Hen. 8. than the Severities before-exercised upon People
for what was commended in and by the ancient Christians, Reading and Teaching
the Scriptures, etc. in a Language they understood.
That to keep the Public Offices of the Church and the Holy Scriptures in a
Language not understood by the People, has no Apostolical or true Catholic
Authority, but is directly contrary to both; was at first the Effect of that
Alteration of Languages which Wars and other Occurrences produced, not only in
the Latin, but Greek Churches also; and is still so continued in both, and
others besides: which, were it through Negligence, seems hardly excusable; much
less justifiable, where by Prohibition or Injunction; but rather scandalous, as
if designed to conceal an ill Cause; however seems to savor more of Worldly
and Humane Wisdom, than of the true Christian and Divine; to be a great
Occasion of Dissentions, a great Obstacle of Reunion, and Disservice to the
Kingdom of Christ.

20. That Prayers to Saints departed has no Apostolic or true Catholic
Authority or Warrant, according to the approved Rule beforementioned; yet if
there be nothing equivalent against it, since it has Near 1300 Years.
long since been a received Practice of the whole Catholic Church in all Parts
of the World, and of many Persons greatly honored by God with extraordinary
Graces, Divine Communications, and very great Blessings and Success in his
Service; and since special Honor to the Memories of Martyrs has the Authority
of a true Catholic Practice, and of Divine Approbation by Miracles, attested
by most credible and eminent Persons in the Church, such as S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, etc. it seems great Presumption to censure
it, as many do. But it is very likely that diverse and great Abuses may have
been, and are committed in the Practice, which, by the Permission of God, has
raised such a Storm of Reformation, through the Malice of the Devil against it:
Which Abuses, if they be not already, ought carefully to be reformed and
repressed: and especially in the Use of Pictures and Images, by reason of the
Scandal and Offense by them given both to Jews and Mahometans, and to many
Christians; whereof an Account will undoubtedly be required. v. Lu. 17.1, 2.

21. That the Use of the Sign of the Cross has that Authority from the known
Practice of the Ancient Christians, and that Evidence of Divine Approbation in
the Conversion and Victories of Constantine, that though it is probable that the
Abuses of it, which have been committed and permitted in the Church, may have
provoked the Displeasure of God; yet the furio^s Opposition and Indignation
which has been showed against it, looks very like the Effect of the Malice and
Revenge of the Powers of Darkness let loose, which had been so affronted,
terrified and exposed by it, instigating a contrary Superstition and abused
Zeal in the People. Which therefore requires that special Care be taken, that
Christianity be not exposed, and the poor People abused into false Confidences,
by things, which, though innocent and useful in themselves, may notwithstanding
be subject to much Abuse.

22. That the Discipline of the Church is a Matter of very great Importance for
the Maintenance and Preservation of the Honor and Power of Religion; so
Powerful a Means, that, if exercised as it ought, it would soon make all the
World to know who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and the greatest Kings
and Emperors to submit their Crowns and Scepters to his Empire: But the
Imprudence and Unfaithfulness of his Ministers, in deserting their true and
proper Strength, and applying to the Arm of Flesh, made it necessary for him to
withdraw his Glorious Presence, and leave them to experiment the Insufficiency
and Deceitfulness of the Supports they had chosen, till at last finding nothing
but an empty Shell, they were willing to make the best they could of it. Though
it be very true, that the Power of Indulgencies was given and left by Christ to
his Church, and the Use of them is very beneficial and necessary for his Church
and People: yet was that Power, though promised first to St. Peter, when actually
given, given alike to all the Apostles and their Successors in all Parts of the
Catholic Church: but that which since the Twelfth Age has been exercised as a
Prerogative, and is the only thing now commonly understood by V. Morin. de
Paenitentia, lib. 10. cap. 16, 20, 21. It is not true Humility, but Stupidity,
and Unfaithfulness to God and his Church, not to be moved at so great an
Indignity to God, Abuse of his People, Scandal to Religion, and Danger of
greater Judgment upon themselves, by so considerable a part of his Church;
especially if after all the Practice be still continued.
Indulgencies, is a mere Abuse of the Christian Discipline, an Abuse of the
Credulity of the People, a Scandalous Abuse: And to cover such an Abuse, under
pretense of that Sacred Authority, and after such a Judgment as it has brought
upon the Church, instead of Confession, Humiliation, and Amendment, and to make
the Belief of it one of the Terms of Communion too, is another complicated
Abuse too gross to be imposed upon any Mortal of competent Understanding, and
too bold a Presumption to be unconcernedly born by any one of an unprejudiced
Christian Spirit; or to be Believed will escape a more severe Judgment of God,
if not timely prevented by a requisite Humiliation, and such a Restitution of
the true Christian Discipline as may in some sort countervail the Mischief of
that Abuse.

23. That Souls not perfectly purified in this Life do after Death pass through
a S^ate of Purgation, I do believe as a probable Opinion; but that they may
receive Benefit by the Prayers, and diverse Good Works of the Faithful
Surviving, I do believe upon good Evidence of Apostolical Authority, besides
other considerable Motives.

24. That though the Church of Rome be the First or Chief Seat, and the Bishop of
Rome the Chief Pastor in the whole Catholic Church, and by the Ordination of
God so constituted by the two C^^ef Apostles, as a Matter of great Importance
in the Body of the Catholic Church, and ought therefore to be so acknowledged
by all Christians; V. Bar. Anno 912. Genebr. l. 4. 10. To oppose plain Matter
of Fact with Promises and Predictions, in a strict sense, is to give Scandal
instead of Conviction: And to defend or palliate what is amiss, instead of
giving Glory to God, and Amending and under remarkable Judgments, is not
consistent with Piety, Prudence, or Honesty.
yet I cannot call or think it the Mother of all Churches, for that Jerusalem
certainly was; nor the Mistress neither; for I neither think that her Right,
nor wellpleasing to her Lord that she should assume it: but that as it is
certain, that though our Savior conferred diverse Favors and some special
Privilege upon St. Peter above the rest, and prayed specially for him, when
Satan desired them to sift them as Wheat, that his Faith might not fail; yet he
did fall foully, even in his Master's Presence, and again after his Ascension
did warp a little, and yield to the Tentation, for which he was reproved by St.
Paul; so his Successors in that Church, whatever Privileges or Promises they
may or can pretend, have in like manner fallen (as perhaps was Mystically
signified in that Fall of their Founder) for some time very foully; partly by
Claiming, Usurping and Exercising more than their due; which has caused much
Disturbance in the World, and, at last, what is really their Right, or their
Due and Duty, to be questioned, disputed, and so made doubtful, and actually
rejected in many Places; and partly by such other Abuses, Corruptions,
Miscarriages, and Scandals, as overspreading all, moved great Complaints and
Discontents, and earnest Defires and Prayers for an Orderly Reformation, and at
last produced, when nothing else could prevail, by the special Providence of
Almighty God, one of the greatest Schisms, all things considered, that in the
Western Church has ever been known: and lastly, by requiring such Terms of
Communion as are not necessary for the Service of our Lord, but much to the
Disservice of his Interest, by hindering the Reunion of many well-disposed
People, and contrary to his Example, Directions and Will.

25. That the Constitution of the Church of God, and the Powers and Authorities
settled in it, are not to be altered, or subject to Alteration by such Ways and
Means as civil Constitutions, Powers and Authorities usually are; as by
Forfeiture, or voluntary Agreement, so as to effect any Diminution of the Power
or Authority of its Successor: And therefore the present Bishop of Rome,
notwithstanding any Miscarriages of any of his Predecessors, has as much
Power and Authority in the Catholic Church, as any since St. Peter (who had an
Authority Superior to all Bishops) in that Seat ever had, (unless there be any
thing Personal against himself:) and in him the Power and Authority of that
Seat ought to be acknowledged, asserted, and maintained by all Christians, as
the Power and Authority of Christ, and for his Service and Interest: that to
reject that is impious, Schismatical, and Heretical: but yet the Personal
Miscarriages of those that are or shall be in that Seat, may be judged,
censured and corrected by the Churches of the same Division or Patriarcate,
either in one general Council, or in several National and Provincial Synods,
agreeing generally upon a mutual Communication of Votes in the same Sentence.
But this is a Matter which, as it is of great Consequence, so ought to be
managed with great Circumspection and much Application by all to God for his
Divine Conduct.

26. That the Authority even of National and Provincial Councils duly
assembled, and proceeding regularly, ought to be respected, and treated with
Reverence by all Christians; and if their Acts be received with a general
Approbation of many other such, they become of equal Authority with a General
Council of all those Churches. But Acts of Councils called general, if not
regularly and unanimously passed in Council, or not generally received and
approved afterward, but disapproved, either by express Declaration, by contrary
Practice, or notorious different Sentiments of the greatest, or a very
considerable part of the Catholic Church, are of little Obligation; yet ought
not to be reproachfully or rudely opposed, but rather decently buried in
Silence, or by a more authentic Determination.

27. That every Provincial Synod under one Metropolitan is a complete
Representation or Model of the whole Catholic Church, (which consists and is
compacted of many such Sacred Corporations) and has a complete Authority of it
self to order all matters of Religion, Against this Noble and Complete
Authority of the Churches of Christ have many things been very injuriously and
scandalously done both by Secular Powers, and by Popes and Patriarchs: The Sins
of both, and of such as have too easily yielded to them, are very great, and
will undoubt edly be severely punished hereafter, as of Rebels and Traitors
against the Supreme Majesty, if not prevented here.
and to correct and reform what is amiss within their own Territories,
according to the common Rules of the Catholic Church; subject notwithstanding
to the Judgment, Censure and Correction of more general Councils, in case they
act any thing contrary to those Rules: But in Matters, whether of Belief or
Practice, not de^^rmined by Catholic Evidence of Apostolical Authority, and
which are therefore left at Liberty, it may be dangerous to impose any thing:
but if any thing be thought necessary or expedient of that Nature, it ought
rather to be gently recommended, than Majesterially imposed, least Authority be
unadvisedly exposed, and Catholic Unity and Charity endangered.

28. That in all Differences in the Church, all Parties ought to be very
careful for the Preservation of Unity and Charity, as Matters of the great^st
Importance in the Kingdom of Christ; the very Difference being a fair Warning
and Admonition for Godly Jealousy and special Caution and Circumspection to
all Parties for the Peace of the Church, the Satisfaction of the differing
Party, and the Security of the Justice and Righteousness of their own Cause,
lest it either be ill, or if good at first in it self, it become ill through
ill Management; and therefore to proceed peaceably, patiently, and amicably; 2
Cor. 10.8. -- 13.10.
Superiors with Gentleness and Condescension, as having their Authority for
Edification, not for Destruction; and therefore not Lording it over their
Subjects; and Inferiors with Humility, Modesty, Respect, and Submission, that
they resist not the Ordinance of God; each as far as Duty and sincere
Conscience will allow; with hearty Desire and sincere Endeavor for
Accommodation, and Grief and Sorrow if it cannot be obtained, and without any
abatement of Charity notwithstanding; but with Pity for the Faults of others.

29. That though there was much need of a Reformation, when the Work so called
was begun, yet was not that Work, as it was managed, any Work of God, as
ordered by Him, but only as permitted by Him for a Judgment upon the Church,
which would not reform, and executed by the Instigation of adverse Powers; as
may be observed in 1. the Qualities of the Persons who were the principal
Leaders and Actors in it, and 2. the Means used to effect it; all merely
Humane, nothing truly Spiritual and Divine, (I intend not in this the
Scriptures in themselves, but the Use which was made of them I do) no
Demonstration of Spirit and Power; in 3. the Manner, with much Arrogance,
Insolence, Malice, Hatred, Violence, Injustice, Oppression, Sacrilege, and
Profanation of Sacred things, Factions, Tumults, and hot Contentions among
themselves; all plain Indications of what Spirit they were: and, 4. in the
Matter or Work effected, Hence the true Cause of the Contempt of the Clergy: Ye
have departed, etc. Therefore I also have made you Contemptible, etc. Mal. 2.7,
8, 9.
destructive of the Government, of the Worship, of the Discipline, and of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church of Christ; all accommodated to recommend the
Preachers, to gratify the natural Disposition of the People, to raise
Prejudice and Odium against the Church, and to draw away Disciples after them;
but secretly tending to the Dissolution and Destruction of the Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth, with diverse special Gratifications of those adverse Powers:
and, lastly, in 5. the Fruits and is very remarkable, That many of the most
Learned amongst us, both Conformists and Non-conformists, are gone off from
diverse Doctrines of the first Reformers, and confess the Papists have been
falsely charged and wronged in diverse things.
Effects, a Form of Godliness, but little of the Power; much Talk of Religion,
but little of the true Works; much in the Head, but little in the Heart; some
Beginnings, some little Progress, but rarely any thing brought to Perfection,
or more complete than the Chickens which are said to be hatched in some
artificial Stoves, which, though otherwise brought to Maturity, are all maimed in
one part or other; and generally Decays of Piety and Virtue, even from the
beginning, such as made Luther complain, That since the Gospel was preached in
its Purity, (as he called it) People were grown worse than under the Papacy.
And certainly, if we come to Comparison, as to the Fruits, one Disciple of
Ignatius Loyola since Luther, Francis Xavier, a Missioner of the Pope, produced
more true Evangelical Fruits in the compass of Ten Years, or little more, in
Conversion of Infidels, and more illustrious Evidences of a Divine Power with
him, than all the Reformers put together ever since Luther began to this day;
which is a great Divine Attestation, both to his Order, and to the Authority by
which he was sent; and the more considerable in respect of the Time, the very
time of the pretended Reformation, as if ordered on purpose by the Divine
Providence for an Evidence of the Difference of the Spirits, by which the two
Works were promoted. And if we consider the Effects in respect of the Church of
Rome, I believe they will not, upon a just Examination, appear to have been
better in those who, on pretense of Reformation, have made the Separation, than
in the Church they have gone out of; and that there wants nothing but a more
complete Reformation of the Churches of the Roman Communion for a final
Demonstration, by an end of this pretended Reformation; that it was no other
than a temporary Judgment, for Correction of what was amiss in the Church.

30. That among all the pretended Reformations it may be a question, Whether
any was introduced with greater Wickedness, or settled at last with greater
Faults, than this of the Church of England, how much soever magnified by such
as have or expect Preferments in it. But to pass by the wicked Practices, first
to hector and terrify, with false Accusations and Pretenses, Wolsey out of his
Life; then the rest of the Clergy into a Recognition of an Antichristian
Supremacy, and Subjection of the Rights of the Church to the Will of a wicked
Tyrant; then the Superiors of the Religious Houses to surrender all their Goods
and Estates; and then, by like Practices, to get all confirmed by Act of
Parliament, partly hectoring, and partly bribing and engaging the Nobility and
Gentry, with the Spoils, into a Compliance with the most horrible Sacrilege and
Devastation of the Goods and Estates of the Religious, of which ten Thousand at
a time were turned out, and put to shift for themselves with Forty Shillings
and a Gown a piece; besides all this, the Guilt of which may still remain,
there are these Monstrous Faults the Effects of that Wickedness still remaining
in the Constitution of this Reformed Church:

1. As to the Government, a Sacrilegious Usurpation upon the Rights of the
Church in the Nomination of Bishops, Deans, Prebends, etc. with a profane
Mockery, or Abuse of a Mock Election of Persons imposed upon them: and in
holding Synods, and making and executing Canons and Constitutions, all
continued in the Power of the Prince by Act of Parliament, and given up by the
Clergy: So that if we have Bishops, as they are called, they are neither
Canonically chosen, nor are permitted, or dare to exercise any Authority of a
National Church: And should we have a Deist, Infidel, or one ill affected to
Christianity, what a Church might here be expected in a few Years?

2. It is a mutinous Body, actually separated from the great Body of the
Kingdom of Christ, the Catholic Church; and has no actual Communion with any
Church, which is not broken off from that Body; or which is regularly and
orderly by Succession of Presbyters descended from the Apostles.

3. As to the Worship, the Public Liturgy has been so curtelled and disordered
by Cranmer, and a secret Faction, in the principal part, that they have
abolished not only the Commemoration of the Saints, and Prayers for the Dead,
but even the Prayer at the Consecration for the Descent of the Holy Spirit, and
whatever might import any thing of Oblation of the Commemorative Sacrifice of
our Savior's Passion; which has always been reputed the Principal, most
Solemn and Peculiar part of the Christian Worship throughout the whole
Catholic Church.

4. As for the Discipline, if we have Bishops, they are so awed by the Civil
Authority on the one side with Prohibitions, and hampered by their Chancellours
on the other, that there is little left for them to exercise of the proper
Authority of a Diocesian Church; but they bear the blame of those Scandals they
cannot remedy.

5. But after all, it may be a Question, Whether we have Bishops; that is, true
Christian Bishops at all, or only a sort of State Bishops, without any true
Spiritual and Apostolical Authority, or other than what was derived from the
King, and dependent upon him?

These things being so, I thought it my Duty to make this Profession of Faith,
and Declaration; That I Disclaim, Renounce and Detest that Horrible Sacrilege
of the Dissolution of the Monasteries; that greater Sacrilege of Usurpation by
the Civil Authority of the Rights of the Church instituted by Divine Authority;
the Sacrilegious Corruptions of the Liturgy; the Erastian Heresy of Cranmer;
the Condemnation and Execution of the Right-Reverend Bishop Fisher, Sir Thomas
More, and the rest, who suffered in Person; and the Condemnation and
Deprivation of the Clergy, who suffered in their Rights and Estates, for
Denying, Contradicting, or Refusing to Swear to the pretended Supremacy of the
Civil Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, and all Laws, Statutes, etc. which
restrain the free Exercise of the Christian Discipline, or any Rites of the
Church, or were intended to establish, confirm or authorize any of the
Sacrileges, Usurpations, Corruptions or Condemnations aforesaid, as wicked,
unjust, and Schismatical, and contrary to the Law of God, and to one of the
chief Fundamental Principles of the Laws of this Land: and that I do sincerely
and heartily desire an actual Communion, as there may be occasion, with all
Churches under the Government of a regular Succession of Bishops and Presbyters
from the Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and in actual Communion
with the Catholic Church, and desire it particularly with the Church of
France, being the next so qualified: and in order thereunto do hereby for my
part humbly make a Public Tender thereof.

FINIS.

