HOVBLON, MAYOR.
Jovis decimo Sexto Aprilis, 1696. Annoque Regni Regis Gulielmi, Angl. etc.
Octavo.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Stephens to Print his Sermon Preached before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City, at the Parish Church of St.
Mary-le-Bow, on Thursday the 16th of April last, being the Thanksgiving Day.

GOODFELLOW.

A Thanksgiving Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor,
Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs and Companies of the City of London, At St.
Mary-le-Bow, April 16. 1696.

Upon Occasion of His MAJESTY'S Deliverance FROM A Villainous Assassination, In
Order to a French Invasion.

By WILLIAM STEPHENS, B. D. Rector of Sutton in Surrey.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill; and J.
Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1696.

Mr. STEPHENS's Thanksgiving Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, AT St.
Mary-le-Bow, April the 16th. 1696.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOVBLON, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London; AND The Worshipful the Court of Aldermen.
HE who at this day shall read the Account which our Annals give of the Spanish
Invasion carried on against England, which is so well defended by her natural
Situation, and where vast Numbers of Brave and Martial People are never
wanting, will conclude with himself, that Spain must have made sure to her
Interests no small Party among us; from whose readiness to close with her
Design, she took confidence to call her Armado Invincible. Without an
Encouragement of this nature, 'twould be at all times a vain Attempt to Invade
England. But this Motive was not then wanting; for the Queen was
Excommunicated, and her Subjects freed from their Allegiance by the Pope, by
whom her Dominions were also disposed of to the King of Spain, who was
therefore by the Papists (then a considerable part of the Nation) esteemed as
King de Jure, whilst Queen Elizabeth held only a bare Possession.

But he who (an Age to come) shall read the History of the late Embarkation, in
order to a French Invasion, and know that then the Papist was but the Two
hundredth Man in the Kingdom, will admire from whence the French should have
drawn their Encouragement to make a Conquest upon England; the Name of KING
WILLIAM will then shine in the History of this Age with a Brightness (at least)
equal to any of his Predecessors in the Sovereignty of these Realms; And the
Knavish Distinction of De Facto, which was the Foundation-stone of the late
designed Assassination, Insurrection and Invasion, will be left out of his
Title.

Your Lordship knows, that those who have refused to Swear Allegiance to His
Majesty, are but a small Party, and the Papists are far from being any great
one; so that the dead Weight which the French King must rely upon, are that
Body of Men who own the King only as a bare Possessor of the Throne: To whom
the Oath of Allegiance is (at best) but a mere Formality; very far from
obliging them in Conscience to a vigorous Assistance of the King. That they
themselves (I mean) think no otherwise, always is made evident, when a
Non-Swearer meets with one of the same Principle with himself, but yet who has
sworn Allegiance. The first Question is, Whether he has sworn Allegiance to
the P. of O? It Is answered, Yes. It Is demanded for what reason; And it is
replied, Because he is now King of England. What Right has he to the Crown of
England? (says the other, with some warmness.) Truly, None (says the
Swearer,) but yet he is King de Facto. If Your Lordship is pleased to sum up
these Answers, you will easily see if they amount to any more than this, viz.
he has sworn Allegiance to the P. of O. Because he is possessed of a Kingdom
which of Right belongs to another. I know that the Style of King William is
allowed and used by these Men; but I am sure that Your Lordship did not think
the Regal Power of this Realm, to which the Laws and Liberties of England are
entitled, could be solidly founded on a mere Complement, or rather Reproach.

Nor is Your Lordship ignorant with what wonderful Zeal and Industry this weak
Title (if it be any) was carried on. Not indeed by the way of Address, but of
mere Noise and Effrontery. So that whosoever asserted His Majesty's Right to
the Crown, from the Peoples Grant in Parliament, was for so doing marked out as
an Enemy to the Church and Monarchy. And thus the King's Dutiful Subjects have
been discouraged, because they owned themselves bound in Conscience to support
his Rightful Title, whilst the Right of King James was sacredly preserved, and
warmly defended by the De Facto Subjects of King William.

Could the French King have wished for more inviting Advantages to the
pretended King's Restoration?

When I consider the wonderful and undeserved Deliverance which our good God,
by his never failing Mercy, has lately wrought for us; as I Congratulate the
Joy of Christendom, of Europe, and of England, so I cannot omit to Congratulate
a Treble Joy which particularly affects Your Lordship, arising from the
Preservation of the Metropolis, Admiralty and Bank of England, all which are
Your Lordship's honorable and near Concerns. And that there may never be
wanting Men of Your Lordships Abilities, and true English Integrity to
discharge the Trusts of the Nation, is the hearty wish of,

My LORD, Your most Obliged and most Humble Servant, William Stephens.

COL. III. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also
ye are called in one body: and be ye thankful.


AMongst the Characters which in ancient Prophecy were given to the Messiah,
Isai. 9.6.
one was that he should be the Prince of Peace: He was born in a time that
seldom happened, when the Roman Empire was at peace with all the World; at his
Birth the Angels, who were his Heralds, proclaimed peace upon Earth, and good
will toward men. The Doctrine which he delivered, is justly styled the Gospel
of Peace, because all the Lines of it center in mutual Love and Charity; by
which Peace is maintained in Societies, and within our Consciences. His whole
Life was a Pattern of the Peace of God, expressed in the most lively manner of
Humility and Condescension: 'Twas indeed a daily return of Good for Evil; and
his Death was the greatest act of Charity which crowned all the former labors
of his Love. But if there be no Herb so salutary, which a Venomous Creature
cannot digest into Poison; it is not impossible that men of Corrupt Morals
should from the very Gospel of Peace, draw Pretenses to raise War, hatch
Treasons, Assasinate and Massacre: Whilst, on the contrary, the Disciples of
Christ do not only follow after Peace with all men, but seriously exhort all
others to do the like. And this is the earnest Exhortation of St. Paul to the
Church at Coloss. Let the Peace of God, etc.

By the Peace of God is meant a peaceable and condescending temper of Mind,
which sweetens all our Actions both to our selves and others; whereby we cast a
favorable Eye upon what we discern in other men; being critical chiefly to
find out the Beauty of every good Thought, and the Graces which attend the
Words and Actions of others. This Moderation of Spirit toward men, is called
the Peace of God; because (1.) 'Twas the Great Design for which he made us (who
are incapable of bringing any advantage to him) that we should be kind to one
another. And, (2.) To the same end he Redeemed us, that being made Members of
one Body, we should be more particularly sensible of each others condition.
And, (3.) To this end he sends his Holy Spirit into our Hearts to allay all
Heat, and Bitterness, and Evil Zeal; to bridle our Passions, and moderate our
Desires, thereby settling the Peace of God in our Hearts. Let this Peace Rule,
says the Apostle.

The word Rule, in its Original, bears relation particularly to the Office of
a Judge or Umpire, who, by his Sentence pronounced, does rule or determine any
Case which is referred to his Arbitration. The word (...) bears relation to
the old Olimpick Games, wherein men strove to outvy each other in manly
Exercises, that they might gain a reward which was provided for him, who showed
the greatest degree of Manhood. Now when any controversy arose between
Competitors for the (...) or reward, there was a Judge, a (...) appointed, who
should by his award overruled and decide the Competition: And the word Rule in
the Text does signify that particular Award, and is therefore restrained to a
Rule of Court, by which Causes are determined.

The Doctrine then, arising from the Text will be this, viz. A Charitable
condescending temper of mind is the best Judge of all Controversies, the best
Moderator and Vmpire of all Differences and Disputes; or in short, Charity is
the best Court of Chancery. In pursuing this Subject I shall endeavor, 1. To
set forth the Truth of this Doctrine in such a manner as may best recommend it
to our practice. 2. To set forth the Rules of this Court by which she governs
her Judgment. And, 3. To show how far the Jurisdiction of this Court extends,
viz to all Christians who are called in one body. 4. To show that all the
reasons which oblige us to be thankful to God, particularly the occasion of
this present Solemnity, do enforce this Duty upon us. For so the last words of
the Text be ye thankful, may be understood as a Motive to us to let the peace
of God rule in our hearts.


I. Now a judgment of Charity for the determination of Controversies cannot
more effectually be recommended to us, than (1.) From the Example of God. (2.)
From the consideration of our Selves. And (3.) From the particular Felicity of
this sort of Judicature.

1. From the Example of God himself, who has usually in this Method put an end
to those Controversies which have arose betwixt Mankind, his weak peevish
Creature and himself, our great and good Creator. If we look back to the
Creation, as described in the Book of Moses, we read that God bestowed the
whole World upon Mankind, only reserving a small peculiar to himself for a
trial of Man's obedience if he would satisfy himself with his own Portion, and
restrain his Appetite at God's Command. We read also that from Man's indulging
his Appetite, and not ruling it by his Reason, arose the first Controversy
betwixt him and his God. But this Breach was soon made up by Divine
condescension. God did not exact the Life of Man on the day of his
Transgression: And though he condemned him to labor, yet he allowed him to get
Bread thereby, and an Appetite to relish the Sweetness of it. He still held
forth the Lights of Heaven to direct him from without, and the Light of Reason
to guide him from within. And to crown all, he revealed to him the way how he
should regain that state of Immortal Happiness from whence he had fallen.

Another instance of this nature we read in the case of Lot, who being
forewarned of the Judgment falling upon Sodom, and directed to fly to the
Neighboring Hills, yet he contests with God the place of refuge, and will
accept only of one of his own choosing. Genesis 19.15, 17.
Arise (said the Angel of God) take thy wife, and thy daughters, and escape to
the mountains, lest thou be consumed: to which kind admonition Lot's answer is,
O not so, my Lord, etc. and insists upon Zoar to be the place of his refuge;
and this Controversy was soon ended by God's condescension, v. 18.
See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing.

But 3ly. What man was ever obliged by God in a higher manner than Moses! who
was designed his Special Ambassador to Egypt, there to discharge the true
Character of an Hero, in being the Deliverer of his Countrymen from slavery.
For this Office God qualified him with the power of working Miracles; thereby
setting the Broad-Seal of Heaven to his Commission, and promising also to
assist him with such Eloquence as should become the Message which he was to
deliver; yet after all, Moses peremptorily refuses to obey these honorable
Commands, Exodus 4.13, 14.
saying to God, Send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send. This
Answer did indeed kindle the anger of the Lord against Moses; but his
Compassion allayed his Anger; and soon after he confirms him in his
Commission, and strengthens him with the assistance of his Brother Aaron. v.
15, 16.


Toward whom we likewise read a signal instance of God's condescension, in
healing up a wide breach made by the treachery of that High Priest: Who, whilst
Moses was upon the Mount, Psalm. 106.20.
changed the glory of Israel into the similitude of an Ox, that eats grass.
How great a Controversy might God have had with him, who being the High Priest
of the Living God, would yet draw all Israel into a party to worship a Lifeless
Idol. Who soon after God had delivered them from the House of Bondage, should
set up Egyptian Idolatry to betray the people of the Lord back into their
former stupidity, and slavery. How justly might God have made him resemble his
Idol, by taking away sight from his Eyes, hearing from his Ears, and breath
from his Nostrils! But see the compassion of God to pass by Aaron's sin, and
still continue him in his high station.

'Twould be endless to number the many Controversies which God had with his
murmuring People in their Journey toward Canaan: Which were yet alldetermined
by the forbearance and long-suffering of the Most High. And doubtless from
God's great condescension to Moses (before mentioned) he learned to bear with
the peevish murmurings of Israel against his Administration in the Wilderness.

But there was never such an angry man as Jonah, who being by God commanded to
go to Ninive, (and be the Herald of his Judgment in order to prepare that
great City to prevent its actual falling upon them) fled to Tarshish, which lay
the contrary way to that which he was ordered to take. Yet instead of a severe
punishment, God gave him a miraculous preservation; and after that confirmed
him in his Prophetical Office. Jona. 3.1.2
For we read that the word of the Lord came to Jonah the second time, saying,
arise go unto Ninive, that great City, and preach unto it the preaching that I
bid thee.

And in this respect Jesus Christ showed himself to be the express Image of the
Father, when with a steady resolution he endured so great a contradiction of
Sinners; which though it rendered him a man of Sorrows, yet could never hinder him
from showing compassion to those who were the causes of his sufferings: When he
was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isa. 53.7.
he was dumb as a sheep before her shearers, and opened not his Mouth: unless
it were to recommend his Enemies to God's mercy. In which prayer he ended his
controversy with them, together with his Life, Father, forgive them, Luke
23.34.
for they know not what they do.

If we consider the particular Controversies which Christ had with two of his
Disciples, Peter and Thomas, they were soon compromized by his gracious
condescentions. Thrice Peter had denied his Master, who after that confirmed
him in his Apostolic Function by a threefold Benediction. And though Thomas was
so obstinately prejudiced against the belief of Christ's Resurrection, that he
would give no credit to the Relation of his Fellow-disciples, whose probity was
so well known to him, but he must be convinced by his senses alone, he must
feel out the Article of the Resurrection in the Side of his Master; Joh. 20.25.
(for thus he says, Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe.) Yet in this case our Savior condescended to satisfy his
unbelieving Disciple in his own way. Reach hither (says he) thy finger, v. 27.
and behold my hands: and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side.
And be not faithless but believing.

The 2d Reason which recommends Charity to rule our Hearts, and direct our
Judgments, is the consideration of our own selves, with relation to the lapsed
state of our Nature: which is so prone to evil, that we dare not suffer our
Actions to be tried in a Court of strict Justice. But we always find it
necessary to appeal to Equity, and a favorable Construction. Do we not find
recorded in Holy Writ, not only the slips and failures, but gross faults
committed by men of high Characters. So that the man after God's own heart
might have reason to say, with relation to men as well as God, if they should
mark wherein he had done amiss, he could not be able to abide their judgment.
And let any man examine the state of his own soul, and he will find reason
enough to condemn himself. He who sees a Mote in his Brother's Eye, if he
would look homewards, might discern a Beam in his own; Romans 2.1.
and therefore (says St. Paul) thou art inexcusable, O man, that judge; for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that judge
do the same things. Nay, in all respects, we may say we do the same thing, to
far forth as God is concerned in the sins of men. For though one sins against
the Laws of Justice, another against the Rules of Charity, a third against
Sobriety: yet they all show the same disrespect to God's Authority. They are
all guity of the same Ingratitude to God who has laid strong obligations on
them all to duty; and of the same Infidelity with regard to the terrors of the
Law, and rich Promises of the Gospel.

Where is the man who would be contented to have a Window into his Breast? Why
then does any man by being a severe Critic upon his Brother, tempt him to
judge as severely as he has been judged, and to pay back that hard measure
which was meeted out to him?

But this consideration ought to be improved further from the common deficiency
found in our Intellectuals as well as Morals: whereby we are rendered
insufficient to pass strict judgment on the ways of others; especially since we
are utter strangers to their Hearts from whence the springs of all actions
arise. As to outward Circumstances, Satan may appear as an Angel of Light,
whilst the true Children of Light seem as the filth of the world, 1 Cor. 4.13.
and the offscouring of all things. It Is hard for man throly to discern even
his own heart: and if we judge by outward appearance, we are not likely to
judge righteous, unless it be likewise charitable, judgment.

But how various are the sizes of human Capacities, and the shapes of our
formed and lashioned understandings? Not one man's Mind, any more than Face,
perfectly resembling another in all its Lines and Features. And yet the weaker
Capacity will most commonly be judging the stronger; as if the smaller measure
could comprehend the greater. And although God has been pleased to reveal his
Wisdom to men, though he who has commanded the light to shine out of darkness, 2
Cor. 4.6.7
has shined in our hearts, to give the enlightening knowledge of God's glory in
the face of Jesus Christ, (as St. Paul speaks,) yet he tells us, that we
have this knowledge in earthen vessels. Subject to many frailties, besides the
ill tincture of the earth which contains it. What strong and almost invincible
prejudices are mixed even with our knowledge of God and his Son Christ Jesus,
the various Sects of Christians sufficiently set forth. How easily do
prejudices arise from the custom of the place where we live? the examples of
those we converse with? the admiration we have for men's persons? from the byas
of affection toward some, and aversion to others, according to the real or
imaginary good or ill turns they have done us? what various forms, and
different shapes does Education give to our common Christianity? so that the
very Sheep of Christ do not so much as know one another, but one part of the
Flock shall fly from the other. Now all their strict and rigorous censures
against one another can never be just; and generally none of those severe
judgments are so. And ought therefore give place to the favorable construction
of Charity, and suffer the peace of God to bear Rule.

The 3d Consideration which recommends Charity as the the best Chancery to end
all differences amongst Christians is the extraordinary Felicity of this Court
of Equity. Because, (1.) it gives the quickest dispatch to business. And (2.)
it decideth all Controversies to the mutual satisfaction of both parties. As to
the first of these, Charity cutteth off all occasions of delay; it admits no
Demurrers, Rejoynders and Rebutters. Charity insisteth not upon strict Fendings
and Provings, 1 Cor. 13.
but rather suffers long, and is kind, and thinks no evil: but admits of as
good colors as the Advocate can put upon the Actions of his Client: v. 4, 5.
for Charity believes all things, and hops all things, i. e. believes and
hops the best of all things; and whenever the Offender pleads Guilty, the
Process is stopped; and then both parties are satisfied: the one that he has
found favor, the other that he has granted it. One is delivered from fear,
the other from trouble; both rejoice that their Controversy is happily brought
to an end. And to crown all, it sometimes falls out, that each has made a
Friend of the other.

2. The Second general Head to be considered, was the Rules of this Court by
which she governs her Judgment. Now the Rules and Measures constantly used in
Courts of Judicature, are those Methods and Ways which long Experience has
found out to be useful and expeditious for determining of Causes. By these our
Courts give Law to their own Power, in order to the public Good. And the Rules
by which Charity decideth Controversies are these:

1. Charity judges not the Person of any Man, from those ill Consequences
which are charged upon his Opinion; especially if he disown those Consequences:
Since nothing but what comes from within can defile the Man. A good Man will
reason thus with himself: It Is possible I may be mistaken in the Inferences I
draw from such an Opinion: Or, if I have concluded right; another, who
receives the Opinion, it may be, does not discern the ill Consequences of it;
but if he declare his Disbelief of 'em, though they may be ever so truly
charged upon the Opinion, they cannot upon the Man: This Rule of Charity would
calm the Disputers of this World, and soften the Style of Controversy. 'Twould
suffer no Gall to drop from the Pen of the Writer in bitter Reflections upon
the Person of his Adversary.

This Rule would have softened the Controversy, and prevented the Quarrel which
not long since arose betwixt the Calvinists and Arminians; the one called the
other Freewillers, and from thence laid to their Charge that they lessened the
Esteem due to the Grace of God, as if it were not absolutely necessary to our
Salvation; when on the other hand it was objected to them who held the Article
of absolute Predetermination, that they blasphemed God by making him the Author
of Sin. Now, though the one Party owned God's Grace absolutely needful to their
Salvation, and most of the other Party disowned God's being the Author of Sin;
and all disowned that he was culpably so, yet an immortal Hatred arose between
both Parties, and when each had the Opportunity of Power the other felt the
Effects of it.

2. This Court esteems Errors in Men's Judgment not to be a Subject Matter of
Punishment, but Instruction, Errantis poena est doceri. Seneca.
Such Opinions which are merely speculative, tending to no immoral Practice,
(whether they be true or false) are innocent, and can therefore give no reason
of Disturbance, and consequently no just Occasion of punishing their Abettors.
They fall not under the Cognizance of the Ruler, Romans 13.3, 4.
who is only a Terror to evil Works, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that
does evil. Had this Rule been observed, Smithfield Fires had never been
kindled, and the World had been guiltless of all the barbarous Murders of those
who held this innocent Opinion (could it possibly have been an Error) viz. That
what was Bread before the Consecration of the Priest, was Bread after it.

But if a Man will propagate such erroneous Opinions which directly mislead Men
into wicked Practices, the public Weal requires that an effectual Restraint
be put thereunto; as in the Case of a Native of England, who has received
Orders from the Sea of Rome, and is therefore by Law condemned to Death, the
reason is because no Priest is admitted to Cure of Souls under that See, but is
obliged to take an Oath contained in the Bull of Pius the 4th, Super formam
juramenti professionis, which is usually annexed to the printed Canons of the
Council of Trent, which Oath contains in it evident Matter of Treason, as will
appear by these Clauses: Romano Pontifici veram Obedientiam spondeo and juro,
i. e. I vow and swear true Obedience to the Pope. Again, Caetera omnia a sacris
Canonibus and oecumenicis Conciliis definita recipio, i. e. all the Decrees and
Determinations of general Councils and holy Canons I receive; and at last, hanc
fidem integram indubitanter recipio, and ab illis quorum Cura ad me spectabit,
teneri, doceri, and praedicari, quantum in me erit curaturum juro, i. e. as I
heartily receive these Doctrins, so I swear that I will take care, to the
utmost of my Power, that they shall be propagated wheresoever I shall be
concerned.

Now, since those Canons, which the Papists call holy, and Councils which they
call general, give the Popes a Power to depose Sovereign Princes: And since the
Experience of our own Nation has informed us that former Popes have
endeavored to render the Imperial Crown of this Realm feudatory to Rome, and
that K. Henry VIII. and Q. Elizabeth were actually excommunicated and deposed
by papal Power, certainly such Natives of England, who swear to propagate
Doctrins of this Tendency among their Countrymen, and also vow and swear
personal Obedience to the Pope in Matters of this nature, can be considered by
our Laws no otherwise than as Traitors to their Country. I know the Papists
complain that their Priests suffer here for Religion and the Catholic Faith;
but if what they are pleased to call by those Names be in Truth Treason of the
highest Nature, The burning of Men alive upon the score of Religion is by the
Papists called an Act of Faith.
I do not see how specious Names can excuse the Guilt of such execrable Villainy
any more than the fine Phrase, An Act of Faith can excuse the most barbarous
Sort of solemn Murder, which is the burning of Men alive, against whom they
pretend not to lay the Charge of any Immorality.

But on the contrary, if the Opinions which some Man or Society of Men profess,
have in their Nature no Tendency to produce immoral Practices betwixt Man and
Man, nor to unsettle the Form of Government which is established in a Nation;
this Court of Chancery has no Rule whereby to punish such Opinions,
notwithstanding the Complaints of some angry Men of all Communions who shall
charge him that professes any Opinion they dislike, with a Breach upon the
Peace of the Church.

3. This Court forbid death no Man or Community of Men, that Liberty in the
Exercise of their Christian Profession which Christ has not forbidden. Nor
will it compel any one by Fine, Imprisonment, bodily Pain, or any other Force
whatsoever, to own any Article of Belief, or join with any Form of Worship,
which he in his Conscience does disapprove. The reason hereof is, 1. Because
our Christian Profession teaches us to call no Man Master but Christ; and, 2.
Because there is no Assembly of Men; no not a general Council, but may err (as
our Church declares in her 21st Article) even in things pertaining unto God.
3. Because our Reason was given us to interpret the Scriptures for our selves,
not to be a standing Rule to others: And, 4. if the Reason of the learned
cannot convince, much less can the Force of the Magistrate. But on the
contrary, put Force in the Place of Reason, and all Religion will be alike, and
as Colors in the dark, undistinguishable. Force in its own Nature equally
disposes a Man to become Mohammedan, Christian, or Pagan: Not that it can
convince Men of any Truth which is in these Professions; but it may compel 'em,
through Hypocrisy, to make a Show of any Religion.

Had this Rule of our Court been observed, Pope Victor had never put the World
into a Flame by enjoining the Day upon which the Feast of Easter was to be
celebrated; which Controversy produced such an unchristian Bitterness that the
Eastern and Western Christians withdrew from the Communion of each other. I
cannot conclude this Point better than with the excellent Words of the
Irenicum, or Book of Peace, written heretofore to compose the Differences in
our Church by the present Right Reverend Bishop of of Worcester. Were we (says
he) so happy but to take off things granted unnecessary by all, and suspected
by many, and judged unlawful by some; and to make nothing the Bonds of our
Communion but what Christ has made so; allowing a Liberty for Matters of
Indifferency, and bearing with the Weakness of those who cannot bear those
things which others count lawful; we might be restored to a true primitive
Luster, far sooner than by furbishing up some antiquated Ceremonies which can
derive their Pedigree no higher than some ancient Custom and Tradition; and
after this he piously concludes, that God will one Day convince Men, that the
Union of the Church lies more in the Unity of Faith and Affection, than in the
Uniformity of doubtful Rites and Ceremonies, p. 123.

4. This Court takes into special Cognizance, all the Bonds of Union, as well
as Causes of Division which may be found amongst Christians. For want of this
impartial Consideration. Men are apt to think the Differences betwixt each
other to be wider than indeed they are; and from hence chiefly it is that the
deplorable Differences amongst Protestants are still maintained. There is not
any one Doctrine or Practice necessary to make us good Men here, or happy
hereafter, but what we are all agreed in. The Moral Law of Christ is equally
received by us all, and the Apostles Creed, which contains a Summary of our
Evangelic Faith, is owned by us all. Idolatry and Superstition are cast out of
the several Forms of Worship which all those Protestants, who dissent from us,
adhere to. Now these Bonds of Union, so many in Number, so strong and important
in their Nature, cannot but prevail upon a charitable Disposition, to
compromize those few Differences which arise from various Ways of Expression,
Rites of Worship, or Forms of Discipline, which are Matters of no great
Importance, if considered by themselves; but if compared with the Fundamentals,
in all which we are agreed, they will scarce be discernible by the Judgment of
Charity.

5. This Court puts the best Construction upon all cases which come before it;
'twill admit of no Innuendo's, strained Aggravations arising from mere
Probabilities or fanciful Conjectures. Plainness of Sense is here better
understood than Sharpness of Wit: It looks upon the best Construction to be the
right Handle of the Cause, according to which it gives Judgment. This Rule was
taught by Christ himself in his Behavior to his Disciples on that Night in
which he was betrayed: At that time when the Troubles and Cares of the Master
increase, the Diligence of the Servant should be doubled. But so heavy were his
Disciples, that they did not watch with him an hour in his Extremity of Grief:
But whilst the Master was in an Agony, the Servants were so unconcerned, that
they fell asleep. Yet Christ put the best construction hereupon; not blaming
their negligence, but in compassion to their Humane Frailty, he pronounced this
Sentence; Mat. 26.41.
The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

3. The Third general Consideration was the Extent of this Court's
Jurisdiction; which reaches as far as the Body of Christ extends. To this we
are called in one Body, says the Text. Humane Nature obliges us to
compassionate Men as Men. But when it pleases God to distinguish a People from
the rest of the World, and take them for his own Lot, by revealing himself
particularly to them, he does oblige them to a closer tie of Love to each other
in answer to the particular condescension he has shown to them. Thus Israel
was obliged to a stricter Charity toward their Brethren than to Strangers from
them in point of Religion; but yet they were to extend their utmost Compassion
to all Proselytes, let them come over to their Religion from what Nation soever.

In like manner Christians are by St. Paul exhorted, Gal. 6.10.
as they have opportunity to do good unto all men, but especially to them who
are of the household of Faith. So that as every Nation and Government is by a
true Civil Polity obliged to a particular care of all the Parts and Members
belonging thereunto; and every part and Member of that Body Politic is obliged
to use his utmost endeavor for the good of the whole, so all People who are
united under one Head the Lord Jesus, should look upon themselves as one Body;
and therefore every division and branch thereof should in Christian policy hold
it self obliged in particular manner to contribute to the safety of the whole;
all one as every individual Member of a Family is bound in a more especial
manner to support the common Interest of their own Household, more than any
other. To exercise this Charity, to the Rule of this Peace of God, we are
called in one Body.

The outward visible bond of Union which joineth this Body together is the pure
Law of Christ, unmixed with the Traditions of Men; not levened with any Worldly
Interest. That Law which teaches us to know that God alone is our Owner,
Governor, and Benefactor, and therefore to him chiefly belongs our Submission,
Obedience, and Thankfulness. Which enjoyneth us Sobriety, Justice, and Charity:
And has no other Design, but to adorn our Souls with all sorts of Virtue in as
eminent Degree as we are capable of receiving. All the Professors of this Law,
howsoever dispersed over the World, are Members of this one Body, and may
therefore demand the utmost assistance of our Christian Charity.

This Rule of Charity was well understood in the beginning of our Reformation,
and was held as a Maxim of State during the happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth of
ever blessed Memory, viz. That England should always make it self the Head and
Protection of the whole Protestant Interest. Our Christian Church or Nation
(call it which you please) saw it self particularly obliged to this undertaking
by the especial Providence of God, which furnished us with that Strength,
Wealth, happy Situation, and Fertile Soil which rendered us the Envy and Terror
of Antichrist. And hence was it that our Church looked upon her self in
relation to other Protestant Churches as the Elder Sister in the Family, who
being grown up to greater Strength and Abilities than the rest, discharges the
part of a Mother, in giving her Assistance to the Younger and more tender
Branches of that Household. By pursuing this Pious State Maxim, Englands
Glorious Queen made her self the Nursing Mother of the whole
Gospel-Reformation; hereby she gave check to the power of Babylon, and by
making all true Protestants, i.e. all true Christians her Friends, she enabled
England to make good her Oldest Maxim of State, which was, To keep the balance
of Europe equal and steady.

From whence it is evident, if the Line which Succeeded that great Queen had
Religiously pursued the Holy Politic of her Reign, Europe had never heard of
the overgrown greatness of France, much less submitted to those Barbarous
Insolences which some places now groan under. Nor had England at this day been
startled by Popish Cutthroats, who were to prepare the way for a French
Invasion. So that our Allies of the Roman Communion must allow this Protestant
Maxim to be truly Catholic, because their safety from the Power of France was
wrapped up in it together with our own. And hence it may be discerned, who
amongst us are truest Protestants and best Englishmen: Those who endeavor to
heal up all Differences amongst Christian Churches who are willing to join with
them in bonds of Affection as Fellow Members of the same Household of Faith, or
those who by vilifying all Foreign Reformations, and all other Communions but
their own, divide the Body of Christ, and the Affections of Christian Churches
from one another.

From what has been said also it is evident, that the Body of Antichrist can
be no part of that One Body mentioned in my Text, and no more within the
perview of our Christian Law of Charity, than Turks and Infidels. I have read
in the Turkish Alcoran some honorable mention of Jesus the Son of Mary; but
though the Mahometans join with us in paying some fort of Respect to our Savior,
yet since they pay a greater Deference to their own Prophet, and an entire
submission to his Laws, and since their Laws have inspired them with the Genius
and Spirit of their Prophet, which never fails to exert itself in the highest
degrees of Rage and Malice against all who profess an entire subjection to the
Lord Jesus; I do not remember that the Mosque has ever been owned as a branch
of the Christian Temple.

And although the State-politick Confederacy of Rome erect Temples and Altars to
Christ (tho more to his Mother) yet in as much as they pay a more profound
Respect to their own High Priest, and the Laws which he has confirmed, and
since the Genius and Spirit of those Laws is so directly opposed to the good
Spirit of the Gospel, that there is no Rebellion or Insurrection so bloody, no
Murder or Massacre so cruel, no Conspiracy or Assassination so base and
barbarous, but what the Spirit of Popery not only allows, but injoyneth in
Opposition to those who own no High Priest but the Lord Jesus, it cannot easily
be comprehended how the Mass-house should be any part of the Christian Church;
although the Papists assume to themselves, in exclusion of all others, the Sacred
Name of Christians.

And in this they are followed by their Adherents among us, though of another
Denomination, who choose to serve Baal for the sake of Jehovah; and to preserve
our holy Christian Church in its original Purity join themselves to Antichrist.
This is indeed a Combination without precedent; the Fundamental of their Faith
is Contradiction, and their Principles would best have been explained by the
Philosopher, who read Lectures concerning the blackness of Snow. I have heard
of a crazed Friar, (the forerunner of these men) who made his Prayer to God to
reconcile himself to the Devil, in order to establish Peace in the world: just
as this sort of Men assist French Dragoons into the Kingdom, Popish Cutthroats
into the Court, and the late Subverter of our Religion and Laws into the
Throne; and all this, in order to support the Church of England; which Church
does therefore cast them out as Apostates from her Communion.

But if there shall be found within the pale of our holy Church any Abettors of
these Adherents, who shall still be disputing our gracious King William's Right
to the British Throne, who, by divine Assistance, first recovered and does
still support all the Rights of these Kingdoms, though this sort of men take
great pains to sequester themselves from our Christian Charity, yet I trust,
that God in his great mercy will continue to blast all the designs of
Antichrist, confound the Stratagems of Rome, discover the Treacheries of
France, and prosper the Arms of our Rightful and Lawful Sovereign King
William, that his happy Success and our secure Settlement may be even to these
men as a divine Illumination.

IV. The fourth general Head, was the great motive to Christian Charity, which
in the Text is taken from our obligation to thankfulness, be ye thankful.

We cannot reflect upon any one reason, which engages us to be thankful to
God, but what obliges us to Charity toward one another. Our Creation,
Preservation, Redemption, Means of Grace, Hopes of Glory, and all the Blessings
of this Life, for which we give daily Thanks, are either common Bonds of Union,
or Talents to be employed for common good. But how particular a motive to
mutual Charity the wonderful Deliverance which God has so lately wrought,
does assord us, will appear, if we consider the Particulars thereof, so far
forth as they have already been discovered: as first, The Deliverance of a Life
as dear to us as the breath of our Nostrils, from a barbarous Assassination:
and secondly, Of our Nation from an unnatural Insurrection in order to assist a
French Invasion. All the parts of this Conspiracy were linked together in one
Chain; the Assassination was to facilitate the Insurrection, the Insurrection
to make way for the Invasion, and all this in order to a French Conquest.

If any private person has received injury from another, there is in all
civilized Countries a Law and Court of Judicature, from whence the Appellant
may receive a Recompense; so that there is no room left for any private
Revenge; much less for that which is in the highest degree barbarous, as is an
Assassination upon the meanest person. If a difference arises between
Sovereign Princes, their Appeal lies to God's Providence, and is to be
prosecuted by open force of Arms. so that hereby is a bar set to all pretense
for an Assassination upon any public person; and indeed no men ever pretended
to assassinate, but such who had openly cast off all principles of Humanity;
such as, House-breakers, Highway Robbers, Tories and Banditti: and no Prince
can be supposed to commission these persons, but such as Nero, who wished that
the people of Rome had but one Neck, that he with his own hand might be the
Executioner of his own people: such, whose insamous Cowardice makes way for
their Cruelty.

It Is fit for him who dares not see his Enemy in the Field, to attack him by
Russians in his Winter Quarters: i. e. his Park, his Garden, his House, or
naked in his Bedchamber; and yet if we may believe the dying Speeches of
Popish Cutthroats, who to gain their own Absolution from the Priest are forced
to absolve their Masters, since Granval is dead, and Du Mont almost forgotten,
there are now no more Ruffians remaining beyond the Seas.

But this Assassination was timed to the Popish Carneval, the preparation to
their holy Fast of Lent was to have been a Riot in the Blood of our excellent
Prince; a fit Preparation for that barbarous Act of Religion they were to
commit when their Fast should be ended, which is to eat the Flesh and Drink the
Blood of our Redeemer.

Brutus the first arose against Tarquin, the second against Caesar, Piso
against Nero, because those Princes were the known Enemies of public Liberty.
And if a Sovereign Prince shall so far degenerate from the Character of a
Father to his Country, as to make it his business to subvert the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties thereof; in such a case a People are not only permitted,
but obliged by the duty they owe to their Country, their Posterity, and their
own Souls effectually, by open force of Arms, to remove the cause of such an
insupportable Calamity, as being fully assured, both from the goodness of the
divine Nature, as well as from the express word of God, that the Magistrate is
the Minister of God only for good: but to commit a Parricide upon such a
Prince, who defends not only the Liberty of England, but Europe, is a greater
Villainy than what was ever thought upon by Cataline. How dear should that Life
be to us which was so barbarously sought after by the professed Enemies of all
that is dear to God and Man? how does it become us to be thankful, that the
breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was not taken in their Pits,
of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen?

But secondly, They who were bringing this Plague upon us, did not intend that
it should visit us single; an Insurrection at Home, and an Invasion from Abroad
were to have been its Attendants.

That the natural Enemy of England should invade and hold Correspondence to
strengthen his design is not strange, (although carrying on that Correspondence
to an Assassination be some diminution to his Glory.) Nor is it to be admired
that English Papists, who by the tie of their Religion are united to a foreign
Head, should forget the Land of their Nativity. Nor is it a wonder, that they
who can believe against their Senses, should persuade themselves, that Lewis
XIV. may found an Invasion in self-denial, and at the expense of French Blood,
make a Conquest upon England, only to restore James the II. But it is
astonishing, that English Protestants, of the best and purest Reformation (as
they themselves assert) should be Harbingers to the eldest Son of Antichrist:
and by an unnatural Conspiracy prepare the way for the grand Nimrod, the mighty
Hunter after Europe's Liberty: and assist him to settle the French Yoke upon
their native Country: i. e. to suppress the Liberty, burn the Body, poison (and
as much as in him lies) damn the Soul of the Nation. For these are the certain
and known effects of a French Conquest.

What could the great Oppressor mean but to found himself a Title to England in
Conquest? and how inviting has it of late bin to him to know how fond we have
(some of us) bin of that Title? especially when crowned with Success and
Settlement: And what other thing could be designed, when the Embarking Army had
not one English, Scotch, or so much as Irish Troop in it, being made up only of
the Veteran Troops of France, but that the late King of unhappy memory might
march through his former Dominions in safe Custody, having only the revenge to
see England become the worst of all Conquests, a French Conquest? For to the
French Monarch alone it is owing, that War is made more barbarous than 'twas
ever known in former Ages. His Promises and Oaths make way for his Perjury, his
Treachery leads on to his Cruelty, and what the Sword is incapable to devour
the Fire must consume. Did ever any Men before now found an Insurrection only
in a revenge upon their own native Country? Did ever Men before now form a
Rebellion without any other rational prospect but of Slavery to the Souls and
Bodies of themselves and their Posterity? May not England with astonishment
take up the words of Isaiah? Hear O Heavens! and give ear O Earth! I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me, Isa. 1.2.

But what does the sense of our wonderful Deliverance call for? Does it not,

1. First engage all those who join together in a just abhorrence of this
unnatural Confederacy to unite together in bonds of mutual love and charity to
each other? are not all those who have the same common Enemies even thereby
compelled to associate themselves together in the strictest Friendship? have
not French Invasions already joined different Nations of differing Religions,
together in one common League for mutual safety? and may not the same reason
prevail for the Union of Protestants of the same Nation (at least) in brotherly
love and charity? When the Heathen and the high Church of Israel conspired
together against the life of Christ, was it not a warning to all his Servants
to unite against their confederated Enemies? Certainly when the reasons of our
mutual agreement with one another are so weighty (as has bin shown) and the
causes of our differences so very light, nothing but our own ill nature can
give an ill turn to the scale.

2dly. This Deliverance calls us to more caution, that we give no further
Encouragements to the common Oppressor to invade, nor to the homebred Traitor
to assist him. Let us no longer preserve as sacred the forseited Right of a
Tyrant, and no longer refuse to own the legal Right of our Deliverer. A Right
by Law should be (if possible) more precious to us than a Right by Succession,
since fortuitous birth gives a Right by Succession, but it is the addition of
Heroic Merit to Princely birth which recommends to a Right by Law. And what
greater affront can we offer to the high Merit of our excellent Prince, who
uses his just Title only to support the true old legal Monarchy of England,
than to pay any respect to the Title or Memory of him who Abdicated the Crown?
i. e. cast off the legal form of Government, and ruled us by a Despotick Power;
was it though decent or indeed tolerable to preserve a respect for Tarquin in
the Consulship of Brutus, by whose Aid the People cast off the Yoke of his
insupportable Tyranny? but what would have been thought of those, who should
publicly disavow the Right of Brutus to that high Dignity which the People had
vested in him out of respect to Tarquin the deposed Prince?

3dly. Let us bless God who brought Light out of Darkness, that by the
discovery of this unnatural Conspiracy, he has sprang a light, whereby his
sacred Majesty, and those who are entrusted with any part of the Government
under him, may clearly discern their Friends from their Enemies, and certainly
know who are for and who are against the conjunct Interest of King and People;
so that from hence such measures may be taken which are absolutely needful to
secure our Establishment.

Whosoever refuses to acknowledge the Right of William the III. does actually
declare for the extinguished Right of James the II. and whosoever owns his
Right, must by Virtue of his Allegiance hold himself in conscience obliged to
endeavor his Restoration. Now I appeal to all the world, if any such person as
this can of right claim to himself so much as Protection from the present
Government; but on the other side, every one must own that the Government, in
protecting them, does fully discharge the highest duty of Christian Charity,
which is to love our Enemies, and do good to those that hate us. Protection is
the highest Favor which the Government can, in this case, bestow, or which
these men are fit to receive; for Christ never commanded us to trust our
Enemies; but, on the contrary, to temper the Innocence of the Dove with the
Wisdom of the Serpent.

He who thinks himself obliged in Conscience to James the II, as his rightful
King, if he has not the Courage to make one in an Insurre Stion, nor the hardy
baseness to join in an Assassination, yet it is manifest that he will not oppose
the former design, nor reveal the latter. Now although to protect such persons be
the highest degree of Christian Charity, yet to admit them into the Trusts of
the Nation is not the highest degree of Christian Prudence. The Jesuits, who
were convicted of a Hellish Plot in the Reign of King Charles II. could never,
with all their Wit, excuse or so much as extenuate their Treason, and therefore
they betook themselves to the last Shift, or an impudent Denial. But our late
Convicts with greater Effrontery, own and justify their unnatural Conspiracy,
and die glorying in their Treason. But was ever any Kingdom so fatally divided
against it self, that the Religion by Law established, should be an open Enemy
to the civil Constitution? that what in the Eye of the Law is Treason, should,
by the Church, be accounted Duty? that whom the Judge condemns, the Priest
shall absolve at Execution? for the Impenitence of the Traitors, and Insolence
of the Absolvers are both justifiable (as they pretend) from the Church of
England's Doctrine concerning Passive Obedience, and it must indeed be granted,
that if James the II. had a divine and indefeasible right to our Passive
Obedience, the right of King William the III. to the Crown of these Realms
could not at this day have been owned, nor could the bloody Conspirators, even
against that Life, which (under God) supporteth the liberty of Europe, and the
Christian Profession throughout the World, been found guilty of Treason. But do
these Apostates think to impose their Passive Doctrine of blind Obedience upon
the Protestant Church and Kingdom of England? do they think we cannot rightly
distinguish this matter? as for instance, Passive Obedience to the Law of the
Land, is the Doctrine of Jesus; Passive Obedience to the will of the Prince, is
the Dostrine of Judas; a false and traiterous Doctrine, whereby all civil
Governments and legal Rights are betrayed to arbitrary Power. Judas betrayed
the person of Christ to the High Priest of Israel. Passive Obedience, to the
will of the late King, betrays the Body of Christ, i. e. all true Christians to
the Pope of Rome, and therefore the Professors of this Doctrine have, by the
righteous Laws of this Land, suffered that Punishment to which God in his just
judgment condemned the Traitor Judas, which was, To be hanged and burst in the
middle. But what can put a stop to the unparalleled Insolence of this Party,
unless the Parliamentary Association (which subjects these hardened Traitors to
a just Revenge) be wellcomed with the Heart and Hand of the Nation? Hereby
every honest Man and Lover of his Country may encourage our Confederates
abroad, and assure the Minds of all true Englishmen at Home, and we need not
doubt, that God will bless these our honest Endeavors in defense of that
Religion which is all Charity and Peace; and of that King whose only fault
perhaps it is, that his own safety is not so dear to him, as it is, and ever
ought to be, to us. These Cautions are absolutely needful to preserve our
Rightful King and righteous Establishment; and therefore let us join our
Prayers to God, that no false Suggestions, nor vain Jealousies may prevent or
frustrate these necessary Cautions, which God in Mercy grant, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

