THE True English Government, AND MIS-GOVERNMENT Of the Four last KINGS, WITH
The ill CONSEQUENCES thereof, Briefly noted in Two little Tracts.

Exurgat DEVS, and dissipentur Inimici ejus.

Dat superne DEVS.

crown of England

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

Advertisement.
BEcause some may be offended at the Freedom and Plaindealing used in these
Papers, it is fit,

1. To acquaint them that it was thought necessary; partly to manifest the
Justice of the Actions of the present King and Queen, the Parliament and
Nation, in the late Revolution, and present Settlement; and partly for a
greater purpose than that, viz. To manifest the Righteous Judgments of God upon
that Family, for the Honor of God, and necessary Caution to them that come
after, that they may be humbled under the mighty Hand of God, and use all good
Means to avert the Course of those Judgments from themselves: and to awaken the
Nation.

2. To admonish them to consider, Whether their Offense be reasonably taken, so
long as we see so much, (not honest Freedom, but) Impious Licentiousness,
Presumption against God, and Rude and Impudent Contempt of the Religion of the
State, by Profanation of the Sacred Name of God, and notorious Violation of the
Precepts of Christianity, to be daily acted without control. Were they
proportionably sensible how far this Rudeness (or rather inconsiderate Folly
and Madness) exceeds any thing in these Papers, all their Resentments would
soon be converted into Admiration at their own Stupidity.

And for the Church and Churchmen, they who are not more concerned that such
things should be, than that they should be said, Dici potuisse and non potuise
refelli, cannot certainly be, either good Men, or good Friends to either; and
they who are in truth so concerned, will rather approve such Plain-dealing, and
put to their helping hand, than quarrel with them who do it.

To the King.
SIR,
THE Two Papers hereunto annexed, do so nearly concern Your Majesty, that is,
the Right of Your Government, and the happy Administration thereof, that it may
be thought Duty, rather than Presumption, to present them to You. Besides, In
each I have used that Freedom and Plaindealing, which may need Your Protection;
and therefore having done it upon the solid grounds of Truth and Righteousness,
and for the Public Good, if it be fit for You to afford it, it is but
reasonable for me to crave it.

The one in the Socratick way of QUESTIONS UPON THE LATE REVOLUTIONS, leads
gently to such obvious and plain Conclusions as justify the Actions of Your
Self, and of all who have joined with You in Your late great Undertakings and
Access to the Government.

The other in the plain way of Narrative and Observations, contains not only a
necessary CAVEAT AGAINST FLATTERY AND PROFANATION, but discovers and lays open
the principal Errors in Government, and Miscarriages, which have involved the
last Race of Kings of this Nation in such fatal Mischiefs, as the World has
beheld with Admiration; and upon that occasion opens a Prospect into certain
necessary Means to make both Prince and People more happy for the future.

The Providence of God is exactly Uniform in all Ages, though through the
variety of the Actions of Men, and different Circumstances thereof, it may
sometimes seem to unskilful Spectators various. The Jews were once the Peculiar
People of God, and as such were under a Peculiar Divine Regimen: But they
having corrupted themselves, and withstood all the Methods of Providence for
their Reformation, and being therefore rejected, the Christians succeed in that
State and Privilege: And accordingly we may observe the like Methods of
Providence in the Occurrences of each.

The due consideration of the Sacred History of the Jews will open a Prospect
into the Mysteries and secret Providential Disposal of the Parallel Occurrences
of this Nation in this Age; and both compared and well considered exhibit a
plain Representation and Pattern of what is to be avoided, what to be done, to
make all Kings and Queens, and the whole Nation, for the future more happy in
their Government.

It pleased God by his Providence to give unto Your Great Grandfather, King
James, an Extraordinary Deliverance in the beginning of his Reign: And he has
given to Your self as Extraordinary Success, and (beyond Your expectation)
brought You to the Throne. Such Extraordinary Acts of Providence do always
naturally produce Special Obligation of Gratitude and Fidelity, and of
Subservience to some Special End and Design, apparent enough by some
Indications in the Course of that Providence, to such as duly apply themselves
to observe and consider it.

Miscarriage in such a case is sometimes fatal; but always involves and
entangles the Party in a labyrinth of Troubles and Difficulties; out of which
many do never extricate themselves; though most have space, and many fair
Opportunities, Invitations, internal Motions, and external Motives to correct
their Errors before it be too late. This was the case of King James, his Son,
and both his Grandsons; who sat upon the Throne but four Successions, and but
three Generations.

But a Prudent, Faithful and Grateful Obedience to the Will of God, and
Subservience to such Special End and Design, is usually not only very succesful
in that special matter, but moreover for the most part procures universal
Prosperity and Happiness to that Person in all things, which are not hindered
by some particular Miscarriage. And this I do heartily wish may be the case of
Your Self and Your Royal Consort.

Their Miscarriages, and the unhappy Confequences thereof, are Obligatory
Cautions to You, not only as Common Examples, but as Examples of Your own, and
Your immediate Predecessors, to whom You succeed in Authority; and more yet,
Examples of Your Progenitors, from whom by the Mother You are personally
descended; a special Caution of great importance for Your greater
Circumspection, lest by the same or the like Miscarriages You enter into
Society or Communion of their Guilt, and the fatal Judgments decreed for the
same.

The Original of their Miscarriages were committed against the two great
Branches of that Righteousness, by which the Throne is Established, Religion
toward God, and Justice toward Men, by King James the First: First, by
Unfaithfulness to that Providence, which had given him so great a Deliverance,
deserting his Call, forsaking his Dependence upon God; and Recourse for his
Security to Worldly Wisdom and Policy. Secondly, by Profanation, or abuse of
Religion to such Policies: 1. For his Security, by Illegal Indulgence and
Favor at home, and unhappy Alliance abroad with Papists. 2. For the Advancing
of his affected Prerogative and Absoluteness above Law, by Disposing of
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Preferments, with more or no less regard to that,
than to the proper Ends of that sacred Employment, and thereby encouraging
Flatterers, and turning the Church into a Faction. 3. By Discouraging and
Oppressing true Piety and Devotion to God, and Conscientious Observance of his
Laws, (by reproachful Names of Puritans and Precisians, and by that impious and
abominable project of the Book of Sports;) and encouraging Formality and the
External Pomp of the Church, to gratify that Faction. And for Injustice I have
already named the root of it, Affectation of unlimited Prerogative and
Absoluteness, which produced more Illegal Proceedings and unjust Actions, than
can conveniently be enumerated here in particular; and besides, such another
Faction in the State. These, like the Wicked Policies of Jeroboam, stuck so
close to his House, and so prevailed in his Posterity, that they produced at
length the like unhappy Consequences to them.

And though it can hardly be imagined, that so Wise, Virtuous and Generous a
Prince as Your Self, should ever fall, especially after such Examples of
Caution, into such Errors and Miscarriages, so contrary to Your own Public
Declaration, and to the avowed Ends of Your Expedition: yet if we consider how
many Eminent Persons, who seemed to have been designed for Great Matters, and
have been carried on a great way by a very propitious Providence, have
notwithstanding, by some unhappy Miscarriage, or Neglect of the Opportunity put
into their Hands, interrupted the Course of that Favorable Providence, and
been deserted by it; it will appear that the Caution is not unreasonable.

And it will appear the more reasonable, if we consider first, The subtle
insinuating and prolifick Nature of Sin; and from what small Beginnings it
insensibly grows up to a full Maturity. Whereof we have very remarkable
Examples in the great persons before mentioned: How indulgence to Papists in
King James the First, came at last to such Zeal for Popery in King James the
Second, as lost him his Kingdom; How Contempt of Preciseness in King James the
first, came at last to direct notorious Immorality in both his Grandsons, and
infected the Nation; and the like. 2. That every Opportunity of doing good, is
an Obligation to do it: but every Special and Extraordinary Opportunity and
Advantage, a Special Obligation of Subservience to the Providence of God upon
that occasion; and such an Obligation as is never neglected by any Man without
Loss, Trouble, or some great Mischief to himself.

3. And yet the more reasonable still will it appear, if we further consider
the Great Obligations, which that extraordinary Providence, which has
conducted you, and the Things, to which it has led You, do necessarily infer,
both for Caution, and Action.

God, by Your Hand, as his visible Instrument, but indeed by his own Invisible
Power and Ministers, has driven out Popery and Arbitrariness before You;
subjected a formidable Army, much more considerable than Your own, unto You;
and brought You with an easy Course to the Administration of the Public
Affairs of the Nation. And thus far all is well. But here we come to a Critical
Point, and of some danger: 1. Lest it be thought that all is done, and nothing
more remaining: which might produce an unhappy Neglect, through Non-attendance
to Your Calling, and to the further Designs of Providence; and that a Relapse
of all again. 2. Lest we fall into the Old unhappy Error, through the Fallacies
of that Spurious Wisdom of the World: For though there be now no temptation to
any Politic Compliance with Papists, yet are there two other Nations of kin to
them, which must be subdued, and all Leagues and Compliance with them avoided,
the Debauched on the one hand, and the Factious on the other, (though the
Debauched are as morally Factious as any) But by Factions, I intend here as
well those Zealots for the Church of England, who are really such (as many are
in a high degree) as others who are such for their several Parties.

The true and effectual way to allay and extinguish the present Factions, is
very plain, if we do but consider the Causes and Occasions of them: which were
principally the Princes Favors partially dispensed, and Church-Preferments
accordingly disposed, and factious Acts of Parliament. It is now known, and
believed by Men of good intelligence, that not only the then D. of York, but K.
Charles 2. also, were entangled in Popery before their Return into England. And
it is therefore not to be questioned, but their Counsels, and the Parliament it
self, being at first under a transport, and after corrupted by Pensions and
Expectations, were through their Means influenced by the crafty and busy Romish
Agents; who by the same Means did both promote their own Designs, and insinuate
themselves into Favor. They did really desire to have the King absolute: for a
single person, they knew, was more easy to be dealt with, than a number of Men
in Parliament: They did really desire very strict Terms of Conformity and
Severity against Protestant Dissenters to be enacted: for this they foresaw
would the more effectually divide the Church and Nation, and so much the more
weaken each part, and give them advantage against either, as they had occasion.
These were both of them plausible Pretenses. And the Impressions of both are
very visible in diverse Acts of Parliament, especially those which concern
Uniformity, Conventicles, Corporations and the Militia. If therefore upon due
consideration of this notable Abuse and Imposture, those undermining Acts were
all repealed; all unnecessary Terms of Conformity, never required in the
ancient Church, discharged; and things were better settled upon a New (or rather
the true Ancient) Foundation, more agreeable, in the Church, to the Nature of
Christianity; and in the State, to the true English Constitution; the Factions
would easily be cured by Your Princely Wisdom and Moderation.

Concerning Debauchery I have said so much in the latter of these Papers, that
I need say the less here: But this is most proper for this place: Whatever
Sensual Men may think, it was not the Power of Your Arms, nor the Concurrence
of the Nobility and Gentry with You, which made Your Success so Great and
Extraordinary beyond all Expectation. But it was the Presence of certain
Invisible Powers, and a Secret Divine Majesty, (far beyond that of Crowns and
Scepters,) communicated to You, (as is frequent with virtuous Men in just
Undertakings agreeable to the Designs of the Divine Providence,) which made all
yield, and give Place, before You. If these be provoked to withdraw or desert
You, (which may be by Your Neglect or deserting their Conduct and the Service
to which they lead You, or by Indulging any wickedness or Profanation in Your
self, or about You, or in Your power to reform; for they are Holy Spirits in
your case employed upon a Holy work and design;) Your Strength will suddenly
be gone, You will become like other Men, all things will be at a stand, go
heavily or cross with You, and if You see not Your Error in time, and amend it,
You will by degrees be wholly deserted and left naked.

And here it may be fit, and I hope without offense to Your Majesty, to offer
to Your Consideration, whether there may not have been some Fault already
committed in this respect, and the Course of Providence, which moved so
smoothly and effectually before, be not since become thereby more slow and
retarded. And the reason is this: There was long since a Paper put into your
hand concerning this matter; and the Care of it, that it might not miscarry
through Multiplicity of Business (for it was then a busy time) or Politic
Considerations, not long after recommended to one specially obliged to be
concerned for such matters: but it seems to have met with no favorable
promotion. But our Streets are still filled, in the day time, with horrid
profane Swearing; and in the night, with lascivious Negotiations: and all kind
of Debauchery is still as impudent and rampant as ever, without control. And
agreeable thereunto the Course of our Affairs seems ever since in some things
very slow, in some stationary, and in others plainly retrograde. A parallel
adjudged case in the Prophet Haggai may direct in the Examination and
Resolution of this.

SIR,
If Your Zeal for the Honor and Service of God in these things, and others to
which You are directed, not proper here to be particularly mentioned, be not
answerable to the Extraordinary Favors and Designs of Providence, I dare be
bold to say, You will suffer an answerable Diminution of Your Majesty: But if
You do with all Fidelity and Resolution attend to Your Call, and follow that
Divine Conduct, it will infallibly lead You to Great Honor and Satisfaction
here, and Eternal Happiness hereafter. Which that You may, is the only End of
this plain Discourse, and for this End I shall in all things endeavor to
approve my self

Your Obedient and most Faithful Subject and Servant.


