OF HUMILIATION, AND The EFFECTS of it, IN RELATION TO THE PRESENT OCCASION.
THE Effects, Success and Consequents of the most solemn Acts of Religion are
somewhat like to those of the Water of Jealousy, which to those that were Pure
produced a Blessing, Health and Conception; but to those who were defiled, a
Curse and Corruption: So these if duly used never fail of a Blessing, but if
profaned by Irreverence or Neglect, and undue Performance, have a suitable
Success, miss of the Blessing expected, and besides, (it may be) meet with some
Temporal Judgment; For this Cause, says S. Paul, many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep: And this he speaks of such as shall be saved
hereafter, as appears by what follows; For if we would judge our selves we
should not be judged, but when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the World: By which it appears, That those
who shall not be condemned with the World, are, if occasion be, and for that
very End, that they may not be condemned with the World, often chastened of the
Lord, with the severest of Temporal Judgments, even Death it self; and That
this may be prevented by judging our selves.

Among those solemn Acts of Religion, by the Well or Ill management whereof we
may procure to our selves a Blessing or a Curse, Acts of Repentance and
Humiliation are to be reckoned. And since the King and Queen have appointed a
General and Public Fast and Humiliation, to implore the Blessing of Almighty
God upon our Forces by Sea and Land, and Success in the War against the French
King, it behooves us to consider well what we do, that we do not provoke a Curse
instead of procuring a Blessing upon our selves and our Forces by it. And we
have the more reason to consider well what we do now, if we do consider our
Ways (as the Prophet Haggai admonished the Isrealistes in a parallel Case)
since our last Solemn Day, which was for Thanksgiving, for a most admirable
Mercy and Deliverance; for it is visible to all, That there is a great
Alteration in the Course of our Affairs since that time. All went before with a
smooth and prosperous Course, beyond all Expectation, even to Admiration; and
has ever since gone as untowardly and heavily. I need not mention Particulars;
for it is so manifest, that none can be insensible of it, who are not very
stupid: but it does concern us to enquire at this Time, when we are about to
implore the Blessing of God upon our Forces, whether we have not by some
Miscarriage forfeited that Blessing of God, which before was with us. For if we
have, if we do not confess the same, give Glory to God, and-speedily reform it,
we may sooner provoke a Curse, than obtain a Blessing by this days work.

This was fit and necessary to be done, were our Fast upon any other occasion,
but being upon such an occasion as this, we have besides a special Admonition
to do it. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee from
every wicked thing. If there be any thing which has provoked an alteration of
the course of our Affairs for the worse already, if we look not well to it, our
Fasting and Praying will not help us. We must consider the Majesty of Almighty
God, before whom the greatest of Princes are but despicable Worms: We must
consider the greatness of that Deliverance he so lately gave us; consider the
special Obligations it laid upon us: and then consider our ways, how we have
answered the same. Which if we do as we ought we shall find, that though we
kept a Day of public Thanksgiving; yet neither Prince not Priest, nor People
(the Parliament) have hitherto done any one act of Gratitude toward Almighty
God, answerable to the occasion. It is a very good Observation. Non been
suceedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Here lies the very root of all
our slow Proceedings. And because on such occasions we are not to mince the
Matter, but confess, and lament the Sins of our selves and our forefathers,
and of our Kings, our Priests and our Prophets: I will plainly relate that
which all ought to take into serious Consideration.

The Christian Religion reformed from the Abuses of the Roman Church, is not
only allowed, but embraced, and the Profession thereof authorized by the Laws
of this Nation; so that any Affront, Contempt, or Dis-respect to it, does
proportionately affect the State, and in that which is most Sacred. No wise man
would unnecessarily do that which might be interpreted a dis-respect to the
State and Government of his Country, nor would any wise State, though Heathen,
endure to be affronted, much less in things so sacred as Religion. Yet to that
degree of folly and madness, are many of the very Gentry and Nobility of this
Nation degenerated, that they not only patiently suffer the Religion of the
State to be contemned, violated, and profaned by the basest of the People, but
are themselves, instead of being examples of Virtue, the evil Examples of all
Wickedness, Vice, and Debauchery.

The speedy Reformation of this, was certainly the proper business, and great
duty of this State; the neglect of it (I doubt not) a great cause and
provocation of the judgments and unhappiness of the late King, and of our slow
and unprosperous Proceedings, and if it be longer continued, and after a solemn
day of Fasting and Prayer, will provoke some smarter Chastisement. This was a
duty, to which our late Deliverance by so extraordinary a Providence, did lead
us and oblige us; and this had been a reasonable act of Gratitude, But it must
be confessed that it has not only been neglected, but with some aggravating
Circumstances.

Upon Christmass-Day was sent to the Prince a Specimen of a Declaration against
Debauchery in the Armies, which had been perused and approved by several
Persons of good Ability, both Divines, Lawyers, and Persons of Quality.

It was enclosed in a Letter, to this Effect: Something of this nature to be
Published by your Highness, is exceeding necessary, would be but a reasonable
act of gratitude to God, who has blessed you with so extraordinary Success,
would be very grateful, and much endear your Person to all good People, would,
as I guess by experience, not want a good Effect, and would I hope, conduce to
obtain yet greater Blessings from Almighty God upon your honorable
undertakings And, because the Prince was then full of Business, about a Week
after notice thereof was given to Dr. Burnet, presuming he would put forward
such Works, and not suffer them to be neglected by multiplicity of Business, or
worldly Policy. Some time after it was published in Print, both alone, and with
other Papers under the Title of the true English Government, and Mis-Government
of the four last Kings, with the ill Confequences thereof. In one of which,
Entitled A Caveat against Flattery and Profanation of sacred things to
secular Ends, were many things said very plainly, and very truly against
Debauchery. All was dedicated to the King, with a brief Narrative of the causes
of the unhappiness of those Kings, and the Danger of his involving himself in
their Fate, and participation in their Judgments, and presented to his own
Hand, March 18. And some time after presented to several of the Lords, and many
of the Commons.

But to this day has not any thing been done to this purpose, or so much as
mentioned by King, Bishop, Lord, or any one of the Commons; nor are we yet
awakened to any sense of the Importance of this Matter, though we see some
things, little less than predicted in those Papers, already come to pass, as
particularly the impeding and crossing our Preparations for Ireland, and
encouraging the Irish. page 15. of the Caveat. And I wish we see not more come
to pass, as we certainly shall if we go on in this manner. Can we think that
our verbal Thanksgiving can find acceptance with the Wise and Righteous God,
without acts of Gratitude, when there is occasion? It would not with a mortal
Man, but rather provoke Indignation. Nor can we reasonably expect our Fasting
and Prayers should ever find favor with him without an actual and speedy
Reformation; but rather aggravate the fault, and provoke some great Cross and
Disappointment.

Sometimes God is pleased in the Government of the World, as it were to
withdraw himself, and wink at the courses of Men, and let them go on without
check or control; at other times to appear in extraordinary Dispensations of
his Providence: And this he is now doing not only in these Nations, but in a
great part of the World. He has in an admirable manner executed his Judgments
against the late King, who had filled up the Iniquity of his Fathers by not
only courting, but espousing the Babylonish Harlot, and when we might have
expected some severe Judgment, gave us a great Deliverance. He gave to the
Prince an extraordinary Success, but withal, at the same time led him to a
Temptation and Trial? whether after such an Army of Men had stooped to him, he
would dare, in dependence upon that Providence, to encounter a Party of Vicious
and debauched Nobility and Gentry; which had he done all had certainly stooped
to him, he had kept up his Authority; which with a Mixture of Kindness,
Confidence and such like encouragements, would by the Blessing of God, have
made that Army as debauched as it was, entirely at his Service; and might have
made things go more smoothly in the Parliament than they have done, without any
Politic Compliance with any Faction whatsoever. That he did not do it, if it
was through Forgetfulness, the Fault lies at the Doctor's Door; but if it was
upon Politic Considerations, he has stumbled at the very same Stone at which
King James the First did, and unless he spedily extricate himself, will be
involved in the Fate of that Family. And for the Bishops, Lords and Commons,
the Representatives of the Nation, who have been so busy in scuffling for
Places and Preferments, or carrying on the Interest of some Faction or Party,
if they neglect to correspond with the present Course of God's Providence in
Reformation of the Nation by the Gentle Means of Good Laws and Vigorous
Execution by the Civil Sword, God will certainly do it by his rougher Ways, of
the Sword of War, and cast out such unprofitable Servants; our extraordinary
Mercies will aggravate our Crimes, may fill up our Measure, and the
Profanation of our Fasting and Prayer, by neglect of Reformation may seal up
our Judgments. I am persuaded God will pull down the Pride and Insolence of
that wicked Man the French King; and great probability there was he would have
done it in a great Measure by our Hands, had we made our selves fit for his
Service; but it is now doubtful, whether he will not first scourge and purge
our wicked Generation by that Rod before he throws it in the Fire: For the
things which belong to our Peace, seem to be hidden from our Eyes, as if we
were possessed with a Spirit of Slumber and Infatuation. Quos perdere vult
Jupiter dementat prius. If this Solemnity produce no better Effects in our
State, it remains only that Private Men look to themselves, have a care who
they associate with, and enter into such Courses, as it is probable Almighty God
will Bless and Protect them in: and perhaps the Condition of Londonderry in
their Siege may be more eligible than of the City of London in their Liberty,
with Licentiousness.

I am amazed to consider the Supine Negligence and Insensibility of our State
in this Respect; and the more, when I consider, that there are some among them,
who make Profession of Religion, and whose sincerity therein I cannot question.
Possibly some may be of some other Church or Party, and look upon all the rest,
as such as are without, and therefore are not concerned for them; but this, if
it be so, is a Mistake, for they and their Parties, being Members of the same
Commonwealth, may deservedly be involved in the Punishment of those Crimes,
which they neglect to reform in other Members thereof.

But for those of the Church of England, how they can magnify this for the
best Church in the World, and at the same time, with Patience see it made a
Cage of every Unclean Bird, I cannot understand; for certain it is, That none
of the Debauchees do profess themselves to be of any other Church, but all of
the Church of England, and many of them Zealots for it too: and reason good,
for there they are connived at.

But I cannot mention this Neglect of the Church of England, in not reforming
its own Members, without calling to mind another Neglect, by no means to be
passed over in Silence, upon this Occasion, because the Mischiefs thereof do
seem very likely to fall heavy upon us: And that is of Reclaiming, Civilizing
and Converting the poor Irish, who seem to have been committed to our Care by
the Providence of God: For we have for a whole Age at least wanted neither Men
nor Means, nor any thing else but good Hearts sensible of our Duty, for that
Servicet. The Souls of that People and of their Ancestors, may cry to Heaven
for Vengeance for that Neglect. And we may reasonably fear that God in
Judgment, may make use of that neglected and despised People for a just Scourge
and Punishment for it. The Wit of Man in his Prosperity may find out Fine
Plausible Exccuses; but it is time now to consider, How far such Excuses are
like to pass with Almighty God: And certainly it will be more suitable to this
Occasion, to lay them all aside; take the Matter into serious Consideration,
and make that one of the Motives of our Humiliation.

Besides the gross Immortalities of the Nation, there are many other matters,
which deserve consideration: And among the rest, that Root of all Evil,
Coveteousness, and insatiable Greediness after the things of the World. This,
as it deadens the Affections, and averts the Soul from God, so it so narrows
and contracts it that it cannot freely exert its Powers for the Public Good,
but is ready upon all occasions to sacrifice that to its insatiable Appetite;
which I mention here because I take it to be no small Impediment to the course
of our affairs at this time. But I shall say no more of it now.

I am so well known to want no Good Will either to the State or Church of
England, that I think an Apology for this Plaindealing needless. The matter it
self, in my Apprehension, carries its own Apology and Justification with it.
And he, whose Cause and Service I have undertaken, is a better Advocate, than
either I my self, or any Man else can before me.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT. To the Paper of HUMILIATION.
THAT Religion and Virtue do greatly conduce to the Weal and Happiness of
Kingdoms, States, and of all Societies of Men, as well as of single Persons;
and Irreligion, Profaneness, Vice and Debauchery, to their Dissolution and
Destruction, has been observed by Philosophers and Wise Men in all Ages: And
that they have both a Natural Tendancy thereunto, and are moreover often
directed by a special Providence of God in concurrence with other causes to
those Ends, I have both by domestict Examples and Reasons, as far as I thought
necessary in so plain a Case, showed in the Caveat before mentioned. In which
taking notice of the great Degeneracy and Corruption of the Manners of this
Nation, I also showed that our late Extraordinary, though undeserved,
Deliverance did in a more special manner oblige us to a speedy and effectual
Reformation thereof: And that we could not expect but that the Neglect thereof
under such special Obligations would be attended with some observable
Disappointments or Obstructions in our Councils and the Course of our Affairs,
as we have seen it hitherto fall out. To this our Solemn Thanksgiving added a
further special Obligation; and the not doing it thereupon does beyond all
question aggravate the Fault of our Neglect, whereupon I presumed to represent
the Case briefly in a particular Dedication of those Papers to the King. And
when we had another Solemn day appointed for Fasting and Praying for God's
Blessing upon our Forces in the War against the French King, which certainly
adds another Obligation, it was but a reasonable Prosecution of the same honest
Design to note briefly the Necessity of making a Public Reformation a
Concomitant of such a Public Humiliation. To all this I will now add these few
Considerations:

They, who have any real Love to their Country, be their Religion what it will,
if they will acquit themselves but like men of sense and reason, ought
certainly to endeavor the promotion of such a Public Reformation, by the
promoting of some good and Effectual Laws for that purpose, even upon Civil
Considerations, as a thing tending by a natural Efficacy to make the People
much better either for Peace or War, and for the Common Benefit and Advantage
of the whole Society. And for an Experiment of the truth of this we need not go
far from home, or from our own times. It will be sufficient but to reflect
back, and consider well the different Morals of the two Parties in our late
Civil Wars, and their different Success.

And if they have indeed any thing of true Loyalty in them (whereof many have
made so high Profession) this they ought to demonstrate both by abstaining
themselves from contemning and affronting the Laws and Government of their
Country in things so sacred with all well constituted States, as the Religion
Publicly professed by them; and by a real and active concern, as they have
occasion, that all others be effectually restrained. If they have no just
conern it is certain their Loyalty is but a Superficial thing, a mere pretense
for some design or advantage to themselves: Nor ever did or ever will such Men
prove steady to any Government, but basely betray all, and sacrifice them to
their own Interest; and therefore are by no means to be trusted by any wise
Governors, notwithstanding any Parts or Abilities, for which they ought the
more to be suspected.

And for those who are Men of Religion, and more particularly those of the
Church of England, besides the Obligations and Considerations before mentioned,
the Common Prayers of the Church which are daily used, and in each House of
Parliament, as they do afford to them who are there present a daily Admonition
of their Duty, so are they in my apprehension a special and great obligation
upon them to it. For to pray that God will be pleased to direct and prosper all
their Consultations to the Advancement of his Glory, etc. and never so much as
enterinto any Consultation for the effectual restraining the Abominable
Profanation of his most holy Name by all sorts of people throughout the whole
Nation, and most impudent and presumptuous violation of his Laws; to pray that
all things may be so ordered and settled by their Endeavors that Religion and
Piety may be Established, and never use any Endeauours for the suppressing of
so common and notorious Impieties in the Nation; What is it but to add Impiety
to Impiety, to turn Religion into mere Formality, and insted of procuring a
Blessing to help to fill up the Measure of our Sins and pull down the Judgments
we have reason to fear, the sooner upon us; And the like observations may be
made upon the occasional Prayers and Confessions purposely composed for the
late Solemnities.

And for those, who perhaps may think better of some separate Churches,
certainly they would take it amiss if we should question whether they do
constantly Pray for God's Direction and Blessing upon this Parliament, or less
then is expressed in the Common Prayers: And if they come not behind in their
Prayers, and yet are as backward in their Consultations and Endeavors, I see
not how they are one jot more excusable, but must neccessarily fall into the
same Condemnation, if not greater for having deserted the Church and yet be no
better.

And these few Questions I would propose to them all, who pretend to be
Christians: Whether they can hope for any good success in this Undertaking
without God's Blessing, unless it be such as God sometimes gives to wicked men,
whom he uses for the correction of others? Whether there be not such Cursed
Things, and National Sins, which may provoke him to withdraw his Presence, and
withhold his Blessings from Christians, as well as from others, until they be
removed? Whether there be not reason to believe that this Nation is Poluted and
defiled and entangled in some such National Sins and Cursed Things, which may
obstruct the Divine Blessing? whether their unaccountable flow, or Retrograde
Course of our Affairs (no less to be admired than the precedent easy
Revolution,) may not with reason be reduced and imputed to some such secret
cause? And whether a diligent search into that remoter but most prevalent
Cause, and speedy and effectual Reformation of what is amiss, be not the most
proper business to begin with, (if we do indeed depend more upon God's
Blessing, now under such inviting Circumstances, than upon our own shallow and
ineffectual Policies) to complete a happy Progress of our Affairs?

This, if it was done to purpose, as it easily may, and ought to be, would soon
produce a great Alteration by the Blessing of God in the Course of our Affairs
for the better. Magnanimity, and Courage is the part and duty of a Christian,
as much as of an upright Judge or a Soldier: and if we will ever show it, now
is the time. If we basely fear the loss of a few debauched Ministers, Gentlemen
or Soldiers, we shall really lose a far greater Number of much better men, and
be enslaved and betrayed, as we well deserve, by the Company we choose: whereas
by a generous doing our Duty we should better secure them bettered by
reformation to our Party.

POssibly, in the Perusal of this Paper, some who are most attentive to the
Importance of the Matter, may overlook other things, and think it very good
and honest; but these must be Men who have some relish of such things But
others, who are not much affected with that, will be apt the more to regard the
Form, and censure it for rude and insolent; and that I am well pleased they
should do, and as severely as they will: For I know no better way to convince
them of a Fault of their own, than to make them judge themselves in the Person
of another. For If I be rude by plain-dealing with my Fellow Creatures for
their Good, who are perhaps but a little above me in some petty, accidental,
transitory Advantage, what are they who are not only more rude toward the
State, but impious against their Creator, or can behold such Rudeness and
Impiety without any Censure, or Endeavor to restrain it? Must I be censured
for breaking the Laws of Man, or but of Civility, and out of a good Design? And
it is equal then that others shall be permitted in impudent Contempt of the
Religion of the State, and impious violation of the Laws of Almighty God?
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge; for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self. And think thou, O
Man that judge, -- and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of
God? Or despisest thou, etc.

FINIS

