AD MAGISTRATUM.

THREE SERMONS preached before the Justices of Assize, at Bury-St.-Edmunds in
the County of Suffolk: With sacred Hymns upon the Gospels for the Hyemal
quarter.

BY THO. STEPHENS.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, printer to the Universitie.

Anno Dom. 1661.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber


To the right Honorable FREDERICK Lord Cornwallis, Baron of Eye, Treasurer of
his Majesty's Household, and one of the most Honorable Privy Council.
My Noble Lord;
THe presumption of prefixing your Name to this piece, were unpardonable, were
it not unlawful for me to appear abroad without your liverie, since I have had
the honor to serve you in the Service of God, and to wait upon you to the
Throne of Grace. The importunate desires of my obliging friends, has made it
thus public. It Is weak and tender-eyed, and cannot well endure the sun: But
your acceptance will create a worth. We have seen and known an evil time,
wherein the prudent kept silence, Amos 5. 13. An evil time indeed, wherein
there was never more preaching, and never fewer sermons: For I cannot call
illiterate seditious discourses by so honorable a name. It adds a luster now,
to your Lordships loyalty and virtue, that you were then content to be under a
cloud, when the sun it self could not break out. And blessed be God, that we
had then a cloud for a covering. Blessed be God who gave such a shelter to our
Moses and Aarons, at the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when the factious
multitude were destroyed. Surely, the Glory of the Lord never more appeared,
then in such an overshadowing. That cloud is now removed, and divides us from
our enemies. It gives light to us, but to them a thick darkness. It is an
earnest of the reestablishment of our decayed Church, that he gave us still a
nail in the Temple, and suffered a remnant to escape. If the Lord would kill
us, he would not have received a sacrifice.

My Lord, The Levitical law commanded that the snuffers of the Sanctuary should
be made of pure gold. There was never more need of snuffers: So many Thieves
are gotten into the wike of the Churches Tapers, that they are well-near
wasted; and the snuffers which should cleanse them, are so foul and bedrozzled,
that they have rather extinguished their light, then cleared them. Some were
made of gold indeed, but they were laid aside, and through disuse grown rusty.
The temple-gates at Jerusalem were shut up, and it was inconsistent with the
religion of many, to go up to worship at Dan and Bethel. If a desuetude of
eighteen years have made this piece rough and unpolisht (although I could never
pretend to the smoothness of Art;) I hope it will find an easy pardon from
your Lordship; who know experimentally, that sighs and tears had in them the
most persuasive Rhetoric, even then when our mouths were stopped. God
preserve you to enjoy that honor, for which you were reserved. So prays, my
Lord,

Your Honors most humble servant, and devoted Chaplain, Tho. Stephens.

THE SPOILER SPOILED, THE FIRST SERMON.

Preached at the Assizes at St. Edmunds Bury, September 10. 1660.

At the request of John Wyard Esquire. then High Sheriff of the County of Suffolk.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1661.

ISAIAH. 33. 1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and
dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: When thou
shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled; andwhen thou shall make an end to
deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
A Woe in the first word makes us willing to shift off the sin which brings that
vengeance. What! Theives amongst our selves? God forbid. Out of the Camp of the
Philistines, from the uncircumcised may come up spoilers perhaps, 1 Samuel 13.
17. and let them tremble, (as ver. 15. of the next chap.) tremble with a great
trembling, on God's name, they deserve it. But far be it from us to deal
treacherously: We are true Israelites, in whom there is no guile: if we borrow
from the Egyptians golden earings or bracelets (although with a purpose never
to repay them) it is at the worst but fraus pia, a waranted cheat, approved of
by God: For that is the Devil's doctrine in opposition to St. Paul: to do evil
to those which are enemies to the Holy Cause, and to rob and spoil them forget
not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: Thus after prostituting our
conscience to injustice and rapine, we are ready with Solomon's adulterous
woman, to wipe our mouth, and say we have done no wickedness, Prove. 13. 20.

It is needless, I presume, to tell you why Isaiah was called the Evangelical
Prophet; who through all his prophesies has like another St. John prepared the
way of the Lord, and made a straight path to advance his Kingdom: So that
although first, and more immediately his writings were directed to the Jews,
yet mediately they were to be diffused so far as God diffused his Church, and
all were concerned in them, who hoped to have a Nail within the Temple. Dagon
must be smitten down, wheresoever the Ark of God was to come: and these
hucksters which deal treacherously, and mony-changers which spoil and oppress,
must be whipped out, that the King of Glory may enter in. So that although the
Jews (which did too much delight in injury and oppression) were the first
sharers in this woe; yet all nations, that must expect the Lord, their judge,
the Lord their Lawgiver, and the Lord their King (as in the 22, v. of this
Chap.) must look for this distributive part of his justice and righteousness:]
And it is not only at this day literally verified, in your Man-eating
Cannibals, where he that breakfasts upon his brother in the morning, is made
afeast at supper for another: and your (...) amongst men, your irrational
heathen, (as I may call them) whose capacity of Moral principles can only
from hence be proved, because they are born with natural concupiscence to
circumvent and plunder one another: But amongst your more civilized Mahumetans
too, whose law pretends much to the golden rule of Equity of doing to another
as they would be done unto themselves; and find it indeed verified in a sense
which they least desire, whilst the Officers of the State are made the spunges
of the Grandseignior, who suck up the moisture of the people, till they be full
and swollen, and fitto be sqeezed themselves. As for us Christians, we have a law
by which we must be judged; Nay, we have a double law: as well the tenth
Commandment, which restrains us from thinking perversely, or coveteousness in
the heart, as the eight which forbids us to do perversely, or to spoil with the
hand. Yet, God knows, we have lived to see iniquity established by another law,
or at least that which has pretended to it, if the Orators rule be true, that
(...) is (...), that the sin of the ruler is a rule for the sinner; we have
then a patent, a protection, for it; Iusque datum sceleri; a law of the members
(we may call it) rebelling against the law of the mind: By which law, religion
has been valued by the gain that has been gotten by it, and the greatest
honor has been adjusted to that Saint, that hathboundthe Kings of the earth
in the strongest chains; and the Nobles in the heaviest fetters of iron, Psalm,
129. ver. 8. and they in the Devils Calendar have been printed with the reddest
letters, who were deepest dyed in blood. Since then we have contracted part of
the guilt, we must expect a share in the vengeance: Non diligenti tela
vibrentur manu: God's thunderbolts cannot fall amiss: the Thee in the text,
though it seems personal, yet it is indefinite: Every one concerned may expect
Nathans particular application, Thou art the man; Woe to thee that spoilest and
thou wast not spoiled, etc.

The words present us with man's sin, and God's judgment; Man's unjust
persecution, and God's just retribution: They spoil others, there is the sin;
They are spoiled of others: there is the vengeance. They deal perversely; there is
the fault. They are dealt perversely with, there is their punishment. And all
this time the judgment runs parallel to the offense: But now they differ;
gratis deliquerunt, ingratiis delicta luent: they sinned causlesly, they spoiled
others when they were not spoiled: but there is too great cause for the
punishment, They shall be spoiled themselves because they spoiled others. Nay,
they differ in the end, in the event too. God will have the last blow: God can
put a hook in their nose, and a bridle in their lips, and turn them back by the
way by which they came, Isa. 35. 29. Desinent maledicere maledicta ut noscant:
They shall cease to spoil, and make an end of dealing treacherouslly: But when
they can no longer (...) do mischief, they shall begin (...), God will reckon
with them for the mischief they have done. They shall then be spoiled: they
shall then be dealt treacherously withal. The sin will be the better conceived
if you consider, first, the names that it is clothed withal; it is called
spoiling, and dealing treacherously. Secondly, the malitiousness that
accompanies it, in that it was acted without any provocation, it was against
them that spoiled not, that dealt not treacherously. The judgment likewise
has two circumstances to agravate it. First, the unexpectedness of it,
vengeance wakes when they sleep secure, they shall cease when God arises to
judgment. Secondly, the certainty of it they shall be spoiled, they shall be
dealt perversely withal. Vengeance is mine, I will repay it says the Lord,
Romans 12. 19. These are the parts of which I desire you to take a summary view;
and first of the first: Woe to thee that spoilest.

The first term that clothes their sin is that of spoiling; which is all one
with plundering: a word (God help us) of which we know the meaning too well. A
thing that our English laws never dreamed of: for who could imagine that the
sword of oppression and the sword of authority should ever be fitted to one
scabbard? that the Magistrate that bears not the sword in vain, has either
vainly worn the sword, which he durst not draw; or drawn it to be a terror to
good works and not to evil? whilst loyalty only made up a traitor; and the
sincere practice of the established religion, has been only branded for
superstition, and profaneness: Which watchword once given, there is work
enough for the spoiler then. The report of an Idol in Micah's house, (though
raised on purpose by a poor hireling Levite,) is cause enough for the Danites
to fall upon him, and to rifle his house and to plunder him of his whole
estate. This makes our Prophet. Chap. 21. 2. call it a grievous vision, when
the treacherous dealer deals treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth: And how
grievous this is, may best be discovered from the three companions of it,
Violence, Injury, and Rapine.

First Violence seems to be a Sister twin, it is so often coupled with spoil in
the holy Scripture: as God cries out to the Tyrannical usurpers over Israel,
Ezech, 45. 9. remove violence and spoil, and take away your exactions from my
people. For violence indeed is nothing else, but armed force that dares to act
whatsoever it lists to fancy; and so properly belongs to those men in buff
which are rib'd with iron. For we can too well remember, when the name of a
Soldier was grown so terrible, that the news of a redcoat at the door, was
enough to fright a man out of his house and estate too. The Satyrist wittily
admires how one eye durst weep for the loss of another if a Soldier beat it
out. A Soldier I say, who must only be called to account before his Bardiacus
judex, before a Court Marshall for all his insolences. Hereupon our Savior
gives this counsel, Luke 3. 14. to the Soldiers that asked of him what their
duty was, Do no violence says he, and accuse no man falsely, but be content
with your wages. An unusual piece of religion this, for Soldiers to go to
Christ for a word of Command, and as great boldness in him to bid them do no
violence. Who dares call prosperous treason by any other name but virtue? who
dares call Marshal violence by any thing but valor and courage? But these were
Soldiers in Christ's School; they must do no violence. Annona sua contenti
sint, non de lachrymis provincialium vivant, says Vopiscus: Let them not
oppress their quarters, and drink up the tears of the fatherless and the widow
whom they plunder: should a poor woman of Zarephath meet such an one, as she
did Elijah 1 King. and 17. it is not a morsel of bread would serve his turn;
no, let her bake him a cake of her handful of meal and cruse of oil, though
she and her son have nothing to eat, but die. And this makes Jeremy threaten
the people with Spoilers that come from the North, Ier. 51. 43. we all have
felt those North-winds which have swept away all before them. But as after a
storm, many times a gentler blast from the same climate, breaks the clouds and
fans the air. God has now brought good out of the North: he has shown a
serene sky, and Charle's-wain most radiant there; the drums beat a Loyal
march, and the noise of the trumpets, do no longer drown the law, but sound a
triumph (as upon mount Sinai) this day at the promulgation of it. So that
violence alone is not spoiling: there may be a good violence: heaven must be
taken by violence; but violence mixed with injury; and that is the Second.

And thus the vulgar reads it, vae tibi qui praedaris, woe to thee who make a
prey of others: a proper Metaphor, fetched from those Beasts of prey, which
leave nothing unworried which they can master: Not a fearful Hare, nor an
innocent Lamb, which can escape their ravenous appetites. That fore-quoted
place (Luke 3. 14. accuse no man falsely) has more in it, in the Original:
(...), come not with your blandishments or flattering insinuations, to
prepossess the Judges ears; The Scholiast says, the word came from the practice
of presenting a basket of figs to the (...) the gift-devouring Judges, as
Hesiod calls them: and a Magistrate thus prejudging a person to be criminal,
leaves him fit to be spoiled: Hence St. Barnard says, the false unjust accuser
carries the Devil in his tongue, the receiver in his car: No such sure way to
rob Naboth of his Vineyard, as for false witnesses to accuse him, that he has
blasphemed God and the King. Blasphemed God! O impious wretch! away with him;
such a man is not fit to live upon the earth: Cursed be he that does the work
of the Lord negligently. And the King! that is treason; if thou let this man go
thou art not Cesars friend: Hereupon Luther makes the slanderer the greatest
offender against the second Table; for whereas the thief sends one soul to the
Devil, and the adulterer two, he is ter homicida, at one thrust he stabs three;
himself, the party to whom, the party of whom he tells the tale: But this
injury of the tongue is nothing comparable to that of the hand, if it did not
make way for it. For thus have we found by too sad experience, that once voice
a man to be a Malignant, the Courts of justice have been obstructed against
him, and the benefit of the law denied him, he is exposed to Kites and Vultures
he is fleeced to the very bones: and thus the second brings in the third;
Injury makes way for Rapine:

And now I do heartily wish, that the Harpy's were only a Poetical brood which
built their nests in the Poets fictions. Tristius haud illis monstrum -- should
I give you the description of them from the Poets, you would believe you had
seen their walking pictures: They are fancied to be Virgins in that they are
barren, because goods so gotten descend seldom to posterity, when they cease
to spoil they shall be spoiled says the text: they have wings to fly, and that
swift in extorting, witness those prodigious sums raised in one Harpie's time,
more then in all the reigns of the Kings from the Conquest to his days: they
are covered with plumes for cloaking of their prey: they have the talons of
Vultures from griping and fast holding of their ill got riches. And has not
our age seen some of these think you? what think ye of Solomon's sinners? Prove.
I. II. which say, come, let us lay wait for blood: let us lurk privily for the
innocent without cause, Let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole
(root and branch) as those that go down into the pit; we shall find all
precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil. Have you seen none of
these? What think you of Elijah's spoilers? 1 Kin. 21. who have killed, and
also taken possession, have you seen none of these? What think you of Jacob's
sons? Genesis 34. which spoil the whole city of the Shechemites upon a pretense of
introducing religion there: have you seen none of these? What think you of
Ieremie's spoilers? Jer. 12. 1^. which are come upon all the high places; they
have defiled the Sanctuary of God, and broken down the carved work thereof with
axes and hammers: nay (pardon great God the irreverence) they have used the
Temple as Iehu did the house of Baal, and made a draught house of it unto this
day. Have ye seen none of these? in a word, what think ye of our Saviors
spoilers? Mat. 23. 14. Scribes and Pharisces hypocrites, who under a pretense
of long prayers devour whole widows houses: who from Pharisees turn Publicans,
and instead of tithing Mint or Rue, decimate or sequester whole estates: which
makes that of Zeno most true (...). All Publicans are rapacious. And if the Law
Books say true, that the word Fellon comes from fell or cruel, we may conclude
them the greatest Fellons of all, for they have been the fiercest spoilers of
all others: And now you would think here were matter enough for an Endictment
against them, but this is but the first branch of it, that they are spoilers;
there is another yet behind, they are treacherous dealers.

We have seen them hitherto as raging Lions, behold them now as subtle Dragons
watching for their prey: And this likewise in a threefold respect. First, in
their pretending false fears, and punishing others for them: Secondly, in their
fomenting real dangers, and imputing them to others. Thirdly, in their
assigning others for causes of that which they know arises from another hand.
For the first of these, I know it is a judgment upon Tyranny, that it is never
secure from jealousies and suspicions. the wicked fears where no fear is,
Psalm 14. 5.. Nero suspects his own shadow for harboring his mothers Ghost: yet
oftentimes it happens, that great dangers are pretended, that the blame may
fall on them who are marked out for sacrifice: Thus Richard (our third shall I
say? or) our first usurper imputes his natural misshapen withered arm, to the
sorcery of such as he had devoted to execution. Iehu knew himself to be
established King over Israel, he was proclaimed by the Soldiers, acknowledged
by the people: he had slain Ioram, his lawful Sovereign: he had by a cunning
hypocrisy cheated the people into a great opinion of his zeal: yet by a fine
reach of policy a letter must be sent to Samaria to persuade the Elders of
Israel to set up the best of their Masters Sons upon his Throne, and fight for
him, 2 King* 10. 3. he knew he had the City already at his devotion by the
terror he had cast upon them* But by this means he obtained a noble present*
the heads of Ahabs seventy sons were sent in baskets to him. Thus the Lapwing
flutters most, and cries the lowdest to cheat the traveller when she is
farthest from indangering her nest. Potiphars wife had too great trial of
Joseph's honesty, yet he must be accused as an Hebrew brought in to mock her:
And thus Daniel, faithful, religious loyal Daniel, upon a pretense of
disobeying the Kings decree, must be thrown into the Lion den. But secondly,
they sometimes contrive* and foment real plots and dangers to punish others for
them: Thus that monster of mankind Nero sets the City of Rome on fire, whilst
he sits in his Tower, and makes music to the dancing flames, singing there his
(...), whilst many thousand Christians are condemned to tortures for being the
Incendiaries: And this was a good man's, even Joseph's policy too, who secretly
conveys the price of the corn and his own divining cup withal, into his
brethrens sacks mouths, that he might have the juster pretense to secure their
persons for spies of the land: And this made David so often, and so fervently
pray for the clearing up of his integrity; not that he suspected the integrity
of his own heart, for he was a man after Gods heart, and so could not deal
treacherously: but Saul had suggested false insinuations of him. He had laid to
his charge things that he knew not; they devised deceitful matters against him
that was quiet in the Land. I am loath to preach Matchiavil in the pulpit: It
is truly said of the old Satyrists, that they whipped the vices of the times so
naked, that they made sport to lascivious eyes to behold them. I should be loath
in the unmasking the designs of Tyrants, to set a copy to any, although of an
inferior rank, to write by: Yet it is too well known that nothing so much
advances the purposes of usurpers, as plots ingeniously contrived by
themselves, and as fortunately discovered when their counsels are ripened for
them. For by this means they raise the reputation of their own sagacity and
waking diligence, and evermore weaken the power of the adverse party, some of
which must fall victims to their wit and industry. But how prosperous soever
such counsels are for a time, Christianity warrants us not for such
dark-lanthorn Stratagems.

But the third and last fallacy of these treacherous dealers is their non causa
pro causa, the assigning the cause of their mischiefs to them who are most
unconcerned and innocent. If a Lamb be drinking at a stream though much below
the Wolf, it is occasion enough to worry him, and to pretend that he has
roil'd the waters. When Ahab's cruelty, and Iezabels sorcery had begot a famine
in the fruitful Land of Canaan, and that Country felt an ebb, which before
had flowed with milk and honey, the blood of the Lords prophets which were
slain is quite forgotten, and the abominations of the Zidonians, Baals
Idolatry, not reflected on; but the blame of all must rest upon Elijah, that
its he that troubles Israel. Herodotus tells us of a foolish people of
Mauritania which yearly go out to curse the Sun, with a great solemnity,
because he tanns their naked bodies: Thus when jealousies and fears have laid
us naked to all the mischiefs of base suspicion: when ingratitude and rebellion
have stained our souls as black as the sins, the furies that harbor in them;
we have gone out to curse the Sun, and make the blessed influence of his heat
and light the cause of all our grievances. But there is no Nation (except our
own) has given more pregnant instances of this then the Israelites, whose
ingratitude this way made the very quails their meat, stink between their
teeth, and named the waters they drank of, bitterness, from their murmuring.
Sometimes Corah and his seditious Elders shall quarrel at Aarons the High
Priest's pre-eminence, upon a pretense of holiness; they are as good as he, why
lifts he up himself above the people of the Lord? And if Moses the civil
Magistrate steps in to his rescue, there is Tyranny straight clapped in his
teeth; He goes about to make himself a Lord over them. Straight after this, two
hundred and fifty assemblymen, shall dare challenge a share in holy
administrations, and offer incense on their unhallowed censers: And when God
shall make a miraculous discrimination between h^s anointed and those that
rebel against them; by not suffering them to die, who did not deserve to live;
but opening the mouth of the earth, he shall let some of them down quick to
hell, whilst he rains down Hell from Heaven, consuming fire upon the rest, the
very next day Moses and Aaron shall be challenged for it that they have
murdered the people of the Lord: even that very people, that perished in their
rebellion: This begets a new plague; when these whom they accuse for their
murderers must be their deliverers again, for there is wrath gone out against
them from the Lord; whilst a cloud covers Moses and Aaron at the Tabernacle of
the Congregation. Yet in the very next story, they are no sooner pinched with a
little drought, but they fall a chiding their governors again as the cause of
all, it is they have brought them up to perish in the wilderness: But what says
Moses? Hearken, O ye Rebels! why murmr ye against the Lord? ye are gathered
together against the Lord, and what are we that you murmr against us? And
have not our eyes, beloved, seen all this acted? Has not the preheminency of
our Aarons been questioned by a pretended godly party? Has not our Moses been
accused of Tyranny, because he stood up to vindicate them? Nay has not our
Moses been arraigned for murdering of them that perished in their rebellion?
Has not every unsuccessfull adventure, every dear year, every deluge or
drought, been imputed to him and his party? Has there been any thunder or rain
in wheat-harvest, which has not been charged upon that great wickedness of
asking a King? But hearken Oh ye rebels! it is Gods Ordinances you despise, in
trampling upon Aaron: Hearken Oh ye rebels! it is Gods Soveraignity you refuse,
in resisting Moses: Hearken Oh ye rebels! it is God himself whom you arraign, in
challenging his Magistrate with the blood of them that perished in their
rebellion: Thus have they committed falsehood, the thief comes in, and the
troop of robbers spoileth without, Hos. 7. 1. and they have dealt treacherously
against the Lord: And this is the second aggravation of their sin; they deal
treacherously.

The last and chiefest remains: this sin was acted without any just
provocation: They spoiled when they were not spoiled, they dealt treacherously
when they were not dealt treacherously withal, without any just provocation, I
say: For against unreasonable fears and jealousies, there can be no security.
Historians tell us of the time when the Romans might not whisper together in
the streets, least their breath should be accused to be rebellious: I am sure
we have known when our very prayers have been suspected of sin. When Hannahs
prayers were muttered in the Temple, Eli supposed she had been drunken: But
alas the Temple has been shut up against us and our worship, as it was in
Ieroboam's days; and if we met in private, to whisper our devotions, some
Sanballats and Geshams would be ready to inform, that we met together to
rebel. Thus have they devised deceitful matters against them that were quiet
in the land: And quiet they are upon a double account, First they cannot.
Secondly they will not retaliate injuries.

First, I say they cannot: For what teeth and claws has a Lamb to encounter
with a Wolf? What beak or talons has a Dove to grapple with a Vulture? God
does many times disarm his people of all outward help, and leave them only the
spiritual weapons of prayers and tears to encounter with their enemies: and
this is to make trial what these dare do, and what those can suffer? Sad was it
with Israel in the days of Saul, they had neither sword nor spear amongst them,
nor yet a Smith to make them any 1 Samuel 13. they were forced to set their
weapons on the grindlestones of the Philistines: And this was their case
before, in the days of Deborah; not a shield nor a spear seen among forty
thousand: I find Peter indeed at one time drawing his sword in his Masters
quarrel, Mat. 26. 52. but instead of a Soldiers pay, he meets with a sharp
reproof: Put up thy sword into its sheath, for they that draw the sword shall
perish with the sword: not that it is unlawful to defend our selves; or to take
up arms, under the command of a just authority: For our Saviors command, Mat.
5. 39. (Resist not evil) bids us not open our doors to plunderers, or expose
our lives or estates to treacherous dealers: the word (...) (as our learned
Paraphraser observes) is all one with (...) which signifies to wage war and fly
to arms: so that to secure our selves we must not make a violent resistance:
Patience at present, and depending on Gods providence for the future does much
better become a Christian: which St. James his just man makes good in practice,
Iam. 5. 6. they did (...) condemn him, there is treacherous dealing: and (...)
kill him, there is spoiling: But he (...) he sets not himself in battle array
against them, non laesi vicem refert, says Tertullian he spoils not again. I
find indeed a young Levite of Bethlem Judah among the children of Dan appointed
with their weapons of war, and plundering his master Micah, Judge. 18. But
withal you will find he was but an hireling, and a Priest of Micha's own
consecrating. As for those hot headed Clergymen who formerly have beaten their
pulpit drums, and marched before their Saints militant into the field, they
look more like Judas amongst the Priests and Elders with swords and staves to
betray Jesus, then his Disciples which took up the cross and followed him:
'Twas Baals Priests that rent and cut themselves, Elijah was of a calmer
temper, and imitated the Lord God whose prophet he was; who came in a still
small voice: not in fire, not in an earthquake, not in thunder:

But secondly, Christians if they had a power, have no will to retaliate
injuries; to spoil others, or deal perversely. Their office is (...) Romans 12.
14. to speak well of their persecutors; and if they be plundered of their
cloak, to give their coat too, rather then to avenge themselves and (...), to
repay evil for evil: It is carnal policy to give our enemies the first blow,
and to strike home too, to make him sure from giving of a second. But it is
Christian piety, to turn the left cheek to him that strikes us upon the right,
to cloth our plunderers, and to feed our persecutors: Courtesy is the most
generous and noble revenge: For this heaps coals of fire upon their heads. St.
Austin interprets the place Metaphorically from the Chemical practice of
melting metals: which cannot be done by fire put under the crusible but by
laying live coals upon it, and that dissolves the hardest metal: So these
courteous returns of kindness are the most prudent method of overcoming our
en^mies, and melting them into compassionate tears, be they nev^r so
hardhearted: This was Daniels language in the Lions den, O King, live for ever!
This was Stephens before he fell a sleep, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge: Nay this was the language of the Lord of life when he was put to death
by wicked hands: Father forgive them they know not what they do: Would you have
a large comment upon this? Oh! think upon those holy meditations of that
blessed Martyr, and now triumphant St. King Charles the first in the 28. chapter of
his (...) and if thou be not all marble, it will thaw thee into tears: My
comfort is (says he) that God gives me the honor, not only to imitate his
example in suffering for righteousness (though obscured by the foulest charges
of tyranny and injustice) but also that charity which is the noblest revenge
upon, and victory over my destroyers, by which I thank God I can both forgive
and pray for them, that God would not impute my blood to them, further then to
convince them, what need they have of Christ's blood to wash their souls from
the guilt of shedding mine? And would you hear how he prayed for them? indeed
can you hear it, without being drowned in passion? Thou O Lord (says he)
made thy son a Savior to many that crucified him, while at once he suffered
violently by them, and yet willingly for them. Oh let the voice of his blood be
heard for my murderers louder then the cry of mine against them. Oh deal not
with them as blood-thirsty-men, but overcome their cruelty with thy compassion
and my charity: And when thou make inquisition for my blood, O sprinkle their
polluted, yet penitent souls with the blood of thy son, that thy destroying
Angel may pass over them. Though they think my kingdoms on earth too little to
entertain at once both them and me, yet let the capacious Kingdom of thy
infinite mercy at last receive both me and mine enemies. I can speak, and you
can hear no more: If it be truly thought that St. Stephens prayer at his
Martyrdom conduced to the Conversion of Paul, then one of his persecutors, how
can we doubt but these devout effusions of the soul of our dying Sovereign has
been an happy means to reduce his most Malignant enemies to a sense of their
duty and allegiance, and has had a blessed influence upon our gacious Lord and
Master the Kings most excellent Majesty in those merciful condescentions of
his, by which he has showed himself more careful of his subjects security
then of his own establishment: And this is the last aggravation of the sin of
the spoilers, they exercised their unjust oppression when they were not
spoiled, when they were not dealt treacherously withal.

But raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede poena claudo, if sin goes
before, vengeance seldom halts behind, Which is the second part: Their
punishment. In which I shall be very brief here, reserving plunderers to their
most just retribution hereafter: And here first I observed the unexpectedness
of the judgment, it comes when they are most secure, when they cease, then God
begins. Secondly, the certainty; they shall be spoiled. First, they shall cease
to spoil, they shall make an end to deal treacherously, for either they will be
satiated with their extortions, or when they are run out to the end of the
line, God will put a hook in their nostrils, and pull them back: First, I say
they will be satiated with their plunder. For although rapine be one of the
Horseleeches daughters, that is always crying out Give, Give, or taking rather
where we do not give: Yet the Horseleech will fall off, when it is plena
cruoris when it has sucked his fill, and is full of blood: They will be tired
with David's grinning Dogs in running to and fro, and going about the city, and
desirous at last to sit still and make merry with their mammon of iniquity,
singing the gluttons requiem to themselves, Soul take thine ease, thou have
goods laid up for many years: As when a Lion breaks into a flock of sheep,
after he has pampet'd himself with their blood, and is now glutted, mediis in
caedibus astat aeger hians victusque cibis -- he stands panting, tired,
yawning, lashing the air with his tail, and licking their worried fleeces. Thus
Holofernes (which executes his Commission to the full, of sparing and giving
quarter to none, but putting all to the slaughter, and spoiling them
wheresoever he comes; and thinking it too little to rage against the people,
unless he blaspheme their God too. Shall their God defend them, says he? for
who is God but Nebuchodonosor? whilst Bethulia is ready to faint for want of
water, and the governors are resolved within five days to surrender it: He
satiated with the glory of his former achievements, and delighted in the
sweetness of Iudiths company, gives up himself to caressing and excess, and
strives to kindle his lust with wine, in which he quenched his valor; sleeping
securely on his bed of pleasure, where he acted a Prologue to his own tragedy,
the eternal sleep of death that presently seized upon him. Judith takes away
his head, and with it the hearts of all his army. Thus Tydeus having overcome
the fifty Thebanes, and now triumphing in their spoil sends Meon home
untouched, not out of pity but necessity; for now lassus ferit praecordia
sanguis, he was tired with conquering. For indeed this ceasing of Tyrants from
the spoil, is as much removed from mercy as a gluttons fast is from religion,
who being lately surfeited can eat no more. Our Savior tells us of Wolves
which should come in sheeps clothing, the nota Vellera, the habits of old
prophets; perhaps this clothing is put on that they might ravin with the more
security: they are Wolves still, and therefore he bids us to beware of them:
And yet its possible that they may be so wearied out with worrying, that with
the clothing they may for a time put on mildness, and the gentleness of the
sheep too. Those very Prophets that have preached up blood and murder, and
encouraged every man to be up and doing and to sanctify himself that very day
on his brother, where if any showed pity he did the work of the Lord
negligently; seeing the shepherd coming with his guard of dogs that can hunt
and worry them, will presently put off the Wolf and put on the sheep, and cry
up tenderness and moderation with the foremost.

But Secondly, God can put an hook in their nostrils as he did to Sennacherib,
2 King. 19. 28. and turn them back the way they came: He that sets bounds to
the Sea that it shall not pass, can still the raging of the waters and the
madness of the people. Iezabel had thought she had made clear work in
destroying the Prophets of the Lord, and believed Elijah was left alone, whose
life she sought to take away; yet he found many thousands, partners enough to
seize upon Baals prophets, and bring them down to the Brook Kishon, and slay
them there. For thus it fares with the Church, as sometimes it did in old Ely's
days that the lamp of God is ready to go out in the temple of the Lord. Yet
even then, when our fears are highest, and our enemies hopes most pregnant,
that because the seere are grown dimsighted and there is not one prophet more
(as David complains) succession must needs fail, and holy orders with it, even
then I say, God will raise up some Samuel to succeed in the ministration. The
Church of God shall sometimes rest in the desolate valleys and in the holes of
the rocks and upon thorns, and upon bushes as it was prophesied, Isa. 7. 19.
Yet even in those valleys of Achor God will open a door of hope: the holes she
creeps into, are the places of her defense, the munition of rocks, even the
rock of her salvation; and those thorns shall bear grapes, and thistles, figs.
When was the light of Israel nearer quenching then in blind Samsons days? His
Dalilah (which had long been a pearl in his eyes) had now put them out: and
with his sight he had lost his strength too, his strength of annoying the
Philistines; although they thought he had an horses strength still; for they
brought him down to Gaza to grind in the prison house. It was now Dagons
holiday, for it was he which had delivered their enemy into their hands: and
to make the Iubilee more solemn, Samson must be brought out to make sport
before them. But God on a sudden renews his strength as the strength of an
Eagle, he bows himself upon the pillars of the house, and left none alive to be
spectators of their Tragedy. And this is according to Ezra's prayer, Ezr. 9. 8.
That God would leave us a remnant to escape and give us a nail in his holy
place and lighten our eyes and give us a little reviving in our bondage. Thus
shall the spoil cease.

But secondly, they shall be spoiled, there is the certainty of the judgment
(...) the day of retribution comes, when these rods worn out to the stumps
shall be thrown into the fire: For if judgment begins at the house of God what
shall the end of those be which obey not the Gospel? When Herod after many
other acts of Tyrannical persecution, had slain James, and imprisoned Peter,
his wickedness seemed very prosperous: the Jews were pleased: his enemies of
Tire and Sidon affrighted into terms, the people applaud and deifie him. But
mark the event: Gods pay is still behind: The vilest creatures shall be his
executioners, and lice shall anticipate the grave and devour him whilst he is
alive: Insomuch that he that lived like a beast, may not die like a man, to
teach the multitude what a rotten, stinking, mortal God they had adored. Thus
plenteously God rewards the proud doer, Psalm. 31. 23. Memorable is that story
of Cepio the Roman Consul at the siege of Tolouse, ubi nec fanis parcitum est
nec profanis, the gold of the temple could not take Sanctuary to secure it from
their sacrilegious fingers; all things sacred and common were lawful plunder:
But although they had taken earnest out of the Churches wealth, Gods pay is
still behind. Of that numerous and well appointed army, Historians say not one
escaped but perished by some miserable and eminent calamity. Go ask rich
Crassus how plenteously he was rewarded, after he had pillaged and spoiled the
Parthians, he had his belly full of molten gold poured down his throat. Some
foolish voluptuaries we know there are which love to revell and riot with their
Mammon of iniquity, and Diis fruuntur iratis, but think not of the reckoning
that is behind, but God will one day give them in a bill with their several
Items. Item for so many Orphans tears, that were robbed by thee. Item for so
many widows houses, that were devoured by thee. Item for so many Naboth's
vineyards, that were falsely accused by thee. Item for so many loyal traitors
estates that were sequestered by thee. Item for so many Church-revenues that
were swallowed by thee. Item for so many (...) dead men's monuments that have
been defaced by thee: the brass of which may serve like the brazen censers of
Corah's confederates to make broad plates for a covering to the Altar, to be a
memorial to after ages to do so wickedly no more: This plentiful reward of
God, was that handwriting on the wall which changed Belshazzars countenance, and
loosned the joints of his loins, and made his knees smite one against another,
when he was carowsing in the plundered vessels of the Temple. This, this is
that which will one day make spoilers hide themselves. Sylvasque and sicubi
concava furtim saxa petent, desire the rocks to fall upon them, and the hills
to cover them from the presence of the judge, with his plenteous reward in his
hand: If a go you cursed was the reward of them that clothed not the naked,
fed not the hungry, lodged not the exile, visited not the prisoner, surely he
will rain snares, fire and brimstone and a horrible tempest shall be the
portion of their cup that make naked the clothed, and eat the bread out of the
mouths of the hungry, that cast in prison those that the law makes freer then
themselves that eject out of their possessions such as comply not with their
fanaticall designs. Did he stand speechless, that came in without a wedding
garment? What will thou answer, that appearest in a plundered garment? Did he
lose his eternal inheritance that would not sell all that he had and give to
the poor? where shall the lot of thy eternal inheritance fall, who by thy
unjust extortion have forced all that he has from the poor? Princes we see
have gone on foot when servants have ridden on horse back: But in the day of
Gods retribution they shall need no horses, when they are hurried quick to
hell. Then thou spoiler shall be dressed up in flames, and thou deceitful dealer
shall have none to cheat withal. Thy false weights will betray thee; thy
secret confederacies will betray thee; thy midnight murders will betray thee;
thy unrighteous Mammon will betray thee; thy own conscience will betray thee.
Thy hidden works of darkness will then be manifested. Thy (...) thy methods of
deceit will then be analyzed. Thy bloody characters will then be uncyphered:
thou shall be unplumed of all thy spoils and stripped of all thy feathers,
whilst thy riches take wings and fly away. For when thou ceasest to spoil thou
shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously they
shall deal treacherously by thee.

I had now done with the text, if the occasion of this days solemnity did not
lead me farther: And yet I will not imitate some, in spending so much time, to
teach others their duty as to forget mine own. Yet reverend Sages, give me
leave to put you in mind that you sit here in a double capacity: you are men
before God, but you are Gods before men. And these two capacities answer the
two parts of the text, in which you will be concerned: As you are men beware
the sin: as you are Gods inflict the punishment. As you are men first, take
heed of spoiling: My Lords, let not the height of your places put you in hopes
of the indemnity of your persons in any actionsof violence and injustice, Tanto
conspectius: The fairest mark is easiest seen and most shot at. A judge is
(...) a living law, and has his denomination from justice, Iudex qui jus
dicit: Let him never keep his name if he leave the Etymology. It was a bitter
Sarcasme in Democrates who seeeing a felon led to the tribunal laughed at the
poor Caitiff, for being a petty thief and stealing trifles: had thou stooped
at noble quarries, says he, and appeared glorious in thy spoils, thou might
have filled a place on the bench now, when thou stand trembling at the bar.
We have lived I confess, to see the day, when Justice had broke her Scoles and
melted the mettle of them to make her sword the longer: With which she stood
armed so like her sister Valor, both clad in buff that they were too often
mistaken one for the other. Or if she she put on scarlet; it was but scarlet
dyed in blood: Voracious scarlet, which begets a proverb in Athenaeus (...),
scarlet which partakes of the nature of that animal of which the dye is made,
quod quicquid nactum fuit retinet ac devorat, which devours and spoils all that
comes within its clutches: which puts another sense upon that old sentence,
Summum jus summa est injuria, the high Courts of justice are Courts of high
injustice. But such Judges have been overthrown in stony places. Ps. 141. 6.
Places which havebeen rugged to ride in, and hard to fall in. Nay, some of them
have feared to be overthrown by stoning as Susannas Elders were. That God who
by his Almighty power has called light out of darkness, and raised this
beautiful and orderly form of government, out of our Chaos of confusion, has
restored our Judges as at the first and our counselors as at the beginning:
And such you are my Lords, as besides the judgment of charity (which bids us
hope the best of all) I have reason to believe, may boldly make Samuel's
challenge, Samuel's, the first itinerant Judge that ever went a circuit. Whose
Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have
I oppressed? or of whose hands have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? 1 Samuel 12. ver. 3. And yet, I beseech you, let me put you in mind
of Iethro's qualifications, for Moses Judges, Exodus 18. 21. who besides their
ability to know the law, and their fear of the Lord to practice what they do
know, must be men of truth too. And my text denounces a woe not only against
open spoilers but against treacherous dealers too. Take heed of varying the
hands (as old Jacob did once at Gods command) and laying the right hand of
blessing upon the wrong person: Justice it is true is painted blind as Isaac
was, but it is not therefore that it should judge by the touch as he did: What
skill is it to hood-wink the eyes where there are oculatae manus (in the
Comicks language) quick-sighted hands, quae credunt quod vident: believe no
more then they see or feel: A gift (says the wise man) blinds the eyes: But
if justice be thus blinded, it will have its reward in the land of darkness.
And yet although justice be blind, not to distinguish between party and party;
it must not be deaf too, to neglect the cry of the poor: Either cease to be a
King or do me right, says the bold Petitioner to the Persian Monarch. Oh my
Lords, Let not the cries of the oppressed reach heaven before you, least it bar
your entrance there. When Philip sat sleeping on the bench whilst a false
judgment passed in the Court he was wakened with the bold appeal of Machaetas:
The King disdaining a higher Iudicatory to which an appeal could be made,
replies with indignation, whither do thou appeal thou Varlet? To thy self. To
K. Philip (says he) Te in te appello, to Philip waking from Philip sleeping.
Such sleepy Judges love darkness, and the deeds of darkness, more then light.
But as their ears must be open yet they must open but one at once: With the
Grecian Monarch they must stop up one, while the Plaintiff is objecting; and
leave it free not prepossest when the Defendant makes his Plea: For this cause
too as a Magistrate has two ears to hear both sides speak, so he has but one
tongue to pronounce single judgment: To which he must come impartial and
unpraejudicate. Remember that Gods law was wrote in Tables of Stone, not of
Leather or Parchment which would stretch wider, or contract narrower? His
Command Thou shall not steal, takes in as well Alexanders royal pillaging Navy
as a poor fly-boat of a single pick-aroon. Such corruption of the laws Severus
complained of, (...) (says he) he that steals much to enable him to give a
little, makes a bridge of gold for his own escape. I press this the more,
because all the guilt of a malefactor is contracted by that Judge who takes
cognizance of it, and lets it go unpunished. Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest,
jubet: That Magistrate that consents to a thief, is himself a robber, and he
that winks at an adulterer lets in that foul Devil at his closed eye. Bitter
was that reply of the malefactor who being asked of his judge, who was
accessory to his felony? Thou thy self (says he) for had thou trusst me up
for my former, I had not lived to commit another: which leads me my Lords to
your second capacity as you are Gods you must execute wrath on evildoers, you
must spoil the spoilers. And here you have need of Hercules his strength to
cleanse another Augaean stable. This age has furnished us with (...) (as the
Comaedian calls them) gulfs and whirlpools of rapine and oppression: But since
his royal Majesty has thrown a mantle over them, not such an one as Ahasuerus
the Persian did over Haman a token of condemnation but of pardon and
absolution, I will not uncover their nakedness: but leave our spoilers to Gods
plentiful reward at the last account, if they do not before that time make
satisfaction for their extortion and violence: Let it suffice your Lordships
with a Calendar of such criminals as have in other places, or may come before
you here: or rather the prophet Hosea shall do it for me, Hos. 4. 2. They brake
forth into swearing, and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing
adultery, and blood touching blood: And well may I call those criminals which
are guilty of these, because for such sins as these the Land has mourned; and
if they be not removed or cut off by the hand of justice, the Land shall mourn
again, and the inhabitants thereof shall languish. Yet, all this while, God
has but a controversy with these sinners, he will implead them, and proceed
judicially against them; But in the fourth verse there follows a sin, that
stops Gods plea, that he will no more take pains to convince them, but give
them up to an obdurate sense: Let no man strive nor reprove another says he,
for the people are as they that strive with the Priest. So near relation
betwixt God and his Vicars, those which are laborers in his stead, that they
that rob them of their Tithes and Offerings, rob God, Mal. 3. 8. They that
strive against Aaron, are gathered together against the Lord, Numb. 16. 11.
Tremble then thou Theomachus, that dare fight against God in his holy
Ministers, dare fight against God in his holy Ordinances: God will take no
pains to reprove thee: he will give thee up to a reprobate mind: Thou art one
that strivest with the Priest: thou art one of those that castest him out of
the Synagogues: Nay (to make up our Saviors prophecy) thou think thou do
God good service if thou killest him. And truly my Lords, this is onerosa
prophetia this is the burden of the Land that by a pretended kind of Saintship,
men entitle God to the Devils cause, they think they do the Lord service, by
killing his servants, and as if his kingdom were divided against it self, they
fancy that they set up the Scepter of Christ by pulling down his anointed: Thus
was it in St. Peter's days if any man suffered, as a (...) a bloody cutthroat,
or a (...) a thievish felon, or a (...) a spoiling plunderer, or an (...) a
Bishop in another man's Diocese, a Sequestrator in another living, it was
voyced abroad to be suffering for the name of Christ. And if your sword of
justice should cut off any such ulcerated gangrain'd member the congregation of
these Saints would be ready to murmr against you as they did against Moses
and Aaron, Numb. 16. and say, ye have killed the people of the Lord. But
remember, I beseech you Jehoshaphats instruction to his Judges, 2 Chr. 19. 6.
Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man but for the Lord who will be
with you in judgment: Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take
heed and do it for there is no iniquity with the Lord, nor respect of persons
nor taking of gifts. Arise therefore up and be doing and the Lord be with you.

Hypocrisy unmasked, THE SECOND SERMON.

Preached at the Assizes at St. Edmunds Bury, March 4. 1660. At the request of
Sr. John Castleton Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of Suffolk.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1661.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.
THe Context will tell you that these words are part of the description of
those men who should cause perilous times in the last days: Which days
although a learned Paraphraser contends to be all one with St. John's (...) 1
John 2. 18. the last hour before Christ's coming in vengeance to destroy his
enemies the Jews: an hour which of all the Disciples St. John only lived to
see; and so they have a more immediate aspect upon the Gnostics those early
debauchers of Christianity, and persecutors of true believers; upon which
account this faithful steward of Gods House St. Paul arms his son Timothy with
a double premonition, both here in this Epistle, and Chap. 4. ver. 1. of the
former: Especially seeing Phygellus and Hermogenes, and other Asian Bishops
were poisoned with this Heresy, 2 Timothy 1. 15. and the false Doctrine of
Hymenaeus and Philetus had like a gangrene infected the body of the Church, 2 Timothy 2. 17. Yet all this seems to be but a partial truth. For sixteen hundred
years since that time past, may well entitle us to latter days; and the
difficulties which the professors of pure religion encounter with, may well
inform us of perilous times: and the names by which the Churches enemies are
described here, may well assure us that they are (...), coaetaneous,
contemporaries with our selves. That we may therefore the better know them and
so avoid their company (as St. Paul advises here From such turn away) let us
take a short view of their persons and so (...): (as in a glass) behold the
Characters of them which bring upon us these perilous times.

First, you have (...) lovers of themselves, men of self interests to preserve
which they will sacrifice the peace of the Church and State not remembering that
they themselves must perish in the community.

Next come your (...) your coveteous persons, such as make a gain of Godliness:
the Demetrius's of this age which cry up Diana of Ephesus, any heathenish
religion whatsoever, if they may be the silver smiths to make her shrines.

Then follow your (...) boasters, circulatores (if you please) Mountebanks, for
so the Etymologer says the word signifies quasi (...), following their master
Satan's trade, and going to and fro the earth, as your itinerant Preachers do,
who glory of their Proselytes and can tell you the instant and occasion of the
conversion of their auditors.

Next are your (...) proud men; such as look over other men's shoulders, as
Corah did over Aarons, that they may appear the heads of the faction: poor
inferior brambles which will burn down the Cedars and all the lofty trees, and
the Olives and all the fruitful ones that they may be Kings over the wood.

Then are (...), blasphemers: the word signifies to hurt by speaking, and the
Scripture tells us but of two persons that can be blasphemed, that is God and
the King. Now although God be above the reach of malice, and the arrows which
they shoot upwards will fall upon their own heads, yet cease they not to bend
their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words, Psalm. 64. 3. they will
murmr against the Lord and Moses, and blaspheme God and slander the footsteps
of his anointed.

Next are (...) disobedient to parents, and if we speak of natural Parents
has not our Saviors prophecy been literally verified amongst us? Mat. 10.
21. That the Children shall rise up against their Parents and cause them to be
put to death? If of Political, have not they spoke evil of dignities and
cursed, made an Anathema of, devoted to execution the Ruler of the people? if
of Ecclesiastical, how many cursed Cams has our Church bred who have made a
sport at their fathers nakedness, such as have been (...) indeed, unperswaded
by them for should they dare to reprove them, they have but seemed like men
that mocked, and they have more then seemed to mock them back again.

Then have we (...), unthankful men which have not prised the great blessing
of peace and plenty, with which the nation has been enriched; but grown weary
of a calm, have hoped to fish more successfully in troubled waters.

Next follow the (...) unholy; which in the general latitude of the word has
so far overspread the nation that we cannot pitch amiss: But by a peculiar
gloss the Scholiast interprets it coram quibus non fiunt (...) such as will not
be present in the holy assemblies, nor join with Gods people in their public
services.

In the next verse are your (...), without na^tural affection; breaking that
bond which unites even beasts and birds to one another: whilst a man's enemies
have been those of his own household.

And then your (...), truce breakers; for indeed nothing is sacred or
inviolable with usurpers, which consists not with their own profit. But yet the
word has more in it, and comes from (...) privativum, and (...), not to admit
of a sacrifice, nullamlibationem facere, not to pour out wine; and how many
places have we known which in this sense have been (...), no breaking of bread,
or pouring out of wine in the blessed Sacrament for many years

Then follow (...), false accusers; which suggest false insinuations against
their brethren, as Satan does who is the accuser of mankind: for which cause
they are branded with the Devils own name in my text.

Then come (...) the incontinent (so we read it) from (...) and (...) to have
no power of subduing a lust; so difficult is the work of mortification that
every child of God finds it as hard, by his own strength, to kill, as it is to
raise to life, to conquer a lust as it is to quicken a grace. But the word may
as well signify intemperate, from (...) and (...) not to mingle water with
their wine as the practice in those hot Countries was; but to drink merum non
dilutum, strong wine to intoxicate; and if this do not concern us what mean
those (...) noonday Devils which stare the Sun in the face with countenances
as red as he?

Next follow (...), fierce men; such (as the word imports) as are always
clouded, who bury their faces with their eyebrows, and never suffer the day to
break in a smile there but by their sour looks discover that they are plotting
of the hidden works of darkness.

What should I speak of the (...) which follow, the despisers of good men? It
has been Satan's policy in all ages of the Church to discourage professors, by
throwingupon them contempt, and disgrace to make them weary of Gods service.
But what need we dive into Church History for that which these last days have
too abundantly verified? wherein the purity and legal establishment of Gods
public worship has been branded with the odious names of superstition and
profaneness.

The fourth verse begins with those who are proprii quarto modo to this present
age, (...) Traitors; the word properly bears it of such as give a largess
before hand to corrupt or betray a trust; which in Iudahs's case was called the
price of innocent blood. And in such a case the receiver is as bad as the
thief. Thus the Jews bought our Savior, and thus we know who did their
Sovereign.

It follows, (...) heady, or headstrong men; which fall rashly upon any
enterprise without counsel or deliberation; impetuous men whose rash fury is
the rule of all their actions

The next are (...) high-minded (we read it) but it is a word of more acute
signification, and comes from the theme (...) smoke and so by a fit Metaphor
decyphers such as having kindled a fire of ambition in their breasts which is
blown up with the bellows of pride, it sends up fames and vapors out of their
mouths, which like smoke smutch and blacken all that stand about them, till at
last they vanish into the air and signify nothing. Such a fire as this the two
hundred and fifty assembly-men kindled, upon their unhallowed censers, which
smutched Aaron and the Leviticall order, and puffed them up into a conceit,
that they had as much right to the service of the sanctuary as any that had a
lawful call, I need not apply it.

The last that shut up this Paraphrase are (...) lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God; such are all carnal sensual voluptuous livers, whose God is
their belly, and whose glory is their shame. And all this while you will
believe that you have met with your contrymen, such as are bone of your
bone, and flesh of your flesh, If any think that we have taken too long
acquaintance of them, it is because they are so near of kin to those that
follow in my text, who are best made known by their companions, they have a
form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof.

The text is an Enantiosis a setting of contraries in opposition; and here is a
double contrariety; First, of the Object there is (...) a form of Godliness
opposed to the (...) to the power thereof. Secondly, of the Subjects, of the
one they are (...) they have the form, of the other they are (...) they deny
the power. In my Method I shall endeavor to comply with the weakest capacity
here present, that so I may not fall under the reproof of the text in seeming
to have a form of Godliness in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but denying
the power thereof in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit. I shall
firstendeavour to clear up the words by explaining to you what is meant by
having a form of Godliness, and what by the denying the power thereof.
Secondly, I shall make it manifest that in the School of Christ there be many
Nominals which are not Reals. Many pretend in show which fall short in
substance. Thirdly, I shall bring all home to our selves by application.

1. Then, this (...) this form of godliness signifies nothing else but a show
and a pretense and is opposed to (...) the power thereof, not otherwise then
species and res, among Historians, the semblance and the substance; as a face
in a glass has all the lines and figures and features, but handle it, it is but
a shadow and has no body. 'Twas but the reflection of the Moon in the water
which the fool thought his ass drunk up, when a cloud interposed between the
body of it and the earth: Such pretenders to religion Ignatius calls (...)
dissembling actours of devotion, not real Christians: such are the decoys in
religion which the Devil sends abroad to bring others into his net. As Iehu
boasts to Iehonadab of the uprightness of his heart. Is thy heart right, says
he, as my heart is with thy heart: And then birds of a feather must fly
together: up into his chariot he takes him to see his zeal for the Lord of
hosts: But alas! 'twas his own secure establishment he sought, by cutting off
all Ahabs posterity: for notwithstanding his specious industry in killing all
Baals prophets, he forsakes not the golden calves in Dan and Bethel, and takes
not heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel: Critics interpret (...)
by (...), which properly signifies the fashioning of the mouth to speak or
pronounce a word or dialect. Thus there are those which can get (as they
account it) the tone of Saints and speak demurely, they will avoid the language
of Ashdod, and counterfeit Jacobs voice, but look to their actions and they
have the hands of Esau. Such as these our Savior mentions, Mat. 7. 21. They
have got his name very perfect, Lord, Lord, say they! they double it with much
seeming zeal and devotion: nay they plead they are gifted brethren too, they
have preached or prophesied in his name and have done many wonderful works
(...) many works of power; besides their (...) they have (...) too, such works
as made all their proselytes stand and admire them; yet Christ will profess he
never knew them because they work iniquity, they do not the will of his Father
which is in heaven.

And this leads me to the second word (...), what is meant by the power of
Godliness: which is nothing else but the energetical force and virtue of it
exercised in our lives. 'Twas said of Zeuxes that he drew so lively a picture
of a boy, with a bunch of grapes in his hand that the birds came and pecked at
them: but he in discontent threw it into the fire, saying if the boy had been
as lively drawn as the grapes those fowls of prey durst not approach so near
it. Thus we may abound with fruit very lively painted, but the birds of prey
the prince of the air will peck it, if we have not life in us, the life of
righteousness to defend it. For indeed it is this (...) this principle of power
which does distinguish between a dead carcass and a living man. Our Savior
compares Hypocrites to painted sepulchers beautified without, but within full
of rottenness. We may seem all fair and polished Marble, to have Angels and
Cherubs in our faces; but without this lively faith, we are but the Skeletons
of religion, full of dead works: We are but like Ezekiels valley full of dry
bones, until we have this (...) this principle of life within us, this power
enabling us to present our bodies a living sacrifice unto the Lord, Romans 12. 1.
By their fruits ye shall know them, says our Savior, speaking of Hypocrites,
Mat. 7. 15. which are Wolves in sheeps clothing: There Is enough of (...), the
show, they have dressed up themselves like actours. There Is (...), they are in
sheeps clothing. But there wants the (...) they bear no fruit. The barren
fig tree had life and sap in it, and flourished with leaves luxuriantly, or
else Christ would not have expected figs upon it; yet because it was barren, it
was cursed: cut it down why cumbreth it the ground? It is not the pleasing
verdure of leaves, nor the promising candor of blossoms will serve the turn:
If there be no fruit, nay if there be no good fruit, no fruit of righteousness,
there wants the (...), we are barren; and if barren we are no better then dead
in Gods esteem. Cut it up why cumbreth it the ground? As Pythagoras, when any
of his Scholars had forsaken his School, the School of virtue, had a (...), an
empty hearse carried about the streets, and in a solemn pageantry they mourned
for him. Do thou see vice triumphant marching top and top gallant, set out
with all its trickments and gayetyes and enticing any of the sons of wisdom?
O! think thou see an hearse carried before thee; such an one is dead, he is
departed; (...), weep for him as for the dead: whatever (...) whatever show he
makes he wants the (...) there is no principle of life within him. And thus am
I fallen upon my second part before I am well aware of it, that in the School
of Christ there are many followers which are no Disciples, many pretenders to,
which are no practisers of Christianity: Many which have a form of Godliness
which deny the power thereof.

For indeed, holiness is so beautiful, that whosoever looks upon it must fall
in love with it, and the Commandments are so just and good that we should fall
from the reason of men if we did not approve of them; which makes the worst of
men put on (...), a show of goodness if not to please themselves, yet thereby
to make themselves the more welcome and gracious to others; For this reason
Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light, that he may the more
successfully practice his deeds of darkness; And the firstborn of Satan, Simon
Magus, styled himself (...) Act. 8. 10. the great power of God, when he spoke
of that power by which he practiced sorcery and enchantments. And I doubt not
but Iannes and Iambres (which follow here in this chap.) pretended to as divine
a virtue, although they withstood Moses and resisted the truth, or else they
could never so effectually have hardened Pharaohs heart. As for those that dare
sin with a witness, and stare heaven in the face whilst they boast of their
impieties, they do more then the works of their father the Devil: for that
Prince of the air casts a cloud before his black actions: his very thunder has
some lightning: but these hasten upon themselves the day of judgment, and they
themselves bring to light their own hidden things of darkness.

Yet though virtue be so admirable and attractive, she is seated on so craggy a
rock that it is hard to climb to it: It Is a very narrow gate opens to her
palace, and we must strip our selves of all our encumbrances how gay or brave
soever they are, if we would crowd in there: The Camel must take away the bunch
of his back if he would enter the needles eye. The young man in the Gospel with
many possessions must sell all that he has and give to the poor, if he would
follow Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

Nay further yet, the most indeared affection, the most darling lusts must be
rooted out, the right eye must be plucked out and the right hand must be cut
off, or we shall find no entertainment there; And this makes us unwilling to
be at the charges to purchase real goodness, if we can but wear her cloth, or
be of her livery it is sufficient. Let poor distressed and despised creatures
the filth and of scouring of all things (...) and (...), such as have lived to
be weary of all things, and all things weary of them, let such begin the work
of mortification, and crucify the world unto themselves with the flesh and the
affections and lusts: Let us enjoy the earth, and the fullness thereof, which
God has given to the sons of men; and shall we neglect these gifts of God?
shall we endanger our selves by a perrillous wading over Jordan in hopes of an
inheritance in Canaan, when the fruitful plains of Gilead are before us?
poteris tutius esse Domi. It Is better to enjoy the creature, and keep a good
house, which may beget the repute of hospitality, and set the poor on work
although thou pay him small wages besides the bread of affliction, and keep a
Chaplain (like Bias's fatted mule) whose looks have religion enough for all the
family; and build Hospitals that men may see thy good works, and so perhaps be
incited to glorify thy father which is in heaven. This is much a cheaper way
to keep our gain, and yet make a fair show too, without contending so eagerly
and desperately for the power of Godliness.

Add to all this, that this (...) cannot be obtained, without encountering with
(...) powers that will over power us without the Almighty power of God to
support and back us. Even Principalities and powers and rulers of darkness in
this world, and spiritual wickednesses in high places. And this potent enemy
has scaled our battlements, this strong man armed has got possession of the
house, he has seized upon the cinque ports of our senses and there gives the
word of command, and orders all our actions: Nay he executes and performs them
himself, he does (...), the spirit works in the children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 2. 2. He sees in our wanton eyes, he hears with our itching years, he
tastes with our curious palates. And turpius ejicitur, he knows its more
disgrace to be dispossessed and thrown out then never to have gotten possession;
Therefore when a stronger then he comes, even the power of God to set up this
power of Godliness, he fortifies himself with all his might and loses by inches
what he has gotten* Sometimes perhaps he sets up Gods colors on the wall, a
from of Godliness, but it is but to betray others and to make them believe the
city is not taken, when indeed it has no (...) no power at all.

Besides all this; consider how agreeable sin is to our corrupt nature, there
is (...) says the Apostle, Heb. 12. and the 1. sins which do easily beset us;
which find many plausible pretenses to ingratiate themselves with us: Nay some
which are dressed up so like unto virtue that we our selves cannot distinguish
between them, some that get into the train and the retinue of Godliness, as
hatred to our brother attends upon zeal to Gods honor, vain glory waits upon
hospitable charity. So that when we open to entertain the one, the other too
often creeps in with it, which make a Christians life checkered, Sables and
Argent are quartered together. Seeing then, that malum est ex quolibet defectu,
bonum non nisi ex causis integris, whatsoever is good must be entirely so, when
any evil circumstance is enough to deprave an action and weaken the power of
Godliness, no marvail if throughout the world we see so much show and so little
substance.

And truly most men make it their work to live up to opinion, not to reality.
They come unto thee as my people comes (says the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33. 31.) and
they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not
do them. They come, and sit, and hear, here is formality enough; and thus far,
we are for them: And yet they are not Gods people: And would to God all would
follow them thus far? There are too many amongst us that will not sit, as Gods
people sit, with reverence and adoration and fear before the Lord their King.
Marlorat interprets the Formalists in my text by a Metaphor fetched from images
and idols, which have the (...) the resemblance, but want the (...) the life of
what they represent: which have eyes and see not, which have ears and hear not:
But these do sit and hear, that is the voice of man, with the ears of their
body, not the voice of God with the ears of their soul. Indeed we live in age
when (...), the whole body of devotion and religion is hearing; like Pliny's
monsters whose ears cover all their bodies. It is worth observing here that the
Prophets complaint is not, they kneel and pray, but they sit and hear: although
I know there is too much formality even in our devotions too: yet because Gods
house is emphatically called an house of prayer, a devout deportment of our
body there carries much of good example with it: were it they sit and pray,
they would find too many followers amongst us; who dare present themselves
before God in our most sacred and mysterious parts of public worship, in that
unmannerly posture.

Our Savior forwarning us of the practice of Hypocrites (which are chiefly
designed here) in reference to the duty of prayer, Mat. 6. 5. describes them by
two notable circumstances; The first is peculiar to them, they pray standing in
the Synagogues or public assemblies; The second they borrow from the heathen,
in using vain repetitions and many words: And has not this age justified their
practice? where kneeling in the Church of God has been changed to standing
(...) in comitiis, in assemblies and committees; where tautologies of Lord,
Lord, have been repeated as long as Baals worshippers cried out, O Baal hear
us! 1 King. 18. 27. from morning unto noon. Mistake me not; I know a devout
repetition in public prayers does inflame our devotion: but to lay hold of the
sacred name of God till they can take surer footing and know what to speak
next, if this be not (...), I confess I know notthemeaning of the phrase. The
next duty which our Savior pitches upon, is that of fasting ver. 16. and
although the adjunct to Hypocrites there (...) of a sad countenance be fully
made up in our (...) our fierce men (as I lately interpreted the word) yet
Isaiah leaves these religious duties more directly at our doors, Chap. 58. ver.
4. ye (fast says he) for strife and debate and to strike with the fist of
wickedness: We may all remember what horrid murders and prodigious rapines,
have been ushered in by this religious pageantry: so that if once they came, to
an in nomine Domini a seeking of the Lord: the people were taught to expect an
inundation of mischief overwhelming them.

It were no difficulty to run a parallel between Hypocrites practices and our
own, in all those circumstances mentioned by our Savior: But in one we do
apparently fall short of this (...) of this show of Godliness, even of the
Pharisees themselves; For they* hold it as a tradition of the Elders, not to
eat, nor drink, nor sacrifice, with unwash'd hands; which was so general a
practice among the heathen that I find (...) washing the hands in Lycophron,
put for (...) for sacrificing: But God knows, we do too often approach Gods
altars without washing our hands in innocence: nay (...) (in the Poets
language) besmeared with gore and blood: as if we were going to lay a bloody
sacrifice upon Gods altar. And indeed so great enemies to innocence are we
grown of late that we cannot endure any thing that is a badge of it: A Surplice
affrights us more then garments rolled in blood: And if any Minister now should
(...) (a custom (says the learned Grotius) among all nations, for those that
officiate in holy offices to be clothed in white) I say, if any should appear
like the angel at our Saviors sepulcher, Mat. 28. 3. with raiment white as
snow; we are ready to cast dirt upon it, and make it as black by our reviling
as the Prince of darkness; as if the power of Godliness consisted in opposing
all shows and appearance of it.

The ambition of Satan at first was to be like God: Now although he has lost
his happiness, yet he retains his vice still, he is as ambitious as ever to
appear to be like God. The sons of God cannot present themselves before the
Lord, but Satan will crowd in amongst them, Job 2. 1. And this Prince of
darkness will work as wonderously in his new lights, as Manoahs angel, did in
the flame, Judge. 13. 19. Eusebius tells us, that Simon Magus the first
Antichrist, appeared in all power and signs, and lying wonders (...) doing
strange miraculous works by the power of the Devil; So that he was reputed a
God, and had a statue erected to him by Claudius in Rome with this inscription,
Simoni magno deo, to the great god Simon. And no wonder that superstitious Rome
should do this, when even in Samaria where a Church was now planted, he was
called the great power of God, Act. 8. 11. Nay (...) (says Eusebius) the
principal God, as his strumpet Helena was (...) the first cogitation, the first
Minerva of this Jupiter: This great Impostor to make his enchantments gain
credit without control, makes a show of Christianity, was baptized by Philip,
and desires to buy from the Apostles the power of the Holy Ghost: Nay boasted
(says Irenaeus) quod in ge^tibus quasi spiritus sanctus adventaverit, that he
had appeared as the Son amongst the Jews, that in Samaria he appeared as the
Father, and in other nations came as the Holy Ghost. And truly although the
works of the spirit differ from the works of the flesh, as much as heaven and
hell, as much as light and darkness, yet many times they are dressed up in such
properties that they aremistaken one for another: How often does sensual lust
mask it self under a pretext of love? voluptuousness be reputed joy? carnal
security be accounted peace? a waiting for a more sure and severe revenge be
called longsuffering? (...) Tiberii a politic declining, nay weeping to accept
that which we do most ambitiously affect (as the late Usurper did his
Protectorship) be esteemed meekness and moderation? But however we may be
deceived, God is not mocked. Whatever outward adornments there be, there is an
(...) a man within, a hidden man of the heart; which God sees, (...) it is the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is precious in Gods sight, 1 Pet. 3.
4. For however the leaven of the Pharisees which is Hypocrisy may puff up some
and make them swell; a Christians virtues must be like his charity, good
measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over. In a word to the form
of Godliness he must add the power thereof.

Hitherto we have shot at rovers; let us now take aim in the application, and
see whom this Doctrine hits. And here give me leave to free my text from the
injuries of those who make it a Mount from whence they b^tter all Christian
Liturgies and established services of the Church; and very zealously (without
knowledge) from hence rail at all forms of Godliness, as if they were
inconsistent with the power thereof: sure if the study of the Oriental tongues
had not made these Rabby's forget Greek and all politer learning they would
have known that there is a vast difference between (...) a form or an
appearance, and (...) a form or established order: But indeed, by mistaking
this (...), they have brought in a strange Metamorphosis, a confusion and
disorderly transformation in the Church of God, crying out of Babylon, they
have builded another Babel where hearts and minds as well as tongues have been
divided in Gods service: whilst one is for a powerful Paul, another for an
eloquent Apollos, another for a confessing Cephas, who is for Christ? For
Christ is not divided, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Nor must his service be. For Christians
must endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4. 3.
I should write Iliads after Homer, should I go about to plead for that
excellent and devout form of worship established in the Church of England,
which has found such eminent and learned assertors, both in the last age and
this, that should I presume to add any thing, I must needs make it go less, and
derogate from it by falling short of what has been published by others. Only
I beseech those men which are oppugners of all set forms, seriously to
consider, that since the first Chaos of confusion when darkness covered all,
nothing has been or can be absolutely without a form; not an unlick'd bears
whelp, not their own conceived ex tempore prayers, not their very directory but
has a kind of form such as it is: And I dare appeal even to the interested
parties themselves whether such forms as are shuffled together by chance, or
such as are most refined and polished, do best become the beauty of holiness.
Add to this: who prays most believingly and with a fullest assurance of
obtaining what he prays for? whether he that has deliberated upon, and
pondered with his heart, the petitions which he offers with his mouth, or he
who must either by an implicit devotion give assent to all that comes from the
mouth of a gifted brother; or suspend his Amen, when he hears any thing that is
inconsistent with reason or the rule of faith? Whilst still the gaping hearers
are as much, nay more stinted by such conceived prayers then they are by any
printed forms before them. So that it is not a form, that can be cavil'd at; but
because it is commanded; when that very command lays the highest obligation
upon us to that form. Obedience (says Samuel) is better then sacrifice, 1 Samuel
15. 22. The Levitical law commanded that the firstling of an ass should be
redeemed with a Lamb: shall we in the contempt of this command, break the
lamb's neck and think that an ass is a more proper offering for the Temple.

When the Temple of Jerusalem had been shut up, and the established worship
forbidden there, whilst the highway religion of Dan and Bethel was only
countenanced, God by the prophet Jeremy in the days of good Josiah endeavors
to reduce these wandering sheep, Ier. 6. 16. Ask for the old paths (says he)
where is the good old way, and walk therein; also he set watchmen over them,
saying hearken to the sound of the trumpet, (that trumpet which was of Gods
appointment Numb. 10.) but they said we will not hearken. And what was the
event, but in the next generation they were swept away in the Babylonish
captivity, much of this story is ours: We have heard the calves of Dan and
Bethel bleat louder then the milch kine which drew the ark could low; and the
trumpets of war have drowned the silver trumpets of the Sanctuary. But now by
the infinite goodness of God, we hear in the days of our Josiah those trumpets
sound again, and this is the tune they sound, Ask for the good old way, and
walk therein. If we like Israelites obstinately refuse to obey this call and
voice of God, take heed of a final captivity, For believe it, Brethren, none
run faster to Rome, then those that seem to make most have from it: And gross
Idolatry may, and (I fear) is then committed when we cry out most zealously
against it. There may be worshipping of imaginations as well as images, and as
they break the second commandment who do worship false Gods, so do they
likewise who worship the true God in a false manner. The one setting up idols,
give them part of Gods worship; the other keeping back a part of that which the
Church requires make idols of themselves.

As for that pitiful objection, that our English service is a collection out
of the Popish ritual or Mass Book; I beseech you know, that there were
Liturgies in the Church of God before ever the Mass had a name or being; and
there was Rome Christian, the Church of Christ, before there was Rome Papal (as
ye count it) the seat of Antichrist. Now when the mystery of iniquity did begin
to work, the old Liturgy was not abolished but interlined and blotted with new
corruptions: which stains being wiped off the frame and body of it was as
beautiful as ever. This then was the work of our most religious reformers, to
melt it down to its first purity, and refining it from its dross, to retain
nothing but either what is Scripture or deduced from it by the opinion and
practice of the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ; which thus
reformed has been signed by the attestation of religious confessors, and
sealed by the blood of glorious Martyrs, those triumphant and undaunted
Vancouriers of our religion who have felt the overflowing joys and power of
Godliness in using the form thereof.

But secondly, in the fear of God, Brethren, suffer a word of exhortation. And
here I beg leave of my reverend brethren of the Clergy, to press this home upon
them. Bullinger is of an opinion, that you are principally intended in this
text, you which are instructers of the foolish and teachers of babes, Romans 2.
20. and have (...) a form of knowledge (the word of my text) Oh labor for the
power of it. Let your lives confute gainsayers. (...), let your lives write a
comment upon your Doctrine; and be an example to believers (as St. Paul exhorts
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 12.) in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in purity. Epictetus laughs at some who were Philosophers (...) (...)
dressed up in their beards and gowns, but uncase them, under that vizard you
should find licentious Poets, debauchers of youth and corrupters of sober
principles. But what need I trace the lives of Heathens? when St. Paul (in the
next words to my text) observes those in the bosom of the Church, who under
this pretense and form of Godliness creep into houses and lead captive silly
women. What use has been made of Pulpit holiness, we all know, where an
opinion of zeal and sanctity once gained has been gloss enough to set off the
foulest and the blackest actions; and they which have seemed most devout on the
Sunday in the work of the Lord, least they should seem to do it negligently the
week after, have dipped their black coats in blood. My dear Brethren, those men
now call you formalists, formalists for your habits as well as your way of
worship. O, shame not your cassocks; be like Simon the son of Onias, Ecclus.
50. make garments of holiness honorable: some of your coats too have had a
tincture of blood, the blood of suffering, as Joseph's had; Oh stain them not,
that at the first sight your father may say, this is my son Joseph's coat:
Remember upon Aarons robe there was imbroydered round about the hem a bell and
a pomgranate, a bell and a pomgranate; the sound of one is good, but the fruit
of the other feeds more. Gods herald ought (...) (...) he must do as well as
speak, or else he is but the shadow of a preacher: for words are but the shadow
of deeds, says Democritus: We know whose motto it is, and from whom he borrowed
it, non magna loquimnr sed vivimus: We do not speak well, but we live well. Let
others triumph in their volubility of tongue and smoothness of language, let
them enjoy the reputation of gifted brethren, and let their mouths overflow
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, As for us, Brethren, Vivamus let us
live Christians, let Gods Commandments be the text, and our lives the Sermons
on it.

The Priest, says our English laws, is daily bound to say divine service,
unless he be otherwise lawfully let and hindered: I confess of late we have had
too great and invincible hindrances: The paths to Gods Temple have been so
overgrown with briers and thorns, that we can hardly hit the way thither now.
The mercies of God under the government of our most religious and gracious
Sovereign, have begun to pave the way again, and opened the prison doors out of
the house of bondage to his service which is perfect freedom, and we hope ere
long the sons of Aaron will learn to attend upon the morning and evening
sacrifice. And will thou so often dare to call upon God by the name of, Our
father which art in heaven, when thy actions speak thee to be the child of
wrath and son of the Devil? will thou say, O Lord open thou our lips, when thy
mouth is used to do the Devils drudgery in blaspheming the holy name of God?
Will thou cry Gloria patri, etc. when thou art plotting and contriving those
things which may most dishonor him? It Is St. Paul's command, 2 Timothy 2. ver.
19. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Sirs
religion has taught us more then barely to name the name, it obliges us to pay
adoration to the holy Name: and shall we imitate the accursed Jews, that bowed
their knee to Jesus, and spit him in the face? shall we tread the steps of the
Tyrant Herod, who pretended that he came to worship the holy Infant when he
intended to kill him. For every scandalous sin which sticks a disgrace upon our
profession, is another stab or wound given to our blessed Savior.

It Is the duty of all men to avoid sin; but the Priest which compasses Gods
altar must avoid the very appearance of evil. When Aristippus was persuaded
once in a frolic to dance at a Bacchanal he did (...), he put off his
Philosophers robe, and put on an effaeminate habit, least his profession might
suffer by his laciviousness. O, Brethren ye have found that there are many
whose daily work is to throw dirt upon you, and make spots in your black coats,
and then (as if those spots were leprous) they have pretense enough to cast you
out of the Synagogues: And that they may kill your names if not your persons
they will write volumes and Centuries upon you. If there be any here that have
outlived such disgraces, make I beseech you, your endeavor to be so eminent in
the exercise of virtue which is truly the power of Godliness, that your enemies
in the gate may see and confess, that whom they called the scandalous, are the
scandalized Clergy.

And yet the Clergy are not concerned alone; the Laity have a share in this
exhortation* Many among you I know there are who are least for form, and cry up
most the power of Godliness. Take heed, I beseech you least what you think to
be the power, be not only (...) a form and bare pretense: We have lived to see
a generation of rebellious people (as Isaiah calls them Isaiah 30. 10.) which
have said to the seers see not, and to the prophets prophecy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits: And hence have we had
so many blind watchmen (as it follows chap. 56. ver. 10.) seers which have
beams in their eyes and yet will be casting out motes out of their brothers, as
our Savior describes Hypocrites: Neglecting the Ordinances, and superstitious
will worship (as they call it) and a cursed neutrality or lukewarmness, and
such motes as these, are knocked down in every Sermon with much zeal and
devotion; but the beams of sacrilege, and rebellion, and murder, have layn
untouched for many years; these have been prosperous and thriving sins and
almost adopted into the number of virtues: Thus do the prophets prophecy
falsely, and the people love to have it so.

But consider it, I beseech you, seriously, that religion ties you up to an
equal observation of all Gods Commandments: And if you find a convenience in
the sixth, seventh, and eighth Commandment, for the preservation of your
persons and your proprieties, all the reason in the world obliges you to
obedience to the fifth, to honor the King, under whom you have that
protection: Consider withal that holiness and righteousness never are
disjoined. And this (...) this Godliness in the text cannot consist without
(...) a sacred adoration and reverence before him, in a religious observation
of his holy days, and awful respect to his holy places, and a reverential
esteem of holy things: Whatsoever is once made an (...), an oblation to the
Lord, such as Church Lands, Church-stock, Church-utensils, leaves the person
that shall so sacrilegiously profane it, an (...) indeed, an accursed person.
And they that thus make much of Godliness, that is, much gain by it, make but
little of themselves: For though they rob God, they cannot rob the Devil, he
will claim his due: he is that merciless servant that will one day take them by
the throat, and claim the utmost farthing. Neither will one single act of
(...), this Godliness, serve the turn: there must be (...) the power of it, a
power of doing it and of continuing so doing too. The lamps of the foolish
Virgins made as great a blaze, and burnt as clear, as the wise ones did. But
they would soon go out, they wanted oil in their vessels. Oh, Sirs, labor to
get oil, the oil of Gods Holy Spirit; labor to fill your vessels, your hearts
the seat of life, your heads the seat of reason, fill up your wills and your
affections with it, so will your light shine before men: This oil will blaze in
your eyes, 'twill be dropped into your ears, 'twill flow out of your mouths:
'twill supple your tongues, that asking you may receive; 'twill supply your
lamps, that seeking by that light ye may find; and it will make glib heaven
gates, that knocking they will be opened unto you. In a word if you thus put
your power of Godliness into a form, and actuate your forms of Godliness with
the power you will proceed from one degree and measure of Godliness to another,
till you be made perfect in that state where there is all form and comeliness,
all power and virtue of it in the highest heavens.

The last use should be St. Paul's words which follow in my text, From such turn
away: Touch not such pitch lest thou be d^filed. But for as much as only our
High Priest has been separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. that is from the
corruption of their manners not the conversation with their persons. For as
much as the wheat and tares must grow together in the field of the world till
the day of harvest, (whatever was dreamed by the Catharists of old, or the
Anabaptists of late,) I shall therefore forbear that, and close all with a word
of concernment to this days solemnity.

And here, ye reverend and learned fathers of the law, I shall be as brief as
the knowledge of mine own weakness, and your worth does oblige me. It may be
expected that out of my text, I should prepare you a Calendar of prisoners; of
such as are proud, blasphemers, disobedient, trucebreakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, traitors, high-minded, heady, and he like. But this were
to tell you what others are, not what you ought to be your selves. And there is
something in the words which does more immediately concern you, which at first
engaged my meditations upon this text. It was said of old, (...) was (...) all
virtues are complectively in justice; and the hinges upon which the two tables
of the Covenant hang, are so jointed and riveted into one another, there is
such a connaturality between holiness to God, and righteousness to man, that
they are inseparable. If so; that exhortation follows as a natural corollary
to my text; Take heed of using a form of justice, but denying the power
thereof. It was the prophetical complaint, of the greatest sufferer by the
malice of Devils and wicked men that ever was murdered since our Saviors
passion, that blessed Martyr our late dread Sovereign L. the King, that his
enemies (to appear more solemnly cruel) would in those greatest Formalities
seek to add (as those did that crucified Christ) the mockery of justice to the
cruelty of malice: For that he might be destroyed as with greater pomp and
artifice, so with less pity, he foresaw that it would be but a necessary
policy, to make his death appear as an act of justice done by subjects upon
their Sovereign, who being sworn and bound by all that was sacred before God
and Man, to endeavor his preservation, must pretend justice to cover their
perjury. And some of us may remember that in those prodigious tribunals erected
in despite of all Law, both Sacred, Common, and Civil, called the High Courts
of Justice, after the nigrum (...), the Clancular Chamber-vote, of who should
be offered up and who acquitted, there followed the solemn pageantry of
bringing the accused person upon the Stage, as if the merits of his cause
should impartially be heard, and he be judicially proceeded against. Ahabs
coveteousness and Iezabels cruelty had appeared too open, and unmasked, had
there not been a solemn fast proclaimed, in which Naboth must be set on high,
and false witnesses sought out to accuse him. And this proved so thriving a
wickedness, that it has been too much practiced ever since. But my Lords, as
you tender your immortal souls take heed of making justice do the drudgery of
private revenge: However ye are called Gods, remember ye shall die like men:
And whilst you live take not Gods work out of his hands; vengeance is mine, I
will repay, says the Lord. It Is Seneca's rule, non ex formula sed ex aequo and
justo judica: the scoles which hang upon the beam of justice are equity and
right: A judge must be swayed by no by-respect: He must be like Melchizedeck,
not only in name the King of righteousness; but in nature too: he must be
(...) without father, without mother, without descent: with Saturn the first
Lawgiver of Crete, he must eat up all his children, not out of cruelty, but
impartiality, he must know no relations.

Plutarch tells us of a Statue of Jupiter without ears: which denoted justice
(says he) which must not be held by the ears by any formal accusation. And
indeed if it were enough to accuse, no man could be innocent. Not an upright
David can avoid false witnesses, which lay to his charge things that he knew not.
But my Lords I am so far from wishing a mutilation of justice, that I pray it
may never want two ears, of an equal size; that the Defendants plea may find
as much room as the Plaintiffs accusation. Let it be quick-sighted too, to
discern what it sees with the eyes, not what it feels with the hands. Let it be
(...) a touchstone to distinguish between gold and dross, not pardon ravening
vultures which bring plundered meat in their mouths and punish innocent doves
which have only sighs and groans to relieve them.

My Lords you sit here now by a full Commission, and can answer to captious
questions of Scribes and Elders, if they shall dare to ask you as they did our
Savior, Mar. 11. ver. 28. By what authority do you these things? and who gave
you this authority? You come not here to publish any Manliana imperia, any
Tyrants decrees, or Usurpers instruments, any Draco's laws written in blood:
You are sent by a Prince whose merciful condescentions have made him less a
King, less absolute, that they may make us more subjects, more obedient. And as
our confidence is that our good Iehoshaphat has sent us judges which have the
fear of the Lord before their eyes, with whom there is no respect of persons
nor taking of bribes; so if you should fail of that trust, you would prove the
greatest traitors of all others, you would pull down that throne which is
established in righteousness.

My Lords the law (of which you are the mouths) is the line and rule of our
actions: Oh, I beseech you (...), remove not the line, do not set it in nearer
to some and remove it farther back from others. 'Twas a severe reproof that
Anacharsis gave to Solon when he told him that his laws were (...) like to
spiders webs which entangled little flies, and sufferd great ones to break
through them. It is an old tradition, that our English Forum, Westminster Hall
is roof'd with Irish wood, which will harbor no spiders. Oh, let not the
floor, the Courts of Justice there be full of Cobwebs, to entangle poor
innocent ignorant wretches with niceties and formalities, which those with
strong backs easily break through. God does so often and so passionately
recommend the poor man's case to your Patronages that methinks in one place he
seems sollicitous, least pity should make you partial, thou shall not
countenance (says he) a poor man in his cause, Exodus 23. verse 3. that is; if
he be querulous and vexatious, and he that dares not steal because of the law,
shall under the cloak of poverty steal by the law, and live by rapine and get
what he can from others, because he has nothing to lose himself: Suidas tells
us of a King of Tenedus who ordained that an Officer should stand behind the
Judges back, holding up an hatchet pointed forward, as well to terrify
vexatious informers and false witnesses, as to let the Judge know that he was
mortal, if he should under the pretense and form of Justice wrong the innocent.

But here, I humbly desire not to be misconceived. I am far from closing with
the Fanatical whimzes of some amongst us who cry out of all forms and legal
proceedings, because grounded perhaps upon Norman customs, or couched in a
language not understood by every high-shoon delver, or whistling carter. That
sad and deplorable inter-regnum (if I may so call it) which we had, when there
was no King visibly reigning in our Israel, but every man did that which was
right in his own eyes, gave us a taste of those innumerable contentions which
would arise by translating the body of the law into the English tongue: when
every man would be Plaintiff, Attorney; Counselor, and he hopes Judge too in
his own case. (...). I reverence those of the long robe, and do know that they
are the best Protectours of our properties, and estates; their abilities smell
of the lamp in those knotty and irksome studies of the laws. But Gentlemen I
wish there were not so many left handed Caelius's among you; whose excellency
lies in palliating a foul cause or blackning a fair one. It Is a common saying
and too much made use of that a bad cause had need of the best Orator, for a
good one will defend it self. And if any thing can stick a disgrace upon the
law it is this; that after equity, and right, and reason have adjudged a cause,
it may be retrived by picking out some punctilio wherein there has been a
miscarriage in the prosecution and formality of it. But remember, that God
stands in the Congregation of the mighty; he stands in it, and over it too
(for so the word imports) he does praesidere, he is president, he is Lord chief
justice: he is judge among the Gods: judges them here, by a secret sentence,
their consciences either accusing or excusing every one: And will judge them
hereafter, when he has arrested them by his Bailiff death: when the Devils
will be Plaintiffs and the Angels Defendants: At that great Assize I mean, when
at the sound of the trumpet we shall all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, and every one shall receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. God fit us all for that account,
etc.

Samuel's Circuit, THE THIRD SERMON.

Preached at the Assizes at St. Edmunds Bury, July 29. 1661. At the request of
Sr. John Castleton Baronet, High Sheriff of the County of Suffolk.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1661.

1 Samuel 7. 15, 16. And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. And he
went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and he
judged Israel in all those places.
THE Government of Gods own people, was at this time committed under him to
Judges; neither so loose, that every man durst do what was right in his own
eyes; nor so strict, that any man did what was right in Gods eyes. A Monarchick
Government it was, where one ruled alone: but whether it was all one with the
Regal, which succeeds in the next chapter, and was differenced from it but in
name; or only a Praecursor, an Usher to it, I will not here determine. God had
run through many changes; from Captains, he had given them Judges, then
Priests; then Judges again: as if he did contrive by experimenting several
forms, how he might best protect them. And now the best of Magistrates, Samuel,
ruled the worst of Subjects, Israel: whether we consider their seditious
mutability and desire of change, in the next chapter; or their idolatrous
worshipping of Baalim and Ashtaroth, in the former: which caused the anger of
the Lord to break out upon them, insomuch that he for sook the Tabernacle in
Shilo, Ps. 78. 60. and suffered the Ark to be captivated by the Philistines:
the husbands are slain, and the wives miscarry, and the children are named
Ichabod: for glory is departed from Israel. 1 Samuel 4. 21.

Yet the Ark (even during the captivity of it) had power enough to triumph over
Dagon, and made those of Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron smart for their sacrilegious
usurpation.

But at Samuels appointment, the people assembled at Mizpeh, and drew water,
the tears of Repentance, from the royll'd fountains of their hearts, and poured
them out before the Lord, and fasted, and confessed their sins: And then the
Lord looked down in mercy upon them, and discomfitted their enemies, who are
(...) thunder-strook, astonished; God thunders upon them with a great thunder:
He sent -- humanas motur a tonitrua mentes: He discharged the Cannon bullets of
heaven against them, which smote them until they were all destroyed. And that
their late Ataxy and confusion might be redressed by the happy establishment of
a settled government, he sets up Samuel over them, who judged Israel all his
days; and went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh,
and judged Israel in all those places.

'Twere too disingenuous to mistrust your application: Mutato nomine de Te --.
This is Englands story; Israel is but our Looking-glass. We have served Baalim
and Ashtaroth, even worshipped our own inventions: we have kicked at Gods
sacrifices and offerings, which he commanded in his habitation. 1 Samuel 2. 29.
We have profaned the service of his sanctuary, and polluted Gods holy
Ordinances. Therefore has our Ark been taken, and our Eli's have fallen
backward and broke their necks: Our maidens have not been given in marriage,
and our women have miscarried, and their children named Ichabod, because our
glory is departed from us. And, notwithstanding that the Philistines have
gotten but little advantage by seizing upon our Ark, for even during the
captivity of it, the Dagon of the times fell down before it: and the
sacrilegious Ashdodites, and Gathites, and Ekronites, who thought to have made
it their own possession, found the hand of God heavy upon them, Haemorroide,
they have voided blood enough; and propensione intestinorum, and well might
they want bowels, who before showed no compassion; And the profane
Bethshemites, who being common persons durst pry into those sacred Mysteries
have been smitten with blindness, a spiritual blindness, for all the pretense
of New Lights within them: yet has it been more then seven months, more then
twice so many years before our Ark could be brought home to Kiriath-jearim, the
house of God. But upon the assembling of the people at Mizpeh, and drawing of
waters; waters either an emblem of their faith, for the forgiveness of their
sins, (as some of the Rabbis say the people cried out here, evanescant pec^ata
mea ut haec aqua, dele peccata mea; let my sins glide away as this water, wash
away mine offenses:) or waters, a sign of humility (as another, Certe nos sumus
coram Te, sicut aqua effusa, Lord we are but like water poured out before
thee:) or waters, e puteo cordis (as the Ghaldee Paraphrase) waters drawn from
the wells of their hearts, in sorrow and repentance before the Lord: I say when
the people fell down and wept before the Lord, God heard the voice of their
tears, and exhaled them into clouds from whence he thundered upon our enemies:
Even by a miraculous power from heaven he confounded them, that we may call the
name of the place Ebenezer, and say, Hitherto has the Lord helped us: He is
lapis adjutorii, the rock of our salvation. And least the thunder that has
destroyed our enemies, might still present black clouds of horror to us, lest
the late confusions of war, should still obstruct our quiet, behold, -- limina
bellicosa Jani Justis legibus, and foro coronat --: He has restored us Judges
as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning. Isa. 1. 26. Even Samuels,
which may go in circuit from county to county and judge the land in all those
places.

The words present you with the first pattern of an itinerant Judge; and in
them consider these three parts:

1. The Judge himself, which was Samuel, whose commission was for life: He
judged Israel all the days of his life.

2. His Circuit: He went from year to year to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh.

3. The Assizes which he kept there; He judged Israel in all those places.
These are the stages through which we shall drive in this hours discourse,
which will not allow us time, to lodge in them, but only to bait at them.

1. The Judge was Samuel: qualified for that dignity after an extraordinary
manner: His extraction was from Elkanah, a Levite of Ramah-Sophim, so named
(says Vatablus) because it was the habitation of Prophets and Seers, and such
as were Doctors of the law. His mother was Hannah, a woman of a religious and a
melting soul who notwithstanding the provocations of her rival Peninnah, (For,
(...) (says the Poet) make (...) a divided bed makes a divided house:) yet
ceased she not, devoutly and constantly, to attend her husband to the solemn
feasts at Shilo, there to beg of God a son, whom she might devote and dedicate
to his Service. A Nazarite she will make him that no rasor come upon his head:
I wonder whence the order of our bald-pate Friars came. The Chaldee Paraphrase,
by adding one Aleph interprets it, no terror shall come upon him; that is, he
shall be free from the commands of men, to wait upon God, whose service is
perfect freedom. And as she was free in promising, she was not slack in
performing, but as God lent her a son, she lent him back unto the Lord, 1 Samuel
1. 28. She restored the petition which God had given her, (says the Targum:)
and whereas other Levites were not admitted to their ministrations before
twenty years of age; She offers him, so soon as he was weaned, to appear before
the Lord, and to abide there for ever, 1 Samuel 2. 18. And he whilst he was yet a
child began to Minister; that is, (says Munster) to study the law, and the
knowledge of God, and to sing divine service, and to play upon musical
instruments; (For such were made use of, in the service of the Sanctuary) being
girt with a linen Ephod (...), with a surplice if you please; besides a little
coat, (...), an embroidered cope, which his mother yearly made him, to wear
upon the solemn Festivals, And I hope these garments were not Popish in those
early days: For thus habited our little Chorister, daily attends upon the holy
Ministrations in Shiloh.

And this was Samuel's employment, all the days of Eli: But when the sins of
the people had devoured their Judges, Hos. 7. 7. when the Ark of God was taken,
and old Eli (like the state of Israel) was fallen backward, and had broke his
neck; Almighty God to prevent the mischief of Anarchy and confusion, calls
Samuel (now grown a man) to a new employment; even to the exercise of public
judicature, which he continued till Saul's investiture in the Kingdom, during
the space of thirty years. Indeed St. Paul in his sermon at Antioch, Act. 13.
21. drawing up a Breviary of the Jewish story, seems to blend both these
Governments together, and assigns 40 years between them: That whereas Samuel
exercising his Prophetical office, had at first governed Israel alone, and
afterward (...), declining under the great burden of years, he joined his sons
in commission with him; after that, by Gods direction, condescending to the
importunate desire of the people, whom he could not dissuade from their
obstinate resolution, he anoints Samuel to be King over them: yet still, as a
faithful counselor, he ceased not to be assisting to him, till his death;
which happened (say the Hebrews) four months before the death of Saul; So that
he judged Israel all the days of his life.

And now the linen Ephod and little Coat is turned to a purple Robe; and the
Stall in Shilo is changed to a Seat in the gates of Ramah, when he judged
Israel; where if we look upon him under two considerations farther, I conceive
the first part of the Text can point at no more: consider him then in his
Individuality, and his Personality: His Individual; he was but one: His Person;
this one was Samuel.

1. He was but one: For God is too much a God of Order, to prepare a government
for his people with a face looking to confusion. The Pythagoreans thought One
to be the Deity, but Two to be the Devil, because it first separates from
Unity. And truly, what ever wild notions some fantastic Commonwealths-men have
found out, to adorn the Babel of their Oceana's, or Utopian fancies; both
reason and experience as well as religion teach us that those frames of
Government stand surest which have but one Basis; those reel most which stand
upon many legs. An unconstant cowardly Christian is called by St. James (...),
Iam. 1. 8. one of two souls, two hearts; As if the more hearts, the less
courage. I am sure the most tottering states, may be called (...); the more
heads the less counsel. Therefore, says the wisest of men, to whom you may add
the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, Prove. 28. 2. For the transgressions of a land
many are the Princes thereof. Princes shall I call them, or servants set on
horseback? such as have spurgalld thispoor jaded Nation, where Ambition,
Rapine, Faction, and the study of parts, has rid us out of breath, whilst the
multiplying the number of our masters, has but increased the baseness of our
bondage. Hereupon the Philosopher, after he had pondred the strength of
arguments on all sides, draws up this conclusion, Ethic. l. 8. (...) Kingdoms
and Monarchies are the best of Governments. But what talk I of Philosophy? when
St. Austin convinces it to be the most natural: For whereas God (says he)
created at first many individuals of all other kind of creatures, as, many
horses, many dogs, many birds, and the like, he made but one man, on whom by
theright of priority all the descendents of that stock must depend. And
Herodian gives this reason, (...), as God alone is King in heaven, so he allots
each particular kingdom upon earth to one particular person. Hand belle
quaedam faciunt duo: Two are too many for some employments; Observe I pray, in
the several changes of the names of the Jewish Government; how God still
avoided Polyarchy and Aristocracy, when Captains, but one Moses in temporals,
one Aaron in Spirituals; When Judges, but one Othniel; When Priests, but one
Eli; When Prophets, but one Samuel: And when for their own ease, they joined
others in commission with them, they presently verged to corruption, and
declined in their reputation. Thus fared it with Hophni and Phineas in the days
of Eli: And good old Samuel found no better success in his two sons Joel and
Abia: For besides the grievance which they brought upon the people, to travel
to one corner of the land, to Beersheba, for judgment; the Elders of Israel
had too just a complaint against them, that they turned aside after lucre, took
bribes, and perverted judgment.

Let no man object (my Lords) that every Circuit now has two Judges, and that
you are of the Quorum of a numerous commission. All your authority flows but
from one fountain: and although the eyes be two, blessed be God, there is but
one head: Your commissions come now from Gods vicegerent our Sovereign Lord the
King: not from that Chimaera, that many headed Fiction: The Keepers (shall I
call them? or) the Goalers of Englands liberties. Not long since England might
have cried out as once the Carians did, (...), Too many Commanders have
destroyed me: But now (...); Blessed be God, that has set his King upon his
holy hill of Sion. And I dare appeal to all sober-minded Christians, in the
words of Abimelech, Judge. 9. 2. whether is it better for you, that all the sons
of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons should reign over you, (and
so many, they say, that fag end of that reproach of Parliaments consisted of)
or that one should reign over you?

But secondly, consider the Person, and this one was Samuel; and this Samuel
was a Levite, bred up in Shilo, where he ministered to God, before he was set
over the people; and yet no scruple was made of the lawfulness of these
concurrent powers: It Is strange that Ecclesiastical persons should by many in
our days be thought so unfit for the exercise of civil power. Eli before him
was a Priest, and so was Phinehas too, and yet he executed judgment upon Zimri
and Cosbi, the two idolatrous adulterers. A thing never quarrelled at by any
nations, Christian or Heathen, before our critical days, when the power of
Churchmen has been suppressed, that Religion it self might be the more easily
prostituted to the spurious fancy of vulgar brains. The Romans thought
Pontifex O. M. was an embellishment of the Imperial titles. Before them, the
Aborigines had both powers concentered in one person, Rex Anius, Rexidem
hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. So had the Graecians in their Lycurgus too. Before
them the Egyptians united them says Plutarch, (...), witness Joseph's
father-in-law, Potiphera the Prince or Priest of On, Genesis 41. 45. Before them,
Melchizedeck, who was King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God. Thus by
Gods own appointment, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. the difficultest cases between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, being matters of controversy, were brought
before the Priests and Levites who must show them the sentence of judgment.
And this was practiced in David's days, 1 Chronicles. 26. 29. when Chenaniah and his
sons, of the tribe of Levi, were set over Israel, for all outward business, in
omni negotio divino and humano (says Vatablus) for officers and Judges. The
same we shall find in the days of good Iehoshaphat, who set of the Priests,
and of the Levites, for the judgment of the Lord, and for controversies
between blood and blood, between Laws and Commandments, between Statutes and
Ordinances, 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. And if the Embassey of the Gospel, be more
honorable then that of the Law, let not the (...) the Ambassadors be more
dishonored. Our Samuels are bred up in Ramah-Sophim too, in the Schools of the
Prophets, and at the feet'of Doctors: And as their education may entitle them
to some talents of knowledge, some (...), so pity it is that they should want
the (...) that they should be excluded those offices, in which they may improve
them. Samuel's first title I know, was to be set apart for the service of the
Tabernacle, and he did not seek his temporal power, by any indirect, ambitious,
or preposterous courses, but being called by God, he judged Israel all his life
time. And if the favor and grace of the Supreme Magistrate (which indeed is
Gods call) shall call any Clergy man, to the exercise of any temporal power;
let us not quarrel at the preferment of a Priest (as in contempt we use to call
them) for in such oblique descants, we glance at the royal prerogative, and
either ty up the hands, or question the discretion of our Sovereigns. And so
much for the Person of Samuel, which judged Israel all the days of his life.

2. We have seen the Judge and his commission, proceed we now to his Circuit:
He went from year to year in Circuit, to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh. Indeed
Josephus adds to the story, and says, that (...): Twice every year passing
through the cities, he sat in judgment there. I confess the temper of the
Jews was so turbulent, and their nature so seditious, that without two Assizes
in the year, their prisons would swarm, and like the College of the sons of
the prophets, be too little for them. Witness those unparalleld riots, which we
read of in the latter end of the Judges, where in the short inter-regnum of
judiciary power, they fall to Idolatry in families, Burglaries in Counties, and
Rapes in cities. And would to God, England were so well tempered, that the
justice and righteousness of the inhabitants did not call for judgment as
often. But the Original is from year to year, whether once or twice is not
determined.

The places whither he went, were Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh. Bethel
signifies the house of God Gilgal Revelation, Mizp. Intention. From whence
Rabanus makes this observation, that judgment in the house of God, is to be
pronounced not indiscreetly, or with a malevolous soul; but as Scripture
reveals, and with a good intention, and brotherly love; and so we must return
to our own house at Ramah, to the closets of our breasts, and there give up our
selves to Meditation. All this is very true, but too much forced: It Is ultra
sobrietatem sapere, to be too wise, in fixing such sense upon holy Scripture,
as the Spirit of God never pointed at. Lyra's short gloss is much more
significant, that he went per loca ad judicandum idonea, to places most fit to
hold Assizes in: and such were these, whether we consider the Situaation or the
capacity of them.

Look upon the site, and you will find Bethel upon mount Ephraim, the navel of
the Country: Gilgal and Mizpeh in the middle of the Longitude, So placed that
Mizpeh was on the west side of the Latitude, and Gilgal on the East: In the
middle, and on both sides of the Country were the Courts of judgment erected.

Again look to the receipt of the places, and ye will find that Bethel after it
was honored by Jacobs pillar, became populous and large: At the return of the
Israelites into Canaan it had a King of its own; and was of so great a strength
that the children of Joseph were constrained to take it by Stratagem, not by
force, Judge. 1. 21. As for Gilgal it was the constant headquarters, where
Joshua pitched his camp: And Mizpeh was the place where all Israel
randezvous'd, to expiate the Idolatry of Baalim and Ashtaroth. They must needs
therefore be large and capacious towns, fit for the reception of all that
repaired to the Courts of Justice there. Appointed no doubt for the ease and
benefit of the inhabitants, whose charge and pains would have been too great,
to have repaired to Ramah, the common seat of judgment. Upon which precedent
no doubt, our King Henry the second by the counsel of his Son and Bishops,
(which was afterward ratified by Parliament authority under Ed. the third)
appointed Justices of Air, justiciarios itineris, that is, Judges itinerant,
to hear and deterwine Pleas of the crown, and pleas between party and party in
the several Counties where the facts are committed: That so the notoriety of
them may appear, and the chargeable attendance upon Lawsuits at Westmin. may
not make men think, the remedy worse then the disease.

And now I should have done with the Places, and the Parallel that is run
between them and us, if I were not assured that there is something Emphatical
and extraordinary in them; to entitle them to the seats of Justice.

Bethel was at first called Luz, Genesis 28. 19. which signifies an Almond, a rod
of which tree God made to flourish miraculously, to show the pre-eminence of
Aaron in the Priesthood. It was by Jacob dedicated to God, and called the house
of the Lord and the gate of heaven, because of Gods gracious appearance to him
at that place. After the return of the Israelites from the Egyptian bondage, it
was set apart for the worship of God: For there was an Altar, and thither went
men up to sacrifice and to pray, even at this very time, as will appear, 1 Samuel
10. 3. by the three men which Saul met there upon that occasion. A place
consecrated, by Gods especial presence and manifestation of himself there;
according to that of the Prophet, in Bethel invenit eum, He found him in
Bethel, then he spoke with us, Hos. 12. 4. Yet Bethel the house of God is made
choice of by Samuel for the seat of justice. Gilgal was remarkable for the
twelve stones, which Joshua pitched there, in remembrance of the twelve Tribes
which at that place passed over Jordan. It is called the hill of fore-skins,
Josh. 5. 3. from the circumcision which by Gods command was renewed there upon
all the children of Israel. There the camp continued till the Passover was
celebrated. Nay, so convenient Quarters it was, that for many years after, even
to the days of Samuel, from thence they began their expeditions, they
randezvous'd there, there they encamped when they renewed the Kingdom to Saul,
1 Samuel 11. 14. Yet in Gilgal in the camp of the men of war is the seat of
justice.

Thirdly, Mizpeh is the place whither the people were assembled by Samuel to
pray for them, and to expiate their Idolatry. And Rupertus is of opinion, that
the waters which the people drew there, had the same virtue which the waters of
jealousy had, Numb. 5. 24. which were waters of bitterness to all offenders
which drank thereof, and caused the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot; and
so discover the worshippers of Baalim and Ashtaroth. Yet even in Mizpeh where
an expiation of Idolatry was to be made, was the seat of Justice.

1. Samuel goes to Bethel, the house of God: The time is come, says St. Peter,
that judgment must begin at the house of God. 1 Pet. 4. 17. Which words,
although they principally reflect upon those persecutions and afflictions which
shall befall Gods people; yet have they an eye to those chastisements and
punishments which shall be inflicted upon offenders within the pale of the
Church. But here I hope neither the Conclave nor the Consistory hear me: should
my voice reach either Rome or Geneva, I should stir a Wasps nest. Which places
although far remote from one another, yet in this case are they coupled
together by the tails like Samsons foxes, with a firebrand of sedition between
them. Most Scholars know, what Bellarm. has wrote De exemptione clericorum a
jugo seculari; so he calls the mild and merciful government of Kings; it is a
yoke, an intolerable yoke, which neither they nor their Proselytes can bear.
Where he ties up the hands of the secular power, from executing judgment upon a
Clerk, though stained with treason or murder, or sins of the deepest die. I
meddle not with those privileges which Christian Emperors and Kings have in
their respective dominions given to the holy Church. Let those that have them,
plead them. But that by the moral or positive law of God, all Clergymen should
be exempt from all civil sanctions, and the coercive power of the Magistrate,
is so destructive to Kingdoms, nay, even to Christianity it self, that nothing
more. It Is that which Christ never pleaded: he paid tribute for fear of bringing
a scandal upon the Gospel, Mat. 17. Nay, he was obedient to the sentence of
death pronounced against him by the secular power, that power which he
acknowledged had that authority from him, which was used to his destruction.
Ioh. 19. 11. He suffered for us (says the Apostle) leaving us an example that
we should follow his steps: 1 Pet. 2. 21. That is, to suffer and to submit; not
(...), to plead an exemption, and then to lord it over others. I, but says
Bellarmine the Pope has exempted all Clergymen, from subjection to secular
Princes, that as to them they are not Princes, nor higher Powers. And I pray
who exempted the Pope? Why, the Canonists will tell you, that Papa est jure
divino direct Dominus totius orbis; the Monarchy, the temporal Monarchy of the
world was absolutely and inseparably given to the Sea of Rome, as a branch of
the Charter, which Christ gave to Peter. Why, but what think they then of the
Apostles injunction? Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.
1. That is, say they, Laymen to their respective Clergy, as sheep to their
shepherds, sons to their spiritual parents. Why, but St. Chrysostom makes
Every soul of a larger extent, and fetches in the Clergy too, (...), etc. Oh,
then by higher Powers (says he) is meant the Pope. Why, but St. Peter
interprets it of secular powers, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme. Oh,
says Bellarmine, Eo tempore valde necessarium erat, diligenter monere
Christianos, ut Regibus obedirent, ne fidei praedicatio impediretur. (I quote
his own words, lest you should suspect that I abuse him.) At that time (says
he) obedience to Kings ought diligently to be pressed upon the people, lest they
should stop the free passage of the Gospel. Let heaven and earth hear this, and
stand amazed. At that time! What, is the eternal spirit of truth become a
servant of the Times? Is scripture become a Lesbian rule, and bowed to our
fancies? But this is the very answer, that a classical Brother gave me, in the
days of Englands rebellion, when I pinched him with those Apostolical precepts,
and asked him whether he thought St. Peter and St Paul wrote true divinity: he
answered that Paul and Peter wrote seasonable doctrine for the times they lived
in; were they alive now, when Christians knew their strength better, he thought
they would change their copy. Thus the Jesuit and the Covenanter, like men
that run in a circle, turn back to back, and run from one another, in a seeming
difference, but never cease till they meet face to face and kiss each other.

But some of the brood of Loyola have met with the best confutation, that is, a
halter; and have found that a cart at Tiburn is but an ill chair to dispute in;
having been justly cut off by those laws from which they pleaded exemption. As
for my Consistorial friends, if they repent not, their brother Guthry will tell
them, they must expect the same condemnation. For they that travel the same
rode, if they keep the same pace must needs come to their journeys end both
together.

Indeed so long as the Lemane lake bounded them, they were to be pitied, not to
be feared; but, cum proximus ardet Ucalegon, it is time to look about us, when
our neighbors house is on fire. If any please to turn over that sober and
modest history of Scotland written by the most reverend Archbishop of St.
Andrews, he will find rebellions even to a prodigy hatched under the wings of
Religion. There Pont dares tell King James and his Council, that they do not
acknowledge them judges in causes Ecclesiastic: which is the cause perhaps,
why our brethren now adays leave that clause of His Majesty's titles out of
their prayers. There will they find the Ministers of Edinborough proclaim a
fast, on a day appointed by His Majesty for a solemn feast; and to detain the
people at Church, three Preachers make Sermon all day long: And we know who
wrote after that copy in England too. In a word (for the raking in this kennel
makes it stink abominably) there Blake audaciously tells the King, that
speeches delivered in the pulpit, although alleged to be treasonable, cannot
be judged by the King, till the Kirk first take cognizance thereof. Did the
Priests of Bethel here put in a Declinator (think you) against Samuel? did they
appeal to the Sanhedrim, or the Schools of the Prophets? No, though Bethel was
the house of God, and so famous that afterward it was made the Kings Chapel,
Amos 7. 13. yet Samuel goes in circuit to Bethel.

But secondly, from Bethel he goes to Gilgal, the camp of war. For of old the
tents of Israel were no sanctuary for rapine or injustice. When Achan had
sacrilegiously stolen the Babylonish garment, and the shekels of silver, and the
wedge of gold, Joshua in the midst of the camp commands execution upon the
malefactor, and all of his stock and lineage, and for a perpetual memory of
the fact, he raises a pillar and named the place the valley of Achor to all
succeeding ages. Josh. 7. 26. That position was not then heard of that inter
arma silent leges, the laws must be hushed where drums and trumpets speak: They
knew they fought to establish peace, which could not be, where right and
justice was neglected. And where should justice whet her sword with more
severity, then where violence and injury may expect most protection? amongst
those, -- quos arma tegunt, and baltheus ambit; belts and buff coats. The witty
Satyrist reckons up all those affronts which a Peasant should meet with in the
Roman Camp, in his time; where one eye durst not weep for the loss of another,
if a Soldier beat it out. And if any one that had two shins, durst adventure
to make a complaint inter tot caligatos, millia clavorum, among so many clubs
and clouted shoes, he should only be heard by a Judge Advocate, in a Court
Martial, where good luck betided him, if his remedy was not worse then the
disease. Which makes our Savior so strict in his advice to Soldiers, Luke 3.
14. That they should do no violence, (...), shake no man. The Metaphor includes
much: neither thresh them by beating of them, nor grind them by oppressing of
them, nor sift them by extorting money from them. For if once it come to a Quod
libet id licet his -- God knows where an armed violence would stop. Which begot
that admirable edict in Cassiodor; vivant cum provincialibus jure civili, nec
insolescat animus qui se sentit armatum, quia clypeus ille exercitus tui
quietem debet praestare paganis. An army ought to be a sword and buckler to the
Country where they quarter. Whether they have obeyed this counsel in
after-ages, some have too sadly found. But blessed be God, who has removed
from us Aquilonarem exercitum, Joel 2. 20. Even the locust and the canker-worm,
and the caterpillar and the palmer-worm; the great army which we had sent
amongst us, which devoured all the fat things of the land. Blessed be God who
has removed that terror, that did accompany the name of Soldier, which is
now a Protection, not an affrightment. Blessed be God who has stilled the
raging of the sea, the noise of the waves, and the tumults of the people, Psalm.
65. 7. Who has shackled venales manus, such as would dispute no commands: Ibi
fas, ubi plurima merces, such as thought good pay, and rich plunder would gild
over a bad cause. Those loyal souls which still are honored with the title of
Soldiers, will no doubt, prove themselves indeed to be the Life guard of their
King. For as Justice supports the Throne, they dare not be so great Rebels, as
by any actions of injustice or oppression to pull it down. They will rather
wait upon our Samuels to Gilgal, then obstruct their passage thither.

But thirdly, from Gilgal he goes to Mizpeh, where was the trial and punishment
of Idolaters. I will not here dispute the case, whether the judgment of
religious controversies, and punishment of offenses belongs only to the civil
Magistrate. I am no Erastian: But this I am sure of, That a man of God came in
his predecessors days to old Ely, and sadly reproves him for neglecting the
uniformity and decency in the service of the sanctuary, which he calls kicking
against Gods sacrifices and his offerings. And Camius proves it, from the
Hebrew Doctors, that this man of God was Elkana the father of Samuel, who no
doubt would have been armed with sharper Rhetoric against his son should he
have gratified a popular faction in their Schism, or Idolatry. For a Magistrate
is custos utriusque tabulae; he is a Judge both in Laws and Commandments,
Statutes and Ordinances, things that concern God as well as man. 2 Chr. 19. 10.
And if any defect can be found in our English Laws, it is this, that they are
more strict to preserve to man his Meu^ and Tuum, then to God his Suum. That it
shall be less hazardous to denyGod (at least consequentially) against the first
Commandment; then the authority of a petty constable, against the fifth: To
worship a horse as the Persians do, against the second; then to steal a horse,
against the eighth: To blaspheme God, against the third; then to slander the
neighbor, against the ninth: To profane Gods Sabbaths and Sanctuaries, in
abusing holy times and places, against the fourth, then to trespass against
man, even pedibus ambulando, by trampling upon his grass, or stepping over his
threshold. Mistake me not: It is not my purpose to give a loose to
licentiousness, or to think a transgression of the second table is but a petty
trespass. I know that without righteousness to man, there is no true holiness
to God, and a religious Rebel is but a gilded Athiest. But forasmuch as the
Poena praesens is that alone, which for the most part strikes a terror to
debauched minds: And practical Atheists, however they have a general notion of
eternity, yet seldom apply it, pro hic and nunc in their particular actions,
to think of the last Assize, when they shall be arraigned before the judgment
seat of Christ, to give an account for what they have have done in the flesh,
whether it be good or evil. And forasmuch, as the the putting to death of one
malefactor causes deeper horror, then the story of a thousand Dives's roaring
in hell: for in the one, we see the ghastly visage of death before our eyes;
whilst the other serves to fill up an empty corner of a stained cloth, where it
is so customary, that profane men esteem it little more then fabulous: Upon
these and many other grounds, sober-minded Christians do wish (My Lords) that
your commissions were enlarged to inquire more for the Lord against Baalim and
Ashtaroth here in Mizpeh. Then should not Atheistical Libertines rant in the
streets; superstitious worshippers of their own inventions should not dare to
separate from Gods public ordinances: profane stabbers of his holy name,
should be indicted of murder, for crucifying again the Lord of Life: the
thriving sin of Sacrilege would find a snare indeed (as the Vulgar Latin reads
it, Laqueus est homini devorare sacra:) to rob God of time or place of worship,
deserves a halter: Rebellious miscreants, which spend their lives in
sacrificing to the Devil, would find such severity of judgment here, that
perhaps, even Poenae formidine, they might be diverted from the evil of their
ways, and not be judged of the Lord hereafter.

My Lords, we have hopes that that religious zeal fills your hearts, which once
touched David's, whose eyes gushed out with water, because men kept not Gods
law. Psalm. 119. 136. And indeed, My Lords, it is time for all to weep, if once
God laughs. Because I have called, (says God) and ye refused, I have stretched
out mine arm, and no body laid it to heart; I will also laugh at your calamity.
Prove. 1. 22. It is time for you, and us, and all the Nation, to draw waters at
Mizpeh, and pour them out abundantly, if once God comes to his subsannabo, to
have us in derision. His frown is not so terrible as such a Sardonick laughter.
He has been graciously pleased once more to turn that laughter into a smile,
and with it, our mourning into joy: He has thundered upon our enemies with a
terrible thunder. But it was not the tears of our repentance, which were
sufficient to raise these storms. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy
Name give we the praise. Our enemies worshipped Ashtaroth: The sins of the
Amorites were full: their guile and hypocrisic, their sacrilege and
bloud-guiltiness, their perjuries and treasons made the wrath of God break out
like fire against them. And now our storms are scattered, I persuade my self
God makes trial whether the Sunshine of his Mercy cannot court us out of those
cloaks, those garments spotted with the flesh, which the blasts of afflictions
could not ruffle us out of: whether our hearts of flint will not be broken upon
the downy beds of mercy.

For let me seriously put the question: Are we men? (...), born to live under a
civil government, such as pretend to honor our gracious King? And shall let
loose the reins to such facinorous actions, as shall provoke God to number and
finish our kingdom? Dan. 5. 26* and cast his Anointed once more into exile,
out of the land of his Nativity? Consider seriously how Samuel threatens the
stiff-necked Israelites, 1 Samuel 12. 25. But if you will still do wickedly,
(says he) you shall be destroyed, both ye and your King. Hear this you
pretenders to Loyalty, who dare fight against God, as well as for your King: ye
are the greatest Traitors to the Crown. Are we Christians? such as took a
military oath in our Baptism, to fight Gods battles, against the world, the
flesh, and the devil? and shall we prove (...), shall we fight on the devils
side, against God? Are we penitent Christians, such as in the day of our
captivity, made many solemn vows and covenants of a better obedience? I do not
mean that Solemn League and Covenant, that covenant with death, Isa. 28. 15.
which was not so truly a holding up of our hands to God, as a lifting up of our
hands against God. But a promise and profession of devoting our selves and all
that God should rescue for us out of the Harpyes talons, to God and to his
service. And is this performed by sacrificing all to Baalim and Ashtaroth, to
Venus and Bacchus, parta meae veneri sunt munera -- to intemperance and
uncleanness, to luxury and profaneness? Pardon I beseech you a just
indignation. Our little cock-boats are tossed on the same waves with the greatest
galleys, and are in danger of shipwreck sooner; we had need look about us, lest
the fluctus decumanus be still behind. Shall after ages say, that they are
made Anathema's, cursed in their cradles, cursed before their nativities,
because their forefathers did not pay their vows? My Lords, you are the
Ministers of God, to take vengeanee of them that do evil; Romans 13. 4. and we
hope and believe that you will not bear the sword vain. We could wish your
power enlarged; yet still you have a power to be a terror to evil doers. I
beseech you, exerite brachia, make bare your arm, strike at profane
libertinisme as far as your swords can reach. And if your adjudging in Mizpeh
will not serve the turn, follow the accursed Agags back to Gilgal, and hew them
there in pieces. Thus have we run through the circuit, and yet have not begun
the Assizes: The last part, he judged Israel in all those places: of which, a
word, and so shall I break up this session.

3. He judged: and how judged he? I answer first negatively: not like his sons,
who did (...), (says Josephus) walk quite contrary to their father, they turned
aside after lucre to take bribes, and to pervert judgment. But secondly,
affirmatively, from his own challenge, 1 Samuel 12. 3. In general that he had
done no injury: whose ox have I taken, or whose ass have I taken? In special
that he was not guilty of Fraud, Oppression, or Bribery. Whom have I defrauded,
or whom have I oppressed, or of whose hands have I received any bribes, to
blind mine eyes therewith? The three first of these have piceatas manus:
Injury, Oppression, and Fraud have birdlime fingers: now a Judge should not be
an Autolicus. The last, Bribery, has manus oculatas, hands full of eyes: now a
Judge should not in this sense be like old Isaac dim of sight, but nimble of
touch. The time does not permit me to enter into a full discourse of these
particulars. I shall only add, that none of these could agree with Samuels
temper: Not Injury, as he was a Man; not Fraud, as he was a Prophet; not
oppression as he was a Magistrate; not Bribery, as he was a Judge.

First as he was a Man enlightened with the noble beams of reason, he would not
be injurious. What if beasts and birds and fishes rob one another? (...), as
the wild ass (says the son of Sirach) is the Lions prey in the wilderness.
Wisd. 13. 19. Man must degenerate into beast, he must be homini lupus, if he
worry and spoil and plunder another. And St. James tells us of a (...), Iam. 2.
8. a royal law that is given us: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Royal, because dictated by that Magisterial rule of refined nature, right
reason: And Royal, because inculcated by our King and Lawgiver, Christ, Joh.
13. 34. And Royal because a Law given principally to Kings and Magistrates, who
should scorn -- quocunque modo rem --. To make the Commonwealth their private
gain: and are presumed to have so much already, that they have overgrown that
root of evil (...) the covetous desire of having more. Samuel did not desire
that he that came to plead at his bar, should bring (...), an ox upon his
tongue, as was said of Demosthenes: that is the first: Whose ox have I taken?
He did no man injury.

Secondly, as he was a Prophet, he knew what the written law enjoined, Levit.
19. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor. The simplicity of those holy
Seers had never learned Lysanders policy: (...), to piece out the Lions skin
with the Foxes tail: where strength was wanting to oppress, there wit should
supply it with a cheat. He did not set traps or lay snares to catch men, Ier.
5. 27. First contrive plots, and then accuse and condemn others for them. In
the next story indeed we find Saul among the Prophets, and he was fraudulent
enough: But the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, and insanivit Saul, Saul was mad:
And many such mad Prophets we have lived to see, who under the cloak of a
sanctimonious life, and a pretense of gifts, have defrauded their poor
Proselytes of their estates, wits, liberties, and lives. But know it brethren:
Satan is never so purely a Devil, as when he appears an Angel of light. No:
Samuel was bred up in Shiloh, and in the causes which he adjudged, he could
appeal to the Law and to the Testimonies. He knew the Lord did abhor both the
blood-thirsty and deceitful man. He defrauded none.

Thirdly, as he was a Magistrate, he would oppress none. He knew their dignity
set them over others, to protect and defend them, not to trample upon them and
oppress them. The fat kine of Basan which dwell in the mountains of Samaria
(says the Prophet Amos) oppress the poor and crush the needy, Amos 4. 1. These
(says Clarius) are pingues proceres, and delicati principes, qui ad ar andum
nihil valent, sed tantum ad devorandum, the well-lined Magistrates, which like
stall'd oxen are fitter to feed then to work. Grotius interprets the Kine of
Basan (in the feminine gender) by the wives of Magistrates who too often give
Law to their Husbands, and abuse their authority to support their own pride and
haughtiness. If once Iezabel be Ahabs instructour, what poor Naboth can keep
his vineyard? Samuel no doubt had a wife, else whence sprung Joel and Abia his
two sons! But she is not once mentioned, in the holy Page, least she should
seem to have a finger in the Government. Thus Melchizedek is called (...)
because his Genealogy is not recorded: So should a Magistrate be (...), he
should know no relations, no bosom favorite, which may grind the faces of
the poor first, that he may come after and eat them up like bread.

We may sadly remember the time, when judgment sprung up as Hemlock (as the
Prophet complains, Hos. 10. 4.) Sicut absynthium vel cicuta, herbs which are
green and flourishing, but taste them, and the juice is bitter poison. What
greater flourishes of equity and impartial proceedings, then in those High
Courts of Justice. But those poor souls that tasted of them, found judicium
amarae mortis (as the Original signifies) the bitterness of death was in them.
And let the Prophet Hosea tell you, when that time was: It was when they spoke
words swearing falsely, in making a Covenant. And what words do you think they
spoke: Even the same that Pharaoh did against the Israelites, Exodus 1. 10.
Opprimamus sapienter, let us deal wisely with them and destroy them: (...) Let
us play the Sophisters with them, (...), there is fraud and oppression both
united. Of both which the people acquit our Magistrate Samuel here: Thou have
not (say they) defrauded us, nor oppressed us, 1 Samuel 12. 4.

Lastly, as he was a Judge, he shook his hands from holding of bribes, as
Isaiah expresses it, Chap. 33. verse 15. The word signifies Volam the palm, the
hollow of the hand, which others who sell courtesies hold out to receive their
gratuities; (...) (a speech too proverbial in taking of fees) This he shook,
which of old was a Symbol of hatred or disdain.

And Judges had need shake off such a viper from their hands, which is of such
a venomous nature, that let it but sting the fingers ends, it presently blinds
the eyes. Even the eyes of the wise says Moses, and perverts the words of the
righteous, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. (...), even wisdom it self stoops to advantage, says
Pindarus. Oh brethren, how much does self interest prevail in the world! What a
persuasive faculty there is in gifts! They do (...); says the Poet, reconcile
heaven, and ingratiate us with all the powers upon earth. What plausible
pretenses the most upright men find to entertain them! They are but the
evidences of a grateful mind; the testimonies of respect and kindness; the
tokens of observance of our loving friends, who either have been benefitted by
us, and then that obliges them to to these returns; or hope to gain a good
opinion of us, by these arguments of their entire devotion to us. And who can
keep his eyes open, when such Sirens charm? Or if any do, it is but one eye, to
look upon the person so well deserving; that, that should look upon the cause,
the right eye, is quite blinded: But Samuel remembered that the people that he
judged lived under a Theocracy: God was their King, he but a viceroy. He knew
that one day he must come to be judged himself, by that God with whom there is
no iniquity nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts: And however justice
may be blinded here, the all-seeing eye of Providence is quick-sighted, and
will at last bring to light the hidden works of darkness: which made him wash
his hands in innocence; and without injury, fraud, oppression, or bribery,
judge Israel all his days.

But longum est iter per praecepta, per exempla breve: All preaching cannot
convince so much my Lords, as your practice. I may spend the time in teaching
facienda, what is to be done: It Is you must apply it faciendo, in doing what is
taught. You see Samuel after his death still prophesies: Eccl. 46. 20. And we
hope he prophesies of our days; that God would raise up Judges like him, men of
integrity, fearing God, and hating coveteousness: which shall go in Circuit to
Bethel and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, from County to County, from City to City, and
judge our Israel in all those places. Wherefore now my Lords, let the fear of
the Lord be upon you, for you judge not for man, but for the Lord.

SACRED HYMNS UPON THE GOSPELS OF THE Hyemal Quarter.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
printer's or publisher's device

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1661.

PREFACE.
READER,
THou art here presented with the Essays of some broken hours: the happiest
means in those unhappy times (when they were meditated) to break our griefs,
and refresh us in our languishments. For they were composed by the waters of
Babylon, where we sat down and wept, to remember Sions captivity: Our harps
were hanged upon the willows in the midst thereof: For when the Sanctuary was
shut up against the established service of God, it is not to be imagined that
we could sing one of the Lords songs there. That were say (our enemies) to
profane Gods worship, with the Imagery of music, and to introduce Heathenish
usages into our Christian Temples. I have always thought holy David as great a
hater of Superstitious vanities as themselves: and yet I have learned, that it
was his daily practice to worship God this way: And if any think that the
burden of the Jewish rites was so heavy, that they had need of music, to cheat
the wearisomeness of their service, (as we use to hang bells in the ears of our
laden horses:) let them know, that the simplicity of our Evangelical worship
admits of singing too, if two Apostles be not mistaken; And if any should
pretend to the Spirit of Revelation, to say that this was meant of Hopkins and
Sternholds Psalms, I would not credit him.

I have often admired at the Prophetic soul of our learned Hooker, who many
years since foretold, that if Puritanism should prevail, it would bring in
Anabaptism with it. We have seen his words made good, with the advantage of
some score of sects besides, which like young adders (fearing some danger) are
crept back into the mouth of the old one and hid themselves. And may they there
find an everlasting tomb, and never come out again, to bite venemously or so
much as to hiss at those which are farther off from Images, then they are from
worshipping of Imaginations.

These odes were prepared for Chamber-musick, which was admirably composed by
that rare son of Art, and Master in his faculty Mr. Jo. Jenkins that when we
might not meet to chaunt holy Anthems in the Quire, devout Christians, might
make their houses and their hearts too, Temples of the Holy Ghost. If any
wonder at their Pindarick numbers, he is desired to know that they were
designed for vocal Music, and best fitted for it by often and uneven
cadencies, which would loose its Grace in equinumeral lines. The Glory of God,
and Service of the Church, is the only aim of

The unworthiest of those that wait at Gods Altars, Tho. Stephens.

1. Sunday in Advent. Mat. 21.
HOly procession! from Mount Olivet,
The King of glory rides in state:
Upon an Asses back he is set,
Passing from Bethpage to the Cities gate.
Ye winde-begotten gennets fly,
And turkish mules stand by.
He that bestrides the Cherubims will grace
The silly Foal of an oppressed Ass:
The glad Disciples spread their robes upon her,
And all the way is straw'd with clothes of honor.
They cast thick branches on the ground,
With which her Temples shall be crowned.
And all the train
Cry out amain,
And make one song;
Hosanna: Hosanna:
Hosanna from the van we hear,
Hosanna's ecchoed in the rear
Hosanna to King David's son.
Collect.
Lord we are silly heavy-laden asses:
But let thy holy Spirit rest upon us;
And cloth us with thy robes of heavenly graces,
Then nothing but Hosanna, Hosanna,
Hosanna shall be heard among us.
2. Sunday in Advent. Luke 21.
PRodigious day! a day of night!
Darkness surrounds the Orb of light.
The Sun his wonted beams forgets,
And muffled up, at noonday sets.
The trembling Moon though wan and faint,
Her paler cheeks with blood does paint.
And all the Stars do sympathise
In The falling sickness of the skies:
Well may the nations roar and shriek,
When sea and waters do the like.
Men's hearts do fail for fear: and why?
Na'ure her self begins to die.
But stay! where thickest darkness crowds,
What glorie's that breaks through the clouds!
Heavens eye did well to wink: 'twas fit:
For such a beam would dazzle it.
It Is he, It Is he: The son of Man
Ten thousand Angels bear his train!
His Trumpets sound so shrill and clear,
That quick and dead the noise do hear.
When Judah's Lion roars, he will make
The beasts of all the earth to quake!
Collect.
Blessed Savior! may thou be thus
Lion to them, but Lamb to us.
Lift up our heads, now draws on
The time of our redemption.
Adopt us thine: Make us thine own,
Joint heirs of promise with thy son!
Lions we know, if we be such,
Will none of the blood royal touch.
3. Sunday in Advent. Mat. II.
What riddle's this? Does John begin to doubt?
Do prisons shut him in and shut faith out?
Or does Christ's Herald with his finger point and say,
Behold the Lamb of God and look another way?
Triumph Herodias! He that did reprove
Thy softer measures (trod to please thy Love)
Now cannot keep his ground,
But he himself turns round.
The people troop to the wilderness, and find
Naught but a reed there, shaken with the wind.
Pardon great Prophet, this false theme
Thy Sacred ashes does blaspheme.
Such temporizing in Kings houses dwells
Not clo^h'd with Camels hair in Hermets cells.
Thou, more then Prophet, did foresee
How thy Disciples faith would die with thee:
Unless the King of life and glory
Would quicken it with a living story:
The blind do see, the lame do walk;
Lepers are cleans'd, the dumb do talk;
Deaf hear, the dead to life are brought;
The poor receive the Gospel taught.
Sense may instruct their faith, and make it clear,
When Nature's at a loss, God does appear.
Collect.
Lord! we are leprous, blind, dumb, deaf and lame:
But thy Almighty power is still the same,
Come Lord, and work another miracle,
Raise our dead souls to life, to heaven from hell.
4. Sunday in Advent. John 1.
IT dawns; the day-star's up, and hasts to greet
The rising of the sun.
The Crier calls; the Court will straight be set
The Judge is coming on.
Strange Crier this
That chose a wilderness
Before a populous town:
Was it because
His Lord and master chose
A manger for his Throne?
Oh no! The Ox and Ass have known,
Their masters crib to be their own:
But man alone
Alas! knows none.
Well suits a wilderness with beasts of prey
When man has made himself more beast then they.
The foolish Jews blind with credulity,
Mistook this harbinger their King to be:
A burning and a shining light was John;
They straightway thought this light to be the sun;
Thus children bow
To the Heralds gilded coat
And do not know
The Prince behind does ow't
John was not the Messiah
Nor was he that Elias,
Nor Moses's Prophet which they long expected:
In power and word, though he
Elias well might be,
And more a Prophet then e're Jew rejected.
Those prophesied upon the earth
He prophesied before his birth.
They things to come did teach,
He present truths did preach:
By faith they saw Messiah to adore him:
But none beheld him clothed with flesh before him
Collect.
Lord! may his shining make us burn;
His burning make us shine in turn:
Let us prepare thy ways by him made known,
And smooth thy paths by making straight our own.
Christmas day. John 1.
THe shortest day has found the longest morn,
Which dawned in Abraham's days but now is born
A day so glorious that the backward sun
Seeing such luster thought his work was done;
And rose so late,
As out of date.
The feathered Quire of heaven, did clap their wing
And tuned this Carol then;
All glory be to God on high, they sing,
Peace and good will to men.
Yet these high-soarers stoop to pry
Into this days great mystery:
When the eternal God in time begun,
The Virgins Maker was the Virgins son.
The King of heaven at's birth
Becomes a Pilgrim on the earth.
The word grows flesh; A Virgin proves a Mother
God-man is one, united both together.
This news first to the Shepherds came
Well might the Shepherds seek a lamb
The Lamb of God; white innocence; yet so
As he is a lamb, he is a shepherd too.
Mysterious truths, time in these changes keep:
The lamb turns Shepherd, shepherds are his sheep.
Collect.
Great Shepherd of our souls; Enlarge thy folds
Let Heathens hear thy Lure:
Keep Wolves and Foxes thence; Be thou our fence,
That we may feed secure.
St. Stephens. Mat. 23.
HOw soon the Heavens orecast! the sun is fled
And hides his glorious head.
The King of Martyrs yesterday did rise;
Now the first Martyr dies.
This is the checkered state of Christians, where
As many blacks as whites appear.
Rare beauty this! in whose sweet face
Blood mixed with white does add a grace.
The stony hearted Jews
Do as they use,
Treating Gods Prophets without love or pity;
Some they do kill,
Others they serve as ill,
With scourges, taunts, and casting out oth' City:
These men of God are things contemned, abhorred:
They truly bear the burden of the Lord.
Ungrateful Jews! requiting ill for good!
From Abel unto Zacharias
The uhappy son of Barachias
This crimson sin
Is still of kin,
And all the Prophets are allied in blood.
Yet blessed Stephen! their forward zeal
To wound thee, teaches them to heal.
They in a ring about thee tread:
This ring's thy Crown of glory:
And all the stones thrown at thy head,
Are pearls to deck thy story.
Thou saw heaven open: their rude blows begin
To pelt thee hence, and make thee enter in.
Coll.
Lord! Let the mischiefs plotted by our foes
Prove our advantage in the close.
Thus shall we bless our persecutours, and
When we are wounded kiss the wounding hand.
St. John's. John 21.
Make room:
And let the friend of the bridegroom come.
Prepare your chaplets, strew the ground
With roses, let the doors be crowned:
But till the bride be decked and dressed,
Let his beloved lie in's breast.
Thou lofty Eagle! who do soar on high
And view the sun with an undazled eye!
Great Prophet! great Evangelist!
Apostle! Doctor! how does Christ
Heap all these offices upon
His favorite John?
And justly: for none of his mind could say
So much as he, that in his bosom lay:
Great Martyr too! for sure he died
Under the Cross, when is Love was crucified.
No; He of all the twelve escaped the Cup
Which they drunk up.
Their faith when Jesus dyed, was at a loss:
Yet they found death by flying of the Cross.
He staid and gave to death a foyl
By taking shelter, where
The Devils arrows did recoyl
And could not wound him there.
Thus he outlives them all; nor could he die
That did partake so much Divinity.
Patmos cannot starve his soul: He feeds upon
High revelation.
Nor can he in a tub of oil expire,
Oil will not quench but feed his fire.
Yet having long maintained the Churches cause
He yields at last to Natures laws.
Coll.
Blessed Savior! inflame our souls with love
To thee above:
So shall we in thy bosom rest
At thy eternal feast.
Innocents day. Mat. 2.
HArk! what a groan
Echoes from Ramah town?
Babes and Mothers shriek together,
Cries confounding one another;
Peace Rachel, peace; thy child will sleep anon;
Sing Lullaby! Alas all comfort's gone!
He soon will sleep eternally, I fear:
The Spear-men have advanced him
And on their pikes have danced him
Poor infant! how he springs
And flings
And clings
About the spear.
Brave Herod! nobly done!
Thy valiant men of war are gone,
To bring home gallant spoils.
A troop of horse will try,
One charge against this infantry,
And their weak mothers wiles.
He will spare none,
Who will not spare his own
It Is better being Herod's swine then son.
Sure he is about
To offer some infernal sacrifice:
Where nothing will suffice,
But blood and milk poured out.
Go pretty babes! go take your flight
In The milky way, that is like you, white:
And to the Angels lisp this story,
Herod mistook you for the King of Glory:
Nor was he much mistaken since
He dwells in pretty innocence.
Your fellow- babe now into Egypt flies
You Have found a nearer passage to the skies.
Coll.
These babes and sucklings Lord, declare thy praise.
Their wounds are mouths to celebrate thy name.
Make their blood milk to us, to feed and raise
Our faith, and strengthen us to do the same.
1 Sunday after Christmas day. Matthew. 1.
What! grown suspicious, Joseph, and afraid
Of false play in the holy Maid!
She is all ice, of such a frozen carriage
It Is wondered she could thaw to thoughts of marriage.
Mark her retirements, view her company:
It Is only God and She
God in her womb, God in her heart,
God overshadowing every part.
Angels, it is true, have been her guests
But knows no other Gossips feasts.
She and Elizabeth the Baptist's mother,
Met to congratulate each other,
And by the way
Stepped in to pray
And pay
Religious duties which she owed
To the temple, when her childhood was bestowed.
Oh fully not her innocence
With giving scope to jealous sense:
Where clouds engender it is the impure air;
But heaven is clear.
Think not of putting her to death
From whom the Lord of Life takes breath.
Make haste to Bethlehem; it is the year,
Augustus tax
Commands each sex
In their own city to appear
There shall thou find a Savior, that comes
To discharge all sums.
Call his name Jesus, it is he
Will pay the price for lost humanity.
Coll.
Sweet Jesus, name of Goodness, name of Power!
A name to which Angels and Men shall bow!
Make good thy Name, and be our Savior:
Sweet Jesus, Holy Jesus, Blessed Jesu; save us now,
And evermore.
Circumcision. Luke 2.
Open the Temple door:
The King of glory eight days old
Shall enter in;
And cast his shine
More rich then Oriental gold
Upon the sacred floor.
The holy pavement turns all ruby, where
The precious drops of his rich blood appear:
Go call the Priest,
And him that does assist
Bid them be clothed in all their richest vests
To entertain unusual guests.
Sharpen their knives; for what they do
To the foreskin, shall cut off their office too:
Let them set up, the Circumcising stone,
A bound to Legal rites, which now are done:
The holy infant bleeds: This blood, of Christ!
Drowns Levi, but anointeth thee a Priest
Henceforth thy Name is Jesus; it is decreed
Thou art no Savior until thou bleed.
Coll.
Lord, be thou still a Priest and circumcise
The foreskin of our hearts, mouths, ears, and eyes,
Cut off our base affections, carnal sin:
And let new lives with the new year begin.
Epiphany. Mat. 2.
A Star points out the Sun, and does display
A much more glorious day,
Then ever yet did rise in the East:
So bright a day that wise Astrologers
Which gaze at other stars,
Fall down and worship at this feast.
Kings of Arabia and Saba bring
Gold, frankincense, and myrrh, to a greater King:
And Persia as it did before,
The rising sun does still adore.
Great Babe what need have thou of Gold?
Thy sacred bosom does infold
Rich Mines of Treasure: From thy garments comes
The smell of Aloes, Cassia, Eastern gumms
Yet though thou need none, you are pleased to take
Those poor oblations which our duties make:
The Sea does want no water, yet receives
That tribute which the little River gives.
These are the Gentiles first fruits, who
Were never so much Wisemen as now.
This light enlightens them, who could divine
That God took up that Inn where a Star's the Sign.
Coll.
Lord! let thy beams attract and guide our mind;
Then soul and body shall be offered thine;
And we vile clay which can no value hold,
Stamped with thy Image shall be current Gold.
1 Sunday after Epiphany.
Haste, Joseph, to the solemn feast
Jerusalem wants such a guest:
Take Mary and the Holy Boy;
Teach him betimes to know the way
To the Temple where hereafter he
Both Priest and Sacrifice must be.
As ye return tell him that he
The shadows of himself did see.
But stay: where is he? it is a day
Since first we mist him on the way.
We have searched all the Caravan,
Amongst his kinsfolks man by man.
Is he fallen weary, faint, or lame?
Has Herod's cup devoured the Lamb?
Back to the Temple, walk the round;
There Christ most likely will be found.
Among the Doctors him behold,
Advanced to the chair at twelve years old.
The Temple-porch where is wit does flow
Was never Beautiful till now.
This little Disputant confounds
The Scribes with all their learned grounds.
Their scarlet robes begin to blush
To see the Doctors non-plust thus.
So little David has orethrown
The great Goliath with a stone
Doctors to School again are brought
Where by a child they must be taught.
The gaping multitudes amazed
To hear his wisdom flow so fast:
Nay his own Parents could not gather
His meaning of another Father.
Coll.
Lord thou the weakest things have crowned,
That they the mighty should confound:
Make bare thy arm, and show us how
To foil the wise, or make us so.
2 Sunday after Epiphany. John 2.
HAng up your rosy garlands ore the doors,
Crown all the pots with flowers:
Let choicest wines invite
The duller appetite
Let the sweet timbrels sound,
And dances fill the round:
Soft Airs and choicest measures well become
This wedding feast
Where such a guest
Is come,
Jesus and his Disciples with his Mother!
Sure heaven and earth have married one another:
Welcome: drink freely: drink all up:
It Is best behind still: Fill the cup:
And fear no want: That table shall have more,
That entertains the author of our store.
He that at first made water, can as well
Change it to wine too, by a miracle.
This is the hour
To show his power
The Elements obey,
When he a charge does lay.
He that once turned the Seas to blood
Can turn't to wine, if he see good.
Nay by a greater miracle he can
Turn wine to his own blood, to nourish man.
Coll.
Lord! you are a spring of goodness, thou have made
Our cups to overflow, hearts to be glad:
But whilst that others of new wine do boast,
Let us be filled with the Holy Ghost
3 Sunday after Epiphany.
THis day strange miracles do crowd together
Leprous and palsick justle one another
Diseases try
Which first can die,
And strive to bury their own name
So to advance the Doctors fame.
The Leper first, who could not stand,
Falls down and rises perfect man.
He whose infection once made others such
Is cured himself by the Physicians touch.
Thus he is cleans'd; and now
Our Leper is as white as snow.
What needs the blood of lambs to dip
The tip
Of's ear or thumb, or toe?
Here is a lamb whose blood
Is good
To wash him clean all over too.
Yet though diseased, he could to the Doctor come:
The palsick man was kept benumbed at home.
Only he found a spokesman for his cure:
Although he shook, his Masters faith stood sure.
Happy Centurion who by a newfound Art
Denying God
To make abode
Under his roof, did lodge him in his heart.
Coll.
Lord! all these maladies in us are summed
Our souls are leprous, and our hearts benumbed.
Stretch forth thy hand, thy touch will make us well
Or speak the word, and 'twill thy servants heal.
4 Sunday after Epiphany. Matthew. 8.
SLeep in a storm! Sure it is a calm within:
Sleep will not fan that soul that is tossed in sin.
Wind stole a play-day, and the revel's kept,
Whilst their Lord and Master slept:
The waves do dance and skip upon the boat,
Which now without a Pilot cou d not float.
But he awake
And when he spoke
The waves attentive sat to hear
And the winds durst not breath for fear.
The glad Disciples now were past the shelves,
Whose faith had been nigh shipwrackt like themselves.
But being landed there they find
A worser tempest was behind.
As winds, imprisoned in the Earth, break out
With violence, and tear the rocks about.
The Prince of Air shut up among the tombs
With raging force and horror comes.
Yet seeing's Judge, he fears lest without bail
He be remaunded to a worser goal:
Which to avoid, he chose to enter in
A herd of Swine.
No reason, why the superstitious Jews
The flesh of swine should now refuse.
For these were drowned; But still he does as much
And entering in their hearts, he makes them such.
Coll.
Lord! we are swine, which wallow in our sin,
And need a sea to wash and bath us in:
Yet it is no sea can cleanse us, it is no flood
Can wash us white, but thine own precious blood.
5. Sunday after Epiphany. Mat. 13.
PLow up your fallow grounds; prepare your hearts
And all your nobler parts.
This is the season, when the husbandman
Good seed will sow
To grow
And flourish spritely in the heart of man.
But sleep not: for the enemy prepares
To scatter tares
Which will choke up the seed.
Nothing grows sooner then an evil weed.
He knows Gods field,
If well manured, a fruitful crop will yield:
Therefore some envious man he does suborn
To scatter cockles, and root up the corn.
Thus Heresies spring up,
And many times pure doctrine do ore-top.
Adam in Paradise could not be free,
But found a serpent lurking in the Tree.
Nay heaven is not secure, even there he tried
With a successful hand to scatter pride.
Thus wheresoever God a Church does plant
The Devil there his Chapel will not want.
Coll.
Lord! whilst we sleep, Satan his tares does sow
Within our hearts, where better corn should grow.
But do not weed us up: Oh spare the field,
Which but a sprinkling of good wheat does yield.
Septuagesima. Mat. 20.
Away:
Why stand you idle, now it is day?
The morning blushes to behold your stay.
The vines want pruning, the young shoots are grown
Luxuriant, and the hedge is broken down
The day grows hot, so don't the work:
Some loyt'rers still in the street do lurk.
It Is noon
And all yet are not gone:
It Is better doing little work then none
The sun declines
Yet still he finds
Some lazy in the market: He has done
Most of his work, when they have not begun.
It Is but an hour to night
You that come last, work hardest: is it righ^
Others should bear the heat oth' day
And you expect an equal pay?
It Is so: the morn, third, sixth, ninth hours all one
Gods pay is sure, when as his work is done.
The Baptist had an early call
In's mothers womb before 'twas light:
Samuel a child, Peter a man;
Gamaliel when 'twas growing night:
All have their wages, no abatement made:
The earnest penny till the whole be paid.
Coll.
Lord! we have loyt'red, the eleventh hour is run
And many have not yet thy work begun.
But when thou call'st us thou accept'st the worst,
And pay'stalike the last as well as first.
Sexagesima, Luke 8.
What price fond men on empty Nothing set,
Whilst the true riches they forget!
The naked Indian following his rich mine,
Digs down to hell his heaven to find.
The parched Negro dives in the deep to own
The seeds of pearl which there are sown.
Whilst we more naked and more black then they,
More precious seeds, do cast away.
Some falls in the highway, which the birds do eat:
The Devil steals this heavenly meat.
Some falls on stones which without moisture dies:
Hard hearts have seldom bubbling eyes.
Some falls among the thorns which choke it up.
Cares our religious duties stop.
Some falls on lusty ground which laughs and sings
And fruit an hundredfold it brings.
Coll.
Lord we have highway hearts: chase thou away
As Abraham did, the birds of prey:
We Are rocks; like Moses broach us, we are all thorn
Stub us and make us lusty corn.
Quinquagesima. Luke 18.
HArk! whata shrieking the blind beggar keeps?
The highways and the streets do ring,
The walls of Jericho ecchoing
With his shrill cries;
As if his eyes
Which could not see, were only made to weep.
Take pity on me David's son!
Oh son of David hear my moan:
Open my eyes, it is thou art he
That made the eye can make it see.
Blind though I am, my faith discovers clear
The son of Iesse passes here.
Oh! Jesus pity me, make it appear
Although I want mine eyes, thou have an ear.
Have mercy on me David's son!
Thou have the eye salve, or there is none.
Such shrieks and cries
Will pierce the skies,
And where the eyes be out will stick a star.
They are not blind, whose faith can see so far.
Coll.
Blessed fountain of all goodness! thou do see
We are as poor, we are as blind as he.
Yet can we but cry after Thee, Oh then
Our faith will help us to our eyes again.
St. Andrew. Mat. 4.
COrd your nets faster, stronger tackling get,
And bigger mashes set:
The draught which next you will make,
Will be a better,
And a greater,
Then any which you formerly did take.
The Sea in which these nets are to be hurled,
Must be the boystrous, foaming, raging world,
Where envious billows dance and skip
Sometimes o'reset the fishers ship,
Who is himself
Lost on a shelf.
It Is not the scaly legions of the Seas
That must be taken in such nets as these
It Is men are they
Must be his prey:
Though all the cords were fetters, every bait
Were bitter pills, though every hook that is laid
Were two-fork'd crosses, yet at such a draught
The only danger is not to be caught.
Thrice happy fisherman
If, by fine art he can
Fishing for others this advantage get
To catch himself in his own net.
Coll.
Our cares are nets, O Lord, which daily rend
With dragging riches: These we daily mend
For second draughts. But could we follow thee
And leave our nets, though caught we should be free
St. Thomas. John 20.
CAn sense instruct our faith? shall purblind eyes,
Or the dull touch reach heavens great mysteries?
Bold fingers! can you hope
To feel the way
Where faith does stray
And in the dark does grope?
Happy for man that God a body took
Had he all spirit been
Where nothing could be seen,
Where should poor Thomas for a Savior look?
Creatures at first without an ear,
And yet unmade, his voice did hear;
And at his call
Attended all
Both touch, and taste, and nose, and ears, and eyes
May all be scouts for faiths discoveries.
What mercy does in God abound!
Whose blessed-side pierced with a spear
Opens a door in every wound
For faith to enter there.
That finger, which has prob'd thy Savior may
Now spread it all abroad;
And with the Baptist point and say
Behold the Lamb of God.
Thus if quick sense improved aright had been,
Faith might be of things felt, although not seen.
Coll.
Our sense is dull, O Lord! else what the touch
Did unto him, our taste would do as much
Imprint thy wounds upon us; make thy blood
Relish to our souls and that will be as good.
Conversion of St. Paul. Acts 9.
RIding of the Devils errand, in the road
To Damasco and to Hell.
Our new Convert meets with God.
Whilst his pockets stufft with Letters
Speak nothing else but bonds and fetters
To proselytes, which dare
Declare
The ways of truth, or like it well.
Glorious rays about him dart,
Which the noon-day's sun out-vies;
Rays more bright*
Then ten days light:
Yet these throw night
Upon his eyes.
Whilst a new day-star's risen in his heart.
Miraculous mercy! such a clap is given
As strikes to earth, but makes rebound to heaven.
It Is heavenly lightning only can
Destroy the persecutour, save the man.
Such beams above, point out that soul a place
That Is ravished thus by the violence of Grace.
Now may the pretty lambs
Frisk and play about their dams
The flocks may feed securely without fear,
When Wolfs turn shepherds, dogs cannot worry there.
Coll.
Shine on us, Lord, with an enlightening ray,
Make chosen vessels of our lumps of clay.
We Are riding post to Hell, use violence
Sweet Jesus to our souls, and drag us thence.
Purification of Mary. Luke 2.
Open the Temple gates
The King of glory shall come in:
Whose Virgin Mother dedicates
Her firstborn spotless without sin.
Holy to God he is offered up, who is
God too himself, Temple and Sacrifice.
For till his sacred person did appear
The Holiest of Holies was not there.
He Is the firstborn of every creature,
Of's Fathers brightness an eternal ray
Dressed up at length in humane feature,
That what man forfeited, a Man might pay.
The holy Virgin little thought
She brought
A God to God, a Temple to the same.
Her turtle-doves she might have spared
Who had
Richer oblations, an unblemisht lamb.
This Agnus Dei is in old Simeons arms
An Amulet against the worst of harms.
Good man! his course was well nigh run
By the first-rising of the Sun.
He wipes his eyes, which never saw light before,
Wishing to see it still, or never see more.
Coll.
Thou wast presented pure, O Lord! whilst we
Impure and stained present our selves to Thee.
Oh hear our hearts, our turtles groan; or please
To take a lamb thy self in stead of these.
FINIS.

