A DISCOURSE OF THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL.

By PETER STERRY, Sometimes Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridge.

HEB. 13. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain STRANGERS: for thereby some have
entertained ANGELS unawares.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter near Temple Bar, in
Fleetstreet. 1675.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe Author having written so large a Preface to his following Discourse; and
therein given the Reader such a delightful taste of his excellent Spirit: The
Publishers decline saying any thing either of it or him. Only I am desired by
them to inform thee, that this Discourse is posthumous, and not Originally
designed for the Press, but the private satisfaction of some worthy persons,
who begged the Author's sense concerning this Argument: and to whom he was
pleased at several times by set discourses to communicate his thoughts so
plentifully, that they and some other Friends importuned him to peruse what he
had dictated to them upon this Subject, to make some additions to it, and to
fit it for Public View. Whilst the Author was perfecting this undertaking, it
pleased God to take him out of this life, but in pursuance of his own desire
before his death, thou have here with all possible integrity delivered to thee
so much of his intended Discourse as came to the Publishers hands either in his
own Copies, or those of his Friends which were examined and owned by himself;
there being nothing altered, or added by them but the Title Page. By these
means it is now grown into a Book, and thou art acquainted with all this not to
bespeak thy greater gentleness and candor in reading it, but to do the Author
right, and give thy self the true account, why thou art wholly disappointed of
what he designed upon that Argument taken from the proper form and essence of
Liberty; and not so fully satisfied in the application of the argument drawn
from the Knowledge of God; and those other two taken from the nature of the
Soul, and the Mediation of Christ: the Scripture cited and promised to be
opened from the 1. Genesis being omitted in the explication of the former, and in
the other nothing said concerning the progress and propagation of the Mediatory
Work of Jesus Christ through his whole Body.

I have only this further to add concerning the many Errata's that have escaped
the Press, which thou will find set down and corrected to thy hand at the end
of the Book. That the impatience of some Friends to have this Discourse out;
and the fears of others lest it should be stifled in the birth; with some other
difficulties of the Copy, have by precipitating the Press, and perplexing the
Printer, occasioned so great a number of mistakes. That yet there is not so
many as at first view the Reader may apprehend, because for the sake of the
more ordinary capacity, more words are made use of for the reforming of most of
them than would else have been necessary. And lastly that thou will find they
are generally Errors only in the points, which are easily and without defacing
the Book to be mended; although otherwise of great moment to the sense: and are
therefore with great care corrected in the last page for the service of the
Vulgar Reader: who may be in some places not a little helped in his perusing of
this Treatise by thereby observing where to place most usefully the points.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian and Candid Reader,

I Entreat some few things of thee, for thine own sake and for mine:

1. Study the Love of God, the Nature of God, as he is Love, the Work of God,
as it is a Work of Love. Moses in his dying Song begins with God, and the
perfection of his Work; He is the Rock, his Work is perfect. St. Paul descended
from the Paradise in the Third Heavens, brings this with him down into the
World, as the Sacred Mystery, and rich ground of all Truth, from which all the
Beauties and Sweetnesses of Paradise, of all the Heavens spring; That Love is
the band of Perfection. It is Love then, which runs through the whole Work
of God, which frames, informs, uniteth it all into one Masterpiece of
Divine Love.

If God be Love, the Attributes of God are the Attributes of this Love; the
Purity, Simplicity, the Sovereignty, the Wisdom, the Almightiness, the
Unchangeableness, the Infiniteness, the eternity of Divine Love. If God be
Love, his Work is the Work of Love, of a Love unmixt, unconfined, supreme,
infinite in Wisdom and Power, not limited in its workings by any pre-existent
matter, but bringing forth freely and entirely from it self its whole work both
matter and form, according to its own inclination and complacency in it self.

Leo Hebraeus, enflamed with the Beauty, and languishing in the Love of the
heavenly Sophia, the heavenly Wisdom, which is the first and freshest life of
all Beauties in one Face, immortal, and ever-flourishing, is instructed by this
Divine Mistress in those excellent Dialogues between her and himself to Court
and Woo her into his Embraces, by enquiring into the Nature of Love. Pursuing
this enquiry, by the bright Conduct of her shining Beauties, he is led through
the whole nature of things above and below, with all the Varieties and Changes
as manifold streams of Divine Love; in diverse breadths and depths, with
innumer able, sportful windings and turnings, flowing forth from its own full
Sea of eternal Sweetness, and through all its Channels, hasting thither again.

Campanella teaches us, That all second Causes, are Causa prima modificata, so
many Modifications of the first Cause, so many forms and shapes in which the
first Cause appears and acts. All the Works of God, are the Divine Love, in so
many Modes and Dresses. There is diversity of Manifestations, there are
diversities of Operations, which compose the whole frame and business of this
Creation, which are as diverse persons acting diverse parts upon this stage.
But there is one Spirit, one Lord, one God, one Love, which works all in all.

It is the Divine Love, with its unsearchable Riches, which is the fullness that
fills all persons, and all parts upon the stage of Time or Eternity. If any
man know not the way to the Sea, let him follow a River in the course of its
stream, says the Comoedian.

Dear Reader, if thou would be lead to that Sea, which is as the gathering
together, and confluence of all the waters of Life, of all Truths, Goodness,
Joys, Beauties and Blessedness; follow the stream of the Divine Love, as it
holds on its course, from its head in eternity through every work of God,
through every Creature. So shall thou be not only happy in thine end, but in
thy way; while this stream of Love shall not only be thy guide by thy side, but
shall carry thee along in its soft and delicious bosom, bearing thee up in the
bright Arms of its own Divine Power, sporting with thee all along, washing thee
white as snow in its own pure floods, and bathing thy whole Spirit and Person
in heavenly unexpressible sweetnesses.

This is my first Request to you.

2. Study and practice that great Command of Love, as the Lesson of thy whole
Life, with which alone thou art to entertain thy self, and all the heavenly
Company, both here and in eternity. This is the first and great Command; That
thou love God with thy whole self; and then, That thou love thy Neighbor as
thy self, which is a second Law, a second Love, like unto the first. Indeed it
is so like, that it is one with it. Be thou thy self in thy whole Person, the
Sacrifice of a whole Burnt-Offering, ascending in a Sacred flame of heavenly
love to God, the only and eternal Beauty. As the zeal of the House of God,
which is Love flaming, did eat up David and Christ; so let this heavenly Love
of the Divine Beauty, which is the Beauty it self, descending in a pure and
sweet flame upon thee, by consuming thee, convert thee into one spiritual flame
with it self. Now live thou no where, but where thou love, in thy Beloved.
Let thy Beloved alone now live in thee; when thou have thus lost thy self by an
heavenly Love in thy Beloved, in thy God; when thou have thus by the Sacred and
sweet mystery of this Love found thy Beloved, thy God, in the place of thy
self; Then love thy Neighbor as thy self. Love thy Neighbor in thy Jesus, thy
God. Love thy Jesus, thy God, in thy Neighbor. Let this Neighborhood of
Divine Love be as large as the God of Love himself is. Let every other Person
and Spirit, which lives and moves, and has its being in God, within the
encompassing, upon the Ground and Root of the Divine Being, be thy Neighbor,
thy Brother, another self, as thy self to thy self; the Object to thee of an
heavenly and incorruptible Love.

Upon this Commandment, says Jesus Christ, hang all the Law and the Prophets.
This Love is the Center and the Circle of all the Works of God, of all Motions
and Rests, of all mysteries in Nature and Grace, in Time and Eternity. Plato
says, That three sorts of Persons are led to God, The Musician by Harmony, the
Philosopher by the beam of Truth, the Lover by the light of Beauty. All these
Conductors to the supreme Being meet in this Love, of which we speak; the first
and only true Beauty, being the first Birth, the first Effulgency, the
essential Image of the supreme Goodness, is also the first, the supreme, the
only Truth; the Original, the measure, the end of all Truth; which by its
amiable attractive Light, conducteth all Understandings in the search of Truth,
and gives them rest only in its transparent and blissful Bosom. This also is
the first, the only, the universal Harmony, the Mufick of all things in Heaven
and on Earth; the Music, in which all things of Earth and of Heaven, meet to
make one melodious Consort.

While the holy Lover then pursues the tracts of this Beauty, through all the
works and ways of God, he is encompassed with the Light of Divine Truth shining
through him, and round about him. He is carried on in the Spirit by the force
of the Divine Harmony; He carries along this Harmony of things, charming all
things round about him, as he passes on. So he sees the God of Gods at last
on Mount Sion, the perfection of Beauty, Harmony, Truth and Goodness, which all
Center in the Divine Love, the Divine Unity, the band of perfection.

3. Let no differences of Principles or Practices divide thee in thine
affections from any person. He who seems to me as a Samaritan to a Jew, most
worthy of contempt and hatred, most apt to wound or kill me, may hide under the
shape of a Samaritan, a generous, affectionate Neighbor, Brother and Friend.
When I lie wounded and dying, neglected by those who are nearest to me, most
esteemed by me; This person may pour Wine and Oil into my Wounds, with tender
and constant care, at his own expense, bring me back to life and joy. How
evident has it been in the History of all times, that in Parties most remote
one from the other, most opposed one to the other; Persons have been found of
equal excellencies, in all kinds, of equal integrity to Truth and Goodness. Our
most Orthodox Divines, who have been heated and heightened with the greatest
zeal of Opposition to the Pope, as the Antichrist, yet have believed a Pope to
have ascended from the Papal Chair, to a Throne in Heaven. Had my Education, my
Acquaintance, the several Circumstances and Concurrances been the same to me,
as to this person from whom I now most of all dissent, that which is now his
sense and state, might have been mine. Have the same just, equal, tender
respects and thoughts with the same allowances of another, which thou requirest
from him to thy self. It is a Rule in Philosophy, That there is the same reason
of Contrarieties. Two opposed Parties or Persons, by reason of the opposition,
for the most part looking through the same disturbed and colored Medium,
behold one another under the same uncomely form, in the same displeasing
Colors. Has there not been frequent experience of those, who by being of
differing Parties, alienated, exasperated, having their fancies filled with
strange Images of each other, when they have been brought together by some
intervening Providence, have discovered such agreeable Beauties of Morality and
Humanity, such an harmonious agreement in essential, in radical Principles of
Divine Truth, of the true and ever lasting good, that they have conversed with
highest delight, they have departed with an higher esteem of each other, their
Souls have been inseparably united with Angelical kisses and embraces? Some
entertaining Strangers, have entertained Angels. Do thou so believe, that in
every encounter, thou may meet under the disguise of an Enemy, a Friend, a
Brother, who, when his Helmet shall be taken off, may disclose a beautiful, and
a well known face, which shall charm all thy Opposition into love and delight
at the sight of it.

But now, Reader, I fall at thy feet, I take hold of thy knees, by all things
moving and obliging I beseech thee, If there be any Bowels, or comforts of
Love, any Peace, Pleasantness, Strength, Prosperity in Union, any good in
Unity, that thou would take deeply into thine Heart, and treasure up safely
there, and frequently with fixed, studious eyes, contemplate this (as I humbly
conceive it) most sure and reconciling Truth, which I shall now, as I am able,
represent to thee.

Often, yea for the most part, two opposed Parties have something on each side,
excellently good, something exorbitantly evil; although perhaps in unequal
degrees. Both mutually set after an unmovable manner before their eyes, their
own good, the evil on the other part. Thus they blind their minds to all sense
or belief of any good there. Thus they lift up themselves above all sense of
their own evil. So they heighten themselves by self-justifications, by mutual
Condemnations, unto an extinguishing of every beam of good, to an increase of
their evils, unto a blackness of darkness, until by these mutual mistakes they
have drawn on upon themselves mutual and absolute ruin. How much better were
it to obey that Precept of the Holy Ghost, which offers it self to us, like
an Olive Branch in the mouth of this Sacred Dove, To look every man not to his
own things, but to the things of another.

O that now I had an hundred Mouths, an hundred Tongues, a voice like Thunder,
like the Voice of God, that rends the Rocks, to cry to all sorts of Persons and
Spirits in this Land, in all the Christian World through the whole Creation;
Let all that differ in Principles, Professions, or Opinions, and Forms, see
that good which is in each other, and the evil in themselves. Join in thi^, to
extirpate the evil, the common evil, your common enemy, and so quench that fire
which burns upon your Estates, your Houses, your Relations, your Bodies, your
Souls, even to the nethermost Hell. Unite the good which is in you, so shall
the good on one side make up that which is imperfect and defective in the good
on the other side, unto a perfection of good in both. So shall the good on one
side be as a proper Antitode to extinguish the evil on the other side. Thus
while the evil is the privation, the loss of your selves, and the good your
true-selves, (as Hor ace calls Virgil, Dimidium animae meae,) you will meet
like two halves of each other, filling up the circle of each others Being,
Beauties, Joys, and be now completed in one. How unexpressible would the
fruits of this Union be? How would it heighten you in all the Beauties and
Blessednesses of Truth and Goodness, in which your immortality and conformity
to God are placed? yea, how would this Union strengthen those outward
Interests, and sweeten those natural Enjoyments, for whose sake, now like
Adders, you stop your Ears to the wisest Charmer, and the most potent Charms,
that would draw you home into the bosom of each other, for whose sake now you
cast down to the ground all ingenuity and integrity. You make your way over
their sweetest Beauties and tenderest Bowels, to the heart-blood of one
another, until you have drowned in blood those very darling Interests and
Enjoyments, together with your own Lives and Persons, your native Country, the
Christian World, the face of the whole Earth? But ab, when will poor Mankind on
Earth be wise, to understand its own good, or be good, that it may me wise?
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lorld. We wait for thy Salvation,
thy Jesus, O God! To him shall the gathering of the people be, the true Shiloe,
for whom this Glory is reserved.

It seems indeed, according to my humble sense, necessary to divide those
Principles and Practices, which divide Mankind into three Heads:

1. Some seem to be of a nature perfectly indifferent, neither good nor evil,
but according to the intention and spirit which acts them.

2. Some differ in the degrees, mixtures, or varieties of good and evil.

3. Others differ in the whole kind of good and evil.

In this last state of things, it is the part of every Child of Light, to
maintain the Divine Love in his Spirit, like the Sun in the Firmament,
encompassing the whole Earth, from one end to the other, shining upon all, both
good and bad, upon dry and sandy Deserts, the Habitations of wild Beasts, and
venomous Serpents, as well as cultivated Gardens, flourishing with wholesome
Herbs, pleasant Flowers, and all sorts of fruits. Thus God himself is
propounded to us for a Pattern by the Son of God.

Distinguish between the good and evil. Love takes pleasure in the good. Hate
the evil. Advance the good. Oppose the evil upon all occasions, with all your
forces. But every where distinguish carefully, with all tenderness of Spirit,
between the person, and the evil of the person. Be wise as Serpents, but
innocent as Doves, according to the Counsel and Command of Jesus Christ, who is
the supreme Wisdom and Love both in one. Discern the evil with a quick and
curious eye, guard your selves with all your might from it, maintain an
aversion, an enmity to it, eternally irreconcilable. Thus be a Serpent to the
evil, but at the same time be a Dove to the person, without gaul, without any
thing to offend, moaning over it, groaning for it, as your Mate, till it be
recovered from the evil, which captivates it into a fellowship with you, in the
purity and love of the Divine Nature.

Have always most tender bowels for, and a most sensible sympathy with all
Mankind in their greatest Deformities and Defilements, as thy Brethren tied
unto thee by a double Consanguinity.

1. All men are made of the same blood in Adam.

2. All men are redeemed by the same blood of the Lord Jesus, who has given
himself a Ransom for all, to be testified, (...), in the proper times. Each
person which has his part in this Ransom, has its proper time for its
discovery in him. Thine may be now sooner. This person also now most of all
lost in the depth of all evils, may have his proper time yet to come, for the
taking off the disguise of these filthy Rags from him, for the discovery of the
Glory, as of a Son of God in him. As his time comes later, so it may come with
a fuller Glory. As Zipporah said to Moses, whether bitterly, or in the sweet
sense of a Sacred mystery, pointing to the Messiah, Thou art an Husband to me
in bloods. So look thou on every man, as a Brother to thee, in both these
bloods, of which one was once pure and precious, as that of the Sacred Image of
God in Paradise. The other is eternally pure and precious, as the blood of God
himself.

Forgiving one another freely for Christ's sake, is the language of St. Paul.
Look upon every person through this twofold Glass, the Blood, and the Beauties
of Christ. Christ has died for all. The natural Being of every person has his
Root in the Grave of Christ, and is watered with his blood. Christ lives in
all. His Resurrection is the life of the whole Creation. He is the Wisdom, the
Power, the Righteousness of God in every work of Nature, as well as of Grace.
He is the Root, out of which every natural, as well as every spiritual, Plant
springs, which brings forth himself through every natural existence, and brings
forth himself out of it, as the flower, the brightness of the Glory of God. He
is the Root and Truth of all things. All things are by him, and for him, to the
praise and glory of God in him. His Name is excellent through all the Earth.
Read then this Name of Excellency, of Glory, the Name of Christ in every part
and point of the ^arth, the darkest, the lowest, the least; forgive the spots
upon this Name in every person, for the Names-sake engrav^n upon it.

Receive one another into the Glory of God, is the Rule of St. Paul. Divines
distinguish between the person, together with the nature of the De^il and the
evil. The person, the nature, springs forth from God, and so is good, has a
Divinity and Glory in it; a Divine Root, a Divine Image. It stands in the Glory
of God, as a Flower in the Garden, a B^am in the Sun, it is maintained by a
continual emanation from the bosom of the supreme Glory. Thus thou art to
receive every person, clouded with the greatest evils, as he is the work of
Nature, and of God into the Glory of God. Thus every other person is to be thy
Neighbor, thy ^rother in the Glory of God; and the Object of a Divine Love.

No evil, as evil is the nature or choice of any person, but the mishap, and
the disease. Truth is the only Object of every Understanding, the only white at
which it aims. Like the Mary-gold, it opens it self only to this Sun, or that
which shines upon it in the glorious form of this Sun, and so descends in
seeming beams of this Divine Beauty into its bosom. Good is the only Object of
the Will. As the Needle touched by the Lodestone, is governed in its motion
and rest by the North Pole; so is the Will moved and attracted by that alone,
which touches it with a sense of good. It rests in no bosom, but that which
courteth and wooeth it under the Divine Form of good, with the seeming Charms
of this its only Beloved and Bridegroom.

St. Paul says, Sin deceived me, and slew me. No person is willingly d^ceived
in his belief of Truth, on disappointed in his expectation of good. Every evil
is a degree of death; a diseafe, in the end death. When it appears like it
self, all things fly from it, as from death. But as Cupid, in the form of the
young and flourishing Prince Ascanius, by treacherous embraces and kisses,
breathed a fatal poison into the veins of the Carthaginean Queen. So does sin
and evil by the hellish enchantments of the Prince of Darkness, form it self
into the most alluring resemblance of the heavenly Image, composed of Truth and
Goodness, meeting in one immortal form. It adorneth it self all over with the
most curious and sparkling Counterfeits of all its most amiable, most Divine
Sweetnesses and Beauties. Thus it insinuates it self into the eyes and hearts
of the Sons of God, and fills them with its false sweetnesses, enflames them
with a false Love, as the poison and fire from Hell. Yet still in the midst of
these enchantments and deaths, as the Athenians in the midst of their Atheism
and Idolatry, had an Altar inscribed, To the unknown God; The Understanding and
the Will, according to their own proper natures, stand in every natural Spirit,
as Altars in a Temple, shining and burning, with continual fires by night and
by day, aspiring to the highest and clearest Heavens, through all opposed
Clouds of Darkness, while this inscription in clear Characters appears
engraven round these Altars, To the Unknown Good, the Unknown God, to the
unknown Truth, the unknown Jesus.

If any person then be fallen into any evil, Let those that are spiritual restore
him with a spiritual skill, with a spirit of Meekness and Divine Love. Apply
Reproofs, Chastisements to evil persons in their seasons, as a Brother gives an
Antidote to a beloved Brother, that by a mistake has been surprised and drunk
in poison; or as one hand applies a Medicine to the other hand, or to the eye,
when it suffers by any wound or distemper.

If thou art an Angel, and have to do with a Devil, use no reviling Language,
for so the Angel himself is by the Spirit of God marked with a Character of
Honor for this, that he used no reviling Speeches to the Devil.

Preserve thy self from that bitter zeal, which St. James mentions, upon
which he sets so evil a mark, branding it deeply with the fire of Hell; as a
Devil transfiguring himself into the form of an Angel. If there be (says he)
amongst you bitter envying; this wisdom is not from above, but earthly, sensual
and devilish; We read it, bitter envying. In Greek it is, (...), bitter zeal.
Take heed of suffering thy zeal against the evil, to be mingled and tempered
with a bittern^ss against the person. As Lightning from Heaven melts the Sword,
but does no harm to the Scabbard. Discover thou in all thy Reproofs and
Chastisements an equal love to the person, and hatred to the evil, an equal
desire to destroy the evil, and save the person. Or rather, let thy zeal
against the evil be love to the person, flaming forth, and burning with a
great, but with a sweet, and Divine force, that it may consume the Dross for
the Golds-sake, to which the dross cleaves, that of the Gold, thus refined, it
may make a Jewel for the Bosom, or a Crown for the Head of Jesus Christ. Suffer
not thy zeal against evil, to be like the Locusts from the bottomless-pit,
which have faces like men, hair soft and delicate like women, Crowns of Glory
upon their heads like Angels, but venomous and killing stings in their tails.
Let it not be like Culinary fire, or the fire of Hell, black, sooty, and
devouring; but like the fire from the golden Altar, mingled with sweet Incense,
filling all round about, and carrying up that upon which it feeds, as a
Sacrifice to Heaven, with the rich Odours and Perfumes of a Divine Love.

If I be lifted up to Heaven by manifold excellencies, together with Corazin
and Bethsaida, from whence I look down upon another far beneath me, lying like
Sodom and Gomorrah, in a loathed and hated deep of darknesses, defilements,
disgraces; Let me then think, That this Sodom may have a better Spirit, a
better ground of good at the bottom of its Spirit than my self. That if the
seed of Love and Light which has been sown in me, had been sown with the like
advantage there, it would have far excelled me in its fruits. Yea, let me think
that it may not only have a better ground, but a Divine seed, hid deep in that
ground beneath all this soil and dung, beneath all this darkness, deformity,
and deadness of its Winter-season, which may rise up in its proper Spring into
pleasant Flowers and Fruits, as the Garden of God. Thus let me think, and let
these thoughts instruct me to love every other person, removed to the greatest
distance from me, cast down to the greatest depth beneath me, as my Neighbor,
my Brother, my self.

This is my double Request to thee, gentle Reader.

1. That thou love every other person, as thy Neighbor, thy Friend, thy self,
with that Divine Love, in whose flame thou sacrificest thy self, and all things
to receive thy self again, and all things together with thy self in a more
excellent and durable form.

2. That thou suffer nothing to stain the Candor of this Love, whose Reasons
being altogether Divine, subject all other reason to themselves. Give me leave
to strengthen this twofold Request, by presenting to thee thine own Interest,
after the highest manner contained in it, after a twofold form.

1. This Divine Love, at this height, in this Latitude, is all that is true in
Religion, all that is good in Man, all that is acceptable with God, all the
hope of future Glory, and of blessed immortality. If I give all my Goods to the
Poor, and my Body to be burnt, and have not Charity, I am nothing. Is there any
Charity or Love to Man greater than this, to give all my Goods to the Poor? Is
there any Charity or Love to God more Divine than this, to give my Body to be
burnt for him? Yes, there is a Charity, a Love, which transcends all this,
which, if I want, I may yet have all this, and be nothing. This is that Divine
Love, of which I speak, which lifts not it self up above any of the works of
God, but keeps the Unity of the eternal Workman, of his Divine Design and
Work, in the golden band of an universal Peace, and Divine Amity. This is that
Divine Love which behaveth not it self uncomely, seeks not its own things,
breaks not the Harmony of the whole, dividing it self from the whole, by a
particular self-love. In the universal Beauty and Melody of the Divine Wisdom
and Work, it respects it self as a part, and all parts, as it self, having
one Beauty and Joy together, in the Beauty, Joy, and harmonious Perfection of
the Divine Figure in the whole piece.

This Love bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
suffers all things. This we read of the Divine Love, 1 Cor. 13. 7. The first
expression in that verse is, (...), which we render, bears all things. I have
three Reasons against this translation of it.

1. It makes the last Clause of this verse a tautology, a vain repetition; It
suffers all things, which is the same with the first.

2. It is the remotest sense of the Greek word, two senses being nearer:

1. To cover. 2. To contain or comprehend.
3. These two nearer senses are more agreeable, more full and Divine.

1. The Divine Love covers all things with the Divine loveliness and beauty
of the universal Harmony, which is the Righteousness of God in Christ, the
first, the fairest Image of the invisible God, in which every other Image of
God stands, as in the Original, the all-comprehending Glory. This is that
which Solomon says, Love covers all sin. And St. Paul, of the Divine
Workman, of the Divine Love; He puts the highest comeliness, that is, the
universal Comeliness of the Divine Image in its entireness and perfection upon
every part, even upon the most uncomely parts; That there may be no schism or
division in the Body, that there may be one glory of all.

2. The Divine Love in every Person or Spirit lives not in it self as a part,
but in the life of the whole, in the Divine, the Universal Spirit, the Spirit
of Love, the Spirit of the whole. I live not, says St. Paul, but Christ lives
in me. Again, If you live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit. Thus the Divine
Love having its life in each person, in the life of the whole, the Universal
Spirit, being one Spirit with that Spirit, which is the Unity of the whole,
comprehends all things with strictest tenderest embraces in it self, as one
self with it self. So faith the holy Apostle, All things are yours, you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. All things are yours, as you are Christ's, as
Christ is Gods; that is, in the Unity of the eternal Spirit, which is Love it
self.

Now from this covering Beauty, and comprehensive Virtue, in Divine Love these
effects naturally flow; To believe all things, to hope all things; We easily
believe and hope that which we desire. The Divine Love has a complacency in
all things, as it comprehends them in their Divine Root. It has a good will
to all things, as they stand in the same Divine Root with it self. From this
Complacency, this Desire, this Divine Root it believes, it hops all things.
It believes all things to be Divine Tabernacles, like that in the Wilderness,
which though moving through Des^ts, through a Land of Graves, through a Land of
fiery Serpents, yet answer to their Pattern on the top of the Mount; though
covered with a course Tent, exposed to the fury of the Sun, and tempests in the
midst of Clouds, of dust; yet are allglorious within, composed of rich
materials, bearing a Divine Figure, filled with the Divine Presence and Glory.
It hops all things, light in the midst of darkness, a flourishing Garden of
Lillies and Roses, in a ground covered, and bound up with all the darknesses
and rigours of the hardest Winter; a treasure of Honey-Combs in the body of a
Lion.

The Master of the Sentences has such an high esteem of this Charity, or
Divine Love, which is the subject of St. Paul's Discourse in this Chapter, That
he affirms it to be the holy Spirit himself, the third Person in the Trinity,
which is the Love in the Divine Nature, and so the Virtue, the Power; As the
second Person, the Lord Jesus is the Beauty, the Wisdom.

St. James reasons after this manner, Can the same Fountain bring forth sweet
and bitter waters? with the same mouth you bless God, and curse man, made after
the Image of God. If from the same heart thou bring forth that Love to some
men, by which thou give all thy Goods to them to supply their wants, and
ragest with wrath or hatred against others, who as they have any making, are
made after the same Divine Image with the rest of Mankind; Who as they have any
Being, have the same Divine Root, are sealed with the same Divine Impression,
thou have not Charity, thou have not Divine Love, thou have not the Spirit; the
universal, the eternal Spirit, thou art nothing. If thou have the gist of
Prophecy, if thou understandest all divine Mysteries, if thou have a divine
Faith, if with the same heart thou love God to so high a degree, that thou
give thy Body to be burnt for him, and yet burnest in rage against any man,
made after the Image of God; All these Divine Gifts or Graces in which thou
gloriest, are nothing; thou art nothing, thou have not Charity. Thou have not
the Divine Love, thou have not the Spirit of Christ and of God, which is the
universal Spirit, the Spring, the Seal, the Band of the Divine Unity.

Dear Reader, follow after this Divine Love, without which all that, which thou
have, is nothing, which, if thou have, it is the band of perfection, never
fails, never falls short of the Glory of God; but by the incorruptibleness
of a meek spirit, preserves in it self a Divine Beauty and Sweetness, which is
ever perfect, which never passes away, in the midst of all changes of Life, in
Death, to Eternity.

This is thy first Interest, in preserving the Divine Love entire in thy heart.

2. The measure which thou measurest to others, shall be measured to thee
again. If you do well, who will harm you? St. Paul distinguishes between a
righteous man and a good man. This doing well is that goodness of Divine Love,
pouring forth round about it, heavenly beams upon all things, which makes men
to be so far from any inclination to harm the person, in whom this goodness
discovers it self, that they are willing to die for him. St. John gives us a
lively figure of the Divine Love, in a light of Glory, by these words, He that
loves his Brother, walks in the light, and there is none offense in him. The
last words are capable of two senses, which very agreeably meet here.

1. There is nothing in this person, at which any man takes any offense.

2. There is nothing, of which this person receives any Image, into his
Spirit, which offends him.

He, who is this Divine Lover, walks always in those blessed Regions of
Divine Light, where every thing presents it self in his heart, as it lies in
the heart of God, springing forth from the womb of an eternal Love, acted by
that eternal Spirit, which is Love it self, clothed with an ever-flourishing
loveliness, lying in the universal Harmony of the Divine Wisdom, being one
piece with it, having the Glory of God resulting from it, and resting upon it.
He, that is, this Divine Lover, shines forth in all his Discourses,
Conversation and Actions, upon all eyes and hearts, with such a sweet light and
heavenly luster of the Divine Nature, of the supreme Love it self, the Unity,
the Mother, the Sister, the Desire of all things, the Joy of the whole Earth,
that nothing takes offense at this Person, nothing can harm him.

O what a Conquest had we attained, if we once did so live, that we convinced
all persons, that we loved them in truth and in deed, that we had a Divine Love
for them, that we esteemed all things in our selves of no value, of no effect
to our present Beauty and Peace, to our eternal Life and Glory, to be
altogether nothing, except this Divine Love alone? How would this demonstration
of an heavenly Wisdom, in an heavenly meekness of Divine Love, disarm all hands
of the weapons lifted up against us, and all hearts of their wrath conceived
against us, like the Music of David's Harp, the sweet force of this Love would
chase away every evil Spirit from every Breast?

There is no power in Nature like to that of Similitude. Every thing draws and
attracts its like to it. Where this Divine Love flourishes in any person, all
the blessed immortal Spirits of heavenly Love above, in eternity, with all the
joys and glories of Love resort to this Person, to this Heart, planting
themselves round about, as heavenly Guards, and heavenly Ministers to it,
inhabiting in it, as their proper Paradise, and Heaven here below. In all
things below, through all their differences, distances and divisions, the
Spirit of Love, which bath in it the Root and Idea of each Creature, which is
in each Creature, as the proper Root of that Creature, as its Ideal, and
primitive Form, discloseth it self to, shines forth upon, and in all forms of
things circleth in this person, this heart, being attracted by it, drawn to it,
as its proper Center.

Some Divine Philosophers teach us, That according to the property or power
which predominateth in us here, such will that Divine Idea be, which shall be
our eternal Habitation and Palace above, in which we shall enjoy all things,
being sealed to us by this Idea. If the Divine universal Love reign in thee
here, Love, which seems to be the highest and sweetest of all Ideas, in the
Divine Nature, the Divine Nature it self in its most proper and perfect Idea,
uniting the Ideas of all Perfections, of all Beauties, of all Sweetnesses, of
all Lives, Loves, Joys, and Glories in it self, at their greatest height, with
the most ravishing agreeableness and harmony; this shall be thy proper
Habitation and Palace, set up for thee in thine own person, in every Creature,
in every Created or uncreated form of things, to dwell unchangeably in both,
here and above. Here shall all things present themselves to thee, clothed and
sealed with this Idea, with this pure and perfect Love. With the measure with
which thou have measured unto others, shall it be measured unto thee. Thou have
loved all things with a Divine Love, looking upon them steadfastly, through all
seasons and changes in a Divine Light, in the incorruptible form of a Divine
loveliness. As thou have looked upon them, so shall they all, in all seasons
and states, appear to thee in a Divine Light, full and overflowing with a
Divine Love, clothed all over with a Divine loveliness. Love all things, O
Reader, after a divine manner, that thou may be the beloved Object of all
divine things, and divinely beloved by all things, that thou may shine with
a divine loveliness in all eyes, and be received with a divine loveliness into
all hearts.

These are the Requests which I make to thee for thine own sake.

I have one Request only to present to thee, for my self, which is, That thou
would come with this Divine Love to the reading of this Discourse.

Come with that love which thinks no evil. We read in the Revelations of an
Angel descending from Heaven, who enlightened the whole Earth. While thou
read, let this heavenly love be as a Seraphim flying down upon its flaming
wings, from the Throne of Love into thy Bosom, to enlighten thy whole Soul with
its beams, unto a Divine Candor, that there may be no dark corner left for any
suspicious Jealousies, Prejudices, Animosities, or ill will, like poisonous
Toads in the hollows of some old wall.

Come with this love which believes all things, all the good that every
subject, either person or thing, is capable of As Bees extract the virtue out
of the commonest Herbs, and convert it to Honey in themselves: So do thou
believe every thing here to be intended in the best sense, of which it is
capable: Draw forth this sense from it, and improve it in thy self with the
utmost advantage, to the sweetest satisfaction, and the richest treasure in thy
own mind.

Believe this Piece to be the fruit of Love, springing from a Root of Divine
Love. We read in the Revelations of an Angel standing in the Sun. Plato
somewhere says, something like this, that if we stood in the Sun, all things,
even this dark mass of Elements, and elementary composition to us, beholding
them from that center of Light, would appear in a Sun-like Glory. Be thou this
Angel, or in this an Angel-like Spirit, stand in this Sun, the glorious circle
of divine Love. From thence see the Fountain of Love opening it self to thee in
this Discourse, all the parts, all the lines as so many streams flowing forth
from it to water thy Spirit, and make it a Garden of Divine Sweetnesses and
Beauties. If the rich man in Hell, next to the quenching of those flames, which
burnt upon himself, made this his Request to Heaven, That his brethren might be
preserved from coming to that place of torment; How much more do the blessed
Inhabitants of Heaven sweetly burn in pure and precious flames of most ardent
desires, that other persons, dear unto them, may be brought into the same
blessed place, to partake of the same incorruptible Joys and Glories? Let Love
instruct and prompt thee, gentle Reader, to think that the worthless Author,
according to the inexplicable sweetness, the unconfined freedom, and fullness of
this eternal Law, the Divine Love, which gu^deth without difference the Cottage
and the Palace, the Dunghill and the Throne, may have been led by a Sacred beam
of this Love, touching his heart from on high, so near unto the borders of the
happy Regions and Kingdoms of Divine Truth, as to discover all to be Heaven
there. Let the same sweet Instructor teach thee, to think that he, as he may
have been by the same gracious beam led farther into the blissful Continent of
this Love, may have met with Heavens, which open themselves into Sweetnesses
and Glories, ever increasing, ever extending themselves to a more vast
amplitude and compass, which heighten themselves in Joys and Glories, in
Sweetness and Beauty, past all description, or belief, except to him alone who
has been by the same shining guide led into the same places. Then let the
sweet waters of this Divine Love, from its own Fountain sprinkled upon thine
heart, raise this candid belief in thee, that as a pair of silver-feathered
Doves flying before Aeneas, guided him to the Tree laden with golden-boughs, in
the midst of a thick and obscure Wood; So this Discourse, aiming at a
resemblance of those beautiful and lovely Birds, sacred to love, in a whiteness
of unspotted Candor, may be a birth of Love, though weak, and flying low, sent
forth to allure and guide thee into those ever lasting Heavens of Divine Truth
and Goodness, which as thou entrest into the discoveries of the Divine Love,
and passest on farther in them, thou will find in the obscurities and tumults
of these earthly shades, of this life of dreams, opening themselves to thee,
with inexplicable delights and satisfactions, with transcending glories,
endlesly raising themselves to greater heighths, and spreading themselves to a
wider compass.

But you will say, what connection has the Divine Love with Free Will, the
subject of this ensuing Discourse?

Very fit and harmonious in two respects:

1. The Will it self is love. Thomas Aquinas defines the Will to be the
inclination of the Soul. The Object of the Will is good. The inclination of the
Soul to good is love. St. Augustine calls Love, Pondus Animae, the weight of
the Soul, by which it moves to its attracting Object, as to its Center. The
Object of Love is loveliness or beauty. Beauty in its Essence is good, in its
effulgency, in its proper and essential Image. Thus the Will and Love are both
one in their Object, and in their proper formality; both are the Souls vital
spring or principle of motion to good. The Understanding receives its Object
into it self, to be a living Light shining within it, and illustrating it. The
Soul in the Will flies forth upon the wings of Love, into the bosom of the
beloved Object, to live there where it loves.

He, who with a clear eye distinguishes the curious and close workings of the
will, may find all its motions or affections to be the same love in various
postures, as it rests with sweetest complacency, in the embraces of the beloved
Beauty, or faints under a despair of fruition, or an irresistible opposition in
its prosecutions; as it sails on smooth Seas, with soft and prosperous gales to
its haven in its eye; or wrestles with tempests of Waves and Winds, with
cheerful courage raising it self to surmount them. As the colors of the
Rainbow are the same light variously reflected from the Sun, and variously
falling upon the watery Cloud; so are all the motions of the Will the same
Love, raised from the same good, beautifully shining forth, and reflecting
it^lf variously upon the Soul in different postures of presence or absence, of
doubt, difficulty, impossibility in the attainment, or facility and assurance
of fruition.

The freedom then of Love is the freedom of the Will. We frequently say, What
so free as Love? yet what so inevitable, as the golden-headed darts of Love,
like beams shot forth as from a golden Quiver, from the face or bosom of the
amiable and shining good? What so inevitable, as the sweet wounds made by these
darts? God is Love, the Soul is the Image of God. According to our
distinctions, God is Love most peculiarly and properly in his Divine Will. The
will of man then is also a Divine Love, being the Image of the Divine Will. If
that be true, as it appears so to many of the greatest Philosophers or
Divines, that the Soul in its essence and faculties, are really one. The Soul
it self is essentially a Divine Love, being in its essence an Image of that God
which is Love.

Behold then the freedom of the humane will in the freedom of the Divine Love;
where as, in the Godhead it self, the most perfect freedom and the most
absolute necessity are joined together in a Marriage, to which the whole
Heavens and Earth, with unutterable joy, sing eternal Marriage-Songs. Where
liberty and necessity meet in one; while the Will is carried most freely and
most necessarily to its Object, which is goodness: Goodness at once becomes
the essence and election of the Will, for the highest necessity is that of our
natures and essences. According to which ground Logicians make those
Propositions most necessary, where there is the most essential connection
between the terms. In like manner, Love being the principal act of the Soul,
and carried most freely, most necessarily to goodness in its proper and
essential Image, which is the first, the most true, the highest beauty; Beauty,
the beauty of Goodness, the beauty of Holiness* become at once the essence and
election of Love. Thus the Divine ^ill and the Divine Good, the Divine Love and
Divine Beauty, are made one, by the golden knot of the same heavenly and
eternal Marriage, diffusing themselves from this marriagebed in Divine
embraces, and unconfined enjoyments, through all things of Time and Eternity,
through finiteness and infiniteness it self.

Let me add to these a third Marriage, making up the joys and triumphs of the
other two; between the Divine Loves, the Father, the Brother, the Bridegroom;
And the Daughter, the Sister, the Bride; the Divine and the Humane will; the
Soul and her God; the Image and her Original. Is any freedom to be compared
with this, which takes up the Image into the ample glories ofits Original;
which determining and espousing the Humane will, the Divine Love below, to the
Universal, the Divine Good, as its dear Object, and delightful Bridegroom;
takes it up also into one uncontrouled, unlimited Sweetness and Liberty, with
the Divine Love, the Divine will above.

Yea, now the will and love enjoy a twofold, full and glorious Liberty, while
Goodness and Beauty are their Essence, as well as their Election.

1. They freely and unconfinedly rove through all the fields of Goodness and
Beauty in their greatest amplitude, in their richest and most unbounded
Varieties, as freely, as through their own proper Essence and Being.

2. Their Liberty, in this unconfined amplitude of all Goodness and Beauty,
becomes most ample and triumphant, while it is free from all fear, danger,
suspicion, possibility of change to any degree of confinement or constraint, by
this essential Connection between it self and the highest necessity. O good, O
beautiful, O blessed Will, which sits upon the Throne of Eternity, which
governest us and all things! While in being good, beautiful, blessed, with a
perfect Liberty, thou art such also with the highest necessity. Thou art now as
delightfully and complacentially; so unchangeably, absolutely, universally,
supreamly, soveraignly, essentially Good, beautiful and blessed in thine whole
Nature, Person and Duration, in all ^hy works and ways. O Good, Beautiful,
Blessed, is that will also, in whom Liberty and Necessity are after the same
manner united by its Union with the Divine will.

2. Nothing seems to present the Divine Face of Truth, and the whole nature of
things with such harmonious and charming Beauties to the eye of the mind, as
the determination of the will by its essential and universal Causes, seen in
one view with the Divine Love. A single light seen by Mariners resting upon
their Ship, which, as I remember, was of old called by the name of Helena.
Threatens a dreadful storm. But two Twin-Lights, known by the name of the two
Brothers, Castor and Pollux, infuse a new life into the hearts of the Seamen,
by the sweet hope of a sudden and gentle Calm. After the same manner, these
two, the divine Love, and the determination of the will, shining together, as
twin-lights, entertain us with a most beautiful composure, a golden Calm, and
Sunshine, a Divine Amity spread through the work of God in all the parts of
it. But either of these alone exposes all to stormy gusts, slawes, and wracks.

We read of the Spouse in the Canticles, That the Joints of her thighs are
Jewels, the work of a curious workman. The indeterminate motions of the Will,
render the work of God, a dis-joynted piece, exposing it in its most principal
parts and motions to an ungoverned contingency, without joints or bands, which
may knit them together one to another, and to the whole, as one piece. If the
will with its motions, by a necessary connection in the Order of Causes, be
joynted into the whole, and compose with the rests of the parts one entire
work, answering to one entire design, framed in the heart, and brought forth by
the hand of that supreme and eternal Spirit, which is love it self; the pure,
unmixt, entire Spirit of love; How sweet? how beautiful? how full of all Divine
Charms and Perfections through all the parts of it? What a Princely Daughter
and Spouse, worthy of the great and eternal King must we think this work to be;
which is the complete and full contrivance of so rich and so high a Love formed
in its own Bosom. In the midst of all its most amiable and delightful
treasures; which is the outward work of a most pure and Almighty Love, wrought
entirely from end to end by its own hand, with fingers dropping its own pure
incorruptible Myrrh upon every part of it, as it wrought it, forming it for a
complete Image of it self, and a continual delight to it self? What Jewels now
must we think all the Joints of the Thighs of this Divine Image and Birth? How
harmonious the motions by these Joints, when the joints and motions are all the
work of so skillful, so curious, so faithful a Workman, as Love it self, the
supreme and eternal Love?

I humbly acknowledge, that to my weak Understanding, a created Will, absolute
and arbitrary, determined in its course by no light of Truth, no light or life
of good, seems to lead my Spirit into a Wilderness, where there is no way or
guide; or to thrust me forth without Ballast or Rudder, without a Pole Star, or
Needle touched with the loadstone upon the face of an unknown and stormy Sea.
What a golden-thread of Harmony guides us through the nature of things? and
leads us into all Truth? (Harmony being the very Essence of all Natures and all
Truths) when we understand the whole nature of things, from the greatest to the
least parts and motions of it to be determined, and that determination to be
the work of the Divine Love, the firmest band of sweetest Union, the sweetest
Life of all beautiful proportion, being only Wise, only Powerful, inasmuch as
it is the highest Unity, containing all Variety Originally in it self, sending
it forth from it self, and diffusing it self through all!

We are taught in Metaphysics, That Being, Truth and Goodness, are really one.
How sweet a rest now does the Spirit, with its Understanding, and its Will,
find to itself in every Being, in every Truth, in every State or Motion of
Being, in every form of Truth, When it has a sense of the highest Love, which
is the same with the highest Goodness, designing, disposing, working all in
all, even all Conceptions in all Understandings, all Motions, in every Will,
Humane, Angelical, Divine? With what a joy and complacency unexpressible does
the Will, the Understanding, the whole Spirit now lie down to rest every where,
as upon a bed of Love, as in the bosom of goodness it self?

Let not any question the close and Divine Contexture of the whole Work in all
the parts and conduct of it; by a firm connection of Causes and Effects, like
links in a Chain, from its first beginning to its last end; because he meets
with an Hell, as well as an Heaven in this work of God. Divine Love (which
transcendently excels in all Wisdom and Prudence, beyond all the highest wits
of men, the richest Contrivances of Poets,) knows how to joint an Hell into
its work, with such Divine Artifice, incomprehensible to Men or Angels, that
this also shall be beautiful, with delights in its place, and shall give a
sweetness, a luster to the whole piece. St. Paul says to the Saints, All
things, this World, Life, Death, things present, things to come are yours, you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and God is Love. See a golden Chain, see the
Order of the precious Links, see how in a beautiful circle the beginning is
fastened to the end.

All Philosophy agrees in this, that the last end is the first mover. In God
then, who is Love, the first and the last links of this Chain meet. All things,
this wicked World, Death it self, even the second Death and Hell, deaths to
come, as well as deaths present, are shining links in this golden Chain,
fastened to that superior Link, the Saint, the spiritual man; He is linkt by
heavenly embraces to Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ to God, the Father of Lights,
and the spring of Loves.

Homer tells us of a Chain fastened to the Throne of Jupiter, which reaches
down to the Earth. He speaks to Neptune, Minerva, and the rest of the Powers
about him, which reign in the Skies, in the Seas, in the Earth, in Hell below.
If ye should all hang with your whole weight upon the end of this Chain, I
would at my pleasure draw you all up to my self. The Throne of the most High
God, is a Throne of Grace, of Love. Like a Chain does the whole Nature of
things descend from this Throne, having its top fastened to it. Whatever the
weights may be of the lowermost links of this Chain, yet that Love which sits
upon the Throne, with a Divine delight, as it lets down the Chain from it self,
so draws it up again by the Order of the successive Links unto a Divine
Ornament, an eternal Joy and Glory to it self. All things of Nature in its
Beauties, all things of Nature in its Ruin, Life and Death in all forms, are a
Saints, a Saint is Christ's, Christ is Gods.

But, gentle Reader, this is enough to set forth the suitableness between the
two Subjects of my Epistle and my Book; the Divine Love, and the Will of Man,
the Daughter, and the Bride of this Love, by its immortal Birth and Espousals,
essentially, inevitably determined to its heavenly Father and Bridegroom. To
this Love the only Good, in all appearances of it, the Will turns it self, as
the Needle touched with the Loadstone to the North Pole. Beautiful and blessed
is this Will, when its own Bridegroom shines upon it, and attracts it by beams,
by sweet glimpses of it self, spread through all things, more clear, or more
obscure, but true. Then do her beauty and blessedness both change into
deformity and misery, when by hellish enchantments she is deluded, and drawn
into the embraces of a wrinkled VVitch, or a Spirit, from the darkness below,
transformed into the likeness of her heavenly Love.

There are now a few things only remaining, of which I would briefly give thee
some account.

1. Persons engaged on both sides in this question, which is the ground of my
Treatise, are highly honored by me, and truly dear to me in an high degree. A
natural Understanding, Ingenuity, Integrity, Learning, Wisdom, Knowledge, an
heavenly mind, set a great price and luster upon them. The ends at which these
persons on both parts profess to aim, are truly Spiritual and Divine. It is the
design of one part to beighten the Grace of God by its freedom and peculiarity.
Of the other, to enlarge the Glory of this Grace by its extent and amplitude.
One admires and adores the absoluteness, the sovereignty of God, the other his
goodness. On one side is an holy jealously, for the Unity and the Beauty of the
Divine Nature, lest God should be imagined like the natural day in the
Creation, made up of two Contraries, coordinate and equally predominate, as
Day and Night, Love and Wrath, a ground of Holiness, and a ground of Sin. The
others are equally jealous of the same Unity and Beauty of the Divine Nature,
lest the eternal Power, and so the Godhead should be divided between the
Creator and the Creature; least in effect two Gods should be set up, like those
of the Manichees, a Fountain of Good, and a Fountain of Evil; lest the Divine
Glory should be darkened in its work, and the Harmony broken, in which the
Divine Unity and Beauty most sweetly shine, by taking away in any part of the
work the fixed subordination of Causes and Effects.

O what Joy and Glory would crown the Earth, and the Church of God on Earth, if
those Divine Persons who have fixed to themselves ends so Divine, instead of
opposing each other in their way, perhaps sometimes mistaken to those ends,
would unite their Divine Will and Forces mutually to advance the ends each of
other* St. Paul says, If the falling away of the Jews be the bringing in of
the Gentiles; what shall the return be, but life from the dead? If the
dividings, the disputes of these Parties have brought much light to the Church,
what will the reconciling and uniting of their glorious ends, and their Spirits
in the glory of those ends be, but as a Marriage-day shining from on high,
which shall fill the Angels themselves with a new joy? The day will come, when
men shall say, Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the Lord, Who reconcilet^
the freedom and peculiarity of the Grace of God, unto a full amplitude and
extent, so raising its sweetness to a perfect height; who shall bring into
mutual embraces the sovereignty or absoluteness of God, and his goodness, that
the sovereignty, the absoluteness, may be soveraignly and absolutely good; that
the goodness alone may be absolute and sovereign; who through the whole compass
of the Divine Nature, and the works of God, shall discover to the eyes of men
in the evidence of a Divine Light, the Unity, the Beauty of the Godhead in
their clearest Purity, their highest Perfection; springing and shining through
all, making all, in the whole, one entire piece, pure and pleasant, perfect in
the Beauties of Holiness.

The Rules which I have desired to govern my self by in this Discourse, are
these, Right Reason, the universally acknowledged Principles of all sober
Philosophy and sound Divinity, the Analogy of Faith, the Letter of the
Scriptures, the Spirit of Christ, in the Head of the Church Christ himself, in
the Scriptures, in the Church, in the Spirits, and experiences of each Saint.
As all these answer each other in a mutual Harmony, like the several strings
upon a well-tuned Lute: So shall I ever (as I humbly believe) take it for
granted, That whatever jars upon any of these strings, is also out of tune to
all the rest. That whatever is not conformable to any one of these Rules,
crosses them all. If any thing of this kind shall have fallen from me, I do here
humbly repent of it, and recant it. I humbly desire all those, who shall stoop
to read what I have written, to believe that no Gift can be so acceptable to
me, as the displacing of any Error or Falsehood in my Mind; with the gentle
hand of Love, by bringing in the Truth which it has counterfeited and veiled.
If any Error have seemed sweet, beautiful, or desirable to me, in any kind. I
humbly undertake to have a confident assurance of this, That the Truth it self
shining forth, will bring along with it far more transcendent Sweetnesses,
Beauties, Agreeablenesses and Satisfactions to all my Desires, excelling it in
all the impressions of a Divine Pleasantness, Power and Profit, as the true Sun
does a Parelius, or a counterfeit Image of the Sun in a Cloud.

If any shall undertake to answer this Discourse with reviling and reproachful
Language, I shall endeavor to imitate the example of the Marquess de Rent,
fixed with much dearness and esteem upon my heart. He came to a City, filled
with Reproaches cast upon him. I (says he) spoke not one word to clear my
self, I received gladly the Humiliation.

Now, gentle Reader, I will seal up my Epistle to thee with that golden
Sentence of St. Paul, Let all your things be done to all in Charity, or in
Divine Love.

Let me add this one short Direction, as a gloss upon it, bear always clearly,
and deeply engraven upon thy Soul, these and the like Precepts, Love all Men,
Honor all men. Love your Enemies, Love another as thy self.

Study to know God, as he is the Pattern, and the Perfection of the Divine
Perfection included in these Precepts; Be you perfect, says Jesus Christ, as
your heavenly Father is perfect. So he sets before his Disciples the rich
ground, out of which these Precepts Spring, as Plants of Paradise.

Study the Reason and the Equity of these Precepts. The Precepts of God are
true, says David, and righteous altogether. Every Divine Precept is founded in
a Divine Truth. The only reason of Love, is loveliness. Thus shall thou be
every where led into a Paradise, and into Heaven, while thou shall now
understand that God is Love, a Godhead of Love; That while thou live and
movest, and have thy Being in God; thou live, and movest, and have thy Being
in Love it self; That while God works all in all, fills all in all, all within
thee, all without thee, is a work of Love, is full of Love.

Thus these Precepts, in the reason of them, which will shine out upon thee
more and more, as thou growest in the practice of them, shall be an anointing
upon thine eyes, by virtue of which thou shall see in all things, every where,
which way soever thou turnest thy self, a Divine Loveliness presenting it self
to thee, continually entertaining, enflaming thine heart with a Divine Love,
crowning thy thoughts with a Divine Peace and Joy.

Gentle Reader, There were in the Temple Vessels made of Wood, but these were
over-laid with pure and massy Gold. This Treatise is no Temple, thou will
certainly meet with many things of wood, and perhaps of the lowest sort of
wood, worthless, the subject of Frailty and Corruption. Let it be thy part and
glory to over-lay it with the Gold of the Temple above, Divine Love, which
covers all Sin. So my humble Prayer is, That thou may be together with my
self, yea, so shall we both be, if we abide in the Divine Love, Priests,
consecrated by an heavenly Blood, and an heavenly Unction, to minister to the
God of all Loving kindnesses, by day and by night, in the Temple of Love. Here
now death is no more, here from our Deathbeds, as from the golden Altar, like
the sweet and costly Incense, we shall ascend in a pure and glorious flame of
heavenly Love, kindled from the Face and Heart of God above, unto the Throne of
God, the Throne of Grace and Love, to be ever in the circuit of that Throne,
where the eternal Spirit, like a Rainbow, shall encompass us round, as the
seal and band of eternal Love shining with all, innumerable beauties and
pleasantuesses, ever full, ever fresh and flourishing.

Perhaps some one will say, Who is this that thus preaches Love to the World?
Is he himself a Dove washed in Milk? Far is he from pretending to the praise and
perfections of that Spirit, the Bride of the heavenly Bridegroom, which sits
in the Garden of Divine Purities, Sweetnesses and Light, making her Beloved,
and his Companions to hear her Voice, while they return their esteem,
affections, and admiration in Songs, saying to her, Thy Voice is pleasant, thy
Face, thy Person is lovely. No, the only Character here is that of a Voice in
the Wilderness, a Wilderness of many Deformities and Distractions within, as
well as without, Crying, Prepare ye the way of Divine Love, make straight paths
for it, by bringing down every Mountain of Vanity and Pride, by filling up the
Valleys of low, dejected, lost, dispairing Spirits. He who thus cries to you
too frequently, too deeply, has ^erc'd the side of this Love; yet still from
the wound^ heart, through the wounds, water and blood flow to wash off the
stains of this blood upon him, and by this blood, as a Balsom, as a Cordial, as
a Spring of Life, all at once to heal his Wounds, to infuse new vigor and joy
into his Spirits, to renew life in his heart, even out of Death it self unto
Immortality. This is the Innocence and Wisdom which makes them blessed, who
aspire to it; who, as often as they fail in their duty of loving every other
person as themselves, are sensible of the guilt of breaking the whole Law,
which is summed up in these two great Commandments, and makes them inseparable
as the substance, and the shadow in the Sunshine, or as the Fountain and the
stream, the Sun and the similitude of the Sun, in the light surrounding it.

To love God, with all our selves, and
To love our Neighbor, as our selves.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Freedom of the Will. The FIRST PART.
CONTAINING The Definition of the Free Will in question, and the Arguments
opposed to it.

Libertas est facultas ejus quod cuique facere libet (ut Romani definiunt)
faith Grotius upon Genesis. This is liberty to do that which we like to do.
Liking is from likeness. Nihil est, quod ad se rem ullam tam alliciat, tam
attrahat, quam ad amicitiam similitudo (says Cicero.) Nothing so allures, and
so attracts, as similitude and likeness does to liking and to love. Liking then
is founded in the nature and harmony of each essence. Every thing moves, and
rests freely, at liberty, when it moves and rests according to its own nature,
according to the harmony of its own essence.

Zeno defines liberty to be (...), a power of selfacting. The Philosopher
defines nature to be the principle of motion and rest there, where it is (...),
and not (...), by it self, and not by accident. Our nature is our true-self.
Then have we the power of self-acting, when we move and rest according to our
own natures, being acted in them by our own natural and essential Principles.

We meet with this Rule often in Aquinas, Vnumquodque operatur prout est; Every
thing acts as it is. The being or nature of each thing is the Root, and the
Rule of its operation.

By these things which I have spoken, two marks present themselves to us, to
guide us in our judgment of liberty.

1. Liberty is a relation or harmony between the essence or nature of each
thing, and its operations.

2. According to the Orders and Degrees of Being, are the Orders and Degrees of
Liberty.

According to these two Marks, we shall find a twofold measure of Liberty:

1. The Principle. 2. The Sphere of Activity.
I shall then upon this ground distinguish liberty into a fourfold Order:

1. The freedom of the Elements and Celestial Bodies. 2. The freedom of
Plants. 3. The freedom of brnit Creatures. 4. The freedom of intellectual
Agents.
1. The freedom of the Elements and Celestial Bodies consists in that
motion and rest, which is generally esteemed and styled simply natural. The
principle of their motion and rest, is nature guiding their motions and rests,
in the figure of Divine motions and rests (their invisible Patterns and
Originals,) either by way of instinct, or by the assistance of intelligences,
(as the Peripateticks Schools assert) or informed by Intellectual, Angelical,
Divine Souls, (as the Academy teaches.)

The sphere of their motion and rest is their own proper place, Adaequate to
their Dimensions. They move and rest naturally within themselves. This is their
liberty. Such also is their liberty in their parts and mixtures, which also
being by violence carried out of their proper places, naturally tend to them by
a simple motion in a strait line.

This is the first Order in the liberty of things, a liberty from outward force
or constraint, with a confinement to a single simple motion and rest, at least
in their material and corporeal part.

Thus the Peripateticks make the Spheres of the Elements the first and lowest
order of Corporeal substances and complete being, confining them to Forms
merely natural, and in a manner allowing them only single and simple local
motion. After the same manner also they circumscribe the Celestial Spheres,
giving them only this twofold pre-eminence,

1. One of a fifth essence, compounded of a distinct matter and form.

2. The other of assisting forms, or intelligences moving them.

With these their grounds agrees the Ptolemaiical System. But (as before I
touched) the ancient Academy sets these spheres of the world in a higher rank,
attributing to them, (...), making them rational Beings, Angels, Gods.
Copernicus also sets them at liberty, altering the whole design of their local
motions, and enlarging them to a greater variety.

2. In the second place, is the liberty of Plants, which is a vital liberty.
The principle of their motion and rest, is animate, a vegetative Soul, which
has in it self a variety of formal Acts or Virtues, according to which it
forms to it self an Organical body, composed of differing parts, framed to be
proper Instruments for the diversity of these vital Acts. In like manner does
this soul of the plant put forth it self into diversity of motions in its
proper body; yet are all these motions confined to the body of the plant it
self, or to a very narrow sphere round about it.

The plant also it self is fixed by its root in one place, and immovable there:
The Ratio seminalis, the seminal harmony, which is the essential form, and the
proper soul of the plant (as it is a vegetative soul) gives measure both to the
principle of motion in the plant, and to the sphere or compass of its motion,
being thus the ground and bound of this vital liberty.

This seminal harmony is the contracted and fainter offspring of the
imaginative form, as those are freer, clearer, livelier Births and Images of
rational forms, which are the living pictures of the intellectual and essential
Ideas;

either In superior Souls, or In superior parts of the same Soul.


These intellectual Ideas or essences, are also rich and ample streams of light
and life, flowing from their Divine Unities and springs in the supreme eternal
Unity, the first seat and head of all liberty.

3. The liberty of bruit Creatures has the third place; this is the liberty of
sense. The principle of this liberty, is the sensitive soul, which has its
chief seat in the imagination. Here is the amplitude of its Kingdom, and the
power of its Rule. This being immediately subordinate to the rational
intellectual power, is that Sea whence all the springs and streams of the
inferior and outward senses (as of the local motions) go forth, and into which
they again flow with all their force and efficacy. Here they are united, here
they have their various mixtures, here they have their greatest amplitude and
heightning. The motions here are no more fixed in one place, nor confined to
the compass of their own proper Subject, but enlarge themselves after their
several manner, according to the amplitude of the object of sense, which is the
whole Corporeal world.

There are indeed diverse ranks of sensitive Creatures, which have diverse
degrees of liberty.

1. Some are confined to particular Elements. 2. Others have the liberty of
distinct Elements.
All that are perfect in the order of sensitive being, agree in this; that they
have the liberty of progressive motion, of motion from place to place,
variously, according to the variety of their appetites, governed by the ample
light of their imaginations.

This chiefest freedom of sense is placed in the imagination, this being the
first and highest faculty of the sensitive Soul, where it is in its perfection,
is as ample as the universal object of sense, the whole Corporeal world. Some
Philosophers teach us, That the imagination is the immediate former of this
universal Image, which comprehends all corporeity, the visible Heavens and
Earth, in it self. Others, that it has a commanding power upon this universal
Image, and all the parts of it, having the force of all magic in its self, to
alter the motions of the heavenly bodies, and the Constitutions of the
Elements. This is more universally understood, that it not only takes in and
enjoys the sensitive forms of all the objects of sense, uniting and varying
them according to its own pleasure, but also that it espouseth in it self the
spiritual and corporeal world to each other, receiving the impressions, the
similitudes, the illapses of the invisible Glories as the Originals into their
sensitive Image, and heightning the sensitive Image to a greatness and glory
above it self by this communion with its invisible patterns.

The sensitive appetite has an inseparable conjunction with and conformity to
the imagination. They mutually influence, excite, and govern each other. They
have both objects of equal extent. The good of the sensitive being (which is
the object of its appetite) is not only the preservation of its own being, but
its pleasure and proper happiness in the fruition of the sensitive forms of
things, which fruition is completed in the imagination.

4. The liberty of intellectual beings, is the utmost point of liberty,
comprehending in the general nature of it, God as the Original, and Angels and
Men as the immediate, immortal, clearest, compleatest Copies of that Original.
This is properly the liberty of Spirits, of the Father of Spirits, and of the
Sons of the eternal Spirit. The ground of this liberty is the Divine essence,
and the Divine Image of that essence. The sphere or compass of this liberty is
being it self in its greatest extent, in its first, highest, and most universal
form with all its unbounded self-bounding varieties, and in its descent into
all forms of things, figuring or shadowing it self upon them, filling them with
it self.

Thus the Schools teach us, That ens qua ens, est objectum intellectus. Being
it self in all its fulnesses and forms under the formality of truth (that is,
in its own most proper, formal, and essential Image, which is beauty it self)
the beauty of truth; the truth of beauty in all its riches and varieties) is
the proper object of the understanding, adaequately suited to it, its
entertainment, its food and feast, its light and life which actuates it, its
perfection which determines it and compleats it in its proper form and essence.
It is an acknowledged Maxim, That good is the object of the will. All things
desire good. Good is the object of every appetite, natural; and sensitive also.
But these are particular goods, proper to those particular Orders of Being; the
mark to which the rational appetite directs it self (the Firmament, in the face
of which this Dove with its wide-spread-wings flies) is the Heaven of the first
and universal Good, as it comprehends within its embraces all inferior goods.

Thus the Will has the freedom of all good before it, a freedom for all good
in its self, an essential suitableness, inclination, and capacity to good,
absolutely as good. The soul of man has a threefold liberty, the liberty of
its Essence, Understanding, and Will.

1. The liberty of its Essence, is the fullness of Being, All Being in the
highest, amplest, and most substantial Image, next to the Original it self, the
Divine Essence. For it is the immediate birth of the Supreme Original, its
darling and best beloved Child, although it be the younger Brother to those
Sons of God, the Angels; yet is it as Isaac to Ismael, and Jacob to Esau, their
Lord, the Heir of all; the Nursling of the Angels, while it is in its minority,
for whom they are made to be ministering Spirits to it. So has the soul of man
(as an intellectual Spirit) all things in its own essence, within it self, the
supreme and eternal Being in its fairest and fullest Image beneath it self, all
inferior Beings, fairer and fuller then they are in themselves; as the Face in
the Glass excels a Picture, or as a Statue exactly framed in Gold or Marble
excels the shadow cast from that Statue.

2. The Soul, or intellectual Spirit, has a liberty of understanding. Here it
is a clear and spacious light, the immediate luster and outshining of the
Supreme Light unconfined; like to that, as the clearest and compleatest Copy of
it, next to it self. In this Light it freely contemplateth all forms of things
above it, beneath it, of the same order with it; all are present before it, it
comprehends them all within its own circle. In the same Image of it self, in
which it contemplateth it self, it freely and unconfinedly rangeth in the midst
of them; taking in their various beauties distinctly, and all their beauties
(with their most delightful proportions and harmonies) united in one: at its
pleasure, freely does it put on all these beautiful forms, the truths and
essences of all things, being made all things in their truest and conpleatest
beauties, both distinctly and unitedly. So it appears to it self in the
sweetness, beauty, reality, truth of each form, each figure of the Divine truth
and beauty apart. So it appears to it self in the unconfined sweetness, beauty,
majesty of the forms, the truths of all things united in one. This, with
unexpressible delights it looks upon as its own proper and complete Image 5
in this it beholds all scenes of things at once within it self, it sees it
self in all persons, and shapes with the beautiful dresses of Divine truths,
acting all parts in the most beautiful harmony with the Divine truth it self in
its eternal Original. In all it enjoys within it self the truth of reality,
of distinction, of unity, as in the highest Copy; and the life-picture of the
supreme life it self, far above all other Copies.

This Aristotle expresses to us, when he teaches us this Lesson, (...), The
understanding is made all things. This also we learn from him, and his
Followers, That the understanding alone does touch, take in, embrace the
essences of things, while all that presents it self below the understanding to
the senses, is only a various combination of accidents and shadows. So also we
learn from Plato's School, That (...), the Understanding, is the Son of God,
the Word of God, the first and most substantial expression of the Divine Unity,
with all its incomprehensible fullness, next to the Divine Unity it self. This
is in that School the only Seat of the Essences, and the essential truths of
all things. Beneath it, in the discourses of reason, are the forms of these
Essences, as lively Pictures without; in the senses the shadows only. Agreeable
to this also does the sense of the sacred Scriptures seem to be, which makes
man that similitude and Image, in which God with all his holy Angels, in all
created forms of things, unite, center, and terminate, as the end and
perfection of all. Upon this ground is the second Person of the Trinity, the
Godhead in its essential Image, as the most adaequate Image of it self, most
answering, and most suited to it self, and so fittest for the most perfect
Union with it self, as of the proper and most immediate Image with its own
proper Idea.

3. The liberty of the Will is equal to, and arises from this liberty of the
Understanding. The Understanding, as the eye of the Soul, first feasteth upon
the beauties presented to it in the truths of things, and so inviteth the will
as the mouth of the Spirit, to taste the sweetness and goodness of them. The
good of all these forms and essential truths, is that which St. Peter calls the
sincere milk of the living Word. It is peculiarly the Divinity, that of the
Original and Supreme Unity, which is in them. The nature of good is defined by
a sutableness or agreeableness. This has its root in an unity. All things that
agree, agree in aliquo tertio. The agreement of things, is their meeting in an
unity. The Soul in its essence is the most complete and immediate Image of the
Divine Unity, in which all varieties of things lie virtually and eminently, as
in their first spring. The understanding, and all forms or truths of things in
the understanding, are the effulgency of this Divine Unity, with all its
varieties contained in it, as they shine forth in the essence of the Soul, and
so become the reflections of it self upon it self, and as the highest figure of
the eternal Son of God, the brightness of its own glory to it self. Thus the
essence of the Soul, and the essential Images of all truths of things,
according to their Divine beauties in the Soul, have an essential sutableness
and agreeableness to each other; from that twofold unity, their unity in their
Original, their unity in their own proper form, as it is the Image of that
Original. The essential inclination of the Soul to these forms of Being, and
Images of the Divinity (and to the Divinity it self in these Images) presented
to the Soul by their essential truths in their understanding, is that power
which we call the Will. The sutableness and agreeableness of these forms of
things to the Will: The (...) (and so more principally the Divine Unity in
them, the root and life of this agreeableness) is the good, which is the Object
of this inclination, the Will of the intellectual Spirit.

Love is defined the union of the Lover, and the Beloved. The will, as it is an
essential inclination to its Object; the good (shining forth in its proper
Image, and beautiful forms of truth in the understanding) is love it self, the
essential love of the Soul. The Soul in this essential power, which we call the
Will, is the Lover. This is that which Plotinus seems to mean, when
discoursing of the Soul, he The same in the Arg. of Kleg.
says, That every Soul comes forth with a Cupid, or love proper to it, and
inseparable from it. It is commonly known, that the Soul is represented by
Venus (the Queen of Beauty, and the Mother of Love) the Daughter of Jupiter, of
Jehovah. As the intellectual Soul is the ^enus, so is this essential
inclination of the Soul to good (which is its will) the Cupid or Love born of
it, and born with it, inseparable from it.

As is the intellectual Spirit, so is its Will or Love; the highest and
loveliest Image of the first Spirit, and the first Love: so has it in it, next
to the Divine Love, the highest, the most potent, the most universal force of
inclination, and love to the highest and most universal good. The Beloved, or
the Object of this Love and this Lover, the intellectual Soul and the
Intellectual Will, is the highest and most universal good, as it presents it
self in its highest luster, in its richest, amplest, most unlimited variety of
beauties in the Understanding. This good being an agreeableness to the Will,
and so meeting with a mutual and answerable agreeableness in the Will to it
self, presents it self thus by the Understanding in these forms of truth,
(which is the Divinest beauty,) as a lover and a beloved both to the Will, that
they may be equally and mutually happy, by equal, by mutual embraces and
fruition.

This is the liberty of the Will consisting in two parts, mutually answering
each other. The first is the vigor and amplitude of the principle, the
inclination or love carrying the Soul to, rendering it capable of, good in its
absolute and universal form. The second is the vigor and amplitude of its
Object, which is the highest good, the Divinity of good it self, presenting it
self in its absolute, universal, or entire truth, beauty, and essential form,
presenting it self in all varieties of distinct truths, beauties, and forms, as
they are represented in their highest, completest Image, next to the Original
it self in the Understanding. Here is the Will, like a Be in a Garden, or
flourishing Field, or rather in an heavenly Paradise, flying at liberty over
all forms of truth and beauty, as the Flowers and Plants in this Paradise,
resting at pleasure upon every one of them, sucking (...) sweetness, the
virtue, the good, the unexpressibleness of the Divinity, and the Divine Unity
from them, as the Honey which is its Divine Feast, Nourishment, Life, and
Treasure.

This is the liberty of the Soul, of the Understanding, of the Will, in its
proper Nature, and primitive State. This is the liberty which it still enjoys
inseparable from its essence, under the fall it self, so far as by the promised
Seed putting forth it self in the moment of the Fall, the essence of the
intellectual Spirit is renewed and maintained universally by common Grace, in
the midst of the ruins of the Fall. I have this one thing only to add, under
this fourth Head, (the Liberty of intellectual Spirits,) that, as God is the
Original Spirit, as Angels and intellectual Souls are Image-Spirits; so is the
liberty of the Divine Essence, the Original liberty, and the liberty of all
other intellectual Spirits, Humane or Angelical, is the Birth, and so the Image
of that liberty.

Having thus passed through the several degrees of liberty, in the several
Orders of Being, we come now more particularly and distinctly to state the
question concerning the Liberty of the Will, which is the subject of our
present Discourse.

There is a twofold liberty of the Will.

1. One by all acknowledged inseparable from the Will, in all States and acts.

2. The other has been through all Ages, Religions, and Philosophyes, the
ground of many learned, eloquent, deep Discourses and Disputes between persons
eminent in all kind.

1. The first uncontroverted liberty of the Will, is that which is built upon
the grounds already laid. It consists in two glorious preheminencies:

1. The liberty of acting from an internal, essential, universal Principle of
inclination or love, which is confined or restrained in its nature and power by
no particular differences; which is by nothing determined in its actings,
except only as it determines it self by the Laws of its own universal nature,
in which it bears the immediate and most express figure of the Divine Nature,
and so of the Divine freedom or liberty.

2. This Principle has for the sphere and compass of its activity, the
absolute and universal good in the entire freedom of his unconfined form or
Essence, in all the varieties of its descents and ascents, its divisions and
compositions. The Will of the Intellectual Spirit is free here in the chase and
pursuit of all good, unconfined to any particular form of good, determined by
it self alone, and its own internal essential motions, to the choice and
embraces of every good.

2. The second liberty of the Will, which has so different aspects to the
differing understanding of excellent persons (for the most part, in all places
and times) is generally known by these terms of Libertas contradictionis, and
libertas contrarietatis; Liberty of contradiction and of contraricty. Suppose
an intellectual Spirit, in the moment immediately preceding its Action, positis
omnibus requisitis ad agendum, now ready for action, in the constitution and
concurrence of all circumstances essential, accidental, from above, from below,
from the first universal cause, from all second and particular causes, from
within, from without, in respect to any Essence, Power, and Operation, in
respect to any thing in any potentiality or act: The Will of this intellectual
Spirit without any change in any circumstance, in any degree, may act, or not
act, which is the liberty of contradiction; may act either in this way, or in
the way directly contrary to it, which is the liberty of contrariety.

This is also expressed by a liberty or power in the Will to determine it self
in the moment of acting by its act, without any predetermination in the Will it
self, in the power of acting, in its proper Essence, and the laws of its own
Nature, in the connection of causes, or in the first, and universal Cause.

The method of my treating upon this Question, shall be,

1. An humble proposal of those Arguments, which seem to fight against this
liberty.

2. To state and examine the Arguments brought to establish this liberty, with
all the clearness and candor that I am capable of.

To these also I shall annex those answers, which may appear proper to give any
satisfaction to those Arguments.

These two sorts of Arguments I shall digest into so many Books.

1. The first Book shall contain the first sort of Arguments opposed to this
liberty in question, divided according to these five Heads, from which they are
drawn,

1. The Divine Nature. 2. The Nature of the Creature. 3. The Mediation of
Christ. 4. The Soul intellectual with its Will. 5. The proper form and essence
of liberty.
1. Head of Arguments.
The first Head of Arguments is the Divine Nature.

From this Head we shall draw seven Arguments.

1. Argument.
The first Argument, from the Divine Nature, is the Being of God. God is Being
it self in its simplicity and absoluteness, the first, the supreme, the
universal Being. This is his Name by which he makes Himself known to Moses, I A
M; Being it self in its absoluteness, undivided, unrestrained, unconfined,
unallayed by any differences of mixtures; Being it self at the utmost height
of all Eminencies and Transcendencies; Being it self in its fullness, in its
greatest Amplitude and Majesty; Being it self in its Truth, in its substance;
the only true Being, the universal Being, comprehending the excellencies of all
Beings, heighthned to a transcendency above all Being and all Excellency, all
Being in one, all Being complete in one complete Person, which is a perfect
number of Persons, Three Persons in One; that it may entertain and enjoy it
self in a perfect immortal Circle of all Being and blessedness. This is God,
this is his Name, I A M.

His Name Jah imports the same sense, Being it self: His Name Jehovah
expresses the same thing, the universal Being; All Beings past, present, and
to come, with all their distinctions and differences, in one.

Every thing that I S bears written upon it this Name of God, I A M. All
things that be declare a Being: While all things agree in this, That they be,
they demonstrate an universal Being. Being, as it is divided and restrained by
particular Differences (in all things particular and different one from
another) by being lessened, contracted, and obscured, is imperfect. Nothing
that is imperfect can subsist, exist of it self, or by it self; for so far as
it is imperfect it is not. Imperfection is so far a privation or negation of
Being. Before then that which is imperfect, is that which is perfect, from
which and by which that which is imperfect existeth. Thus Socrates in Plato,
from the beauties of sense scattered and divided among diverse beautiful
Subjects or Persons, leads us to all the beauties of sense united in one Person
completely beautiful. From this perfection of beauty, where it is an accident
seated in a subject of dark matter, ever changing, he raises us to the
innumerable forms of beauty, the unchangeable essences and immortal substances
of beauty, where beauty is the whole substance, pure, and immaterial. These
manifold forms of immaterial and essential beauties, awakened into the
intellectual Spirit, he makes as golden wings, by which we fly upward into the
bosom of that first Beauty, where all beauties meet in an entire and
transcendent Unity.

Thus all particular and imperfect Beings carry us up to the perfect and
universal Being, abstracted from them all, set on his Throne high and listed up
above them all, from which, as their proper Head, they flow, by and in which,
as in their proper Root, they subsist, being the beams of this glorious Sun,
and Rivers from this full Sea. This is God in his high and holy place of
Eternity. This universal Being, where all Beings meet in one, is Eternity. This
is the holy place of Eternity. Being it self in its most exalted Purity
abstracted and separated from all differences, mixtures, allayes, from every
thing foreign. This is the high place of Eternity. Being it self in its first
and supreme Unity, comprehending all Beings, all perfections of Being,
heighthned to a perfection so far above themselves, that no Being, the most
perfect, is able to look up to it.

Can now any thing, any where, any Essence, Power, Act, any Will, or motion of
the Will, be, and not be originally contained in this first Being, and not be
subject, subordinate to this supreme Being, and not lie within the compass, be
full of, be universally filled with this universal Being?

In Metaphysics we are taught, That God, as He is Being it self in its
simplicity, is the proper, immediate, and formal Cause of all Being, every
where; and that the modifications only of each Being proceed from it by the
mediation of second Causes. Is it not clear then, that these modifications
themselves, so far as they be, or have any Being in them, are the immediate and
formal effects of the first and universal Being?

If now the motion, the modification, the determination of the Will in its Acts
be not, it is no more the subject of any dispute, discourse, or thought, it
has no more any place or effect in the nature of things, to bring forth any
Consequences, or to make any Differences. If it be, if it have any Being at
all, Can it have any place without the comprehension and embraces of the
universal Being? Shall it not yield the Power, the Pre-eminence, the
Sovereignty to Him, whose Name alone is I AM, and I AM that which I AM? Shall
it not confess to him, and say, Thou only art the only true Being, the
universal Being; I am a shadow, and empty figure. Thou art the truth, the
substance of my Being. Thou fillest all in all of me. Thou art that which thou
art. I am a shadow of my self only; I am only That, which I am in Thee, That
which Thou art in me: I am my true self only, so far as I am in Thee, the
Original truth of all Being; only so far as thou art in me, the Substantial
truth of all Being.

Object. Do we make the Creature nothing? Do we make God All? Do we confound
God and the Creature?

Answ. Far be it. We speak the Language of the general stream of Divines,
Philosophers, Poets, Heathen and Sacred, through all Ages. We speak their
Language with their sense, and upon their grounds: But we chiefly build upon
the foundation of the holy Scriptures, in which we read such characters of men,
of the world, of all things in it, that they are a scheam or figure, that they
are not, lighter than vanity, less than nothing, a vapor, a vain show, a tale
that is told, a dream in sleep. All that we converse with, is styled by Plato,
(...), that which is not, and distinguished from (...), that which truly is.
Aristotle styles God, (...), the Being of Beings. We learn of him that, that is
True which terminates and gives rest to the Understanding, and that to
understand things, is to know them by their causes; which plainly infers, that
God alone is the Truth of every Creature and in every Creature, that He alone
terminates and gives rest to our Understandings, in as much as He is the first
Cause.

Our design and desire is to establish most firmly and clearly the immutable
and everlasting bounds between God and the Creature. The Creature truly really
is in the proper rank and order of its own Being; but all that it is, in the
presence of the Divine Being, in comparison with it, is like a dream, when one
awakes, less than nothing. Every Creature at its best estate is vanity, an
obscure, empty shadow of its Divine Original in God. The Creature is nothing of
it self, or by it self, but a momentany emanation from God, sent forth from
him, sustained by Him, comprehended by him, and filled with him. God is not the
Creature, yet is he in the Creature, not Circumscriptive, nor Definitive,
confined to the Creature, or defined by the Creature; but Repletive, filling
all in all, in every Creature.

St. Paul says of him, That he is above all, in all, and through all: Above
all, as incomprehensibly transcending all, as the eternal universal Head of
all: In all, as the truth, the fullness of all, by each Idea in each Creature
(like the Seal in the Impression): Through all, as the perfection and end of
all:

2. Argument.
The second Argument is the Trinity in God. God is the first, and so the most
perfect Unity, every way undivided, every way unconfined, in all-comprehending,
all-transcending, incomprehensible Unity, eminently transcendently, one in all,
one with all, uniting all, most full, most fruitful, the Spring of all things.
This is God the Father, the Godhead in its fountain, as it is its own
fountain. This is the first Person, the universal Being, in its most complete
existence and subsistence, in an entire Unity.

All our senses, our intellectual powers, every where present to us an unity,
and a variety, equally inseparable: the inclinations of all our faculties carry
us equally to both these: these two jointly constitute and compose all essences
and forms of things, all our objects, entertainments and delights. Unity
without distinction or variety, is a barrenness, a melancholy, a solitude, a
blackness of Darkness, a death beyond any thing existent, or imaginable in the
nature of things. A distinction or variety without unity, is a confusion, a
wilderness beyond the wildest fancy, a distraction beyond all madness.

Variety is every way equal to an Unity; as positive, as real, as ample, as
high; As the first and most perfect Unity, comprehends all Variety in it self
(as one with it self, and so is as properly, as formally, variety as unity;) so
does the first, and most perfect Variety comprehend the Unity in it self, in
its own proper essence and formality; for if the Variety were not all things,
and so the highest Unity, it were not a full Variety. Thus are both these every
way equal, equally all, most perfectly one, most perfectly distinct; by being
both the proper character of each, the first and highest Unity, the first and
fullest Distinction or Variety.

The Godhead in the second Person is the first Distinction or Variety, and so
the most perfect Variety, equal with the Father, equally a Divine Person, All
variety of Being in a most complete, most distinct existence, or subsistence,
in an entire Unity. All fullness, All the fullness of the Godhead is said to
dwell in him, (...), bodily or personally; that is, essentially, substantially,
entirely, distinctly, in the highest and most perfect Unity, with the clearest
and compleatest Variety.

Thus is this Person at once, most perfectly one with the Father, having the
Father in himself, and being himself in the Father: Thus is He also distinct
from the Father, with the highest and most perfect Distinction, being Himself
the first, the fullest Distinction and Variety, in its most abstracted form,
and so in its greatest amplitude.

Jesus Christ, as He is this Second Person, is known peculiarly by this Name
(...), as it comes from (...), which signifies to gather together: the proper
Name of Christ, as He is the first and most universal Variety. Upon this ground
also he is styled, (...), the manifoldly various Wisdom of God. This is the
brightness of the Glory of God, that is, the effulgency of the Divine Glory or
Godhead, shining out clearly and distinctly into all beautiful and blessed
Varieties, so richly (beyond all number and limit) contained in it. This is the
effulgency of the Godhead, shining out into an essential Image, a clear
distinct Image of it self, in the fullness of its Divine Essence, and into all
Images, all forms of things, eternally springing up fresh and new, in the
brightness and glory of this essential Image, which is it self ever entire,
ever new, and distinct with the highest Distinction in every one of these. This
is the first and fullest Distinction; this of the Image from its Original in
the Divine Nature. This is Variety it self in its abstracted and essential
form, where it is most absolute, most free, and unconfined, being it self
entire; the first, the freshest, the fullest Variety, an ever springing
fountain of all Varieties, in every part of the Variety. This is the proper
form, the unvailed face, the uncircumscribed Amplitude and Majesty of God,
Variety it self, with its most unlimited fullness, with its clearest light and
luster, in a most absolute, most entire, undivided Unity. This is the Second of
the Three in the adored Trinity.

God, the third Person, the Holy Spirit, is the Union of these two. He
proceeds from these two, as the spiration or conspiration of these two,
meeting in one. As the Father and the Son are one by the first and highest
Unity, as they are distinct by the first and fullest Distinction; so are they
at once equally one, and equally distinct. This is the proper form of Union, a
concurrence of Distinction and Unity, where two as two are one, retaining their
distinction in their Unity. Thus meeting in a third, this third is equal to the
other two, containing them both in it self. It is one with the other two, and
in the other two, by having the Unity in it self: It is distinct from the other
two, by having the first and highest Distinction in it self.

The Union of variety and Unity is the essence of Harmony; Unity of a variety,
variety in an Unity, is the essential form of Harmony. God then being in
Himself the first Unity, the first Variety; in their first Union is the first
harmony, the most perfect, the most exalted, the universal Harmony, the
fountain of all Harmonies. All things lie here in a perfect Harmony. This
Harmony comprehends all things in it self, diffuseth it self through all.
Every thing, every where, lies within the bounds and measures of this Divine
Harmony, is measured and governed by it, springs forth from it, bears the
figure of it, bears a part in it, is Harmony in this Harmony. Every nature
and form of each thing, in each kind and degree, to the lowest divisions and
least distinctions of things, is expressed universally by (...) in Greek, by
Ratio in Latin, which both properly express Harmony; A variety bound up in an
Unity, an Unity diffusing it self through a variety.

This is God, the third Person in the Trinity, Harmony it self. The first
Harmony, most perfect, most absolute, diffusing it self through all things,
endlesly and unboundedly unfolding it self into all forms of things, by its
Divine force, as the force, as the fulnesses and streams of this Harmony, in
its own soft and spacious Bosom, enfolding all forms of things in the same
Bosom, as Harmonies of this Harmony, Harmonies in this Harmony, in each of
which the universal Harmony is new and complete.

Can there be now any one thing in the nature of things, any one thing in the
will of any Spirit, any one essence, form, power, act, accident, or
circumstance which lies not in, which flows not from this first and universal
spring, the Divine Unity? Or shall we deny this Divine Unity, to be the first
Unity, to be an entire Unity, the fountain of the Godhead, the only fountain
of all?

Is there any where, in any Will, any distinction of power, or of act, of an
indeterminate power, and determinate? Is there any varying of the Will from
power to act, from an undetermined, to a determined State? Is there any
distinction in the Will, any distinct qualification, modification of any kind
or degree, which lies not most distinctly, most clearly, most completely, with
all its variations, in this Divine, this first, this universal and unconfined
Variety, which flows not from it?

Has any Spirit, any Being, a Will? Has any Will any liberty, any motion?
Has any Spirit, any will, any liberty, any motion? Have all these, either
jointly in relation to each other, or each a part in it self, rationem aliquam,
any form, any agrecableness, which is not enfolded, and wrapped up in the Divine,
the sirst, the universal, unconfined Harmony, which does not arise from, which
does not feel the force, and flow in the course of this Harmony? Then must the
Divine Harmony it self be out of tune, being in a discord to this, that lies
without it, being stopped and checked by it. Then must this it self, what ever it
be, have no Harmony, no agreeableness with any thing, no not so much as with it
self; then must it be a discord to all Being; then must it be divided from all
Being, and so not be at all.

3. Argument.
The Wisdom of God comes in the third place, to oppose this Liberty of the Will
in question.

The Divine Wisdom thus expresses it self by the mouth of Solomon in his
Proverbs, I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out witty inventions. The
Philosopher seems to furnish us with a fair Comment upon this Text, when he
divides the intellectual habits or perfections of the mind into these five,
(...). The first is the eternal truth of things in their immediate Principles
and Springs, as they lie in the eternal mind, and thence shine forth in the
Understandings (the superior parts of the inferior and created Spirits.) The
second comprehends all forms of Knowledge, as streams flowing from these
springs running along together in the mind, representing in one view, in one
entire Image, the whole nature of things, as a Copy of the Divine Nature, and
of the Original Image in the Divine mind. The third Perfection, in the account
of the Philosopher, is Wisdom, which he describes to be the union of both
these foregoing Perfections in the same mind or spirit. Prudence in the fourth
place, is the luster or brightness of this Wisdom shining forth in our Manners,
in our moral Actions and Conversations. This is the light of Wisdom flowing
forth upon all the motions of our Will, of our sensitive Appetite and Passions,
with their proper effects, forming and figuring them according to (in an
harmony with) the Divine Image, in the universal nature of things, and in its
Original, the Divine Nature it self, as this Image shines forth in the mind.
Lastly, That Art which compriseth all witty Inventions, is composed of the
emanations of this Wisdom, as beams from the Sun, by which Inferior Spirits
bring forth external effects, works without themselves, in the similitude and
imitation of the Divine Work in the Divine Nature, for the use of life in its
necessities, conveniences and delights.

Thus Wisdom above and below dwells with Prudence, and finds out knowledge of
witty Inventions. Agreeable to this is that Doctrine of another sort of
Philosophers that, as Wisdom is the perfection of the Understanding, so the
Understanding in its perfect state is the first seat and spring of Order.
Therefore they say, wherever there is Order, wherever there is Harmony or
Beauty which consists in Order, there is an Understanding. The Understanding,
say they, in its proper and native state, is the immediate Son and Image of God
beneath God himself, the first and fullest effulgency of the Godhead in its
essential Image, so it becomes Omniform, being all forms in one, with a richly
heighthned Light, and a Divine Order. Here Order has all its Springs and
Measures, here Judgment has its Throne and Scepter, comparing and measuring
all forms of things according to the Order in which they lie here, accordingly
determining order and disorder in things below.

Moses in that sweet and dying Song of his, where he represents the Order and
Beauty of the whole Work of God in the Nation of the Jews (as a principal part
of that Work, and as a mysterious figure of the whole Work) expresses the
whole force and form of the Divine Wisdom, as the ground of his Song, in the
beginning of it: He is the Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are
judgment, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Behold here the three parts of Wisdom; the Rock, the
Judgment, the perfection of the Work.

1. The eternal truths of things in the Divine Mind (the first principle and
spring) where they shine immediately immutably; These are the Rock.

2. The universal Image of things in all variety of Forms, with a beautiful
Order drawn forth from these springs, joined immediately to them, exactly and
most agreeably suited to them, most harmoniously answering them, in all mutual
Comparisons and Relations within the Divine mind: This is the Judgment.

3. The production of the whole work in an apt correspondency with this inward
Image, that the whole answer the whole, part answer part, universally through
the whole. This is the perfection of the Work, the perfection of Wisdom and
Judgment in the work. Thus the ways of the Workman in his work are Judgment.

If now any part of the work of God, if a principal part of his work, the will
of intellectual Spirits, in those motions, in those moments, which are as the
hinge upon which the whole Work of God chiefly turns about, in respect to its
Beauty and Deformity, its Misery and Felicity, its Eternity, have no Connection
with or Dependence upon the other parts of the work, the Image or Original
Model in the Divine mind; Can there be an Order here in the whole, Can all the
parts in the whole have an harmonious proportion to each other? Can the Work
outward agree with the inward Model, the whole agreeing with the whole, and
each part answering each part? Can this work be perfect? Can it be wrought in
Judgment? Is the whole way of this work the way of Judgment? Is there in each
step of it, the foot-step of a Divine Understanding, the impression of a Divine
Wisdom, which is an entire uninterrupted Order? Do all the parts in this Work,
according to the Model or Image in the mind of the Workman, lie together in
one whole piece, in one beautiful body, knit together by fit joints and bands,
ministering to each other by these joints and bands mutual strength, beauties,
and perfections, from the same Head, whose Unity runs through, shines in
the whole, and all its several parts, thus uniting them as one body to each
other, and to its self?

Does not this supposition of such an independent Liberty in the Will to
Contrarieties and Contradictions, naturally lead us to an imagination of two
Gods, one Good, the other Evil, striving together in the composure of the same
work, bringing in consusion upon it by crossing and interrupting each other,
according to the sense of the Manichees? Or does it not favor that Opinion of
some Platonists, of a matter, the subject of the Divine Work, coeternal with
the Divine Spirit, the Workman, which being in some parts of it altogether
intractable, resisting the skill and power of the Archytect or working Spirit,
receives not the Divine form which that would introduce, could not be made
beautiful, and so brought Confusion, War, all Evil into the Work? Or (if that
seem more probable) would it not incline us to the belief of fortuitous
motions, of numberless Particles confusedly concurring, which have neither
beginning, rule, nor end of themselves, their shapes or motions?

What skilful Poet makes his Poem so, that the great Chain, and final
Catastrophe, in the conduct and government of which the chief beauty of the
whole Work is placed (from which arise the greatest Consequences, together with
the perfection and praise of the whole piece) should be derived from a mere
Contingency, which has no coherence with any antecedent part, which receives
no force from any thing of any reason, proportion, or order in the whole, which
has no place nor form in the design of the Poet?

Would any wise Workman, who had an absolute power over his work, who brought
forth from himself entirely both the matter and form of it according to his
will, frame a work, in which the great end of the principal parts and of the
whole, should be undetermined, by being dependant upon the great and chief
motion of the work, which can have no complete Idea in the mind of the Worker
from which it may receive its form, which is incapable of having any certain
conformity to the will of the Workman, to derive from thence an agreeable
sweetness and goodness through the veins of the whole and of all the parts,
that the spirit which has wrought it may have rest and complacency in the work
it self, in the harmony of the work within it self, and in the harmony of it
with the Model in its own Understanding? Would he frame a work which in this
its principal motion should be altogether out of its own power, should have no
natural, no moral necessity or certainty from any antecedent causality and
reason, which should be altogether fortuitous, which should be thus rendered
altogether incapable of being one entire piece, where all the parts first
contained in the Potentiality and Unity of the whole, flowing forth from it by
virtue of that Unity, are united among themselves by their mutual Relations and
Proportions, making up a beautiful harmony in the whole?

This in all learning and observation has been esteemed the first and chief
part of wisdom, to fix determinately, with full strength of inclination,
thought and contrivance, the end of every work. This the second part next to
it, particularly styled Prudence, to dispose and direct all the means
efficaciously and infallibly to those ends.

Object. 1. Perhaps some one will say, That the parts of the Divine Work have
their coherence, connection, and proportion, while this grand motion of which
wespeak, the determination of the Will, flows from the power of the Will, which
flows from God, the Fountain of causality, in the centinued stream of second
causes.

Answ. This indeed is often spoken of, Let us see if it be well understood, if
there be no fallacy or ambiguity latent or manifest in this Assertion: If the
power of the Will be the cause of its determination, if God in the order of
second causes be the Author of this Power, then also is the determination of
the Will from Him; after the same manner, by the force of that Rule, Quicquid
est causa causae, est causa causati: The cause of any cause, is also the cause
of the effect produced by that cause. Now is the Will no more free, with an
undetermined freedom or liberty, being thus predetermined in its superior
causes, from which it receives both the power of determining, and the
determination of its power. Now is the power of its Will in its state of
acting, not undetermined, or indifferent to contradictory and contrary terms or
bounds of its motion.

If it be replied, that the power of the Will, in determining it self, is from
God in the natural course of things; but the act of that power in the
determination of it self, from the power of the Will alone, with an absolute
and universal independancy upon all things antecedent to it, either natural or
moral: Although this be very difficult to be understood, yet I shall not at
present make any other opposition to it than this, that it leaves my present
Argument untoucht in its full strength and vigor.

Object. 2. There is something of greater moment, which perhaps may seem to
shake the structure and strength of this Reason. The great and Ultimate ends of
God in his Work, are the glories of his Goodness and his Justice. In this the
Divine Wisdom shines out with a luster, dazzling the eyes of our Reason (of
every created Understanding) in finding out this the most proper and effectual
way to these ends, viz. The setting up of intellectual Spirits, free in the
determination of themselves to good or evil, and compensating this good and
this evil with suitable torments, suitable triumphs.

Answ. Three Answers offer themselves to this Objection.

1. Answ. This also yields that on which the whole weight of the Argument
against Free Will lies, the righteousness and wickedness of intellectual
Spirits; that is, the highest Beauty, the foulest Deformity upon the principal
parts of the Divine Work, to which all the other parts serve. The great and
Ultimate ends of these intellectual Spirits, unexpressible eternal joys or
miseries, hang all upon a mere contingency, upon the motion of the Will, which
has no place, no part in the Divine Design, which receives no form, no measure
from any model in the Workman, or any part of the work. Thus are the great
consequences, the great ends of the work, in the great, the principal parts and
passages of it, altogether undetermined and uncertain, in the nature of the
work, and in the continuance of the Worker.

2. Answ. Does not this seem much rather a reflection upon, than an exaltation
of the Divine Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom; that the righteousness and
wickedness of intell^ctual Creatures, the highest good and evil in the whole
work, the eternal blessedness and misery of its own so great, so glorious
Births and Images, should be of so little moment to the Divine Nature, to the
Divine Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, that they should be left entirely out of
the Divine contrivance and conduct, without the compass of all reason and
proportion, to an uncertainty, an indeterminateness of which no account can be
given, as effects of the blindest chance which was ever entertained into the
most blind and confused imagination of the most vulgar Spirits? But this
subject of the Divine Goodness and Justice, and the Argument taken from them to
justify this freedom of the Will, belongs properly to the second Book, where
the Reader may meet with a large discourse upon it. I shall therefore thus
lightly pass over it here.

3. Answ. The inconsistency of the setting up intellectual Spirits, in this
freedom, by the Divine Power and Wisdom, with the very essences of all Power
and wisdom, with the whole nature of things created or uncreated, will also
find its proper place in other following Arguments, which is therefore only
touched here.

4. Argument.
Next to the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, seems to furnish a fourth
Argument against this Liberty of the Will.

We have it proclaimed from Heaven by the mouth of God Himself, That Power
belongs to God. God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, That Power
belongs unto God, Psalm. 62. 11. Joseph says to Pharaoh, That his dream was
repeated, to declare the certainty of it. A Repetition also is designed to
express the weight and consequence of that Truth, which is twice over affirmed.
No Truth has a clearer certainty, or bears a greater weight upon it in the
whole nature of things, than this, That Power belongs to God. Jesus Christ,
who is the only true God, is said by the word of his Power to uphold all
things, to bring forth, and to bear up all things, as the Greek word manifestly
and commonly signifies. This alone brings forth all things, all spirits. This
alone bears upon its bosom all its own Births, as a root the plant with all
its fruit. Here only in the sense of this truth, with an immediate repose upon
it, do all things, all hearts find rest.

Power is here by the Psalmist expressed absolutely, unlimited, in the
abstract; all Power is Gods, and of Him: So the Hebrew phrase imports.

God is the first Seat and Spring of all Power, in every kind. All Power
supernatural, natural, civil, moral; All Power in every State undetermined,
determined; All Power in every degree, the Power of acting; the Power in act
has its first seat in God, and comes down from Him.

There is a threefold Power, 1. An Active Power. 2. A Passive Power. 3. A
Power in Act.


1. The Power of Acting, which as it belongs to the forms of things, which
are either Spirits or spiritual, so it self is a Spirit or a spiritual form.
This is defined to be a principle of Acting. This is it self an eminent and
universal Act, or active form like a Spring; containing and sending forth from
it self variety of Acts or forms, as a Spring does streams. This Power is more
excellent than the Act which is produced by it.

2. The Passive Power, is that of matter, which as an obscute shade,
comprehending or hiding variety of Acts or forms in it, like Plants; obscured
and contracted there, like Plants in their seeds in the Earth, or the
Intellectual and sensitive Soul, with all its treasure of Intellectual, of
sensitive forms, in a sleeping Body. This Power is inferior to the Act, which,
when it is brought forth, is the exaltation of this Passive Power to an higher
degree of Being; it is indeed, as a spiritual Act or form, encompast with,
obscured within its own shade. As the Sun calls up the Plants out of their
seeds and beds in the dust, so the Spirit it self, the Spiritual Act or form
shining forth from the Active Power upon this shade of matter and of the
Passive Power, awakeneth it into a beautiful form.

3. Power in Act. All Power purely Active is ever in Act. Such Power is always
abstracted from matter and a spiritual essence or form, eminent above all
things in matter, an universal comprehending variety of Acts or spiritual forms
in it self.

Every Active Power, in matter is compounded, being partly Active, and partly
Passive. This Power is never brought into Act, but as it is excited and
awakened, from without, by its Object, from above, by power abstractive and
purely active, shedding its beams upon it. Thus in the Schools they distinguish
between the Active Understanding in man, separated from matter in its
operations, and the Passive, which ever works in Conjunction with the
material and imaginative faculty; like the Moon, having some obscure light in
it self, but depending upon the illuminations of the Active Understanding, as
its Sun.

Power and Act are distinguished, not as two several Beings, but as the same
Being in several states, modifications, or degrees of Being. When Power, as it
is a spiritual and universal Act, comprehending all its own Acts formally and
eminently in it self, being all at once in Act within it self, brings forth it
self into any particular or single Act in matter, This is the same Power
contracted, and so in a less degree of perfection. When a Passive Power in
matter springs up into Act, This Act is the perfection of the Power. The Power
and the Act here are the same form, sleeping and awakened, in the seed and in
the flower.

All Power is Gods. As he is the most pure, perfect, and universal Spirit: so
is Power in Him, the most pure, perfect, and most universal Act. God gives this
Testimony of Himself, I am Alpha and Omega, The beginning and the ending,
(says the Lord) Which is, and which was, and which is to come, The Almighty,
Rev. 1. 8. As the Power of God comprehends all Powers, most eminently and
most actually, in himself; so all Powers in Him are ever most perfectly in Act,
being themselves pure Acts: God is said to work all things after the counsel of
his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

Power is the principle of Activity. The Will is the inclination or spring of
internal motion in a Spirit, whence all external motions flow, as commanded by
those internal, and immediate, or elicite motions. So is the Will also the
principle of Activity, and the same with power in every Spirit.

Power is a principle of Activity, a spring of Action or Motion; Motion,
Action, are the form in communication, diffusing and propagating it self. The
Will of God is goodness it self, the Object being the Actuation, the perfection
of the Will: The object and the perfection of the will being most perfectly one
with the will, in the Divine Nature. Goodness is properly and formally the
principle of communication: The more there is of the nature of good in any
thing, so much the more communicative and diffusive it is. Thus is, upon this
ground also, the Will and the Power of God the same; both being that Divine
Goodness, which being the supreme and universal form, comprehends all forms
of things most perfectly in it self, and diffuseth it self endlesly into all
forms.

Neither let this trouble any person, that there are evil Powers as well as
good, that there are Powers of doing evil as well as of doing good, that there
are communications and diffusions of evil as well as good, which is manifest in
Original Sin. For all Power in every state and degree in its own nature, is a
participation of the Divine Power, and truly good. As all good in every rank is
truly good, and a stream from the Fountain of good, yet may every subordinate
good be turned by accident into evil, if it be broken off from its
subordination to the supreme good, and be terminated in any other principle or
end: so also is every communication, or propagation of things, in its own
nature good; each form, which is propagated in every communication, being good,
and a branch of the first good. As Evil and Sin are themselves privations, and
deficiencies of Being; so is the propagation of these by Accident, or rather no
propagation in truth, but a deficiency in the propagation and communication,
from the deficiency in its principle.

But as the Will and Power, so also the Will and Wisdom in the Divine Nature
are properly and formally the same in their most proper, most formal
conceptions and definitions. The Divine Will is goodness it self. Goodness is
the suitableness, the agreeableness, the harmony of things, by which they are
desirable to each other, by which they become the perfection of each other,
being as one self, diffusing it self into many forms within it self, in each of
which as a distinct-self, it entirely answers it self. This Harmony is the
proper and essential form of Wisdom, which thus falls in with goodness, and so
with the Will, by giving to all things their proper forms, measures, weights,
bounds, and all manner of proportions in which the Agreeableness and Harmony
consists.

Saint Paul seems plainly to instruct us in this, That the Will of God being
goodness it self, The first, the supreme goodness, being the Spring of all the
Divine inclinations, motions, and communications, giving to each thing its
Being, Form, and proportions, is properly both the Power and the Wisdom of
God, when he says, That he works all things according to the Counsel of his
Will. The power of working, and the Counsel in working (which is Wisdom) are
both here attributed to the Divine Will.

At the same time, the holy Apostle signifies also, That this Divine power
comprehends all powers in it self, and is one pure, perpetual, universal Act,
comprehending all things, in their highest and most eminent acts, within it
self, diffusing it self into power, all acts of power, when he expresses this
in the present Tense, which, according to the Rule of Grammarians, does also
imply a continued act, That God works all things, according to the Counsel
of his Will. As the Divine Power is one pure, eternal, universal Act within it
self, (which is the Divine Goodness, the Divine Will, the Divine Wisdom in the
highest and amplest activity;) so from their eternal Originals in this
universal Power, in this universal Act, spring by a Divine emanation all
Powe^s, all Acts in all seasons, in their proper forms, measures, and
proportions, through the whole Creation.

Having thus laid the ground, let us build up our Argument upon this ground.
There is employed and supposed in Discourses upon this Question, a threefold
Power in the Will.

1. The Will it self, is the power of the Soul, by which it wills.

2. The Will has a power of Acting freely.

3. There is the power of the Will in Act, as often as it acts: and now in
this joint sense of having its power in Act, it is no more free. We will not
now dispute the distinction of these powers: Only as we have before asserted
the Power of acting, and the Power in act are both the same Being, the same
form in different states or degrees of Being, Accordingly, both are eminently
originally seated in God, and formally derived from God, who is the seat and
spring of all Power.

As I have before touched a great part, if not the whole weight of this
question of the power in the Will, to determine it self, and to act, (which is
confessed to be an effect of the Divine Power) and of the determination (the
acting of this power in the determination of it) which is ascribed to the power
it self, without any dependence upon the supreme Power, How does this ground of
the freedom of the Will, laid in this distinction, vanish in the light of
this Truth (like a shady Ghost, before a Divine appearance) That the supreme
Power is a most pure and perfect Act, and so comprehends all Powers in its
self, not only in their potentiality, but in their several acts? If the Divine
Power be omnipotence it self, that is, all Power, it is Power in every state,
Power indeterminate or determinate, Power in Act as well as the Power of Acting.

I shall seal up this Argument with the signature and impression of the Divine
Will, as it is goodness it self, power it self, under one Formal conception.
Goodness has this essential to it, to be diffusive. Every good, the more it
communicates it self, has the more of good in it. Goodness then most simple,
most absolute and perfect; diffuseth it self most simply, absolutely and
universally. This is that Sun which encompasseth the Heavens from one end to
the other, which penetrates to the neithermost parts, to the center of the
Earth, from whose heat and force nothing can hide it self. This touches most
intimately, most powerfully, disposes most sweetly and beautifully all things,
every state, every distinction of things, the Will of each Spirit, each
determination and motion of the Will. The goodness of God is upon, above, and
over all his Works, says the Psalmist. It not only extends it self adaequately
through all, but transcendeth all. It not only fills, but overflows all.

Although the simplicity of the Divine Nature suffers it not to be the
subject of any relation to the Creature, yet does it terminate relations from
the Creature to it self. Thus does the Divine goodness, in the Divine Will,
terminate the relation of every created Will to it self, in the agreeableness
or disagreeableness of every Act. This supreme goodness then has in it self
the measure of this agreeableness and disagreeableness which it receives not
from without, but has originally in it self. So all the acts of the Will,
according to their conformity with, or deformity from the first goodness,
derive themselves from their proper Original in that goodness.

Accordingly the Goodness and the Will of God, has a complacency in every Act
of the Will if it be agreeable to it, or an aversion from it if it be
disagreeable. Thus is the created Will, in all its motions, with their several
most exact distinctions, the Object of the eternal Will in its love or hatred.
Every faculty or power has an essential relation to its proper object, and
dependence upon it. It is drawn forth by it into the most proper Acts of its
essence, and receives from it the perfection of its essence, which consists
in its Activity. The supreme Will, the supreme Goodness, being perfectly,
eternally in Act, has all its Acts, all its Objects, by which it is actuated
perfectly, eternally, from and in it self.

Object. You will say, How can this be? Can the Divine Will, which is
infinitely pure in the beauties of Holiness, in the joys of all blessedness,
comprehend in it self Good and Evil, agreeableness and disagreeableness to it
self, which are the proper measures, and essential forms of all good and evil?
Can it comprehend in it self Objects of Love and Hatred? Can this Fountain send
forth from it self sweet and bitter waters? How is it holy, if there be these
mixtures? How is it happy, if it be thus divided within it self?

Answ. The Flats and Sharpes, the Bases and Trebles, the Concords and Discords
of Music, are all comprehended by the spirit of the Musician in one Act of
Harmony, in one simple and undivided Act of Harmony. This single Act of
Harmony, by its proper force, first invented and formed all Musical
Instruments, prepared them for it self through all the diversity of touches and
motions, actuated them, that it might completely figure and display upon them
and upon all things round about them, it self, in its own full sweetness,
according to all those rich varieties, virtually and eminently comprehended
within it self, in one simple Act. So in one indivisible Act, or Idea of beauty
in the Spirit of the Painter, lie together all the differing lines, lights,
shades, and colors, by which that Idea reflecteth it self in Picture upon the
eyes and spirits of the Beholder. In like manner, the far greater perfection,
the Will of God, being a simple (...) of Goodness, supreamly indivisible and
eternal, contains originally eminently within it self complacency and
aversion, love and hatred, with their several objects, in their several forms
and degrees, in their several risings and fallings, most properly and
harmoniously suited to each other. From it self does this supreme Goodness
bring forth its own Objects, like tuned Instruments wound up or let down, every
way prepared for the diffusion and discovery of it self upon them, in those
Varieties of love and hatred, complacency and aversion, with their several
steps or modifications, which, as so many distinct forms or virtues of the
Divine Goodness, dwell together there in the highest and most absolute Variety,
as in the fullest and most unconfined Unity.

The Will of God is commonly and rightly distinguished into positive and
permissive. Evil is by the permissive, Good from the positive Will of God. All
the determinations and motions of the Will in every Spirit, are, at least, from
the permission of the Divine Will. I will not now enquire, how the most perfect
Goodness can be permissive in that, in which it is positive: This only I take,
which is universally granted, That there is no permissive Will in God, without
a positive Act. He permits nothing, without a positive Act of his Will for
that permission. If the permission of any Act in the will of man antecede that
Act, then is that act or motion of the humane will the Object of a positive Act
of the Divine Will for the permission of it, before it be brought forth here
below. This objective existence in the Divine Will, is either the Copy or the
Original to that motion in the will of the Creature. If it be universally
received by all Understandings from the universal Harmony and principles of
Truth, that the Divine Nature can take no Copy, receive no Impression of any
thing, from any thing without it self: it necessarily follows, that all
motions in the will of man flow from that antecedent existence, which they have
in the Divine Will, as the Objects of that.

Thus, that I may not be too long upon this Head of Arguments, drawn from the
Divine Nature, I have contracted three sorts of Arguments into one. Those from
the Will, the Goodness, the Power of God being drawn together under that of the
Divine Power. I have in it built upon this sure ground, The Will of God is the
first, the supreme, the essential Goodness: The Goodness of God is his Power.
As every thing depends upon the Will of God, in its permission or positive
Act, As all things in their measures of Good or Evil, lie together in the
Divine Goodness, the Original, the eternal measure of all Good and Evil; so
have all Powers, all Acts and Motions of Power, their first spring, their exact
form and rule in the Power of God.

5. Argument.
The fifth Argument is the Knowledge of God. This is in our present cause, a
most celebrated Argument. I shall therefore endeavor to represent the state of
it, with all exactness, clearness, and integrity, that I can bring to it.

I shall divide this Argument into two parts:

1. The first is the perfection of the Divine Knowledge. 2. The second is the
Original.
1. Part. The first part is the perfection of the Divine Knowledge. This
consists in two things:

1. The Comprehensiveness. 2. The distinctness of the Knowledge.
We then know perfectly, when we know all things capable of being known, when
we know each thing in its proper distinction, in all its distinct forms,
properties, and relations.

Shall not He who made the eye see? Shall not the Fountain of Knowledge contain
all Knowledges, after the most exact and eminent manner? Shall not He know all
things most accurately, by whom all things know, and are known? St. Peter says
to Jesus Christ, as to God, Lord, Lord, thou know all things, thou know
that I love thee. See two things remarkable here:

1. The universality of Christ's Knowledge, extending its self to all things.

2. A confirmation of this, by a particular instance; Thou know that I love
thee. The instance is most pertinent to our present purpose: It is that
peculiar Object of Knowledge, which is the ground and subject of this
Discourse, the Will of Man, the motions of the will, the freest of these
motions, acts of Love; Thou know that I love thee.

Object. Here it may be said, and is said by some, The knowledge of all things
does not contribute to the perfection of Knowledge. There are many things in
knowing of which, there is neither beauty, nor any beautiful delight. The
Orator makes it the property of a wise man, to seek the knowledge only of
things excellent and worthy to be known.

1. Individual and particular things are below the Knowledge of God.
Philosophers teach us, That there are no Ideas, no Forms, no Images in the
Divine Mind of individual and particular things. All the Ideal Forms and Images
seated there, are universal, eternal Substances, Essences, and Truths, sixed in
most beautiful, harmonious, unchangeable proportions. Individual and particular
things are uncertain, undetermined, composed of changeable, tumultuous,
confused accidents, slight, and ever fleeting like shadows. Upon this ground
the Philosopher concludes, That individual, or singular things, can be no
Objects of Science, or true Knowledge. This Master also teaches us, That they
are the Objects of Opinion only, which is like these things ever fluctuating,
unsubstantial, ungrounded, obscure, unsatisfactory, unworthy, not only of God,
but of all separated and Divine Spirits.

2. Many things are too mean, and too vile for the knowledge of an excellent
Spirit. The Understanding is transformed into the Image of that which is known.
Mean and vile Objects embase the Mind and Spirit, into which they are received.
The similitudes and forms of froth and filth in a Divine Spirit, are like Rats
and Crocodiles in the Egyptian Temples, or dead Carcases in the stately
Pyramids.

Answ. That God knows all things, to the lowest, the last division and
distinction, that He knows the least, the obscurest, the vilest of all
things, the Scriptures testify by their whole design, by plain affirmations
and instances every where. From these, which are innumerable, I will cite only
two:

1. The first is that Heb. 4. 12. where we read of the living Word of God, That
it is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. The words in Greek
properly import this sense; A critical Distinguisher and Judge of the motions
or agitations in the Will, and sensitive Appetite, of the notions or images in
the understanding or fancy. The Word of God in the verse following is clearly
declared to be a Person, God Himself in Person; For these are the words, And
there is no Creature which is not manifest in his sight: But all things are
naked and bare in his eyes, with whom we have to do.

There is nothing more universal, great, or glorious, than thought; which
raises it self to the height, and extends it self to the amplitude of the
visible Heavens, and the most universal Glories. There is nothing more
particular, more low, more vile, than thought, which levels it self with every
single atome and dust, which sinks down to the depth of all divisions,
darknesses, deformities, and confusions, as low as the neithermost Hell. Yet is
God a Critical Distinguisher of the thoughts, singling every thought, setting
it naked in its own proper form, clear with all its circumstances, in his light
and sight. There is one thing in this Scripture, which has an eminent sense in
it self, and suitableness to our purpose. The 12. verse begins this Argument
with (...), The Word of God; the 13. verse concludes this Argument with (...),
The Word. In this last place, we translate it thus, With whom we have to do.
The Greek phrase literally sounds thus, To whom the Word is to us. The Greek
term first signifies Reason, which is the internal Word, or the Understanding;
their Speech, the external Word, the Image of the internal, of Reason, of the
Understanding. The Holy Ghost seems by this expression in the end, answering
and ecchoing to that in the beginning, to design this sweet and rich sense;
that our Reason, our Understanding, in its internal form, in its outward Image,
which is our speech, so far as it is right and true, answering to Jesus Christ,
turns it self to him, forms it self according to him, fixes it self upon
him, flows back into him, who is the first Reason and Understanding in the
Godhead within, and its Image without in the Creature. The inward or outward
word of Angels or Men, is to this word, as the Echo to the Voice, the Face in
the Glass to the living Face, the reflection of the Beam to the direct Beam,
the Stream to the Fountain. The same term signifies also, the proportion of
things.

All things then, which fall within the compass of any created Understanding,
of any expression in discourse, lie first, most clearly, most completely in
Jesus Christ, the Divine Understanding, the Divine Word, as the Original spring
and measure of all understandings and expressions. What ever, in the nature of
things, bears any proportion of great or little, universal or particular,
beautiful or deformed, lies according to that proportion most distinctly in
this Divine Word, the Divine Understanding, which is the first, the most
universal proportion and harmony, the Original spring and measure of all
proportions.

2. I will add another Scripture, which, as in a Picture wrought by a most
skilful hand, sets with lively force before our eyes the least, the lowest
things, shining with highest beauty in the Divine Mind, embraced with the
dearest sweetnesses by the Divine Love. You shall see there the Divine
Understanding and Affection encompassing all things after the most universal
manner, and insinuating themselves into each thing, with the most exact
distinction of singulars and individuals.

Jesus Christ, endeavoring to bring us into a Divine Liberty, by being free
from solicitous cares and fears, endeavoring to fix our Spirits upon the
Divine Goodness, by a full Trust, and sweet Rest, an absolute and delightful
Resignation, affirms, That even the hairs of our head are numbered. Therefore
says he, Fear not, Luke 12. 7.

Number is defined to be quantity discrete, because it does most accurately
discern and distinguish all the differences of things, as they lie in the whole
and apart, both at once. What so slight, of so little weight, as a single hair
of the head? yet God takes an account of every single hair, while he numbreth
all our hairs.

The numbering of things, marketh each single Unity, for a treasure, for the
object of esteem and of care in its preservation. This appears by the Latin
Poet, who brings in the Shepherd Swain speaking thus to his Companions upon
the Downs, when they were to strive for the mastery, in their Rural Music.

I from my flock, dare nothing lay with thee.
A Father, a Stepmother hard agree
To number both each day, the bleating sheep;
One of the wanton Kids, the tale does keep.
Each single hair then is a Divine Treasure, attracting the Eye of eternity,
which diligently and delightfully watches for its eternal preservation; for
all our hairs are numbered in eternity. As it is said of the Stars in Heaven,
God there calls them all by their names, none of them is wanting, every one
shines as a fixed Star in that supreme Orb of Glory.

God has made all things, in number, weight, and measure. Number is here
interpreted to be the Character of the species, or kinds of things, according
to their distinct essences. The first and supreme link in this Chain of
essential forms, is the Idea, or the eternal Pattern or Spring of each Essence,
in the Mind of God. The Pythagorean Philosophy foundeth its heighest mysteries
of Divinity upon the nature of numbers, as the most agreeable figures of it.
The Ideas or eternal Images of things in God so seem to shine forth most
clearly, with the sweetest and fullest beauties, in abstracted numbers.

Our Lord says, That little Children have their Angels, which always behold
the face of their Father in Heaven. Behold here each single hair of our heads,
which is an excrement only; how much more each part of our Bodies, each motion
of our Spirits, each moment of our Lives, or circumstance in our affairs has
its Idea, its first Image and Truth, its Original first true Being and Beauty
eternal; in the heart of God. These at once are the Eyes of God, which by day
and by night circle round, watch over, and guide them, the invisible Chambers
and Treasures of God, where they are laid up, and kept safe, as his Jewels.

Number has been reputed the first seat and measure of proportion, Harmony,
Music, and Beauty in every kind. Number, and Beauty or Harmony, are both by
Philosophers and Divines appropriated to Intellectual Spirits, who alone are
capable of them as their proper operations and objects. Both agree in this
definition, which seems to comprehend not only the proper objects and
operations, but the Essence also of immortal Minds; an Unity diffusing it self
into Variety, keeping it self undivided and entire through the whole Variety,
bounding the Variety with its self, and binding it up within it self. A great
and learned Divine teaches us, That there is a vast difference as between the
natures, so between the numbers of the Humane, the Angelical, the Divine
Understanding. The numbers which men apply to corporeal and material Subjects,
divide, break, and lessen the subject. In these numbers that holds true, that
the whole is greater than any single part. The numbers with which the Angels
number things, retain through all, the indivisibility of the Unity, with
diversity of forms. Here each form or essence comprehends under its own
undivided Unity all forms of things, according to their proper and complete
amplitude, agreeable to the Angelical State, but under the Character of its own
peculiar and distinct property. But the Divine number, transcending all
divisibility and diversity joyneth in one, the simplest Unity, with the amplest
and most distinct Variety.

Thus after a Divine manner, by this Divine Art of Numeration, are all the hai^
of our head numbered in the mind of God. Thus every single hair there, makes up
a Divine Harmony, composed of a rich Variety of Divine Proportions, according
to the number of all the other hairs, as in the whole, so in the several parts,
and single unities. Every single hair is a center, and a seat to the various
proportions between it self and all the rest in particular, as well as also to
the Harmony of the whole.

I shall now give a brief answer to the Objections alleged against the
Universality of the Divine Knowledge:

1. No Object, however low, however base, embaseth the Divine Understanding.
The figures of Mice and Emraulds formed in Gold; lessened not the luster, or
preciousness of the Gold, neither did they detract any thing from the sacred
Worth, Majesty, or Divinity of the Ark, by being put into it. This Ark was the
Figure of our Jesus, the essential Image, the Divine Mind, Understanding, and
Wisdom of the Father. Lazarus with his Rags, his running Sores, and the Dogs
licking them, represented to the life in an excellent Picture, done by the hand
of Vandike, of Titian, or some great Master, is a worthy and most agreeable
entertainment for the eye and fancy of any Princess, a rich Ornament and rare
Jewel for the Chamber or Cabinet of a Prince. The Plague with all its loathsome
and horrid attendance, conceived in the mind, formed to a most exact Image in
Virgil's fancy, from thence transferred into his inimitable Poems, becomes
worthy of the Ear, the Fancy, the Mind of that great and most polite Prince,
Augustus Caesar; yea, clothed thus with this Image, the mind and fancy of the
Poet transfuse, and present themselves to the spirit of that Prince, as of all
learned and judicious Readers, with a heightened Beauty, and kind of Divinity.

That is a certain Rule, That every thing received, is received according to
the nature and manner of the Recipient. The Divine Understanding clothing it
self with the Images and Forms of all Objects, desormeth not it self, but
makes them Divine: To the Pure all things are pure, but to the Unclean nothing
is pure, but even their minds (the Angelical part,) their Consciences (the
Divine part of their Souls,) is desiled.

2. Individuals and particulars, together with Universals, appear distinctly to
the Eye of God, at once, in one view. The Philosopher of old, affirmed all
things to be in all. The shady blueness in the clear Heavens above us, which
seems to terminate our sight, is said to be the deficiency of our sight,
which is incapable either of extending it self to so remote an Object, or of
having any Commerce with a Body so pure, so glorious, and so near to the nature
of a Spirit. Thus the contraction, the obscurity, the materiality, which
seems to be the bound of our eye and sense when we look to individual things
here below, are in truth the weaknesses of our senses, falling short of the
glory shining in the nature of things.

The light of God, which is alone the true Light, having no darkness in it, and
so the measure of all Truth, is styled by St. Peter, A marvailous Light. This
is one of the wonders in the Divine Light. All things here are transparent;
each particular, each part is seen distinctly in the whole, and the whole
completely in ^h part.

The Psalmist sings of this holy and high mystery, That with God the Darkness
and the Light are both alike, Materiality and corporeity, as they appear before
him, are spiritual and Divine forms. In the face of each material, individual
object, shines the whole nature of things. This is manifest upon a threefold
ground:

1. All things in Heaven above, and Earth beneath, meet in the constitution of
each individual. In Jacob's Vision Angels were seen descending and ascending
upon each step of the Ladder, from the Throne of God Himself above, down to the
Earth below. Thus by the Scale of Praedicaments in Logic, and in Metaphysics,
we are taught, That universal and superior Beings, even Being it self in its
absolute and unlimited fullness, descend into the essential constitution of each
inferior Being. In them also the inferior Being is seen ascending again,
according to their several steps, inasmuch as it is eminently comprehended in
them.

Thus the Descent and Ascent of things is presented unto us in the first
Philosophy, by division, composition, and resolution. Being it self in its
absolute fullness, divides it self into potential parts, which are therefore
called potential, because it self remains potentially, and undividedly in
each of these parts. As in abstracted numbers, the Unity divides it self into
many Unities; then this Unity, or first Being, by its own unconfined power and
virtue, joyneth or compoundeth these several Unities or Parts, into the common
Unity of one particular form, as a particular number. Again, the first Unity,
or Being, according to the Laws and Measures of all Harmony in it self,
dissolveth the common Unity of this inferior form, into its several parts or
unities. These are gathered up into their superior Unities, and so return to
their first Original, as they return, retaining their distinction still, but
becoming more and more absolute and universal, according to the nature of those
^perior Unities, by which they ascend.

2. Each Being in its lowest division, and narrowest contraction, bears
imprinted upon it, and inseparable from it, the figure of the first and supreme
Being. For this is the first, efficient, and exemplar, the last final cause of
all things. Having the figure of the first Being, it has in that, the figures
of all Beings, in all their various Unities and Distinctions. As every shadow
is inseparable from its proper Body: so, where the figures of things are, there
are the truths themselves, as the Original, exemplar, formal causes of those
figures, which flow by perpetual emanations from them, as Beams from the Sun.

3. The Omnipresence of God, filling all in all, even in the fullest sense, as
the Essence of all Essences, as the Form of all Forms, as the Being of all
Beings, in every the most contracted, most obscure degree of Being, as in a
clear Crystal Glass, presents Himself with open naked face to Himself, and
so all things in Himself.

After this manner God, whose Knowledge as Himself, is one pure, perfect,
eternal Act, at once beholds all Particulars in their Universals, all
Universals in their Particulars, according to all their several Modes and
Distinctions. He, to whom all things are naked and bare, sees all things in
every one, and every one in all forms at once. The night of materiality and
corporeity, before him shines with a determinate Beauty, with a bright
Transparency, as the day of spiritual substances. The contracted shades and
darknesses of Individuals and Particulars, are as the ample and full sight of
Universals. From this, which I have said here, will easily slow my third Answer.

3. Nothing is mean and vile, seen in a right and universal Light. Every degree
of Being to the least, the narrowest, and obscurest Point, has Being it self
in its amplitude and majesty in it, without which it could not be. Every thing
that is in any kind or degree, has the Throne of Being set up in it, with God
the supreme King, and Fountain of Beings, sitting upon it and filling it with
the train of his Glories. Thus look upon each Being, and you will see it as a
spacious Palace, a sacred Temple, or a new and distinct Heaven.

Being it self, in its universal Nature, from its purest height, by beautiful,
harmonious, just degrees and steps, descends into every Being, even to the
lowest shades. All ranks and degrees of Being, so become like the mystical
steps in that scale of Divine Harmony and Proportions, Jacobs Ladder. Every
form of Being to the lowest step, seen and understood according to its order
and proportions in its descent upon this Ladder, seems as an Angel, or as a
Troop of Angels in one, full of all Angelick Music and Beauty.

Every thing as it lies in the whole piece, bears its part in the Universal
Consort. The Divine Music of the whole would be changed into Confusion and
Discords, All the sweet proportions of all the parts would be discorded, and
become disagreeable, if any one, the least, and least cons^red part, were taken
out of the whole. Every part is tied to the whole, and to all the other parts,
by mutual and essential Relations. By virtue of these Relations, All the
distinct proportions, of all the parts, and of the whole, meet in one, on each
part, filling it with, and wrapping it up in the rich Garment of the Universal
Harmony, curiously wrought, with all the distinct and particular Harmonies.

Every Distinction, and so every distinct degree of Being, has its proper
Original, its exemplar Cause, its distinct Idea in the first Distinction, the
Son of God in the Trinity, the Divine Wisdom or Mind, the essential Idea or
Image of the Godhead. The distinct Idea or original Image of each distinct
Being, is here in the form of God, comprehending clearly and completely all
distinct Ideas, all the Original and eternal Truths, or Images of things, with
their highest Distinctions, in a perfect Unity, in it self. Every thing in its
proper form, is the figure and impression of this Idea. The Idea, and its
impressed form, mutually enfold and wrap up each other. The lowest and
obscurest form of Being, reigns, shines virtually, eminently in its highest
Truth, with the full and distinct Glories of all the Divine Ideas, united in
its own proper Idea, as a Throne in eternity, or as in the bosom of its Father
and Bridegroom, both in one. In like manner the Idea, with all the Divine forms
of things, lies seminally, in each particular Being derived from it, like a
Divine Sun, in the center of it, forming it and all its motions every moment,
drawing its own Picture, and figuring its own Glories upon them all.

Every degree of Being, as it is a part of the whole, is a Divine Variety,
springing forth from, and comprehended in the Unity of the whole. The Unity of
the whole comprehends all parts indivisibly in it self. If it were not so,
how or where should all the parts be compared each with other? How should a
judgment be made of their suitableness and proportions to each other? The Unity
of the whole, with the full variety of all the parts, rests entirely in each
part. In what way, or by what force otherwise shall each part be figured,
bounded, acted to an agreeableness and correspondency with all the other parts,
that the universal Music may be full and entire?

Reader, I only offer it now to thy thoughts, to be determined by thy judgment,
whether all that which we call materiality and corporeity, do not by the charms
of this Music awaken into a Divine Company of beautiful Spirits. If this be
the proper Character of a Spirit, an Unity indivisibly comprehending a Variety,
all Variety, according to its rank and degree in it self, diffusing it self
through the whole Variety, and yet resting entire in the bosom of each Variety.

Doctor More, whose Books full of excellent Wit, Learning, and Piety I always
read with much pleasure and profit, although I be not always so happy, as to
find my Understanding tuned to a consort and harmony with his, seems to me
like a Prophet as well as a Poet, to sing this mystery, drawn forth from the
sacred retreats of the divinest Philosophy in his Poems. There he painteth out
with liveliest colors the whole Universe, as a great Soul and Spirit, as a
Contexture, as a Quire, or as a Dance of many Souls or Spirits, where
materiality and corporeity are seen, not as distinct substances from the Soul,
but as figures wrought by the Soul her self, in the lowest part of that
Vestment, with which spun forth from her self, she is clothed, and comes forth
upon this lower Stage; As the lowest point of that beam, whose head is in the
bosom of the Sun. So with him matter and body seem to be the lowest shade,
into which the Soul descends within her self, and the various forms which she
puts on in this shade.

That seems to be most pleasantly harmonious to this, which the same Author
has in that pleasant piece of his Cabbala, upon the beginning of Genesis.
There he figures out to us the Soul and the Body, which he calls her Vehicle or
Chariot, that is, the Image into which she descends and rides forth here below,
by the Male and Female, or the Bridegroom and the Bride, which are also Father
and Daughter. The Body thus appears as a beautiful Image of the Soul, springing
forth from the Soul, abiding by a mystical marriage in the eye and bosom of
the Soul. In it, as in a clear and chrystalline Glass, the Soul, with ravishing
delights, sees her self in all her own beauties and sweetnesses. Of it she
says, This is life of my life, beauty of my beauty, my self springing forth
from my self in a beautiful Image, and so represented to my self. Thus is the
Soul tied by irresistible Charms to its Body. This way the Soul falls from her
purity, and the joys of her immortality, while she sinks into, and loses her
self in this shadowy Image, as if this were her only true, her only beautiful
form. She has now drowned in a deep oblivion her Angelical, her Divine Beauty
and Being, unto which she should have risen, as to the Original Glory, by those
inferior and fading figures of her self in this shade. On these Original
Glories, as her golden full-spread wings, she should have descended into this
shadowy Image, and upon the same wings have carried up in her embraces this
shadow into the eternal Light. This divinely pleasant figure of Dr. More,
brings to my mind some thing of Plot^nus, in his Discourses upon the Soul, not
unsuitable to him, and to our present purpose. He teaches us, as from a sacred
Oracle, That every Soul comes down into this World as a Caelestial Venus, or
an heavenly Beauty, the beautiful Daughter and Image of the supreme God,
attended with a Caelestial Cupid, or an heavenly Love, her own Birth, ever with
her, ever before her, her dear delight and glory. By this Love, the seed of the
Divine and eternal Beauty in the Soul, sprung up into a Child, into a pleasant
youthful growing Image, upon his wings she springs up, and takes her flight
abroad into all forms of things, as so many scattred figures and births of the
first Beauty, until, with her Love, she return into the bosom of that.

Dr. Cudworth, who by giving us a short relish of that rich treasure of
Knowledge and Learning, remote from the Vulgar, causes also a regret in us,
that he entertaineth us with no fuller a Feast, when that Feast might be a
Divine Feast, Sacrifice, and Marriage all in one, enformeth us from the Jewish
Doctors, That all Souls come down from above in a married, or Conjugal state.
This seems to make one entire piece with Plotinus and Dr. More. The ever
blessed Trinity is the first Marriage, and glorious Prototype of all Marriages.
Here the Father is the Lover and Bridegroom, the eternal Word or Wisdom is
the Daughter and Bride, his essential Image, in which his own glories and
sweetnesses offer themselves to his Divine View and embraces. The Holy Spirit
is the Love, which springs forth from these two, which is the Fountain of the
Divine Birth and Generation between these two, which uniteth them in eternal
embraces, in a Divine fruitfulness, by which they Spring up within this
Marriage Bed, into innumerable Births and Images of themselves, in this their
Love-Union.

Souls, as they are the Birth, so do they bear the Image of this Trinity and
Marriage. The Soul brings forth within her self this sensitive Image, which
is her Daughter and her Bride. The love which unites these two in a Conjugal
state, which springs mutually from both, as they are living Images each of
other, as they are one self or substance in two distinct forms, which is the
same in both, is the Spirit of life and motion. This makes the sweetness of
life, and of all vital motions, That Love is their Spring and their Spirit.
From this Love, as from the Marriage Bed, does the Soul by her own proper
Bride, which is its Body, bring forth it self into all sensitive and corporeal
forms, which furnish and fill this visible World. Thus Souls come down in a
Conjugal state, while each Soul brings down its Bride and Body in its bosom,
out of which it springs, as Eve sprung forth out of the side of Adam, his fair
and flourishing Image, while he flourished in his pure and Primitive Beauties.
I confine not that sentence of the Jewish Rabbis to this sense, which yet
seems to me (although perhaps not the only sense) as proper in it self, as it
is pertinent to our Discourse. If these grounds be good and firm, clear will it
be, That there is nothing vile or mean in the nature of things, rightly seen,
when as all things are Spirits, or Souls in their married state; that is,
heavenly Beauties, and heavenly Loves in various forms and postures, where all
their motions are the loves of these Souls in their lovely flights. Some one
may think this to be understood and confirmed by that of the Psalmist, cited in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, He has made his Ministers Spirits, or Winds, his
Angels a flame of fire. The Fire, the Air, all the Elements in their various
composition, the Celestial Bodies, are Spirits, in their proper Vestments,
Vehicles, or Chariots, with their proper Brides.

These heavenly Beauties and Loves may be cast into a deep sleep here, yet are
they still sleeping Beauties and sleeping Loves, beautiful and lovely in their
sleep. Although, like Abraham, they may have disorderly, deformed, distracting
Dreams in their sleep. In these Dreams an horrible darkness may fall upon them,
strange Visions may be presented to them. They may see dreadful fires in the
midst of this darkness, themselves, their dear Bride the sensitive Image, like
Doves, lying dead, and divided one from another, like innocent Beasts of
Sacrifice slain, and cut into several pieces, with the brands of fire, or
burning Lamps passing between them. In the horror of these Dreams, and in this
sleep, they may lie, till ^hey be awakened, by that joyful sound of a Trumpet
from Heaven, or of an Archangel, Arise and shine, for thy light is come, the
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; Which St. Paul expresses thus, Awake
thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, for Christ shall give thee
light. Then shall these Bridegroom-Souls, with their beloved Brides, their
Bodies, appear after this dark and tempestuous night of their sleep and dreams,
in the fresh and pleasant morning of a new day, as new Heavens and a new Earth,
with their Beauties, all new married anew to each other.

Some have imagined, that these Souls, together with their Bodies lying yet in
their bosoms above, before their descent and fall, had a prospect of this
terrible dream in that Image of the Divine Wisdom, which did then shine clearly
in their Natures and Essences. It seemed to them an horrible Pit without any
bottom, a vast and howling Wilderness full of deformed and dreadful Monsters,
to which their sweet Beauties and Chastities, dearer than their Lives, would be
exposed to be deflowred and defiled by them, full of Dearths and Droughts, full
of fiery Serpents, which with stings fixed in them, with their infused Poison
would fill them all over with pains and horrors, would subject them to that
most deformed and most dreadful Monster, the King of Terrors, death it self.
Thus were they for their own sakes most averse to this descent and exile from
their native home, from themselves, from their own true, sweetest Purities,
Beauties and Beings.

But in that Divine Glass, in which they saw this Prospect, they saw also that
this terrible Dream had a Divine mystery of wisdom and love in it, that out of
it was to arise from every part and circumstance in it, a far more transcendent
Glory to the supreme Love, their Father and Bridegroom. They saw, that this
Love it self would go along with them through all, though hidden and veiled,
reserving his own Purities and Sweetnesses in the midst of all. They saw, that
he in the midst of those hidden Purities and Sweetnesses, would preserve that
Love which he had to them in eternity, when he beheld them in that firstborn
Image of all loves and lovelinesses, and that in these loves and lovelinesses
he would conduct them, and direct their way through this Wilderness. They
understood, that he would be a seed of hope to them, by the virtue of which
they should certainly in the set time, in their proper season ascend out of
this Pit, return home from this Exile: then should they be received with an
universal shout of Joys and Glories, resounding from all things without them,
and within them, when they should see all these sufferings break up into the
most heightened Glories of the supreme God, the supreme eternal Love, and
themselves with Raptures of highest pleasures, transcending all Humane or
Angel-like thoughts, taken up into the fellowship of these Glories.

This imagination seems to some to be well-grounded upon, and naturally to
arise from that Scripture, The earnest expectation of the Creature (or the
Creation) was made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him (or
for his sake) who subjected the same in hope; because the Creature (or the
Creation) it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the Children of God: For we know that the whole
Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain till now.

Reader, I hope it will not be unacceptable to you, that I have endeavored to
divert thee and my self by these Speculations, which seem to be very pleasant,
representing to us the Soul, as a Celestial Bridegroom with its Bride and
Bridal Chariot both in one, its Body descending and returning, as in a
Caelestial Dance, measured by the Music of the Divine Harmony. Let these
things have with thee that weight of probability or truth which thou thy self
shall give to them in thine own judgment. However I have thought them proper to
my present end, the illustration of that truth, the harmony of things in the
whole, and of the several parts as they lie in the whole, which seems to me
to be clearly charactered in all the beautiful and bright lineaments of Reason
it self, which its essential form, is an universal Harmony, and to be expressed
through the whole Scriptures as their proper design, which are a Divine Draught
or Description of the Divine Harmony in its eternal Original, and in its Figure.

St. Paul says, That all things work together for good for those that love
God. The only true love of God, is the immediate and proper Birth of the Divine
Love, its clearest and fullest effulgency, and its most perfect reflection upon
it self. This is the essential Character of a Saint, as he is the Spiritual
man. To this person St. Paul says, All things are yours, this world, lise and
death, things present, and things to come; you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

God is the Head, the beginning, the end, the measure of Christ. Christ is the
Head, the beginning, the end, the measure of a Saint. A Saint is the head, the
beginning, the end, the measure of all things. All things through the whole
World, through the whole compass of time, in both those bright and black
Regions of Life and of Death, are exactly tuned each to other, and struck with
a Divine Hand of Power and Skill with all manner of sweetness, to make the most
agreeable and charming Music to God, to Christ, and to a Saint, as they dwell
together in one heavenly Image, and in one eternal Spirit. All things, even the
most distant and most contrary, meet together by a most admirable and ravishing
consent, in one most beautiful Harmony of a perfect, universal, eternal good,
to a Saint, as he is in Christ, as Christ is in God, as all three lie together
in the pure, the soft, the spacious bosom of Divine and eternal Love.

But I shall speak more fully of this universal Harmony in the Second Part,
when I shall have occasion to show, what place Sin has in this Harmony, how
Disorder it self is reduced into Order by its powerful Charms, how the Harmony
is made perfect by a full Variety; The Variety cannot be full without a
Contrariety; how in the contrariety the Law arises, as a ministry of wrath,
out of which Sin takes its birth as a Contrary, which is the proper correlate,
or mark, or object of the Divine Contrariety and Wrath, how this Divine
Contrariety heightning it self to the utmost upon Sin and Sinners, to declare
to the utmost their irresistible contrariety to the Divine Nature, and
prevailing over them, in the Person of Christ consuming them, consumes it self
together with them as a flame with its fuel, like a flame it vanishes into
the pure Air, Light and Heaven, where all things now spring again, and are seen
new in the beauteous Glories and ever-flourishing sweetnesses of an Universal
and Divine Harmony, through the Death and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus.

But we will leave these things to their proper places: In the mean time this
Truth seems t^ be firmly established upon unmovable grounds, that nothing,
as it lies in the whole, in all its causes, concurrences, relations, and
circumstances, is mean, vile, or little, unworthy of the Divine Mind, which if
it were a stranger to any the least circumstance of things, even the first,
most unperceptible motions of the Will, were incapable of judging of the
Harmony of the whole, of Good and Evil, which consist in order and disorder,
especially of moral Good and Evil, the chief Good and Evil, of the chief pieces
of the whole Work, Intellectual Spirits, whose Good and Evil in order to an
eternity of Happiness or Misery, are defined and determined by every motion of
the Will.

If I have been at the expense of much time and pains upon this Subject, the
Omniscience of God, or the universality of his Knowledge, and the exactness of
it in this Universality, I humbly conceive that I have not done it
impertinently, being moved to it by these two Reasons,

1. Learned men know, that this Flower in the Crown of the Great King, this
Attribute of God, has been denied to him in the face of the whole World with
great confidence, with bold pretenses of Reason and Learning opposed to it. I
have heard this perfection of the Divine Nature, in the Process of a Discourse
upon this freedom of the Will, questioned, Whether it were proper to God, or a
Perfection? and this Question made soberly there, where modesty, goodness, and
learning have met together.

2. This Argument of the Divine Omniscience appears to mewith so great weight
in this cause, that if this be freely granted, and clearly understood, I cannot
at all comprehend by what way or means the liberty of the Will, now examined,
can suppart it self, without the overturning the whole fabric of our
Philosophy and Divinity, with the absolute ruins of all their beauties and
strengths. I hope in a few words to manifest this in the Second Part of this
Argument, which now follows.

2. Part. The Second Part is the Original of the Divine Knowledge.

This knowledge of God arises not from without, but from within himself. This
Truth seems to carry the full and sweet light of its own evidence brightly
shining in the face of it. If God receive any thing from without, he is no more
immutable, impassible, independent, a pure Act, a perfect eternal Act, a simple
Unity, but a composition of diverse and different ingredients. If any Species or
Image, if any Knowledge flow in upon the Divine Understanding from any external
Object, not only all the Properties, Perfections, and Attributes ascribed to
God, but his Godhead it self, with all its most essential Glories are shaken,
overthrown, and utterly demolished. If God be receptive of any thing from any
other, he is no more the first, the universal Being, the Fountain of all Being,
and so no more God. It is generally and rightly affirmed, That the Essence of
God and the Operations are the same, that his Knowledge is Himself. If then He
receive the knowledge of any thing, He receives also Himself, and his Godhead
from a Foreign Spring. W^o, says St. Paul, has been his Counselor? or who
has given to Him first, that He should repay?

Object. Some eminent Divines seeming to understand, the force of the Reason in
this Point to lie in the foreknowledge of God, have believed themselves to
have gained a full Victory over it, by an imagined co-existence of God with the
Creature. For, say they, God is infinite, as in his Essence, so in his
duration. By virtue of this infiniteness he after an immutable manner co-exists
with the Creature in all its changes. Eternity, which is the duration of the
Divine Essence in its undivided and unchangeable but unconfined Unity,
co-exists with time, the duration of the Creature in all its numerous and
successive motions, in all its undivided moments. Thus, say they, God properly
foreknows nothing, but knows every Creature, as it is present with Him in its
own proper existence and time.

Answ. If all this in the full Latitude be freely granted, I humbly conceive,
that the present Argument remains still in its full force, unshaken, untoucht.
But first, I shall crave leave to offer some incongruities and mistakes, which
make me incapable of satisfying my self with this co-existence, thus formed and
founded:

1. This seems to take away out of the mouth of God Himself, speaking by the
Prophet Isaiah, one Principal proof of his Godhead, which he pleases to make
use of several times over, and in which he glories, challenging all the gods of
the Heathen to come and try their Divinities by this Test; This is the Power of
Prophesying, the declaring of things to come.

2. Does not the Co-existence mentioned commensurate God with the Creature,
make God the Subject of a Relation to the Creature, establish a proportion
between Him and the Creature; which are all contrary to the infiniteness of
God, as to the most uncontroverted Principle of Divinity shining in upon us by
the light of Nature, or of Revelation.

3. If God by Co-existing with the Creature, in the moment of the Fall, at the
beginning of time, declares that full Victory of Christ over the Serpent at the
end of time, which he knows only by coexisting with that action in its proper
scene and duration, at the winding up of all Ages; Does it not follow, that the
beginning, and the end of time in their proper seasons and durations, co-exist
and fall in with each other? For this is a Maxim of universal force, That those
two things which meet in a third, meet in themselves.

4. The best Understandings, pure and clear as the Sun it self, clouded with
flesh, while they see through so thick a medium, are capable of various and
disproportionate views of their Object. A weaker sight fixed on, and confined
to some narrower and more particular Image, may in that sometimes discover to
better eyes, which extend themselves to a more spacious Object, an error in
that smaller Point. Accordingly those great Spirits, with whom I now treat,
perhaps may find themselves mistaken in their sense of the Divine Co-existence
with the Creature, if they please to consider this which I shall now propound.

God indeed is infinite. By this infiniteness he is above all proportion to,
all commerce with every thing that is finite. By this infiniteness he
comprehends in himself all Creatures, with all theirExistencies, Formalities,
and Modifications, after an infinite manner, eminently, and with the highest
transcendency. Thus he beholds, thus he converseth with all things within
Himself.

Divines generally place the Joys of glorified Spirits in that Beatifical
Vision, which is the sight of all things in the most amiable face of the most
highly adored Trinity, as in the only clear Glass of all Images of things, in
their eternal Truths. Is not God Himself blessed in the first place with this
Beatifical Vision? Does not He much more certainly, with a delight proportioned
to a God, behold all things in this Glass of the Trinity, in the supreamly
beautiful face of our Jesus, his own eternal Birth, his own essential Image,
the full reflection of himself upon himself? Is not this first and full birth
of the Godhead its most universal Birth, where by bringing forth him, he brings
sorth all things at once in him, according to their first and fairest Births,
as beautiful lineaments composed of Divine Lights and Shades in this face and
Divine Form, where all pleasantnesses dwell.

Thus, of a truth, God co-exists with all Creatures, has in Himself, in his
Essence, Existence, and Duration, the exact measure of all Essences,
Existencies, and Durations; but this is according to the manner of the Divine
and Uncreated, not of the created nature, as he comprehends all in himself.

5. I come to that now, which I promised, as my chief and concluding Answer.

Here I shall endeavor to make it appear, that all this established in the
most desired sense falls short or flies wide off our present Argument, leaving
it altogether untoucht. For let it be, that God does exist, together with the
Creature, in the proper and formal existence of each Creature; yet still we
fall upon this Dilemma, The knowledge of each Creature, in the Divine
Understanding, arriveth from without, or arises from within.

The first of these has following it an horrid train of direful
inconveniences represented above, such as I may well tremble to mention and
the holy Angels stand amazed to hear, the passibility, mutability, dependency,
imperfection of the Divine Essence in it self, compositions, divisions in the
Divine Nature: in a word, the desposing of God from being God. The Devil indeed
in all forms practices this as his chiefest Artifice, the establishing of such
imaginations and opinions in our Spirits, as by the dividing of the Godhead in
it self, may divide God from Himself in our sense of Him, and so in truth
separate us from the supreme Unity, the only Crown of all Righteousness, Rest
and Joy, that by dividing he may Reign.

If I deceive not my self thus this imagination of Gods receiving his Knowledge
of created things from the objects themselves, existing in their own proper
forms out of their causes and present before him, is thus attended with such a
troop of infernal Monsters, as cannot but affrighten us from entertaining any
such conception. The first part of the Dilemma being then removed, the second
is established, namely, that the knowledge of all things in the mind of God,
has no spring from which it streameth besides God Himself. All the Attributes
of God, all the sense which all Nations, all Spirits have of God from the light
of Nature or of Revelation, his All Sufficiency, his Being the beginning, the
end of all things, testify with great concurrence to this Truth. It seems to
me indeed Impertinent to use many words to clear or confirm it. If then God
have his Knowledge of every Creature from within, he comprehends all the
Creatures in his own Divine Essence, either formally, in their own proper
Natures and Existencies, or virtually and eminently, as in their first cause.
No other way seems to me imaginable, by which the Divine Mind should be at
once both the Eye and the Glass, to behold all things in it self.

If we place any Creature, according to its proper form, in the Divine Essence,
we place it upon the Throne of the Godhead, and cloth it with the form of God.
It remains then, that the Divine Knowledge is the intuition or view of things
in their first and eternal Original.

Moreover, Knowledge is the Im^ge of the thing known, in the understanding of
him who knows it. There are only three sorts of Images: 1. The Original
Image, the exemplar cause and p^ttern. 2, The essential form, which is the
thing it self. 3. A Copy or Figure of this, as the Picture taken from the life,
and the shadow cast from the substance. Thus the Lord Jesus in his spiritual
Glories, as He is the Divine Understanding, is the Original form of the Sun,
the Suns Sun. To him agrees that, which Plutarch delivers to us from the
ancient Philosophers, that the God of the Sun, which inhabits the Sun, excels
the Sun in the sweetness, beauty, and glory of his Light, ten thousand times
more, than the Sun does this Earth, or the darkest Cloud. The Sun it self
shining in these visible Heavens, is the essence or essential form, framed by
this pattern, sprung forth from it. The Light, the Sun-shines, and Suns which
we severally take in with our eyes, are so many figures, and pictures, or
shadows rather of this Sun flowing from him.

If we believe the Creatures in their essential forms, or in their shadowy
figures, to inhabit the Divine Understanding, we either exalt them to an
height too far above them, by bringing them into the Divine Unity, and so
making them one God with God; or we debase the Divine Nature, by bringing it
down to a composition with things foreign and inferior to it.

The Philosopher teaches us, that Science, or clear and certain Knowledge, is
only the knowledge of things in their causes. The first and most perfect Spirit
is only capable of this knowledge, which alone is most perfectly clear and
immutable, the knowledge of things in their first and universal cause. Thus the
Divine Essence in the Person of our Jesus, the Divine Wisdom and
Understanding, the brightness of the Divine Glory, the Image of the Godhead,
pure, naked, full, substantial, eternal, is both the only Object of the Divine
Eye, worthy of it, and completely suited to it, and also the Species or Image,
in which and by which alone all Creatures, all forms of things in Heaven, Earth
and Hell, are presented to it. This is that Unity, which in its pure
simplicity, being free from all division of parts, or diversities of forms, is
absolutely unbounded, and so diffuseth it self into the most perfect and
unconfined Variety, comprehending it entirely, altogether undivided within it
self, as in a spiritual most spacious Palace of Light, and Paradise of the
Divine Life, upon the high and flourishing Mount of Eternity. This is that
Unity in its first distinction, and so in the most full Variety, our Jesus; in
whom all fullness of Nature, Grace, and Glory dwells in its sweetest repose,
in the most perfect Harmony of all the most heightning Beauties and Delights.
This is the Beatisical Vision, in which God clearly contemplates, completely
enjoys Himself, and all things in Himself, as in the Christalline Fountain of
the Godhead.

Let me now bring home to my present mark, this present Argument, by drawing up
my whole Discourse upon it, into three short Propositions:

1. God, who knows all things distinctly and exactly, knows every Act of
the Will, every actual determination of it in each Act.

2. God, who only knows all things, by beholding them in the Glass of his
own Essence, in the divinely beautiful, the only beloved Person and form of his
only eternal Birth, his own Son; there has the view of the Will of Man in
every distinct motion, act, and determination, as in its first exemplar cause
in eternity.

3. The will of man then in every motion, act, and determination of it, is from
eternity predetermined in the Divine Understanding, as in its first cause and
Original form. Upon these grounds, the Knowledge of God is at once a
foreknowledge of future things, and a knowledge of things present: 1. It is a
foreknowledge, as it sees things in their first cause, in a state far above
and transcendent to the state of their proper existency, as they stand forth
out of their causes. 2. It is a knowledge of things present, as eternity and
the Divine duration contains in it self the measures, the exemplars, and so
the most exact forms of time and every successive duration, in its several
aspects of past, present, and to come. Besides that, as the Sun looking forth,
makes the Day and the Light, with all the visible Images, with which it beholds
the Heavens and the Earth, so the Divine Eye is at once a Glass to it self, and
a Fountain to all things; by beholding things every moment in it self, it does
formally every moment send them forth from it self: so at once it sees them in
their formal cause and present existence.

6. Argument.
The sixth Argument drawn from this Head, is the infiniteness of God. This is a
Negative expression, representing to us a Positive Perfection, which surmounts
all Assimilations, all Similitudes or Images, which the highest understanding
of men or Angels is capable of taking in, or the whole Creation united in its
most abstracted and heightened Excellencies of bringing forth. We figure it to
our selves only by a Negation, or removal of all figures, of all terms or
bounds. We seem to touch it with the Top point, and simplest Unity of Spirits,
by a silence and cessation of all created powers or faculties in us. We seem to
apprehend it only by being comprehended of it, and lost in it. If we knew and
tasted the unexpressible Sweetnesses, the high Raptures, with the Divinest
Pleasures, in the contemplation of the Divine Infiniteness, how far should we
be from streightning or darkening its Glories by limiting, and in limiting,
dividing them? If God be God, that is, before all things, and above them, he is
absolutely unchangeable: As He is unchangeable, He is every where, every way
the same, equal and entirely perfect, equally and endlesly removed from all
bound and limit. If God be God, that is, the first of all things, He has the
Fountain of Life in himself. Thus he is ever fresh and new, ever springing into
fresh and new Glories, ever equally, endlesly removed from any conclusion or
confinement in his Births and Beauties.

The Divinity and Poetry of the Heathen from their most ancient, most sacred
mysteries, teach us, that Love is the Eldest and Youngest of all the gods* Our
God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, is the God of Love in the truest,
the sweetest and the best sense. He alone is Love it self, in an abstracted
eternal Divine Essence and Substance, pure Love, altogether unmixt, having
nothing in it self different, or diverse from it self; thus is an infinite Love,
a sweet and clear Sea, which swalloweth up all bounds, all shores and bottoms,
into it self. This Love, as it is every way the same, is the ancient of Days,
the eldest of all the Gods. This Love, as it ever flourishes with a perpetual
Spring and Youth of all Beauties, of all beautiful Delights, is the youngest of
all the Gods. Thus is this most high and holy Love, the God of Gods, the First
and the Last, containing all things within its own blissful bosom, as the
bound of all, but being it self every way beyond all bounds, without all
bounds, infinite.

How infinite are the joys and blessedness of this Infiniteness! How is this
infinite God, our God, the only true God, a Paradise of Love, infinitely
heightened in all the beauties and sweetnesses of Love, infinitely diffused
through all things, beyond all things? How is He at once the Paradise of Love,
with its infinite heightnings, with its infinite amplitudes in every part, in
every point of things, entirely perfect? How is it every where the same, every
where new, to the satisfaction, to the swallowing up of all the most fixed, most
various, most vast desires, into an Aybss or Ocean of Delights equally
unconfined and undivided! Shall we then limit the holy One of Israel? If we do
not, we must ascribe this greatness to Him, that He contains all things in
Himself. In Him all things live, move, and have their Being. We must attribute
this immenseness, or immensurableness to Him, to fill all in all, as the only
distinct, exact measure of all things; himself still transcending all, and
being measured by nothing. It is said of Christ, That the Church is the fullness
of him, who fills all in all. The Humane Soul, or Intellectual Spirit, is a
rude imperfect shadow of the Divine Infiniteness. Our thoughts are living
Images in various postures and motions. They are in a manner the Creation, the
Creatures of our Souls. They live, move, and have their being in our Souls. Our
Souls alone fill all in them all. How far greater is the distance between God
and his Creatures, than between the Soul and its Creation? How much more less,
even less than nothing are all the Creatures to God? How much more truly, more
entirely are they all that they are in Him? how much more absolutely is he
their fullness, silling them all in all? All things then, all Essences, all
Lives, all Vital Powers and Faculties in each Essence, all Motions of life, all
Acts or Operations of every power and faculty, are in God. He alone fills all
in every Essence, Life, Power, Faculty, Motion, Act. All are in Him, have all
their distinct forms, degrees, modes of being in Him, to the least degree, or
shadow of Being.

Thus Angels and Men, the Understanding and Will of each Man, of each Angel,
every act, motion, determination of each Understanding, of each Will, are
comprehended in God. God entirely fills all, every Person or Spirit, every
Understanding and Will, every Determination and Motion. Where we exclude him
out of any Spirit, Essence, Power, or Operation, there we set a bound to the
eternal Spirit, there we limit the holy One, that pure Essence and Act, there
we say to Him, Thus far shall thou go, no farther.

If God be acknowledged for Being it self in its purest simplicity, it is Being
alone which can bound him. All without him, where he cease and terminateth,
is not Being. But who understands not this, that that which has no Being can
be no bounds?

7. Argument.
The seventh Argument is the causality of God. The celebrated Argument of the
Philosopher, by which he asserts the Divine Being, is the necessity of one
first mover. For, if the causes of motion did not terminate in some one first
mover, but did proceed to an infiniteness of successions, all things will be at
a stand, motion will universally cease. For an infinite succession of causes
could never be past through, nor arrive at any effect.

This determinates the truth of a God, and the Nature of a true God, that He is
the first Mover, the first Cause.

The force and dignity of this first Cause declares it self to us in these
following Maxims, which stand fixed in the eternal Reason of things, as in
their proper root, and shine clearly in the evidence of their own Light, and
have their Truth sealed by an universal Testimony.

1. The first Cause is the universal Cause. All things, all causes and effects,
all causalities and efficacies, all order and connection of things, are
virtually and eminently comprehended in the first Cause, from which, according
to their proper places, and eternal patterns, they flow.

2. The first Cause is most of all, most truly and most fully, most properly
and most powerfully the cause of every effect.

3. The first Cause is more intimate to every effect than any second Cause. It
is most intimate to every effect, with an intimateness of presence and power,
it is immediately omnipotent with an immediateness of Person and of Virtue, of
Operation and of Efficacy.

4. Every second Cause has its causality, acts and produces its effect, in
the virtue of the first Cause. Therefore Philosophers and Divines have taught
us, that all Causes and Effects, in their orders and connexions, are only
explications or modifications of the first Cause.

5. That which is the Cause of the Cause, is also the Cause of its Effects. The
Operation of each thing follows its Essence. All Operations, which are second
Acts, are folded up in the first Act, which is the Essence, and flow forth from
it, as that unfolds it self in them, within the compass of its own proper Orb
and Sphere.

All these Maxims reign with an universal Sovereignty of Truth and Power
through all orders of things, over all minds. They seem to be unmoveably
established upon the Basis or Foundation of that Principle, That which is the
first in any kind of things, is the universal Root, Rule, Truth, and Life, to
all things of the same kind. That alone is such by it self. All other things of
the same kind are such in the force and virtue of that, by its presence and
power in them.

Let us now bring this down to the particular Subject of our Discourse. If God
be the first Cause, if the Will be a second Cause, if the Acts of the Will, and
the determination of the Will in these Acts, be the effects of the Will, then
is God the universal cause of all these, then is he more truly and effectually
the cause of each act and determination of the Will, than the Will it self,
then is he in the immediateness of his Person, Power and Operation, more
intimate to each act and determination of the Will, than the Will it self, then
does the Will, with all its acts and determinations, in their several Orders,
Connexions and Circumstances, lie virtually and eminently in the Divine Will,
as in their first Cause, from which, in their proper seasons and places, they
flow distinctly forth, as that first Will, which is one pure eternal Act,
unfoldeth it self into them.

A great Philosopher and Divine represents all Births and Productions, those
of Flowers and Trees in Gardens, of Beasts in the Fields, of Fishes in the Sea,
of Birds in the Air, of Celestial Light, of Men and Angels, as so many Songs of
Praise celebrating the first Birth and Production, the eternal Generation of
the Son from the Father in the Trinity. For, says he, all other Productions or
Births spring up and stand, in the virtue of this.

All causes and effects in like manner are so many Divine Songs, sounding forth
through the whole Heavens and Earth the Praises, the Power, the Efficacy of the
first Cause. For in the womb of that, as they all immediately fall in the
bosom of that, they lie together in its virtue and presence, they spring and
flourish, its sacred Image and Impression they all bear divinely engraven upon
them. I have now finished my Arguments drawn from the first Head, the Nature of
God.

Gentle Reader, Perhaps I may seem to thee to have drawn out to a great length,
and to have made frequent large Digressions upon this Head of the Deity. I have
indeed willingly taken every fair occasion, as I have past along through this
Land of Life and Bliss, amidst the Gardens of true Adonis, the eternal Son, to
stay thy self and me some moments, upon the contemplation of the charming
Prospect, as also to gather and present thee with some of the Paradisical
Flowers and Fruits which grow so plentifully here. I have endeavored in my
way, according to the narrow measure of my weak capacity, far below the Glories
of this Object, if not to open, yet to point out to thee the Excellencies of
the Godhead, as they lie in their first and fairest ground of eternal life.

Two Reasons have moved me to this,

1. God is the first and fairest Ground, the clearest and sweetest Light of
Truth. The Philosopher has taught us, That demonstration is only by first and
immediate Principles. The first and immediate Principle is that, which has the
Light of Truth immediately seated and shining in it self, which receives not
its evidence from any Superior Medium or Argument, which immediately displayeth
its beams from its own face on the eye of the Understanding, without the
interposal of any inferior Medium or Argument. This is the only Principle of
Demonstration, and this is God alone. He is the Father of Lights, the
Intellectual Sun, God unvailing Himself in our Spirits, setting Himself, as the
golden Seal of purest Light, upon our Spirits. Thus, by his immediate embraces,
he impregnateth them with the Divine forms of truth. In this sense St. Paul
says, That our Faith is in the demonstration of God. Accordingly he describes
the truly Evangelical or Spiritual Knowledge, to be the shining of God in our
hearts, unto the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ.

He, that in a clear Evening fixes his eye on the Firmament above him,
beholds by degrees innumerable Stars, with springing lights sparkling forth
upon him. If God lift up a little of his Vail, and by the least glimpses of his
naked Face enlighten and attract the eye of our Soul to a fixed view of
Himself, with what Divine Raptures do we see the eternal Truths of things, in
their sweetest Lights, springing and sparkling upon us, besetting us round in
that Firmament of the Divine Essence, as a Crown of incorruptible Glory?

The heavenly Bridegroom in the Canticles sings thus, I am come into my
Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have drunk my Milk with my Wine, I have eaten
my Honey with my Honeycomb. If this lovely Bridegroom lead our Souls, his
Bride, into the Celestial Gardens of the Divine Mind, in the eternal Spirit,
then they with a pleasure unexpressible sit and sing in those Gardens. Now we
drink in the Crystal Streams of all Truth, now we drink in the Light, as warm
Milk, most sweet and lively, from the warm and living Breasts of Truth, now we
eat the living Honey of Divine Wisdom, as it drops and distills upon our Lips,
from the Honeycomb it self of the Divine Nature.

2. God is the Pleasantest, the only pleasure of all Objects. He alone is the
proper Object, the true and perfect Pleasure of all Faculties, of the
Understanding and of the Will, the only sweet Rest, the only and full Feast of
them both. God, as He is the Light, which has no Darkness in it, so is He Love
without any allay. He is that Love, which is Goodness it self, Beauty it self,
Sweetness it self, all alone, unmixt, at the utmost height of purity,
sweetness and simplicity, all in all of Him, and all one in Him. This is that
Trinity, which is the fullness and majesty of the Divine Essence, out of which
all the Attributes, Properties, and Perfections arise to our Understanding, and
into which, in the clearest Light, they most clearly resolve themselves.

Goodness here is Beauty and Sweetness in their spring. Beauty is Goodness in
its proper native and complete form. Sweetness is Goodness and Beauty flowing
or in motion, or goodness, as it springs up into beauty, and in the delicious
bosom of that beauty, multiplies it self endlesly into innumerable births and
forms. Goodness is the ever flourishing, ever youthful Father and Bridegroom,
Beauty the most lovely Daughter and Bride, Sweetness the Marriage of these two.

Goodness, as it is the spring of all Beauty and Sweetness, is power in the
abstract, in as much as Evil, the only opposite to Goodness, is the weakest of
all things, weakness it self. Beauty, being the essential and full form of
Goodness, being the abstract and exemplar of Harmony, is Wisdom it self, the
only Intellectual Beauty, of which all the inferior Beauties of sense are only
shadowy impressions and footsteps. The Divine Sweetness being Goodness and
Beauty in motion, is upon this account the first and highest Activity.

The Fowler draws the soaring Larks to his Net, by the reflection of Heavens
Light, from a piece of glass upon the Earth. Thus the best Spirits, whose
Music and Flight excited or directed by no earthly Interest, no force of
Flesh, mount upward to Heaven and eternity, are most properly, most powerfully
drawn to any Opinion, when it appears, as the pure unmixt reflections of the
Divine Beauties falling from their heights of eternal Glory upon any
Understanding, and from thence diffusing themselves to enlighten the darkness
of this inferior Region.

The first Beauty, and the first Truth, are one Being, both the first Form or
Image, in which the Godhead represents it self to it self, in the most full and
entire Harmony of all Perfections, at their utmost heights, as they rise up
immediate and fresh in their eternal spring, and of it self with it self, as
the first Image with the first Original. Thus every Truth in all its descents,
springing from the first Truth, is also a Divine Beauty, in the Face of which
the Divine Goodness shines, smileth, and pours forth it self in the most
charming and attractive sweetness. If then it were rightly represented and
rightly seen, it would by irresistible Charms draw at once the Understanding
and the Will of every Spirit into its embraces.

We easily believe that which we desire. Reader, Set before the eyes of thy
Spirit a God, whose Essence is Love. Represent to thy self a Love, which
subsisteth in a Trinity of Beauty, Goodness, and Sweetness, all three raised to
the uttermost height of Purity and Holiness, that being altogether without any
mixture or allay, they are also without any bounds, all three so absolute and
unbounded in Perfection, that they mutually unfold one another, most completely
and most clearly, all three, so heightened to the supreme Point of Intellectual,
or rather Superintellectual Life, that as they are Love, the band of all
Perfection and Pleasantness, and so every Perfection in the Abstract and Unity,
they are also in like manner complete, living, and immortal Persons. When thou
have thus represented God to thy self most perfectly, most universally amiable
in all Lights of Nature and Grace, in every posture, in every glance, do thou
not at once most ardently desire this God to fill all, to be all in all, in
this work? The work of some excellent Painter is known by this, that it is a
finished piece. Every part, every point has its just and full proportions, as
from a spring of life opening it self there, as if Nature her self were a vital
sense. This gives the life, the beauty, the sweetning to the whole piece, a
living form to the Workman. Can we then think, that God, who is beauty and
sweetness it self, who works immediately and alone, by beauty and sweetness in
the highest Perfection, in as much as he works only and immediately by his
Essence, which is one and the same with its Operations, will leave any point of
his work without the sweetning touch from his own hand? Can we think that God,
whose Beauty is his Wisdom, whose Goodness is his Power, whose Sweetness is
his Life, his Joy, his Glory, will leave this piece, his Creation, which he
has drawn from Himself, to be in the whole a Divine Picture of Himself,
unfinished? Will he suffer any part of it to pass without its just and full
proportions, in an inviolable order to the whole and to the parts, upon which
the life, the beauty, the sweetness of the whole depends?

We read in the Canticles, That the heavenly Image of God, that new Creation
which is the spiritual Bride in a Saint, the joints of the thighs are like
Jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman. Cunning in Hebrew is there
properly word for word, trusty and faithful. It implies a truth of skill and
care in the workman, by which he exactly answers the relation in which he
stands to his work, the trust in him, the dependence upon him, and expectation
from him. Motion is the chiefest part of Beauty, in as much as it is the most
proper expression of Life, and the spring of Variety. This first Creation, the
work of Nature taken together in its invisible and visible parts, from its
beginning to its end, is a living Image of God, his Daughter and Bride,
although it be a shadow only of the heavenly Image, or the heavenly Image in a
shadow. Are not the Wills of Intellectual Spirits here, the joints of the Thigh
of this Image, the manifest and most principal Instruments of motion, by which
it ascends or descends, it turns it self about, and moves every way? Shall not
then the faithful Creator, whose Truth, whose Goodness, whose Skill is the Idea
of all Beauty in Himself, infinitely transcends all trust, all expectation,
make these Joints, Jewels? Shall he not here express the most beautiful Ideas
of his Skill and Wisdom? Shall he not here lay on the greatest Riches of his
Divine Goodness? Shall he not stamp on these the most glorious Seal of his
Truth, his Faithfulness to the work of his hands? Shall he not give the most
heightened life and sweetning to this Seal of his Goodness, Truth and Skill?
Does not he understand, that the perfection of the whole work lies, that the
praise and glory of the Workman depends, principally if not entirely, upon
these Joints, on which the motion of the whole in so high a degree depends?

I will briefly conclude this part of my Discourse. Reader, think of God as
Sweetness it self, all pure, unmixt, unconfined. Think of God, as the Spirit of
Love, Beauty, Joy, all in one, in their most abstracted Essences, in their
highest Exaltation, in their greatest amplitude, in their most potent vigor,
incorruptible, eternal. Think of God, as the purest and richest Spring, without
beginning or end; as the clearest Sea, without bottom or bounds, of all
Perfections, in the highest degree of Pleasantness, of all Pleasantness in the
highest Perfection. Think of all things together with thy self in this God, the
Unchangeable Original of all, according to their first and truest forms,
according to their eternal Truths, one Goodness and Sweetness together with
this goodness and sweetness it self, one Spirit with this Spirit of all Loves,
Beauties and Joys, in Divine figures, divinely distinct, as the first and
fullest Variety, in the first and entirest Unity.

When thou have thought thus of God, now think whether all things within thee
do not with the fullest concurrence meet in this one only most passionate
desire, that this God may alone conduct his whole Work, the whole course of all
things, that he may be present, may act, may appear alone, in every part, in
every motion of it, as filling so many figures and shadows of Himself. After
all, consider whether that ground, in which is founded the desire of this, as
the most perfect good, the Object of all desires, be not as firm a foundation
for the belief of this, no less agreeable Truth to the Understanding, than it
is of good to the Will. Can Goodness and Truth be separated, when Truth is
Goodness in its essential Image, in its fullest, fairest reflection? Shall not
the most perfect Workman bring forth the most perfect Work; the best from the
best? Shall not the highest God, the most true of Himself thus do, who is the
supreme Good, whose Will is Goodness it self, where (as Ficinus upon Plato
speaks) the highest Voluntariness, and the highest Necessity, most beautifully
and most pleasantly meet, in the most inviolable band of the most true, the
most perfect Good.

2. Head of Arguments.
I pass now to the second Head of Arguments, taken from the Mediation of
Christ, and opposed to that Liberty of the Will, which is placed in a freedom
from the predetermination of its Acts, in its essential Principles and superior
Causes.

My method of treating of the Mediation of Christ, and directing my Discourse
upon it to the service of my present design, shall be this: I will endeavor
with all humility and holy reverence, by the conduct of that sweet Light which
falls from the Face of Christ (by the guidance of his Eyes, the only Fountain
of Grace and Truth) to set before us the Lord Jesus in those three principal
Parts of his Mediation, as he is, 1. The ground. 2. The way. 3. The end of the
whole Work of God.

1. Jesus Christ is the ground of the whole Work of God. This is the first and
principal part of Christ's Mediation, in which he is the Golden Head of the
whole Image of things in Grace and Nature. This well understood (according to
the weak capacity of our Understanding here below) seems to make all the
other parts of the Mediatorship, with the whole tract of things, plain and
pleasant.

That, which in Divinity and Philosophy is understood by the name of a Person,
is an Intellectual Being, completely existing. Therefore God, Angels, (which
are called Gods) and Men, made in the Image of God, which are also dignified
with the Name of God in the holy Scripture, are only styled and esteemed
Persons. The reason of the Name, I humbly conceive to be this, Every
Intellectual Spirit, according to the propriety of its Nature and Essence,
comprehends entirely within it self, the principle of its own Essence, its
essential form and operation, by comprehending in it self the whole nature of
things.

The Understanding in its perfect Act, and Being in its largest compass, are
said (by Philosophers) to meet in a mutual proportion and union; the one being
the proper and adequate Object of the other. Therefore the Greeks call every
Intellectual Spirit, (...), the whole.

The prime operation of every Intellectual Spirit is contemplation. The first
and immediate Object of its contemplation is its own Essence. In this Glass of
living and immortal Light, all other things, according to their proper
essences, in their several and essential forms, appear to it most clearly and
delightfully, as its own Births and Beauties. God, the first, and most perfect,
the Father and King of all Intellectual Spirits, is the truest Person. He alone
in truth subsisteth in himself, existeth without, and above all things. He
truly contains the whole compass of things, in their unchangeable Truths and
Substances within himself, although he Himself be the most absolute, and most
abstracted Unity. Angels and Men, in the perfection of their Natures, are no
more than shadowy persons. They have only shadowy Essences, a shadowy
comprehension of shadows.

God then alone most perfectly and substantially enjoys Himself in the
contemplation of Himself, which is the Beatifical Vision of the most beautiful,
the most blessed Essence of Essences. This Act of Contemplation is an
Intellectual and Divine Generation, in which the Divine Essence, with an
eternity of most heightened Pleasures, eternally brings forth it self, within
it self, into an Image of it self.

According to the Perfection in which God knows Himself, and enjoys
Himself, so is the Perfection of this Image. As those are, so is this clear,
distinct and full. The more distinct the beam is from the first Light in its
emanation, the more strong and full is the reflectiou. This Divine Image then
is at once most perfectly distinct from its Divine Original, most exactly equal
to it, and most perfectly one with it. As then God is, so is this essential,
eternal Image of God, a complete and distinct Person in it self, in every point
with the highest and most ravishing agreeableness, answering the Divine
Esseunce in its spring out of which it arises.

If this Image were not a complete Person, Gods knowledge and fruition of
Himself would be incomplete, without the pleasing and proportionate returns of
an equal Loveliness, Life and Love. If this Image were not most perfectly
distinct from the bosom out of which it flourishes, the knowledge and
enjoyment of God would be confused, more like to the blindness, the barrenness,
the cold of darkness and death, than the life and fruitfulness, the warmth of
beauty, life and love, which all have their Perfection and their Joys in the
propagation of themselves into most distinct forms, and the reflection upon
themselves from these forms.

This is the first, and so the most universal Image, the first seat of all
Images of things. In this all the fullness, the unchangeable riches of the
Godhead display themselves in their first, their fairest, their fullest
glories. All forms of things are here most proper, most perfect, most distinct,
substantial, and true. Philosophers and Divines call the first Images of
things, as they rise up from the Fountain of eternity in the bosom of this
universal and eternal Image, Ideas. The Idea, in this sense, is the first and
distinct Image of each form of things in the Divine Mind; The universal Image,
of which we speak, is that Divine Mind or Understanding. This is the proper
Idea of the Godhead, the universal Idea, the Idea of Ideas, and so that Mother
of us all, which is above. Every Idea of each Creature is this Idea, bringing
forth it self, according to the inestimable Treasures of the Godhead in it,
into innumerable distinct figures of it self in the unconfined Varieties of its
own Excellencies and Beauties, that so it may enjoy it self, sport with it
self, in these, with endless and ever new Pleasures of all Divine Loves.

Thus in every Idea of each Creature does this universal Idea dwell at large,
and freely shine forth with all its fulnesses and sweetnesses in a distinct
form, as it self in another form.

The Ideas or Images being the only and eternal Truths of all things, do from
themselves, as the true Heavens in eternity, send forth, as shadowy figures,
the Heaven of Angels, these visible Heavens, the Earth, all the Elements with
their Inhabitants and Furniture.

Each Idea contains its own created figure, as the proper place of it; gives
it its essence and existence in it self, sustaineth it, and supporteth it in
its own bosom by new Births, or emanations from it self every moment; it
fills it throughout, as the Light does the Air, or rather the beams in the
Air. This alone is the unchangeable Truth, the true substance of each thing,
the golden Head above, the inward spring below, the Crystal Vessel which
holds and encloseth every created Being, the living water of all Truth and
true Being, which fills every created Vessel.

Place is affirmed by the Jews, to be one of the Names of God. Christ says in
the Gospel, In my Fathers house are many Mansions. This universal and eternal
Image, of which we speak, is a Divine Person: This is our Jesus, the God of all
Glory, in the clearest, the fullest effulgency or brightness of all his Glories
in his own most proper and most glorious form. This is the House or Palace of
the Father upon the Mount of Eternity, the House of Ideas, or the first and
eternal Images of things, which are at once, as so many Children of this Great
King, the Father of all, and as so many Mansions in this House. Here in this
House of God, as David speaks, each Bird has its Nest, has its place to sit
and sing near his holy Altar. Thus God, in each of these distinct and eternal
Images, is the distinct and eternal Place of each thing.

As the golden Seals were the only place of the Impression, if there were
nothing besides the golden Substance and the Impression; so is the Idea, or the
Divine Image in our Lord Jesus, the only place of each thing. How sweet a
Contemplation is this?

Every created Being, as a Figure or an Impression, which has no ground, no
foundation to sustain it, besides the Seal which makes it, rises, flourishes,
fades and falls, has the whole compass of its beginning, way and end, in
the soft and beautiful bosom of its own Divine Image or Idea in the Person of
our Lord Jesus. Thus all things live, move, and have their being in Him. It is
the Rule of the Philosopher, That all motion is made upon something unmovable.
We read in the first of the Hebrews, a place cited out of the Psalms, where it
is thus said to Jesus Christ, The Heavens and the Earth are the work of thine
hands, they perish, but thou remainest; They all wax old as a Garment, as a
Vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the
same, thy years fail not. Behold Jesus Christ, as he is the eternal Image of
the Godhead, containing the first Images of all things eternally in Himself, is
the Divine and unmovable ground, upon which the Heaven, the Earth, with all
things in them (whose whole being is a perpetual motion and change) perpetually
move.

Jesus Christ is the Wisdom of God, as he is the first and most perfect Image
of the Divine Essence within it self, and in this Image contains those Images
which are the first Patterns, the eternal Grounds, Truths, Measures of all
things. The same Jesus is the Power of God in respect to that seminal or
propagative Power in those first Patterns, by which, as sacred Springs, they
multiply themselves by various streams, receiving all along from them the
continuation of their Beings, in continual motions, till by circling about they
return to, and rest in the bosom of their Fountain. This is that pure and
clear Sea of Ideal Lights and Lives, from which all their Rivers of Being go
forth, and into which they return again, while that still is equally full, and
capable of no diminution or increase.

This ground of the Work of God in Christ, and of the Mediation of Christ,
seems to be the fundamental sense, though perhaps not the only one, nor that
principally intended by the Apostle in those words, where he says, That our
Lord Jesus is the Image of the invisible God, and the Firstborn of every
Creature. This last expression is divinely contrived to be both in one, a
collective and a distributive: with equal propriety of sense, you may read of
all Creation, of every Creature.

The holy Scripture in the Epistle to the Hebrews distinguishes between the
shadow and the Image, the very Image, the self Image of good things to come.
The whole Creation, with the Law in its Angelical Glories, as it is the Crown
and Ground of this Creation, according to the Doctrine of the Jewish Masters,
and of all the Scripture, is a shadow of good things, and no more. Jesus Christ
alone is the Image of God, and so of all good things, the very Image, the self
Image, that Image which by its exactness is one self, with its Original God, in
all those Glories, in which (by reason of their excess of Light) He is in this
Image equally glorious, and perfectly visible to Himself.

Jacob styles his firstborn, the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of
Strength. Jesus Christ being the first Image of God, is also in that the first
Image of the Creation in the whole, the first Image of every Creature, in its
distinct form, in its whole compass, as a part of the whole. Thus is He the
Firstborn, the Excellency of Dignity, the Exceliency of Strength, both in
respect to the Father of all, and of every Birth. He is the first effulgency,
or shining out of the Divine Glory, in every form imitable or inimitable.

If this Nail were fastened by a Master of the Assemblies, how unmoveably would
it be fixed, and be the frame of my design. Socrates in Plato professes to
love his beautiful Friend* because he always generated in his mind within, and
his sp^ch without, rational Discourses, harmonious Forms of things, beaut^ul
Images, con^ting of agreeable porportions. Reason in (...) intellectual Spirit,
is a treasure of Divine pr^portions, the patterns and principles of its
Activity. Every Intellectual Spirit by its Reason is a sacred Field,
replenished with Divine Powers, Divine Springs and Forms of proportions and
harmony, which compose reason in the essence of it, are at once Divine Flowers
of Intellectual Beauties and Divine Springs, a prolifick virtue of seminative
and formative force, by which they propagate themselves. Our Jesus is this
Field, and this Paradise of Flowers and Springs in the Godhead, the
Understanding, the Reason of the Godhead.

Every Workman, according to the measure of his reason and wisdom, has in
himself, before he begins to work, the form and perfection of his work. This
is the end which first moves the Agent, and sets him on work. This is the
reason, the rule of his works, which gives him both life to it, and light in
it. This Harmony of skill or reason within, is the Angelical Music in the
mind, to which all things in the work without do move; like Amphion's Lute, by
sound of which the Walls of Thebes were raised.

Thus the Workman works by wisdom; For his God teaches him. Shall not the
only wise God much more work in Wisdom? Shall not He have the form of that
Work, which he intends, perfect and plain, with all its proportions in his
Spirit, before He begineth it? Shall not He have his end, the pattern, the
principle, the reason, and the rule of His Work in Himself? Or does He work
blindly, or by chance? Or is He enlivened or enlightened from without for his
Work? Does He not from the treasure and measure of all harmony in his own mind
give to it its proportions and perfections? Solomon brings in Wisdom, as a
Person in eternity, speaking after this manner; When God stretched out the
Heavens, when he laid the foundations of the Earth, when he dug up a place
for the Sea, then I was with him. St. John in the beginning of his Gospel takes
the Vail off from his Person, and discovers this Wisdom in an eternal
Person, to be the Lord Jesus. For he says, In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and by him were all things made.
This is the internal Word of the Mind, the Wisdom of God, the essential Image
of the Godhead, the Original, the eternal Image of all things. In this Word,
are eternally contained the Patterns, the prolisick Virtues, by which the whole
Creation, with all things in it, are brought forth and formed. This is the Word
in the Mind of God, in which the whole Creation is drawn forth, in which it
lies in the first and most proper draught of it, from the beginning to the
end, before it comes forth in it self. This is our Jesus bred with the Father
in eternity, ever before Him, who thus day by day sporteth Himself, and plays
with Him, whiles in all his Work, ^e multiplieth and spreads forth round
about him to the uttermost bounds of things, Divine Figures of those Archetypal
and exemplar Glories which he sees in him.

Can this then be? Can Jesus Christ thus be the ground of the Creation, and of
the whole Work of God in it? Can the whole piece in all its proportions and
perfection, lie here in the Person of this Jesus, in its first draught, in its
exactest patterns, and the will of man with the motions of it be left out of
this model? Is not the Will of every Intellectual Spirit, are not the motions
of this Will the principal parts of this Work, are they not those Hinges and
Engines by which the whole is turned about in all the great revolutions of it?
Does not the Catastrophe, the final change, does not the finishings and
perfections, the Ultimate and most glorious closes of the whole, on which the
expectations of Men and Angels are fixed, in which the full Harmony of the whole
Work, the full glory of the Workman do consist, and are discovered, depend upon
these, the Will, and its motion?

If therefore these also lie in this Jesus, the essential, the personal Wisdom
of God, their first ground, their most perfect pattern in eternity, are they
not here determined, as in their first cause? But thus much of the Mediatorship
of Christ, in the ground of it, as the first ground of the whole work of God
lies most fair, most full, and flourishing in his Person in eternity.

2. Jesus Christ in his Mediatorship is the way of the whole work of God from
the beginning to the end of it, a most beautiful and a most pleasant way. I
shall set this way before us in two parts.

1. Part. Jesus Christ is the first and universal Creature, the first created
Head, the first, the fairest Copy of the whole Angelical Nature with all its
Glories, of the whole Creation, the Life-Picture, taken immediately from the
Life it self. I shall not insist much on this, as seeming perhaps not so clear,
not having been generally received, neither does it bring any new Argument to
this Cause, but only add new force to the Argument immediately before, taken
from the ground of the Mediatorship in Christ.

Yet am I not willing to pass it by, without a brief offer of those Reasons,
which seem to give clearness and countenance to it, and that upon a twofold
Consideration:

1. I gladly thus far gratify the Arians and Socinians, by complying with
them, in giving to our Lord Jesus, as a Creature, this pre-existency to the
whole Creation, and pre-eminence above it. I cannot but conceive fair hopes,
that clear and candid Spirits among them, will by this link in the golden Chain
of Christ's Mediatorship, in which God, and all his Works, are by an
inseparable and harmonious order fastened each to other, be easily lead to that
first and highest Link of the Godhead of Christ, the original, eternal,
essential form of the Divine Essence, sweetly conceived, and completely finished
there, as the womb and bosom of the first Love. Neither can any more doubt,
but that those intelligent and ingenious Persons, of which I speak, will as
delightfully by this same Link, upon a wise contemplation of it, be carried to
those other lower Links of Redemption and Justification, Sanctification and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, as the purchase, the power, the pattern, the
meritorious, the efficient, the formal cause of all this, in his Humiliation
and Exaltation.

If Jesus Christ be a created form, living, immortal, glorious, containing in
himself the whole Creation, with all its Vicissitudes of Lives and Deaths in
one entire Beauty, more fresh, more fair, more full, then ever it can be in it
self, if it be seen at one view, at the uttermost height of all sweetness,
softness, amiableness, luster, that it is capable of, (although that be true,
which some say, that the World in the whole is the most beautiful of all
things, or which others say, that it is an Angel.) This created form then has
a Prototype, its Original Image, its exemplar Cause in eternity, in God, on
which it depends, and from which it flows; otherwise it is not a created form,
but uncreated, absolute and eternal. This Original Image is one with the first,
the supreme Image of eternity, and of God. For all things are there, as in the
fullest Variety, so in the most entire Unity. This then is the Godhead of
Christ, that essential Image of the Divine Nature, in which Jesus Christ, with
all his created Glories, pre-exists in eternity, from whence he descends into a
created state, and has there an existency antecedent to every other Creature.

If this Jesus be the first and universal Creature, the whole world, in one
Spirit and Person, who takes flesh of the Virgin Mary, then does the whole
world live, die, and rise again in him. Now is his Death the Death of the whole
world, his Resurrection is the universal Resurrection of the whole world in its
Divine Head, and in its immortal Root. Now is Jesus Christ a Sacrifice for our
Redemption, Sanctification, Salvation; not by an imaginary, notional, arbitrary
Imputation, but a judgment founded upon the Divine Nature of things, and a real
immediate Union between Christ and the World, as a Divine Seed, and a Divine
Plant, which with a Divine eminency is comprehended in that Seed, and virtually
produced out of it, receiving every moment its alterations from it, according
to the seminal and Divine proportions treasured up in it. Thus Christ takes
away the Sin of the World; thus he makes all things new. These are only glances
by the way.

2. The second Consideration which moved me to touch this string, is the
perfection and the heightning which it seems to give to the whole mystery of
Divine Truth in the Scripture, and in the Gospel. A sweet and beautiful line
would probably arise from this Point, to illustrate many and principal
Scriptures, many and principal Mysteries of the Gospel, if it were found
consonant to the letter of the Scripture, to the Analogy of Faith, and so
generally received. I will now therefore offer in few words, a reason or two in
this case, leaving the judgment of it and the full prosecution, to those who
have either Humane or Divine Learning in these things above my self.

1. The first, or rather cluster of Reasons, lies in that Scripture, Col. 1.
15, 16, 17.

1. Christ is here described in the proper Character of his Divine Person (as
the general ground of his Mediatorship) by these words, Who is the Image of the
invisible God. He is the Image of God by way of eminence, the first, the
supreme, the most perfect Image, representing the Essence, the Substance, the
Unity of God to himself within himself, essentially, substantially in his own
proper Unity. He is the Image of the invisible God, as he is invisible in that
Glory of his own eternal form, in which he is visible by no Light, to no Light,
to no Eye, in no Spirit besides his own. He is the only Image of God in every
Image, the Image of God in its first state upon the Throne, in its descent
through all states, in the Grave, unto the nethermost parts of the Earth, until
it return and re-ascend above all Heavens thither where it was at first.

2. Jesus Christ is here described in the two parts of his Mediatorship, one
relating to the state of Nature, the other to the state of Grace. At the 25.
verse he is styled the firstborn of every Creature, at the 18. verse, the
firstborn from the dead. These two being contra-distinguished from each other,
seem to point at, and paint forth Jesus Christ in two different forms, agreeing
both in this, that they have their ground in his eternal form, and are
subordinate to it. These two being contra-distinguished, and answering each
other, seem to be interpreted one by the other.

Jesus is the firstborn of the Resurrection in a twofold sense. He is the
first of those that rise from beneath the shades of this Creation into the true
Heavens, the Holy of Holies, the unvailed Glory of God. He is the fullness of
the Resurrection. He, as a Divine Head, comprehends clearly, completely,
eminently in himself all these, who are to rise as Divine Members of himself,
inseparably joined in the Unity of the same Divine Spirit. They all rise
together with him at his Resurrection. He is the Fountain of the Resurrection.
Every one in his own proper person and season rises up out of him by his
Power, in the Virtue of his Resurrection.

After the same manner is Jesus the firstborn of every Creature. He is the
first, the fullness, the fountain of the Creation. He is the first Creature. So
in the 17. verse, in the illustration of this state, as he is the first of
every Creature, it is said, He is before all things. He pre-existed in a
created form, when there was yet no other Creature formed. All things were made
in him, whether visible or invisible, Principalities, Powers, or Thrones,
things in Heaven, or on Earth, and all things stood together in him, says St.
Paul, verse 17. So the Greek words in both verses are most properly rendered.
Great men in the mystery of Philosophy and Divinty affirm, That which is below
to be the same with that which is above. Every Flower on Earth is a Star in the
Firmament. Each Star an Angel in the Heavens above. If this be St. Paul's
sense, which we have represented from these words, the Elements with all of
them, the visible Heavens with all in them, the innumerable Company of Angels
in their invisible Heavens, have all met and subsisted together in one created
Form, in one Divine Spirit and Person, which is our Jesus. In this Person they
are not Flowers of Beauty, not Stars of Light, not Angels of Glory, but Divine
Forms, antecedent and transcendent to the brightest Cherubims, the highest, the
most flaming Seraphims.

Thus they exist in Christ. Thus with the unsearchable Riches of all agreeable
Varieties they make up the Body of Christ, as he is the created Head of all.
Thus as he is the first of all Creatures, so is he the fullness of the whole
Creation.

He is also the Fountain. St. Paul adds also this, All things were made by
him, verse 16. All Creatures flow from him, as second Lights are cast from the
first brightness by various reflections and refractions.

3. The design of all this discovers it self to us in these words, That he in
all things might have the pre-eminence, verse 18. The first sense of the Greek
word is this, that he in all things may be first. So you have a plain allusion
to that word of Firstborn twice applied to Jesus, once in respect to the
Creation, another time to the Resurrection. Jesus Christ as God (if so we may
speak of him after the manner of Man) is alike the first of all things, not as
by design, or any act of the Will, but by Nature and his Essence, as in our
Conceptions it antecedes every act of Council or Will. This primacy then, which
is attributed to Christ, as founded in a Divine contrivance, properly
respects him as in a created Form, in which he, who, as God, is by Nature the
first of all things, so by design of the Godhead, as a Creature, becomes the
Firstborn Son of God in Nature and Creation, the Firstborn Son of God in
Grace, in Glory, in the Resurrection: Until he in his created Nature, by his
Resurrection, became a new Creature, anointed with the eternal Spirit, and
entered into the Holy of Holies, by the rending of the Vail of Flesh: The Seed
of the New Creature, of the spiritual Man, and the heavenly Image, was not yet
come up into its proper form, nor risen up out of the Earth of the first
Creation, where it lay buried.

4. The ground of this design appears, verse 19. For it pleased the Father,
that in him should all fullness dwell. The Greek word signifies a perfect and
most agreeable rest of all our faculties, a sweet and full complacency in the
presence and appearance of an Object most entirely, most universally amiable
and pleasing. Thus the joy of the Father is full, to see in the same Person of
his beloved Son (the dear and entire reflection of himself) to dwell together
at once in One, the fullness of his Godhead, the fullness of all his designs and
works, in Nature, in Grace, in the Creation, in the Resurrection. Thus is this
Son of his Love ever before him, his Delight day by day, all along, through
time and eternity. All his works are love-sports with this his Son and Bride,
various parts of Divine Love which he acts, various forms of Divine Beauty
and Joy into which he casts himself in the Bosom and Person of this lovely,
only beloved One. Now his Soul rests in all his Counsels and Works, while he
sees the Face of his Son with all pleasantness there. Now his Soul rests in
his Son, while he sees all his Counsels and Works, as the finished Beauties,
and unsearchable Riches of his Person. Now is the Person of his Son a complete
Paradise, while out of this ground he makes to spring every Plant that is
desirable for Beauty, for Pleasantness, for Wisdom, for Food, for a Feast to
Men, to Angels, to God himself.

2. I pass now to my second Reason, the Lord Jesus thus set in a created form,
renders the order of the Creatures proceeding from God, more harmonious and
entire, its connection more immediate and inviolable, its dependence more firm
and sure: for thus the Creature comes forth from God, first in a distinct
Nature from him, but in the Unity of the same eternal Person with him; then in
a distinction both of Nature and Person. While the universal nature of the
Creature subsisting in the Person of Christ, reposeth it self immediately upon
the Godhead, and becomes it self the ground of all the Creatures in their
several subsistencies and essences, reposing themselves in the bosom of this
first Creature; How perfect is the order of things without any gap or leaps?
How full is the Harmony in this entireness of the Order? With what clearness
and delightfulness are the Links of the Chain in the whole frame, by mutual
embraces fastened to each other? How does the beautiful blissful Unity and Union
of the Divine Love, in the connection, in the mutualness of influencies and
dependencies, shine through all, sustain, animate, beautify, and sweeten all?
How clear now is the passage between God and the Creature, time and eternity,
by this milky way in the bosom of Christ?

That Scripture seems under that covert of rich expression to contain the
riches of this sense, where Christ is said to be the brightness of the Glory of
God, the engraven Image of his Substance, and so to bear all things by the Word
of his Power, Heb. 1. That word Bear signifies both to bring forth, and to
sustain, as a Root the Plant.

The Sun has a threefold effulgency or light; 1. The essential and internal
Image of the Sun within it self. 2. The Sunshine immediately fastened to the
body of the Sun, and flowing from it. 3. The Light cast upon the elementary
World, as the figure of this Sunshine. Thus is Jesus Christ a threefold
Light, or effulgency of the Divine Glory; by one, he shines as the essential
Image of God in the bosom of God; by the other, he shines forth, as the first
Creature, fairest, freshest, and fullest, like a knot of beams springing
immediately from the face of the Sun, and subsisting inseparably in it; by the
third, he shines out in the distinct forms and existences of all the Creatures.

The figure of a living substance first engraven upon a golden Seal, from
thence impresseth it self on manifold and various pieces of white, or yellow,
or red, or black wax; so the essential Image of God engraveth it self first in
a created form upon the Person of Christ, as a golden Seal, from thence
multiplieth it self into innumerable figures, in the various forms of all the
several Creatures.

Power and Glory are frequently Names of God in the Scripture: The Power of
Christ is his Godhead. The Word of his Power is threefold; 1. The internal
Word, which is Christ in his Divine Nature. 2. The Word upon the Lips, is the
Person of Christ in the first created form. 3. The Word from thence multiplied
and figured upon the Air all round about, are the Creatures, in all their
various forms, thus encompassing their King, as figures all round about him,
flowing out from him. Thus Jesus by the out-shining of the Divine Glory, by the
engraven Image of the Divine Substance, by the Word of the Divine Power, in an
order altogether Divine for beauty and strength, brings forth, bears up all
things.

3. I shall propound only one Reason more, to give light or strength to this
Opinion, submitting it entirely to the judgment of the Reader. Jesus Christ
says of himself, I am the Light of the World, 1 John 8. 10. St. John in the
beginning of his Gospel, manifestly alludes to the beginning of Genesis, while
he attributes the Creation of all things to that Word with God, which is God.
In the same place he teaches us this mystery, That the Life of all was in
Christ, and that life was the light of man, both Intellectual and Sensitive,
this latter being the shadow of the former. Then he adds, The Light shined in
Darkness, but the Darkness comprehended it not. This seems to be a clear
allusion to the work of the first day, when God called Light out of Darkness,
dividing at the same time between the Light and the Darkness. The Light now
shined in the midst of the Darkness, enlightening the Darkness, so that it still
remains incomprehensible to the Darkness, as that abode in its own natural
form divided from the Light.

All generally agree, that Moses comprehended the History of the whole Creation
in this Chapter. And under the Covert and Vail of the visible part as a figure,
divinely describes the Intellectual, Angelical, and more Divine part, as the
immediate Original and Life of this Figure. We have an Image of this in the
Body of Heaven, with the Sun-shining in it by day, or the Moon and Stars by
night, when they present themselves to our eyes, by plain figures of
themselves, formed in a flowing stream here below.

The Jews therefore say, That a man of Flesh and Blood, cannot understand the
first Chapter of Genesis. St. Paul affirms, That the invisible things are
perceived, being understood by the things that are made. By these words he
seems plainly to signify, that while Moses painteth out to us the visible
world, and framing of it, his design is to set before us a lively Picture of
the invisible part of things, which is, as the heavenly Person, whose Picture
is drawn on this Table.

The Light then, which is the work of the first day, being not only Sensitive,
but Intellectual, is the first Creature, the first and most immediate
effulgency, irradiation, or out-shining of the Godhead, the beginning of the
Creation of God. St. Paul says, That which makes manisest is Light. Then the
first Light is the first, the most eminent, the amplest, the clearest, the
compleatest manifestation of God, and so of the whole Creation, as its golden
Head.

The first day, according to the Hebrew, Idiom is the one day, which Idiom has
this mystery wrapped up in it, That the Unity, the Fountain of numbers, is the
first in order, from which we begin to number. This Light, which is the first
Creature, the work of the first day, is the first procession of the Divine
Unity without it self. It retains therefore the highest Image of this Unity,
and partakes of it in the highest degree, that any created Nature is capable
of. This is the Unity of the Divine Person, or subsistency, in a distinct
created Essence or Form. Thus you have in this lovely Form of the purest, the
sweetest of all created Lights, the Person of Jesus Christ, as he is the first
Creature, divinely subsisting in the Godhead. This is that Light, which while
it shines with a derived brightness, in the midst of that darkness which is
the first matter of every Creature, it remains, in the Unity and Divinity of
its Person and subsistence, veiled to the highest and most glorious of all
Creatures. For even in this blessed Person the darkness is a dividing Vail
between the Nature and the Godhead, in which that Nature subsists.

The Jewish Masters by a twofold tradition, seem to seal up this mystery for
Posterity. First, they number the Soul of the Messiah among those sacred and
sublime Glories which were before the world. Secondly, They mysteriously affirm
the Light of the first day to be a Light, in which the whole work of Creation
in all the parts of it, with all its Revolutions from its first beginning to
its last end, are clearly and distinctly seen. But say they, at the fall of man
by Sin, this Light was hid beneath the Throne of God, until the days of the
Messiah. Can any thing more plainly express our Jesus, as He is the first and
universal Creature? the first, the fairest, the clearest draught of the whole
Creation, in the whole course and conduct of it, pre-existent to every
Creature, comprehending all the works of God, from the first line to the last
finishing of it, in one most delightful View, in one most agreeable Prospect,
in one Spirit and Form of purest, sweetest life, more than Angelical, only less
then Divine, yet subsisting in a Divine Person? If the will of man, with its
motions, be seen and pre-exist here, are they not here predetermined?

But I have said before, that I would neither insist long upon this Point, nor
lay any thing of the weight of this Cause upon it, being it self by few
received or understood.

I divided my discourse of the Mediatorship into three Heads: 1. Christ, as he
is the ground of all the Works of God, in which also lies the ground of his
Mediatorship. 2. Christ, as he is the Way. 3. Christ, as he is the End of the
whole Work of God. There are two parts in the way; 1. Christ, as he is the
beginning of the Works of God, the first Creature. 2. Christ, as the coming
forth and the conduct of every Creature (from the beginning to the end) is in
him, and by him. This I am now to take in hand.

Christ is Mediator, as he is the way of the coming forth, and the conduct of
the Work of God, in the whole and every part of it. As in a Plant, the seminal
Spirit has treasured up in it the seminal Reasons, the whole Harmony, all the
proportions of the Plant, in the whole Plant, and in every part of it, as this
seminal Spirit has in it self the formative power of the Plant, according to
the proportion, as this Spirit puts forth it self into every part of the
Plant, springs up together with it, gives it its proper measures and
proportions suited to the Harmony of the whole Plant, appears in each part as a
living Image of that particular proportion or harmony which with an invisible
Beauty flourishes within it self, resides on every part of the Plant with the
full harmony of the whole, being one and the same, altogether undivided, in the
whole Plant and in all its parts; Thus is Christ after a more eminent and
divine manner the seminal Spirit of the whole Creation.

I have before represented him, from clear Scriptures, as the Wisdom and Power
of God, by virtue of which he is clearly a Spirit, containing in himself the
seminal Reasons, and the formative Power, by which every Creature is formed
universally in its production, and in its conduct.

Jesus Christ is frequently known in the Scriptures by that Name of the Seed,
which though it relates eminently to the state of Grace and Glory, where it
comes up into its ripe fruit and entire form, yet does it relate to the state
of Nature. For by virtue of this Seed Adam was the Son of God. By this Seed,
and in it, were all things made, as Plants springing forth from it, although
the Seed were yet come up in them only into the green Leaf, or smiling Blossoms
at the best. That Name given in Greek to Jesus, which is translated the Word,
signifies as properly Reason. Jesus Christ is the Reason of God, the Reason of
the Divine Nature, the universal Reason of the whole Creation, in which lies
the particular Reason of each Creature, in its Essence, in its Operations. Thus
is Jesus Christ the universal Harmony of the Godhead, and of the whole Work of
God. He is that Harmony, according to the measure of which the whole work of
God is formed.

The Reader is desired to take notice, That the Authors Papers upon this Head
were imperfect, and that he will find what can be recovered of them before the
finishing of this Work, together with a large Discourse upon this whole
Argument of the Mediation of Christ at the end of the Book, where it was
thought most convenient to place it, because of its length.

The third Head of Arguments in this Cause of Free Will, is the Universal
Nature of the Creature, Every Creature is a shadow. That that is first in every
kind is such by it self, and every other thing by that. God is the first Being,
the only Original. All created Being, in every kind, degree, or manner of
being, is a shadow of this Original, and so is all that which it is, in every
distinct form, motion, or circumstance, in its Essence, Subsistence, and
Operations, distinctly by this. It has its Being by the first Being. It
subsists, it acts by the subsistency, and by the acting of this first Being,
this first subsistency, this first activity in it. The whole Creation in its
best state, is no more than a shadowy Image of the Great Creator. Man, who is
styled the Glory of God, as being the band, the sealed sum, the circling Crown
of the whole Creation, is said to be made in the Image of God. The various
Powers and Beauties dispersed through the several Creatures, to make the whole a
complete Image of the Divine Nature, meet in one in Him, as a comprehension of
the whole, in whom the Divine Image is as entire, but more heightened and
refined, as being more finished here, being drawn out further, being more
elaborate, and having the last hand put to it. Thus was He made worthy to be
the Son of God, the Figure of Jesus Christ, in order to lie eternally in his
bosom, as his Bride, and to be a Fellow-Heir of God together with Him.

Yet was this Image, in which man was thus made, a shadowy Image only. The word
by which it is expressed in the first of Genesis, is Tselem. This word has in
it entirely the name of a shadow. It has also the first and chief letter of
Death with which it ends. It signifies properly such an Image, as is an empty,
vanishing, dying shadow; the shadow of a substance, without any substance; a
shadow of life, without any true life.

The same word is used Psalm. 39. 6. Man walks in a vain show, and disquieteth
himself in vain. The word here rendered, a vain show, is Tselem, the same with
that by which the Image of God in Man is expressed, Genesis 1. The words
immediately preceding in this Psalm are these, Man in his best state is all of
him all vanity. The Reason is added, Man walks in a vain show. Man himself in
the purity of his Nature, in the unfaded, the unstained flower of all his
senses, in the primitive height of all his Intellectual Glories, was a vain
show. The Paradise of his Understanding, the invisible World of Angels, with
all the Virgin beauties and sweetnesses of both in the midst of which he
walks, were a vain show. For they, round about him, with all their pomp and
pleasantness, were no more than a shadowy Image of the Divine World, lying in
the bosom of it. He himself was a shadowy Image of the Divine Essence and
Person, in the midst of a world of shadows.

We have this word used again, Psalm. 73. 20, As a dream when one awaketh, so, O
Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their Image. Image here is Tselem,
which before was translated vain show. God the supreme and eternal Spirit is
here presented, bringing forth this World, as a man does a dream in his sleep.
The darkness at the beginning of the Creation, described Genesis 1. seems here to
be alluded to, as a mysterious sleep into which the first Spirit, the Fountain
of all, the Father of all, after a Divine manner cast its self. Then the Light,
with the work of the six days, and so the whole Creation, springs forth from
this Spirit in this sleep as a dream.

The Devil, with his Ministers or Creatures, Angels and Man, by the Fall become
Princes and Lords of this Creation. They possess the Powers, Treasures, and
Glory of this World. But all this while, themselves with all these created
Riches, Honors and Joys, in which they swim and swell, are only shadows in a
dream, beneath the shining and anointed feet of those true, substantial,
immortal Beauties and Sweetnesses, to which their hope, their sight, their
imaginations can never raise themselves. When this eternal Spirit in whose
sleep, like painted forms in a dream, they vainly flutter about, awakeneth
himself, he at once dissolveth them into their own nothingness, and despises
them, as having never been any thing, yea, less than nothing in the Light of
Divine Truth, and in the glorious face of the eternal substances.

Thus we see the universal Nature of the Creature and of Man, in their first
form, to consist in a shadowy Image. If the Creature were its own Original, and
had the truth, the life of its own Being, its Original form in it self, it were
no more a Creature, but a God. As then the Face in the Waters, or in the Glass,
in all its powers, parts, colors, and motions, depends upon the living face,
being determinated by it every moment; so are all Creatures, all Spirits,
Angels, or Men, in their Essences, Powers, or Operations, continually figured
by those forms in which the eternal Spirit from above presents it self, as
the reflections of that Spirit, like the shapes of the Clouds, or the Face of
Heaven in a clear stream.

This truth seems to be with a Divine elegancy set forth, Cant. 5. 12. It is
said there of Jesus Christ, That his Eyes are as Doves, above the Rivers of
Waters, washing in milk, full set. Thus the words in Hebrew most properly
render themselves. A learned Jew in his Paraphrase, has this gloss upon those
words, Full set; The whole world is the fullness of his Eyes. There seems to
be in this verse, a plain allusion to that expression, Genesis 1. of the Spirit
moving upon the waters, or above the waters. The Chaldee Paraphrase makes this
to be in the form of a Dove.

The Lamb in the Revelation is said to have seven Eyes, a perfect number
expressing a full Variety. The Ideal forms, or the first Images of things,
those eternal Truths and Lights of Life in the Person of Christ, as the
essential Image, the sweetest, the only living Light of the Godhead, are these
Eyes of the Bridge-groom here celebrated. These Eyes are Doves, pure, eternal
Spirits of Divine Love and Beauty, in the bosom, in the Unity of the eternal
Spirit, the heavenly King and Bridegroom of all Spirits. These Doves are the
lovely Eyes with which this Spirit is all over thick set, like the wings of the
Seraphims full of eyes within and without.

These Doves are washing themselves in Milk. So the Hebrew has it, as a
present perpetual Act. They lie washing and bathing eternally in the springs of
Divine Light and Beauty, in the softnesses, sweetnesses, and walks of the
Divine Love. These are the Milk of the Godhead, and of blessed Spirits; These
Eyes are full set. For each of these Ideal Original forms in Christ
comprehends in it self under the character or property of its own distinct
Variety, the whole Divine World, and all Worlds in their first forms.

These first eternal Images of things in Christ are his Eyes, the sweetly
shining Springs of all Light, Life, Love, and Joy. For he ever beholds all
things with these, in these. By these, as he looks forth with them, he guides
all things. In these is he, as the supreme Spirit of truth and beauty, seen in
his liveliest and loveliest appearances. These Eyes are Doves, being each of
them one Spirit comprehending all things in its Unity, a Spirit of purest Light
and Sweetness, the chaste and beloved Mate of the eternal Spirit, eternally
springing up, lying eternally in the Bosom and Unity of it.

These Doves in the Firmament of Divine Glory spreading their Wings, flying
every where to and fro over the water of this Creation, figure themselves and
their motions in shadowy Images upon them. Thus are all things here formed and
moved, as the face in the Glass by the living Face.

This similitude has in it a signal difference from the Truth represented by
it. The living Eye or Face sends forth its Image. But this Image has its
reception and subsistence in another substance, the glass or the water. But the
Creation has no ground to bear it up, but that alone which brings it forth.
These Divine Eyes of which we speak, at once send forth and support these
Images of themselves. They are the clear Springs from which they stream, and
the Crystal Looking-Glasses in which they appear. In this eternal Spirit, in
this living Light all things as varied shadows of this Light, as shadowy forms
of this Life, live, move, have their being and appearance: Not as accidents in
their subject, but after a manner far more eminent, and altogether transcendent
to any resemblance in the Creature.

This is the Universal Nature of the Creature.

How pleasant? how Divine a Spectacle is this? All things in their primitive
purity are spotles Doves, Celestial Loves, Virgin-Spirits like Angels clothed
in white, Eyes that are Springs of purest light and sweetness, looking up from
a Divine Light, veiled with a Divine shade, to their Life, their immortal
Mates, their Divine Originals, those Doves, those Eyes above, which looking
down meet themselves here beneath, in shadowy figures, in sweetest reflections
of themselves from the midst of loveliest shades upon a ground of eternal Light.

It is time now to close this Argument. All the Creatures are shadowy Images,
both Men and Angels. As are they, so is their Liberty, so are all their motions
shadowy, as figures they are all formed and determined by the Life in eternity.

I pass now to the second Argument under this Head.

2. Every Creature is an emanation or stream from the Divine Essence, the
emanation of a moment. This is a truth generally established upon all the
clearest, the firmest Principles of truth, in Philosophy or Divinity, by the
most universal consent and harmony in the spirits of learned men, in the nature
of things. ^sse Creaturae est emanare, The Being of the Creature is the beaming
sorth from God, like light from the Sun. The preservation and continuance of
things is a continued Creation.

The whole Creation, with every Creature comprehended in it, through all the
moments of time, to the end of time, rises up immediately, entirely out of
God, as in the first moment of its Being at the beginning of time. The white
sheet full of all living Creatures, was let down out of Heaven thrice in the
sight of St. Peter. The World is a Divine Light, with all forms of things
Angelical or Humane, visible, invisible, appearing in it, let down out of the
Heaven of the Godhead, as often as there are moments in its duration. Thus are
all things a new World, a new Creation, each twinkling of an Eye brought forth
a new, by a fresh glance of the Divine Eye.

If any Creature could subsist one moment apart from God, the first and supreme
Being, without the particular dependence, a particular derivation, of that
moment, it would have the principle of Being in it self, and so eternity in
that moment, and so a Godhead.

The connection, the dependence between God and the Creature, the first, the
universal Cause and every Effect, is much more universal, intimate, immediate,
inseparable, than that between any effect and any second Gause. We have a
demonstration to our sense from the interposal of a Cloud between our eyes and
a clear Sky, that the beams are continued streams of light from the body of the
Sun. In that moment in which they cease to flow from the Sun, to subsist in the
Sun, they cease to be.

It is affirmed of all things material and visible, Fiunt, non sunt; They are
sent forth, but subsist not. They are only in the making; in the same moment in
which they are brought forth, they are no more.

This is universally true of all Creatures, Men and Angels. They have only a
transient, no permanent Being. No eye ever takes in twice the same beam of
Light. No man standing upon the bank of a River sees twice the same water
present with him. Before he can cast his eye upon it the second time, it is
past by, and gone: So is no Creature no appearance the same two moments. We can
never say of created Beings or Beauties, of our sweetest Solaces, or bitterest
Sufferings, they are. For while we are saying it, they fly away, and are no
more; like Lightning, or the shadow upon any point of the Dial. As our
Afflictions in the Language of St. Paul, are Afflictions of a moment; so are
all our Joys, Glories, and Beings in the Creature. No one of them lasts two
moments.

The Scripture testifies to Jesus Christ of the Heavens and the Earth, As a
Garment thou roulest them up, and they shall be changed: But thou art the same,
and thy years fail not. Again, in another place, Jesus the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever. Nothing below Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and to day,
the last moment and this. This is one part of the Vanity marked by Solomon in
all things beneath this Sun of the Godhead, fixed in the midday point of
eternity; that through their whole Being, they are ever in motion, like the
Rivers, and the Wind, In each point of time, one breath, one beam, one stream
from the eternal Spirit, succeeds new in the place of the other sprung forth
from it in the point of time immediately preceding. The whole Creation, each
particular Creature is no more the same, has no continuance, has no Unity
with it self, save only as it is in Jesus Christ, in its first and eternal
Form, its truest Form, its truest Self, in Him, who alone is the true, the
substantial, the universal Image of God, the express Image of his Substance,
Unity, and Eternity. All created forms are so far only the same, and one in a
figure or similitude, as they are sealed with the impression of their Ideal and
Original form in Christ, as they subsist in this Root, as they are Garments
with which this their eternal Truth and Substance clothes it self.

In the my stical Fables of the Heathens, the Goddess of Wisdom contending
with the God of the Seas, for the tutelage of Athens, made suddenly at once to
spring up out of the Earth an Olive Tree in its perfection, with its branches
and leaves all green, laden with ripe Olives. When an Olive Tree or an
Apple Tree rises up by degrees from its Kernel to a perfect Plant, when it
successively puts forth it self through the Spring and Summer, in buds, in
leaves, in blosomes, in fruit, unto a fullness in Autumn; then in that state of
maturity, with its leaves, and fruit in full growth and beauty upon it, it
stands up immediately and entirely out of its Ideal, or first Cause, out of
the Divine Omnipotency or Almightiness, as if it had never before existed, as
if no Summer, no Spring had ever gone before. Yea, the whole Creation round
about that Olive Tree, in its present posture with all Plants on Earth, with
the present face of Heaven, with the present configuration of all Bodies, of
all Humane or Angelical Spirits comes forth from God, as immediately, entirely,
absolutely, as when on the third day, all Herbs, Flowers, and Trees first
appeared, and rose up in a moment, at once perfect out of the Earth; or as if
this present Autumn had been the first, and the beginning of the World, as some
suppose that season to have been.

All things in the Creature upon this ground have their order and connection,
not by virtue of any dependence upon each other, but by the force of the
eternal Order, the inviolable Harmony in the first Cause, the Ideal, or
exemplary World in the Divine Mind. If the Being of the Creature be an
emanation, or beaming forth from the first Being; then as the emanation, or
flowing forth is distinct, new, and fresh every moment, so is there every
moment a new, fresh, distinct World, or Creation.

If man thus with his Soul, his Powers, his Operations, with all the
modifications of his whole Person, Body, and Spirit, in each moment spring
forth fresh and full that moment from his first and universal Cause, as
Philosophers say, the Sun and his beams were concreated at the beginning of the
World; What then is the liberty of the Will in determining it self? Is it any
other than this, the truest, the happiest, the only desirable freedom of
coming forth as it is sent forth from God, the first, and the best of all
things, in a conformity to its eternal Truth, its Original Form, in the highest
Beauty, the highest Bliss, the Divine Wisdom and Will?

Reader, if any difficulties arise in thy mind, about the reconciling of the
appearances of things in the World so mixed with Good and Evil, the evil of
Deformity, the evil of Sin, the deformity of Intellectual Spirits, the most
hateful Fountain of all Deformity, the evil of Sufferings, consequent to this
Deformity, with this proceeding of the Creature distinct and new every moment
from God, the pure Fountain of Good, I entreat thee to carry this along in thy
thoughts, that the second part of this Discourse is designed for a clear
stating, and full examination of all Objections. I am unwilling therefore to
disturb my method, to prevent my self, or make Repetitions by bringing in these
things here, which are there to be treated of. I entreat thee here only to mark
with a skilful and curious eye, whether the foundation of Truth be firmly laid,
and whether the building arise regularly out of it. In the second Book, it will
be thy part to see whether this building stand fast against the assaults of all
contrary appearances, which like the Rivers, the Wind, the Rain, from above,
from below, on every side beat upon it. This is enough upon this Head, the
universal Nature of the Creature.

4. My fourth Head, from which I draw my Reasonings upon this Subject of
Free Will, is, The Nature of the Soul. From the Nature of the Soul we thus
reason; the Essence of the Soul, and its Faculties the Understanding, and the
Will differ not really, but formally alone. All three are one and the same.
Every one is all three in one. They are distinguished according to the distinct
forms in which they appear, ever appearing with all their forms in each form.

1. The Essence of the Soul is immaterial, a substantial Act, an undivided
Unity, and essential Form, which comprehends the forms of all Essences
essentially in it self. We speak all this while of the Intellectual Soul. This
Soul then essentially comprehends it self, reflects upon it self, and all forms
of things in it self. Thus it springs up into an essential Image of it self,
and of all Essences to it self, within it self. Thus is the Essence of the Soul
its own Understanding, by virtue of its immaterial Substance, and its
substantial Unity.

2. The Understanding of the Soul differs from the senses in two things: 1. The
Senses touch and take in their Objects only by material accidents, as shadowy
figures. The Understanding touches, takes hold of, and embraces the
Substances themselves incorruptible, immutable in their eternal Truths. 2. The
senses take in the Images of their Objects from without, but the Understanding
brings forth its Object in an essential Image from within, which is therefore
called Verbum mentis. The Senses being material, are thus passive; but the
Understanding, as an immaterial power, altogether active. If the Understanding
bring forth from it self, and comprehend within it self the essential and
substantial forms of things, it can be no less than a substance it self, and
one substance with the Soul in the essence of it. For nothing unsubstantial can
receive into it self that which is substantial. We have also said before, that
the Soul in its essence or substance essentially comprehends all things in
their essential and substantial forms. Let me add this upon the same ground,
that if the Soul understand it self, the understanding is every way adequate
and equal to the Soul, in as much as it adequately comprehends it.

The Will is described by Thomas Aquinas to be the Inclination of the Soul. It
is also a Rule, That every Power or Faculty is distinguished and defined by its
Object. The Object of the Will is Good. Good is the perfection of every thing.
The suitableness and convenience makes the Goodness. Every thing has
essentially in its nature an inclination to its Good, to its Perfection, to
every thing suitable and agreeable to it. Suitableness is from Similitude.
Similitude is from Unity. For it is an agreement in the same form. Every thing
then has in its essence an inclination to a suitable Object, to its
Perfection, to its Good, as to it self presented distinctly to it self, and to
the completing of it self in the embraces of it self. Thus it appears, that
the Soul essentially is its own Will, in as much as its essence taken most
abstractedly, being a substantial Act, is in that Act an essential inclination
to its own Good and Perfection. Thus also it appears, that the Understanding of
the Soul is the Will of the Soul, in as much as in its distinct formality it is
an inclination to Truth, as to its proper Perfection and Good.

Again, the most proper and most perfective Act of the Will in its most perfect
state is Love. Love is an Union. The Object of the Will is Good in its full
Latitude, the essential, substantial, universal Good. The Act of the Will in
Love is then a mutual, intimate Union with the Object, by which it adequately
comprehends it, and is adequately comprehended by it. The Will then, which is
necessarily equal to that which it comprehends, can be no other than the
essence or substance of the Soul it self, of which we have before said, that it
has all Essences of things essentially within it self, and so the whole
compass of Being complete within it self. As it represents it self in this
whole compass of Being to it self, in a distinct Image, and so reflects upon it
self, it is its own Understanding. As it does by this distinct Image with
mutual embraces, mutually comprehend and enjoy it self in Love, and Joy, it is
its own Will, its own Love and Joy. So we seem to have proved, that the Will,
as it is a distinct faculty, is really, and formally the same with the essence
and substance of the Soul.

We will endeavor also to prove, that the Will comprehends the Understanding
in its own proper and distinct formality.

1. When the Soul Loves it self, and understands it self, both these Acts fall
under the same definition of comprehending it self in a distinct and complete
Image of it self. This Act cannot but be mutual, if the Image of the Soul be
adequate to the Soul, and so are Love and Understanding both in one.

2. The Acts and Motions of the Will do imply sense in their essential
Formalities. Sense in the Intellectual Soul is Understanding.

3. The Object attracts and acts the Faculty by impressions of it self. The
impression of Good upon an Intellectual Subject, is an Intellectual taste or
relish of the Good. The impression of an Intellectual Good, which is the proper
Object of the Will, is an Intellectual impression.

4. The Will, as it is essentially distinguished from the natural Appetite,
which inanimate things are naturally moved by; and from the sensitive Appetite
proper to bruit Creatures, is defined to be a rational Appetite. Thus it
comprehends Reason or Understanding in its essential Form.

So we have attempted to make it plain, that Those three, the Essence, the
Understanding, the Will of the Intellectual Soul, mutually comprehend one
another in their essential Formality, and are perfectly adequate one to
another, so far as the Soul is in a state of Perfection, perfectly
understanding and loving it self.

By the way, In this Glass you may have a pleasant glimps of the Trinity: 1.
The Soul in its essence is an Unity comprehending it self, and all created
forms of things entirely in one substantial and indivisible Act, as the
Fountain of all. This is a shadow of the Father in the Trinity. 2. The
Understanding of the Soul is the essential and adequate Image of this Unity, in
which it brings forth, and contemplates it self within it self. This is the
Son, the Word. 3. The Will is the essential, the intellectual, and adequate
Union of these two, with the most full communion and highest complacency, by
which they propagate and multiply themselves within themselves into an endless
Race of innumerable Forms, in each of which they are still themselves entire
and complete. This is the figure of the Holy Spirit.

Thus he that knows God knows the Soul, as the Picture by the Life; and he that
knows the Soul knows God, as the Life by the Picture. Each of these is all to
it self within it self: God as the Original Life-World, the Soul as the shadowy
World, the World of shadows.

But to conclude this Argument, If the Essence of the Soul, the Understanding
and the Will, be really one, and formally distinct, so that every one
comprehends all Three, in its proper Formality, where is that freedom of the
Will, by which it may act independent on the Understanding?

We will seal up this Argument with that confirmation of it, which seems to
have great strength and clearness. Powers and faculties are distinguished
according to their Objects. The Essence of the Soul, the Understanding, and the
Will differ as Being, Truth, and Goodness; not really, but formally only,
formally comprehending the formality of each other.

The Reader is desired to take notice, That how ever the Author, in one of his
Copies, intended only this short account of this Argument taken from the Nature
of the Soul; yet a larger Discourse upon this Head being found amongst his
Papers, it is judged most fitting in this place to publish it.

The chief Praise of this Age is, that it runs along in a stream directly
contrary to the Romish Church, having little veneration for an implicit Faith,
Tradition, Antiquity, Universality in the persuit of Truth. Its labor and
glory is with its hands, eyes, and spirit, to penetrate and view the first
grounds of Truth. I desire it may be as happy, in distinguishing between the
upper part of the beam of Light, where it unites it self to its Sun and
Fountain, where it is firmest, fullest, brightest, warming, enlivening as well
as shining; and the lower part of the beam, which touches the Earth, and the
Senses, where it is weak, wavering, obscure, mixed with and vanishing into the
darkest shade.

I shall therefore endeavor (taking my rise somewhat high from the Fountain of
things) to open the Nature of the Soul with as much clearness and plainness as
I am able, and the nature of the Subject will bear, in these three Propositions.

1. Prop. The Intellectual Soul in Man is an Unity altogether indivisible,
comprehending Variety, Diversity, Contrariety of Forms, Powers, and Parts,
without and above all Division.

2. Prop. This indivisible Unity, contains in it self the full Variety of all
forms created, uncreated, after its own manner, according to its own proper
Character.

3. Prop. The most perfect and full Image of God in the midst of the Creation,
resulting from the Harmonious Union of the Unity and Variety, is the Soul's
Essence, and essential Form.

I design, and hope, so to open and establish these Propositions, that the true
Liberty of the Soul in its Operations, may all along shine clearly forth from
the Divine ground and form of its proper nature.

1. Proposition.
The Intellectual Soul in Man is an indivisible Unity, comprehending Variety,
Diversity, Contrariety of Forms. This is the first Proposition. There is a
threefold Unity.

1. There is an Unity in the Division of Parts. This is the most imperfect
Unity, or rather a shadow of Unity, the Unity of shadows, of Corporeal
substances or bodies.

2. There is an Unity in Diversity of Forms or Essences, above all divisibility
of parts. This also is an imperfect Unity. This is the Unity of Essences, of
Intellectual Substances, of all created Spirits. The Unities of this sort are
the Essences of things in their created state, which are said to be indivisible.

3. Above all Divisibility, or Diversity is the first, the supreme, the perfect
Unity, having in it self the first, the fullest Variety, and distinction. This
is the Unity of the Divine Nature, or the Divine World. This for its infinite
height, above all expression or comprehension, by any created Image or
Understanding, for the equal concurrence of the first, the most entire Unity,
and the first, the most full Variety, both alike boundless and infinite, is
well termed (...), Above an Unity.

The Humane Soul is an Unity of the second Rank, whether you ascend or descend,
in the number of Intellectual Substances, like the Angels, above all Division,
but subject to Diversity.

This is an Unity in a Diversity. Diversity (which is Variety contracted and
obscured) by a mixture of the Contrariety with the Unity, overshadows the Unity
of the Soul, and renders it a shadowy Unity. The Divine Unity and Variety lie
hid and veiled beneath the Diversity, in the shadowy Unity of the Souls natural
Form.

This Diversity, as it over-shadows, so it also bounds the Unity, and renders
it finite, infinitely beneath the first and supreme Unity in the Divine Nature.

This is the Unity of the Intellectual Soul, an Unity free from, raised above
all Division, or divisibility of parts, lying one without another, as they
appear in Bodies, or Corporeal Substances.

The explication of this Unity in the Intellectual Operations of the Soul, as I
humbly conceive, will be a full demonstration of it.

There seems, according to common sense and language, to be manifest in us, a
Life, a Power, which compares and judges things; which discerns the
differences of things, relations, proportions, agreements, disagreements; which
is delighted with Harmony, Beauty, Music; which takes in, entertaineth it
self with the Essences of things, the whole, Universals, as its most native,
and most suitable Companions; which adorneth it self with Sciences. The
Sciences are an Angel-like building, which this Life or Power has framed by
single notions, or forms of things regularly composed into Propositions, by
Propositions in a most beautiful order laid one upon another, and by fit
joints, like Jewels knit together into one Body of Divine Light, which sets
its Feet on the Earth, and raises its Head into the unseen Glories of the
highest Heavens.

This Power and Life within us, which makes good all this, or a similitude of
this, with more or less degrees of Perfection, is that which we call the
Intellectual Soul in Man.

If the Object, or its Image, be extended, and so composed of parts, which lie
all one without another, if the Subject, which receives into it self the
Object, or the Image, be of the same nature, Now the one part of the Object is
taken into, and seated in one part of the Subject; Another part in another.
Thus all lie diffused differently in different parts; not only divisible, but
actually divided from each other. Now they no where meet together in one, they
are no where compared and judged, the Discord, the Harmony, the Whole, is no
where understood.

Yea, These are no more in the nature of things. There is no such thing as
Picture, Prospect, or Person, Life, Love, or Joy, Death or Suffering. All is an
unimaginable heap of unconceivable Atoms, which have no Relation to, no
Commerce with each other, if there be no indivisible Unity, in which things
meet, in which they are compared, judged, and proportioned. How an Atome it
self, or any thing of whole, or part, can be without Unity, which constitutes
it, which connects it, into which it Ultimately resolves it self, from which it
first arises, is of all things to me most hard to comprehend.

But this is a digression, and more than is necessary to my present design.

Let us return. The two essential Operations of the Intellectual Soul, are to
understand, and to will. The Objects of these, are Truth and Goodness, real or
apparent.

1. Truth is a representative conformity of the Image to its Original.

2. Goodness is a mutual, perfcctive Conformity, or suitableness of the
Original and Image, or of the Object to the Faculty, Power, or Spirit, to which
it relates.

These two are the Divine Meat and Drink of the Soul, like the Ambrosia and
Nectar of the Gods, or separated Spirits, with the Poets.

But where there is any impression, any sense or relish of these two, Truth or
Goodness, in the lowest forms of things, These three must meet undividedly in
one, The two terms or bounds of conformity or suitableness, the relation
between these two, their suitableness and conformity to each other.

The Intellectual Soul rises an higher pitch, according to the Doctrine of all
the Schools, and its own innate testimony of it self, in all its Motions, in
all its Virtues and Vices. It is carried up upon these two soaring wings, as
the wings of an Angel, quite out of the sight of sense, above all the tumult of
Individuals and particulars, to the invisible Glories, and Harmonies of
universal Forms. The universal Truth and Good are its only mark and rest, where
its motions terminate.

The heavenly Beauty of the universal Truth, can be no where seen, the heavenly
sweetness of the universal Good, can be tasted by no Spirit, but that alone,
where all Truths, all kinds and degrees of good, all things in their
friendships and enmities are met and concentred with a full, with an exact
Harmony, in one indivisible Point, or in a perfect Unity.

It is indeed a Divine Unity, running like the Spirit of Music through all
these, terminating them all by it self, recollecting them all entirely (with
their several Divisions) after the most undivided manner into it self, which
makes this Harmony, the Joy, the Glory, the Divine Life of Angels, of God, and
God-like men.

This Divine Unity can be no where received, but into an Unity like it self.
This Unity in the Intellectual Soul, makes it a Divine ^ye, Ear, and Spirit,
capable of taking in the Beauty, enjoying the Music, being entertained at the
heavenly Feast of the universal Truth and Goodness, in the Society of all
blessed and immortal Spirits.

Keep the Unity of the Spirit, says St. Paul, in the bond of peace. Peace in
Hebrew is the same with Persection. The word signifies the Harmony of things,
mutually answering each other in fit and full proportions. In Greek, peace
signifies the harmonious Union of things, (...), peace, from (...), to knit or
join together.

Without Union, without Order and Harmony in the Union, Many things can never
become One; there can be no Beauty to the Eye, no Music to the Ear, no Life,
no Light of Sense or Understanding, no Form of things, no Peace, no Perfection,
no Power, no Pleasantness, no Person. Without an undivided Unity, where all
meet in one, which is One, the same undivided in All, there can be no Union, no
Order, no Harmony.

The eternal Spirit is the first and supreme Unity. Intellectual Spirits, next
to this Spirit, are Similitudes and Births of it. Substantial, undivided
Unities, the Springs, the Seats of the universal, the supreme, the incorporeal
Beauties, Musicks, Perfection, Order, Harmony, through the Creation; the only
Persons; the bonds of all Union, Order, Harmony, Peace, Perfection, Beauty,
Life, Loveliness, Virtue, Joy, Power, Personality, in all Bodies, in all
Corporeal Forms.

By one Spirit, says that Spirit, we are all baptized into one Body. In
spirituality, by meeting together undividedly in the Unity of the eternal
Spirit, which is undividedly one and the same in all, by which all are one, and
the same in every one, All the Saints become one heavenly Body. This Unity of
the Spirit, springing up into every one, as a Divine and complete Image of it
self, having thus the Whole, the Image, the Life, the Spirit of the whole in it
self, is the bond of their fellow-membership.

This is the ground and spring of their Sympathy, of all their Motions, by
which in a Divine Love and Harmony they exactly accord with each other. We have
the shadowy figure of this mystery in natural things.

How inexplicable is motion in Bodies, without the understanding of this Unity?
What shall excite Motion in any Corporeal Subject? Accidents, Virtues,
Qualities, pass not from one Corporeal Substance to another. They are
essentially inseparable, from their Individual Subjects. Corporeal Substances
are impenetrable each to other, and so cannot operate immediately one upon
another.

In what order shall Motion be advanced, if it be excited? Shall the part
immediately touched move first? How can it, until that part next before it,
give place to it? Upon what account shall this before move, until that behind
it on which the impression is first made, thrust it forward?

How Beautiful? how Harmonious? how Easy is all? If an Intellectual Spirit,
containing the whole Body, the whole Corporeal frame, in an undivided Unity,
being undividedly entirely one and the same through the whole Body, and in each
part, immediately, at once, by it self Act all the parts in a mutual exact
Correspondency to each other, like persons in a figure-Dance? All is now it
self, in so many shadowy figures of more substantial and sublimer Variety, in
the Unity, and Harmony of its own Essence.

This is a clear reason for that Sympathy, by which all the parts most remote
of the same Body, have a present sense of, are acted and moved together with,
all the essential acts and motions of each other. They are all by one Spirit
baptized into one Body. They all are comprehended together in the undivided
Unity of the same Spirit. So they mutually penetrate, possess each other in
One; as One in the Fountain of their Being, Life, and Motion, the same Spirit.
This Spirit is each Intellectual Soul to its own Body.

Let us sum up this whole Argument into a brief and clear conclusion.

The Intellectual Soul, in the perfection of its natural form, understands,
compares, judges, not only particular Beauties and Harmonies, but the Beauty
and Harmony of the whole Universe, the Universal Truth and Goodness. All
particular Beauties and Harmonies, all Agreements and Disagreements, Strifes,
Friendships, all forms and parts, as they make up the Beauty of the Universe:
Then all forms of things, in all their Similitudes and Differences,
Conformities and Contrarieties, in all their Essences and Accidents, in all
their several distinct Proportions and order, in their Beauties and Harmonies,
with all the Parts and Elements which compose these, as they make up the
universal Harmony and Beauty meet together, clearly, completely in the
undivided Unity of the Souls Essence.

Thus also this Soul contains within it self its own Body, its Image and Organ,
in all the forms, parts, and proportions of it. Neither does it so comprehend
this alone, but the universal Body, as it relates to its own particular Body,
as it stands in the senses of this Body, like Images in a Glass.

Here, in this Unity, is the Corporeal Image, as in a Divine Mould, formed in
all its parts and proportions, to answer to their Original in the Soul, and to
each other, for here only are they seen together, to be compared and judged,
from hence they come forth, by this Unity they consist in their Union, are
acted every moment unto motions corresponding with each other, and to a
Sympathy; for one Spirit springs up through the whole Body, as it self
descended into a shadowy figure of it self, and abiding ever with it self,
within the Unity of its own Essence.

The most eminent Character of the eternal Spirit, is its Unity. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is one God. How glorious an Image of God, in this
Character of the Divine Glory, is man in the perfection of his natural form?
What is the amplitude, the majesty of this Divine Unity, in which the whole
Creation, with all its beauties and fullness, appear together at once, in One,
as upon its Throne?

Thus, I hope, I have from common sense, and principles universally received,
made plain in some imperfect degree, this indivisible Unity of the Intellectual
Soul in man.

2. Propos. The Humane Soul is an indivisible Unity, containing in it self all
Variety of forms.

The Argument before taken from the Operations of the Soul, in knowing and
judging things, to explain its Unity, declares also this Variety in its Unity.

The Soul has naturally a desire, and power, or potentiality of knowing all
things, especially the Harmony of things, which is the Intellectual Beauty. The
Harmony in no part can be understood without the knowledge of the whole. If the
Soul then in the primitive, and pure state of the Creation, did actually enjoy
it self in the perfection of its natural form and faculties, it contained
within it self, in the Unity of its Essence, all Variety of things in all their
Distinctions, Differences, and Divisions, Originals, and Copies, Causes and
Effects, Substances, and Circumstances, or Accidents, Essence^, and Operations.

The power or potentiality in the Soul of Man, is not Passive but Active. It is
a pure Act, free from the passiveness, which is the consequent of corporeal or
bodily matter. The Intellectual Spirit having always in it self the judgment
of all things, in the potentiality or power of it, which either is its Essence,
or inseparable from it, has also all forms of things in the same Capacity, or
Power, and so in its Original Act. Indeed as it subsisteth in the Body, this
plenitude in the Original Act, or power of the Soul, is very much veiled by
matter, or corporeity, at least under the fall.

But I pass from this Argument, to another, drawn from the Unity of the Soul,
established in the former Proposition.

The Soul being in its Essence, by Virtue of its essential Unity altogether
undivided, and so above all place or time, which consist of divided parts, is
thus incapable of Absence, Distance, or Division from any thing. All things
then are ever present with it.

There is only a twofold presence imaginable, Corporeal, and Spiritual.

1. The Corporeal, or bodily presence is after the manner of Corporeal
Substances or Bodies, with Division, a divided presence.

This is the presence of two Bodies, one containing the other as its proper
place, or of two Bodies, contained in one Body as their common place, one
common space of Air, one Field, one Chamber, one Bed.

2. The spiritual presence is a meeting in one Incorporeal Form, or in one
Spirit, which is an Indivisible Unity. This the Schools express by the
penetration of Spirits, which penetration, where there are no extensions or
dimensions, as in Bodies, seems to me, incapable of any other sense, in the
strict examination of it, than their subsisting together in the same undivided
Unity, and their mutual subsistencies in the undivided and essential Unities of
each other.

Harmonious with this, are those two well-grounded and unshaken Axioms in
Philosophy,

1. The Essences of things are Indivisible.

2. The understanding alone reaches to, and comprehends the Essences and
Substances of things, whiles sense feeds only upon empty shadows, Aerie,
accidental Forms.

Proclus thus teaches us, That all things are in the Soul (...), according to
the peculiar property and character of the Soul. In like manner the Lord Jesus
says to the unbelieving Jews, which look for signs of the Divinity, for a Pomp
and Glory without, in their senses, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you.

The Heathen Philosophers styled the Unities of things, Gods. This Unity, to
which all things were present, was, with them, the Character of a God. The
Scriptures upon the same ground, style all Intellectual Spirits, both Angels
and Men, Gods. He calls (says Christ) them Gods, to whom the word of God
came. That living Word, which is the Image of the invisible God, (and so
contains all Forms, the whole nature of things in it self) comes by Nature,
and by Grace, although after a diverse manner, to all Intellectual Spirits. That
Scripture, which our Lord Jesus relates to, seems peculiarly to regard Humane
Souls, I have said, ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men. Ye Intellectual
Spirits, which in your abstracted forms are immortal, impassible, undivided,
comprehensive Unities, To which all forms of things, in their immutable
Essences, are ever present by my presence with you, who am the eternal Word of
the Divine Mind, the Divine and Universal Image of things, Ye being humbled
beneath the Angels, into a Body of Dust, a Corporeal Form, in this, by your
sympathy with this, are subject to the Government of the Elements and
Celestial Bodies, of the Powers ruling in them, as Tutors over you, and so to
their Laws of Time, Place, Division, and Death, until you grow up to the full
Age of the Intellectual Life, by returning into the Bosom of your first Divine
Ideal Unity in me.

All diversity of Forms are in this manner present with the Intellectual Soul,
meeting together, and being contained in the Unity of its Essence, as in an
invisible Palace, or City, like the City of God described by the Psalmist,
which is compact in it self.

Object. Is God then, are all the Angels, is this visible World so present with
the Soul, so contained in its essential Unity, as to be one Essence, one Spirit
with it?

Answ. I shall give three distinct Answers to the three parts of this Objection,

In relation, 1. To God. 2. To Angels. 3. To the visible World.


1. Answ. This comprehensive Unity, which is the proper Character of
Intellectual Spirits, is called by Philosophers, the Apex, or supreme Point,
the Head of the Soul, hid in a Divine Glory, the Divine part of the Soul, in
which it symbolizeth with, is capable of Commerce with the Divinity it self,
and of enjoying in it self the Divine presence, as in its most proper and
beloved Temple.

I shall humbly present to the Readers Candor four Distinctions, for the
unvailing of this Divine presence in the Soul.

1. Distinction. God is not present in the Soul, as in a place Divisible, but
as in an undivided Unity; for he were otherwise no more a pure, an infinite
Spirit, the first, supreme, simple Spirit of Being, Beauty, of all Excellency
and Virtue, a Life of Sweetness, a Light of Glory, without allay, shade, or
limit: He were now Corporeal and finite.

Of this Local Circumscription (which has no place here) is that Rule rightly
understood, The container is greater than the contained.

2. Distinction. God by his Omnipresence, and undivided Unity, is every where,
in every Creature, in every part and point of the Creation, with the fullness of
his Glories and Godhead after a twofold manner,

1. God is present to himself in every Creature, Secundum modum Dei, after the
manner of a God.

2. God is present in each Creature, to that Creature, Secundum modum
Creaturae, according to the manner of the Creature.

1. God is present to himself in every Creature, after the manner of a God.

Wherever he is present, He is entirely present with all the Joys and Glories
of eternity, ever undivided, His own Heaven to himself, in the Depths of Hell
beneath as in the Height of Heaven above, in the dust of the Grave, in a wave
of the Sea, as in the most shining Cherubim or flaming Seraphim.

God is not thus present to any natural Spirit, no, not in the purity ofits
Creation, with his unvailed Beauties, shining forth in the brightness of his
Glory, in the fullness of his Godhead. Then should he transfigure that Spirit
into the same Image of one Divine Form and Glory with himself. Then would there
be no difference between Adam in Paradise, the Angels in Heaven, and Jesus
Christ in his Paradise and Heaven above all Heavens, the Bosom of the Father.
No, after this manner God dwells in Jesus Christ alone, as he is risen from the
Dead, in the eternal Spirit, in the Glory of the Father.

2. God is in every Creature present with that Creature, according to the
manner of that Creature, By the diverse manners of his Appearance, as by the
ingraving upon the Seal, setting diverse impressions upon the Creature, and
giving diverse forms of Being to it like the Seal in the impression upon the
Wax. He thus becomes the fullness of every Creature, filling all, in all parts
of it, and so Omnipresent to it.

Therefore the Schoolmen say of the sending, giving, pouring forth, the coming
of the Spirit to us, to be in us, That it is only Novus modus apparendi, A new
manner of appearing. The Holy Spirit, the third Person in the Trinity, from
whom the other two Persons are ever undivided, God blessed for ever, is ever in
every Creature, in every Spirit. He only changes his Appearances and
Effulgencies there. By the change of his Appearance, he changes and forms
each Creature, each Spirit in all its Changes. Thus he turns to himself the
Heavens and the Earth, as the Clay to the Seal, according to the Language in
the Book of Job.

How divinely pure and pleasant a prospect, or living Picture, is now the
nature of things, while God himself, according to the distinct Idea, or eternal
exemplar of each Creature, comes forth, and appears together with it, as
Twin-brothers, as Twin-Loves, (...), and (...), one the reflection of the
other? while a Third Love breaks from both these, in which they are blessed, and
made perfect, with a mutual Union, and the fruition of each other.

The ever-glorious, and eternally-joyous Trinity of the highest, and first
Love, seems to multiply and figure it self in each Creature. All Creatures now
seem to be in a lively and living Beauty, represented by the two Breasts of the
heavenly Spouse, Like two Twin-Roes of a lovely kind, two Twin-Loves, the
Births of their heavenly Mother, the Universal and Divine Image in the Person
of Christ, feeding among the Lillies, the Ideal, eternal Lights and Beauties of
her soft and shining Bosom.

But all this is to be understood of simple Nature, abstracted from the
Corruption by Sin, with which, in the midst of the pure, peaceful, pleasant
Varieties, the charming Harmonies, the golden Calms and Gardens of Divine Love,
comes in a scene of War and Death, of tempestuous Seas, fields of Blood,
Contrariety and Enmity, God willing to show the Power of his Wrath. That God,
who is the God of Love, that Will, which is Love it self, All Love in the
beloved Soul, to the beloved Soul here in its fallen state, puts on this strange
person of an Enemy. Under this dark Disguise, and horrid Vizat, he hides all
his Beauties and Sweetnesses, he acts a part of Wrath. But this it self at last
appears to the beloved Soul, to be a most delightful Love-part. While, by it,
the Variety is made more full, being extended to the greatest Contrariety, and
utmost extremes. While in the reconciling of these, the Divine Harmony is more
full and ravishing, The Divine Love heightened to an excess of Sweetness, and
triumphant Joys, The Wisdom of the Design more admird and adored in its rich
and glorious Depths, All expectations of Men and Angels are suspended, most
happily deceived, and in the end infinitely transcended.

But how have I wandered, and delightfully lost my self, by drinking in eagerly
this Wine of Angels and glorified Saints, the Sweetness of this Divine Light
and Love? I will now pass from this second Distinction to the third, for the
illustration of the Divine presence in the soul.

3. Distinction. God is one with the Soul, not formally, but transcendently.

God is not one with the Soul formally, as the formal and proper Essence of the
Soul or of any created Spirit, much less as a Constitutive part of its Essence.
This would make God and that Spirit essentially one. The Essence of that Spirit
would reciprocally be the Essence of God. That Spirit would be essentially God.
Is not this the utmost height of Ignorance, Profaneness, Impiety, Blasphemy,
Giant-like, Lucifer-like to war with God, for the Throne of his Godhead?

Besides all this evil, how great were the loss to every Spirit, of Angels and
Men? Their Sun, which makes the eternal Day and Spring, were now set in an
hopeless Night of Clouds and Confusions. All their Loves, Hopes, and Joys,
aspiring to an infiniteness above themselves, would now all droop and die in
their own Bosom. The beginning, the end of them all is taken away. That
distinction of things, which is the Mother of all Lives, Loves, Beauties, and
Pleasures, as Unity is the Father of them, would now sink into a rude
undistinguished Darkness; the first and the fountain of all Distinctions being
taken away, in taking away the Distinction of the Divine Nature from the
created form of things.

How unpleasant were it to the Eye below, to be persuaded that there were no
Sun, besides it self, above it self? Now the joy in beholding the face of the
Sun and of Heaven, the taking in of the sweet Light of Heaven and the Sun, the
charming Delights in the Varieties of Lights and Shades, of Colors and
Pictures, in the Light and the Sunshine, were no more.

2. God is transcendently one with the Soul, as he is with all things by the
transcendency of his Unity, and his Infiniteness. He comprehends all things
in one in Himself, after a manner altogether incomprehensible. As he is the
first, the Universal Cause, the most immediate, the most intimate, the
inseparable, the Ideal Cause of all things, He is the Unity of every Unity, the
Being of Beings, the Essence of every Essence, not formally, but
transcendently, not after a finite, but an infinite manner.

Cusanus, says, God is the Sun in the Sun, not formally, finitely, but after a
transcendent, infinite manner. He is so the Sun in the Sun, that he is all
things with the fullness of the Divine Nature and eternity in that form.

4. Distinction. God is present with, and in the natural form of the Soul, as
in an earthly and shadowy Image. He is present, according to his heavenly, his
eternal form in this shadow, as veiled and hidden beneath it.

As Jesus Christ at his Incarnation, so the first man by his Creation, was made
under the Law, (the Law, the Glory of the created Image improved and
heightened.) The Holy Spirit says of the Law, That it is a shadow of good
things to come, not the very Image. It is commonly said, That the Law is the
Gospel veiled, the Gospel, the Law unvailed.

Jesus Christ, as he is the essential Image, the brightness of the Glory of
God, is the first Adam, veiled, beneath a shadowy Image. He is there, as the
Truth, the Original, the Root of this shadow, bringing it forth, bearing it in
himself, comprehending it. He is in it, as the Spirit and beautiful form of a
Plant in the Seed, ready to spring forth through it, to transfigure it into the
similitude of its own Beauties, to fill it so transfigured with its own Divine
Life, Virtues, and Fruits in the proper season.

St. Paul makes the first man, in his pure State and in his Fall, a Type or
Figure of Him, who is to come, Jesus Christ, Romans 5.

God in the Light of his Glory, Jesus Christ, according to his heavenly Image,
hidden in God, The Soul, according to its Divine Life, in the state of Grace,
are all present veiled in the natural man, as in their proper shadow.

Some think this following sense to be intended by St. Paul in these words,
[Christ is the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of the whole
Creation, or of every Creature,] Col. 1.

God in that same second Person, which is the Godhead in its essential Image,
(which in the fullness of time, took flesh of the Virgin Mary,) in the beginning
of Time came forth from the secret and unaccessible Light of Eternity, in a
shadowy Image. This Image was the full figure of his Person, with all its
Divine Glories, according to the capacity of a shadow. This was the whole
Creation complete in its first Draught. All the Glories of the Divine Nature,
which are imitable, were here first distinctly figured in the primitive, and
pure forms of all the Creatures. Thus was he the Image of the Invisible God,
the firstborn of the whole Creation in general, and of each Creature in
particular.

Thus was He in the Language of the Jews, the great Adam, who brought forth the
little Adam in his own likeness.

Thus was Jesus Christ in Adam, at once, the life of all, in his essential
Glories, the Original Copy, or first Draught of the Creature, in the whole
compass of it, of each Creature in particular. All this in the Humane Soul, in
Adam, as the only perfect and proper Figure of this Original.

I understand nothing in this interpretation of St. Paul's words, contrary to
the Analogy of Faith, or the Scriptures. There seems to be in it a complete
Harmony, and order in the nature of things, according to this sense.

1. All things stand first in an Uncreated Subsistence and Essence, Then in an
Uncreated Subsistence or Person, they come forth into Created Essences or
Natures, Lastly, By this medium uniting all, they pass in Created Subsistencies
and Essences, into created Persons and Natures.

2. Jesus Christ gradually descends from his essential Glories, into an
Universal, Original Figure of himself, of the whole Creation, of each Creature.
Through this He passes into the particular form of fallen man, in the Womb of
the Virgin. So he descends to the nethermost parts of the Earth, ascends again
through all forms of things, with all, united in his own Person, above all
Heavens, and fills All.

After this manner, the Lord Jesus is the Mediator of the Creation, as well as
of the Reconciliation and Regeneration. All things are made by him, and nothing
that is made (or brought forth from the beginning of things to the end) comes
forth without him. As according to his appearances in Grace or Glory, the
Saints appear together with him; so according to his Appearances in Nature, all
things appear together with him. He lives and subsists in the form of every
Creature. Every Creature subsists by its transcendental Union with him in
Nature.

Thus it is most true, That we are in this World, as he is in this World. We
are Sojourners together with him in his Land. He suffers in all our Sufferings,
is straightened in all our straitnings. He is in all things made like unto us, Sin
only excepted. He carries along in every particular form the Universal Harmony,
the Divine Glory, even in all the sufferings and straitnings of every Creature.
The Universal Harmony and Divine Glory is to him the liberty, the joy of
Paradise, Heaven, Eternity, in each straitning and suffering. Sin only is the
breach of this Harmony, the violation of this Glory, not by a privation only,
but a Contradiction and Enmity founded in the privation. This can bear no part
in the Divine Harmony, save as it is reduced into Order, and the Harmony
carried on through the Wrath and Righteousness of God, in the Death and
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus.

But I desire to leave my self, and my Reader free in this Point.

I have now finished, in four Distinctions, my Answer to the first part of the
Objection, made against the Variety of forms in the Unity of the Soul. In this
part of my Answer I have endeavored to state the presence of God with and in
the Soul of man, as perspicuously as my dark and narrow mind is capable of
taking in, and expressing a Divine Mystery of so great an amplitude, and such
an height of Glory.

I pass now to the second part of my Answer, which concerns the Angels.

2. Answer. Angels, with the whole Company of invisible substances, or
separated Forms and immortal Spirits are contained in the Unity of the Soul
these two ways,

1. They are Superior and Universal Causes, subordinate to the first Cause.
Thus they are most intimately, and inseparably present in the Constitution of
the Soul. As Entity, or Being, and substantiality in their Superior and
Universal Nature descend into incorporeal Spirits, and through these, into
Corporeal Shapes and Bodies; so do all the Angels, greater in Might and Glory,
cloth themselves with the Incorporeal Form of the immortal Soul, communicating
all their diverse Virtues, Powers, and Glories to this Form in which themselves
subsist, and live together with it, being an head of Glory to it.

2. All Angelical, Immortal Spirits, are another way in the Soul, as making up
the full diversity of all Forms in it, and so composing its Essence. Thus all
Angels, all Essences, all Forms of things in their immortal Substances, as
Intellectual Spirits, meet in the proper Unity, under the peculiar Character
and Diversity of each Intellectual Soul, as, in some obscure resemblance,
Variety of colors in a particular color, or as all the Elements in each
Element, in each mixed Form, under the proper Character of the predominant
Element or Form.

3. Answer. The Intellectual Soul contains all Corporeal Forms or Bodies in
it self, two ways, 1. Virtually. 2. Formally.


1. The Soul has in it self all Bodies virtually from the Angels above it, as
the shining Bosom, where the eternal Spring through Jesus Christ powers forth
its living streams. Here the Soul drinks in the Essences, and essential forms
of things, in their Angelick Truth and Goodness. These feast and fill the
Understanding and the Will. In the Understanding, or Angelick Light of the
Soul, they shine as the Exemplars or Patterns of all below in the visible
World. In the Will, as in the Angelick Love of the Soul, they lie as in the
Womb, or in the seminal Virtue, or executive Power, which brings them forth.

2. This Soul comprehends the Corporeal World in it self formally. The Essences
of all Bodies, as they are Objects only of the Understanding, and not of Sense,
so are they, according to the Nature and Law of all Essences, Intellectual
Unities, and Forms, in the Unity or essential Form of this Intellectual Spirit.
The Soul in these distinct Essences flows forth into these shadowy forms,
with which our Senses, the shadows of the Intellectual Light, are entertained.

The Intellectual Unity diffuseth it self into the continued parts of these
divisible Forms. This Unity forms the Proportions of the parts in their
mutual Correspondencies, knitteth them together unto a mutual sympathy in each
natural Body. For as I have before said, a mutual correspondency of parts
suited exactly each to other through the whole Corporeal Frame, a concurrence
in all the parts of the sensations, mutations, or impressions seated in each
distinct and divided part, seems altogether unimaginable, if there be not an
undivided Unity, which is one and the same in all the divided parts, where all
the parts meet in one, and are one. By this Unity alone can all the parts have
a mutual proportion, a comprehension, penetration, sensation, or feeling of
each other through out, as they have of themselves, and in the same undivided
moment. This rend the sympathy true and perfect.

The Unity then of the Intellectual Soul, as it diffuseth it self into all
Bodies, in all their extended forms and divided parts, so it binds them all
up within it self. This is the substance to these shadows, and Contextures of
shadowy Forms or Accidents in which they subsist. This is the Spring out of
which they rise up every moment. This is the band which joins and ties them
together in one. This is the Bosom or proper place, which incompasseth,
imbraceth, brings forth, sustains, and cherishes them.

I have now answered the Objection, and so endeavored to clear from all Clouds
the beauty of the Soul, as all Varieties shine most pleasantly in the face of
it, in the diversity indeed of the shadowy Image, but an Angel-like Diversity,
and a God-like Image.

Thus I have finished the two Propositions in the Description of the Souls
Essence. Asserting, 1. The Unity, 2. The Variety in the Diversity.

3. Prop. The Image of God resulting from the most harmonious Union of these
two, the Unity, and the Diversity of Forms, is the proper Essence, and
essential form of the Soul.

This Harmonious Union consists in a twofold Perfection.

1. The Unity and Variety of things under a form of Diversity, meet in the
Essence of the Soul, with the Character or Propriety of the Unity and Harmony.

When God had drawn the several parts of his Divine Image in the several Angels
and Creatures, according to the Diversities of their several Characters or
Properties, He now summons them, and calls them all together to meet in Man, in
him to be united and completed in the entire Unity and full Harmony of the
Divine Image. Thus he speaks to himself in the Trinity, to all the Quires of
Angels, to all his foregoing Works, Let us (says He) make man in our Image,
in our own likeness. The expression is doubled, to give the more force and
emphasis to it. So afterward God created man in his own Image, in the Image of
God created he him. The entireness, the Eminency, the Principality of the
Divine Image in man is thus set forth, and therefore the Dominion is
immediately added to it.

Angels, and all other Creatures, have their distinct Ideas in the Divine Mind.
But God himself in his own essential Image, in the Person of the Son, the Idea
of Ideas, is the Idea of Man. This therefore alone, as it is his glorious
beginning in Nature, is his Beatifical End in Grace and Glory, his
Righteousness, Rest, Eternal and full Blessedness, in his full, immediate,
entire Union, Conformity, Communion with it.

The Lord Jesus is the Head, the Unity, the Harmony of the whole Creation, in
this Region of Diversity. The Angels, in the heights of a Created Glory next
him, are like Notes in a Musical Lesson, Diversities in the Harmony springing
forth from this Unity.

But each of these Diversities, as the top of the Beams next the Sun, standing
in the highest degree of Diversity, beneath the Unity, bear in themselves the
Universal Harmony, the Universal Nature of Diversity, the whole Creation, in
the shadowy figure of the Godhead. Therefore are they in Scripture styled,
Thrones, Principalities, Gods. They are so many Divine Unities in a shadowy
Image, but under the Character and Property of so many distinct Diversities.

Thus are they ministering Spirits; As they are shadowy Unities. They are
shadowy Gods. But as they are Unities under the several Characters of
Diversity, they are ministering Deities, or ministering Spirits. They are
Servants to the Lord Jesus, the proper Unity and Harmony in its own full
Character, and Divine Property. From him they minister the whole Creation, in
the several Diversities of the Universal Forms, and undivided Essences unto
man. In man they all meet, as in their proper Unity and Harmony answering
exactly to the Person of the Lord Jesus. So the Sun in Heaven, by his several
Beams, figureth himself into a Sun in a Cloud, by his side, or in a clear
stream beneath him.

Thus are the Angels, so many Chariots, and the whole Society of Angels one
Chariot, in which Jesus Christ rides forth into the Humane Nature, unto a
complete Image of himself in man.

After this manner Angels Rule over Man, are superior to him in Glory and
Might, as he is the shadowy Image, in which all the lines of Nature meet, and
terminate themselves. He is now the Heir under Age, subject to Tutors and
Guardians. But the spiritual man made lower than the Angels, in its shadowy
Image, upon the stage of the first Creation, grown up to its Age of maturity,
in the Resurrection of Christ, is now crowned with Honor and Dignity, is Heir
of all things, Lord of the Angels. Together with Jesus Christ he rides forth
upon the Angels, as the Chariots and Horses, which he now governs.

Thus in this shadowy Image, and state of Diversity, the Unity and the Variety
meet in man with the most Harmonious Union, the fullest Character of the Unity
in the Variety. So man becomes the principal, the complete Image of the Godhead
in the whole Creation, ministered from the Lord Jesus, the Head and Harmony of
the whole Diversity, by the concurrent service of all the Angels, as the whole
Creation, in so many Diversities.

2. The Harmonious Union, constituting the Divine Image in man, consists in the
Unity of the Soul, in its undivided Essence, subsisting in all diversity of
Forms, circling through them all, returning ever into it self. As the same
spacious, and delightfully various Prospect, seen through several clear
Glasses, diversely, but delicately shaded. So the Soul by the Unity of its
Essence subsists, and contemplates it self within it self, in all forms of
things from the highest to the lowest, according to their several Angelical
Diversities, as so many pleasingly new, and richly distinct, but sweet and
transparent shades. This is the Soul in the perfection of its natural Form, a
Divine Cir^le, a complete Paradise. Every where presenting the whole, the form
of a man, in the Divine Image, the Beginning and the End, meeting themselves in
each Point.

The Intellectual Soul by its Unity at once subsisteth diversely in all
Diversity of Forms, and circleth through them all within it self.

The Soul by its Idea, and Divine Unity, has its Throne in the Divine World.
By its Intellectual Life, and Intuitive Light, it spreads its self in flames of
heavenly Love, in beams of heavenly Beauty among the Seraphim and Cherubim. In
its sensitive powers and parts, it stretches forth it self through those lower
Worlds, the Celestial and Elementary. In its rational and discoursive faculty,
it makes a distinct World of its own, at once dividing and uniting the
invisible and visible Worlds, filling up the internal or middle space between
them.

The Soul, from its Divine Unity, in its most immediate Union with its eternal
Idea (where all Unities of things in their God-like forms do meet together in
one) descends into its Angelick Image, or Intellectual Form. Here all things
in Angels shapes dwell together, as in a Palace of Angels. Here the Soul in her
own face, as in a Glass, beholds all things in their universal Forms, rouling
through them all, so that in each form she is Omniform, comprehending in open
view all things in their universal Forms, under the Property or Character of
that universal Form, in which she at present appears. From thence she passes
into her rational Form, in which she is a contexture of universal and
particular Images mutually enfolding each other, mutually springing up and
shining forth, in a beautiful Harmony from the Christalline Bosoms of each
other. So this Spirit slides by degrees into the most divided shapes in sense,
and on Earth, through these into the lowest and obscurest shades beneath the
Earth.

Again by answerable Revolutions, and in the same proportions, she gathers
her self up again into her first and supreme Unity.

Three things make the Soul in these Circlings a most beautiful and delightful
Prospect, which three Beauties and Pleasures all flow by a sweetly-natural
necessity, from her Divine Unity.

1. The Changes of the Soul through all these Diversities of forms, are all
most orderly and harmonious, all together make up one most ravishing Harmony of
Divine Beauty and Music. For the Unity spreads it self through all this
diversity of Forms and Changes. The Unity preserves it self entire in the
whole composure of these Changes, and in each part, in each turn of the whole.
Upon this account has the Soul been defined to be Harmony and a self-moving
Number, or a numerous Motion, a numerous spring of Motion. Harmony consists
in, is measured, and expressed by Numbers: Inasmuch as Number is Unity
diffusing it self, Unity going forth from it self, in a just order, by
Multiplication or Division of it self returning again into it self, and all
this within it self.

2. The Soul, through the whole Circle of its Descent and Return, carries
along with it all diversity of Forms into every Change. For the Unity of the
Soul is her self every where inseparable from the Soul, and indivisible in it
self. This is clearly signified in that Maxim concerning the Soul, universally
taught in the Schools; That the Soul is divisible and mutable in her Operation,
that is, in respect to her Change into diversity of forms; but through all this
mutability of Operations, and Changes, indivisible and immutable in her Essence.

Thus is the Essence of the Soul, as a Christalline Heaven, or as a Palace
composed all of purest and firmest Looking-Glass, after such a manner, that all
the parts of the wonderful structure, all the persons in all the Apartments,
all the Changes and Motions, are seen at once, in every point of the Divine
Building. All the Glories, all the Inhabitants of this Heaven in all shapes, in
all postures of Light and Life, meet the Eye every where, not only by a most
clear transparency, but by the Spring, or Fountain of Light and Life, which in
winding streams flows through the whole, opens it self, with all its
various streams, and all their curious windings in its Bosom every where.

3. The Soul rouleth through all these Changes, circling from the highest
Lights above, to the most shady depths below, and through those shades into the
brightnesses above within her self. Her own Essence is within it self, the
Spring, the Center, the Seat, the Circle of all those mysterious and harmonious
Revolutions. For this is the Essence of the Soul, An Unity containing in it
self all diversity of Forms.

This is the Soul in its Essence, in the perfection of its natural form, the
Universe within it self, like God comprehending, conversing with all things,
within its self alone. All this indeed was in a shadowy figure; yet such, as
the Life it self, brought forth, supported, filled, illustrated, and acted. But
alas! now by the Fall, this great and glorious Spirit contracted, obscured in
death, wandreth within it self as a Ghost, or shade of it self, among the Dead.
It looks up, it beholds it self, all things round about it, and wondreth at
their strange shapes, as the shades of the Dead. It understands, knows
nothing of it self, or them; not so much, as that it is dead. It calls this
state of Death, Life, This the World, which is it self become its own Tomb.

Perhaps this Picture which I have drawn of the Soul, in her proper Essence, or
Nature, in her true and essential form, may seem rather a fancy, than any thing
taken from the Life. I shall therefore attempt to touch it over again, that I
may give more luster and life to it, that I may at once make it more clear, and
confirm it. I shall to this end make use of two Authorities: The one Humane,
the other Divine. I shall begin with Humane Authority, that I may prepare the
way to, and close all with the Divine Authority, as the seal of Truth.

The Humane Authority is taken from a Person eminent, as a Philosopher and
Divine, for a profound Knowledge in all manner of Learning, for a height of
Beauty in his Life, the suitable Birth and Image of that Divine Light in his
Mind, for a Death, which was an ascent to the eternal Mansions in a flame of
Martyrdom and Divine Love, agreeable to both the Light of his Knowledge, and
the Beauty of his Life. His Writings are universally esteemed. His Testimony
universally received, and often cited as Authentic, by the greatest Persons
through many Ages. He has the stamp of Antiquity upon him.

Boethius, that great Roman, is the Person of whom I speak. The Authority I cite
from him, is the Meeter in the Book of the Consolation of Philosophy. It is a
part of this Meeter, which describes the nature of the Soul. But the whole
seems to me so pertinent to the general Subject of my Discourse, so excellent
in it self, drawn forth from the inmost Treasuries of the Platonical,
Pythagorean, Mosaical, Christian Philosophy and Divinity, that I thought I
should oblige the Reader to set it down entire. I have therefore first
transcribed it in Latin, for the sake of the learned Reader: and then rendered
it into English for the benefit of all, that shall take any pleasure in those
sacred Mysteries of Truth presented in her richest Robes, at the whitest
height of her never fading Beauty and Majesty.

The Latin.
O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas,
Terrarum Caelique sator, qui tempus ab aevo
Ire jubes, stabilisque manens das Cunct a moveri;
Quem non externae pepulerunt singere Causae
Materiae fluitantis opus: verum insita summi
Forma boni, livore carens. Tu cunct a superno
Ducis ab exemplo, pulchrum, pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum mente gerens, similique in imagine formans,
Perfect asque jubens perfectum absolvere parts.
Tu numeris Elementa ligas, ut frigora flammis,
Arida conveniant liquidis; ne purior ignis
Evolet, aut mersas deducant pondera terras.
Tu triplicis mediam naturae cuncta moventem
Connectens animam, per Consona membra resoluis.
Quae cum sect a duos motum glomeravit in orbeis,
In semet reditura meat, mentemque profundam
Circuit, and simili convertit imagine Caelum.
Tu causis animas paribus, vitasque minores
Provehis, and levibus sublimeis curribus aptans,
In Caelum terramque seris; quas lege benigna
Ad te conversas reduci facis igne reverti.
Da pater Augustam menti conscendere sedem;
Da fontem lustrare boni; Da, luce reperta,
In te conspicuos animi Desigere visus.
Deiice terrenae nebulas and pondera molis,
Atque tuo splendore mica; tu namque serenum;
Tu requies tranquilla piis, te cernere finis,
Principium, Vector, Dux, semita, terminus idem.
The English.
O thou, who by the golden linked Chain
Of reason's Music, with an even strain
Conductest all from thy bright Throne on high,
Father of shady Earth, and shining Sky.
By undiscovered Tracts, Time's stream and spring,
Thou from Eternity's vast Sea do bring.
Motion, and change ever unknown to thee,
From thee derived, and by thee guided be.
This work of floating matter, which we see,
By inbred form of good, from envy free,
By sweetest force of Native Loves rich seeds,
Without external cause from thee proceeds.
In Loves eternal Garden, as its flowers,
Flourish in their first forms, and fullest powers
All Beauties. These are the life, the living Law,
From which thou do all forms of Being draw.
As light to dazzled eyes, all things below
From these pure Suns, in fading circles flow.
A World all fair, from thee supreamly fair,
Shines in thy mind, above control or care.
In an harmonious Image thou the same,
By perfect parts do to perfection frame.
By potent Charms of sacred numbers bound,
The waving Elements keep their set round.
Fire, Air, Earth, Water in mysterious Dances
Move to thy Music through all times and chances.
Mixed into various figures with sweet grace,
In each form undivided they embrace.
Earth sinks not, nor does fire to Heaven fly,
Frosts, Flames, Droughts, Floods, meet in an Unity.
The threefold Natures golden Knot, mid-band,
The Soul thou tyest in one, by Love's bright hand.
Then it by thee, unloosned, spread does lie
In Limbs well suited to a sympathy
Of motion, and distinct melody,
Diffused through things below, or those on high.
This is the Spring, and Circle ampler far,
And purer, than the Crystal Heavens are;
The universal Beauties charming face,
Where sweetly spring and dance each lovely grace.
Within it self divided this great Soul
Into a double Globe it self does roll.
One hidden from us by excess of light,
One with shades sweetly tempered to our sight.
As thorough these it moves, it still returns
Into it self, still with Love's fire it burns.
By force of this it still does circle round
The eternal minds great deep. Heaven thus does found,
And in like figure of those unseen Lights,
Does turn about these Glories in our sights.
Brought forth from causes like Souls, and less lives,
Thy will aloft in airy Chariots drives,
And sows in Heaven, in Earth, which by Love's Law
Turned back to thee, thou to thy self do draw
By the innate returning flame.
Grant Father, to our minds thy glorious Mount
To climb, to view of good the sacred Fount:
In thine own Light, which does within us shine,
To fix the clear eyes of our Souls on thine.
Cast down the mists, and weight of earthly mold.
The joyous splendors of thy face unfold.
Thou art to holy minds the golden Calm,
The sweet repose, the grief appeasing Balm.
To see Thee our Beginning, is our End,
Guide, Chariot, Way, our Home, to which we tend.
I mean to take no notice of any thing in this Poem, besides that alone, which
immediately concerns the Soul. In that part I shall, after the manner of a
brief Commentary, present the Reader with some few Notes upon the several
Passages, for the illustration and confirmation of my foregoing Discourse upon
the Nature of the Humane, or Intellectual Soul.

1. Passage. The threefold Natures golden knot, Mid-band: The Soul. Thou tiest
in one. Triplicis. Naturae mediam Connectens Animam.

1. Note. The three Natures here are manifestly, The Invisible, Incorporeal
Nature, Immortal Spirits: The Visible, Corporeal Nature, Bodies, Mortal, or
Immortal: The Soul, the middle between both these.

2. Note. The Soul is a middle-nature between both these, not by Abnegation or
Separation, but by Participation and Connection. So that word imports,
Connectens, the Golden Knot lying all in one. The Soul is a middle-nature three
ways,

1. The Soul extends her self through both Natures, to their utmost Heighths
above, and Depths beneath, by her Idea, which is her Golden Head, by her Angel,
which is her Arms and Breast of her Silver, her immediate Image and Birth, as
she springs forth from her Idea, her incorruptible Essence, above all motion,
the first seat of her Life, Understanding, Virtue, Power, as they flow from her
Ideal Spring. Thus Plotinus believed the Soul her self, in her Essence, in her
Intellectual Form, at its first abstracted height and purity to be her own
good Angel. But the Soul dissuseth her self also by her Celestial Garment or
Body, through the wide-spread Heavens. These are her Belly and Thighs of Brass,
the Springs of Generation, the first seat of Motion, Division, and successive
Forms. By her Elemental Body, she swims in this uncertain Sea of Generation and
Corruption. The Elements in their Orbs, compose her Legs and Feet of Iron. Here
is the lowest Region of Division, Motion, and Change. Here is the scene of
Corruption, here is the Soul most obscured. In the lowest parts of this Earth
is she resolved into a shade.

2. The Soul is a Nature distinct from the other two. Angelical Spirits are
Omniforme, or Universal. Bodies are extended into divisible parts. The
Intellectual is composed of both universal and particular Forms, all which it
contains in an indivisible Unity. The Soul circles through all forms of things,
universal and particular, as they subsist apart, or united, appearing mutually,
enfolding each other within the undivided Unity of its own Essence, whilst, in
the Unity and Majesty of its undivided Essence, it rouls through all forms and
parts of it self, as the Sun through the whole compass of the Heavens. In this
is a more glorious Sun and Heaven, that it is in each point of it self, at
once, as a distinct Sun in its full glory, and every Sun, a spacious,
transparent Glass, in which the whole Heaven of its Essence, with all its
harmonious Motions, and most regular diversity of Forms, appear together by
virtue of the Unity every where indivisible.

3. Within the Unity of the Soul lie both the other Natures in a way proper to
the nature of the Soul. The Angelical, the Divine Natures above are there, with
contracted and dimmer Glories, appearing through Images of less brightness, and
less Majesty. All Corporeal Natures are there exalted into Spirits, in their
Intellectual Patterns and Powers, in their rational Forms and Virtues, in their
Imaginative figures and force, in their seminal Reasons, and plastical or
formative Power.

That mystical Picture which the Prophet Esaias draws of the Seraphim, from the
Life it self, when he saw them, will serve in its proportion for the figure of
the Intellectual Soul. They had each six wings, with two they covered their
Face, with two their Feet, with two they flew. Spirits are described by Wings.
The Images of things, springing up within them, are their Wings, not by change
of place without them, but by these inward Images are they present with things,
and in each place. By these they work after the way of a Natural, or rather
Angelical Magic. By raising and converting themselves to Images in their
minds, they bring forth new forms without, as the Offspring or Emanations from
those Images, like shadows from Bodies. Upon this account Angels are said to
work Cognoscendo, by the force of figures in their minds.

Each Soul has, like a Seraphim, six wings. The face of the Soul is his
Divine, his Angelical Idea, in which the face of God, and the face of the
Angel, in their proper forms, are seen. The two uppermost wings, with which the
Soul covers her Angelical Face, and within that her Divine Face, is the Divine
Image shining in the Angelical Image. These wings are full of eyes within and
without. As by the eyes without, they see the Images of Angelical and Divine
Glories. So by the eyes within, they see the Faces of Angels and of God, and in
them their own faces, veiled beneath these Images, full of eyes.

These Eyes are the living Light, the reflection of the Angelical and Divine
Glory, of which these Images are composed, and by virtue of which they,
according to their pure Natures, stand in a mutual, inseparable Union with the
Angels, and in the Angels with the Divine Glory. By virtue of this Union, they
at once look inward to their Ideal Beauties, and outward to the Images of these
Beauties.

The two lowest wings are the Images of all Corporeal Natures, of all Bodies
which cover these, as the feet of the Soul. Nymphs, which are Souls, according
to Porphyrius, are described in Poets with silver feet. Bodily Natures, in
their extended and divisible parts, are the feet of the Soul, its lowest
descent, the lowest and shadowest forms figured upon it. These in the Soul it
self, which is an Unity, appear only in their seminal Unities and Beauties, as
Spirits in the Harmony of this Universal Spirit. For this cause are they
represented by silver feet, shining, and incorruptible; for the same reason are
they said to be covered with wings, which are those Spirits, the lowermost
forms of things in the Soul, the seminal Unity and Harmonies, out of which
Bodies immediately flow, and in which they are seen, as in a mystical Glass.

The middle-wings of the Soul are the proper Image of the Soul it self, by
which it performs its own proper Motions and Operations, flying between those
Angelical, those Divine Images above, and the shady forms of Bodies below.

The Images, or Natures of Spirits are expressed by pairs of wings, not only for
congruity, and the decency of the Parable, but from the Truth of the mystery;
for in Spirits, each Image distinguishes it self by a most substantial Variety
into its own Original and Image, by that self-reflection, or spiritual
Generation, which is the essential Act of each Understanding, of each
Intellectual Nature, of each Spirit.

Thus much of this first passage, the threefold Nature united in the Soul.

2. Passage. Then it by thee unloosened, spread does lie,
Through Limbs well suited to a sympathy.
-- Per Consona membra resoluis.


Note. How elegantly does this Divine Philosopher, and Poet, at once, paint out
to us the Soul extended into Corporeal Forms, in divisible parts; languishing,
obscure, with a faint, and fading light; weak, with a feeble and dying force;
as also present in its Divine Unity, the spring of Light, of Life, through the
whole extent of these Bodies, and binding them up into an indivisible Unity.
This Unity every where present with all the parts of the wholly Body, This Unity
comprehending them all in one, making them all one by a mutual comprehension of
each other in it self, is the only ground of the Consonancy, the Harmony and
Sympathy. The Unity of the same Spirit answering to it self every where,
presenting all the parts in an Unity in it self, is every where in all
Corporeal Forms, the Beauty, the Music, the Harmony.

3. Passage. Of motion and divinest Melody,
Diffused through things below, or those on high.
This is the Spring and Circle.
Cuncta moventem.


1. Note. The difficulties in Motion, are inexplicable, if Motion have not for
its Spring and Seat an essential, substantial Unity, which contains at once in
it self the terms of the Motion, its Beginning and End; the Way; the Forms or
Parts of that which is moved. Without this, how shall the Motion be directed?
How shall the Forms or parts of that which is moved, give place to, or pass
into the place of each other? How shall the Impression, or force of Motion be
communicated? But now all things move by a divinely natural Magic; that is, by
the force of Harmony, in the Unity of the same Soul or Spirit inhabiting and
acting all, presenting it self in every form, part, and motion. Now all motions
present themselves to our eyes, as exact and Divine Dances of persons to a
Divine Music, from unseen Musicians sounding entirely, and distinctly in the
ear of each person, to which they all at once, in their order, move most
agreeably.

2. Note. Immutablity; Mutation, or Change; Motion, differ after the same
manner with Eternity, Aeviternity, Time. This is best explained by the
threefold Unity, the Divine, the Angelical Unity, the Unity of the Soul.

1. The Divine Unity is alone a true and perfect Unity, substantial, supreme,
unbounded. This has a perfect boundless Variety in it, with an Uniformity. All
forms of things here, as they are most perfectly distinct, by the perfection of
the Variety; so are they most perfectly one, by the perfection of the Unity.
This is the Divine World, containing innumerable Divine Worlds within it self,
of which every one is infinitely new, and various from all the rest; yet
entirely one with all the Rest, including at once innumerable Divine Worlds,
all new, and all the same. As the Variety there, comprehends all distinctions
below it, and infinitely transcends them; So each, the minutest, the least
distinction here, being a Variety there, is a new Divine World, having all the
other Varieties complete in it self, as so many Divine Worlds, all new. This is
Eternity above all change.

2. The Angelical Unity follows. Here the Divine Unity descends into a shadow,
beneath which it shades it self. This is a shadowy Unity, the first and most
perfect of all shadowy Unities. The shade here bounds, and diversifieth the
Unity. But the Light, and the Unity in the shadow, predominate over the
Darkness and Diversity. The Divine Variety is here contracted and obscured in a
diversity of Forms. But in this diversity of Forms, is an Omniformity. Each
Form is Universal and Omniform. Each Form has this Angelical Unity in it,
where all diversity of Forms meet to compose it, and shine together in it,
according to the diversity and property of that Form. Thus every Form of things
here is an Angel, every Angel is the whole World in himself; the whole World,
and a new World of Angels.

In this World is motion, not properly or simply, but with a predominancy of
station, over the motion: for, as the Unity is continually rouling through
diversity of Forms, so it is Omniform, Universal, clothed with, possessing,
and enjoying in it self, all diversity of Forms, and so the full compass of the
whole Angelical Harmony in each Form. This is Aeviternity, where mutability or
change begins.

3. The Unity of the Soul is the last, this is mixed of Eviternity and Time; Of
Change, where station predominates over motion, and motion single in its own
kingdom. The Soul in its superior part is in the form of an Angel; In its
Angelical Unity it comprehends and rouls through all diversity of Forms, in
their Universality and Omniformity, carrying the whole pomp and full splendour
of all universal Forms, of all Angelical Beauties along with it, in the face of
it, into each diverse Form.

Thus it is all Forms in every Form.

In its inferior part, the Soul descends into all particular Forms, where the
Unity in its Angelick majesty and luster, in its universal Form and Glory, is
gradually contracted and obscured by the increasing shade. The Soul now becomes
each particular Form.

Here, in this inferior part of the Soul, Motion and Time have their first
birth and seat. Time is defined to be the number of Motion, in an orderly
Priority and Posteriority. Accordingly the Soul in respect to its inferior
part, most properly is described to be a self-moving number. As numbers, by a
just order, spring up one out of the other, the succeeding numbers, being ever
less universal, removed further from the Unity, and multiplied more into
particular Unities, then the foregoing numbers. So does the Soul after the
manner of number, which is the measure of all proportion and order from its
supreme and universal Unity, descend and re-ascend through all particular
Forms, in the most just order, and most exact proportions.

The Soul, being the first seat of Motion and Time, is also the first seat of
Music, which is a motion, measured by Time, and by the order of Ascents or
Descents. It is therefore defined by an Harmony. There is a threefold Harmony
in the motions of the Soul,

1. All the motions of the Soul, through all particular Forms, lie together
after a most agreeable and harmonious manner in the supreme Unity of the Soul,
in its universal Form, which is its Essence. By the Harmony here are measured
all the motions of the Soul, in its passage through inferior Forms, and so all
Time.

2. The Soul in its Unity diffuseth it self through all its particular Forms
and Motions, dwells as an hidden seed of Harmony in each of them, figureth it
self upon each particular, and upon the whole, uniteth and binds up all by it
self in it self into one entire piece, into one universal Harmony, which
includes all particular Harmonies, all sorts of Music in it self.

3. The Soul by virtue of its Unity, and universal 'Form, within the embraces
and incompassings of that, descends most regularly to the lowest Forms. Then
ascends again, ending in that Point, that Unity, where it first begun. So it
finisheth in it self the Divine Circle of Music or Harmony, within which lies
all Harmony and Music in all its most delightful diversity of Modes or Figures.

Thus the Soul in it self, as it spreads it self through time and motion, the
first, the universal Music, the measure, the Spirit of all Music, all time
and motion here, make up the universal Music. Again, as all universal and
particular Forms, all motion and time appear at once, in one view, in the Unity
of the Souls Essence, and universal Form; so is the Soul, the first, the
universal Beauty, the Measure, the Spirit of all Beauty, Forms, and Harmony.
This is spoken of the Soul in comparison with the Corporeal Beauties, Music,
and Harmony, Celestial or Terrestrial. But the Harmony of the Angelick Nature
transcends this of the Soul. That also is infinitely surmo^nted by those
unexpressible, incomprehensible Harmonies of the Divine Effence, which it is
not possible for any created sense to take in.

4. Passage. -- It still returns.
Into it self --
It still does circle round.
The eternal minds great deep, Heaven thus does found.
And in like figure of those unseen Lights,
Does turn about these Glories in our sights.
In semel reditura meat, mentemque profundam.
Circuit, and simili convertit imagine Caelum.


1. Note. How the Soul in all her motions returns into her self? you see in the
Harmony of the Soul described, in the last Note, upon the foregoing Passage. I
will here only add this, The Soul is an indivisible Unity, yet spacious,
enriched with a Variety of Powers and Forms, far beyond the compass or glory of
this visible World, with all its Starry, Christalline, or Empyrean Heavens.
This Soul, from it self, within it self, circles through vast and various Forms
of richest Lights, deepest Shades, with all their mixtures in a most exact and
ravishing order, making all one Piece, one Structure, one Palace, one Person,
one Face of Beauty, most divinely beautiful, where all forms of Beauty meet in
one. As it is thus from it self within it self, circles through all forms; so
in each form it springs up, and brings forth it self entire in the Unity of its
Essence. Thus in every Point, the beginning and the end meet; the circle of the
Souls Essence, and of all Beauties; the Divine Piece, the Divine Palace, with
all its bright Inhabitants, and shining Furniture; the Divine Person, the Face
of Beauty, is all finished and complete, with all the sweet and beautiful
Varieties in every part, in every point. Thus the Soul in all its motions, by
virtue of the most charming Harmony, and transporting Unity, every where entire
and undivided, is ever returning into it self.

2. Note. The Souls Original, the manner of its Divine Procession, from its
eternal King, is with an admirable brevity, perspicuity, and depth represented
to us, in the Souls circling round, the Minds great deep. The Platonists
distinguish all invisible Being into three ranks; The Unity, which is God, the
Mind, the Soul. The Mind they call the Son, the World of God, the first seat of
all Ideas. But with us Christians, this Mind is the Angelical Nature, the chief
of those ministering Spirits, to which we in the Language of the Scripture, give
the Name of Angels, The Son of God, the World of God, in the first and most
proper sense, is the Uncreated Mind and Wisdom, the Lord Jesus, who, as he is
the second person in the Trinity, is the supreme Unity, the one only true God.
The Godhead in its essential Image, where first are seated, and shine all forms
of things in their Original Glories, in their eternal Patterns, as they are the
Variety in the Divine Unity, every one God entirely in it self, in all the full
Glories of the Godhead, and all one God, ever undivided, indivisible.

Plutarch calls Life, a Depth; This Mind is expressed by a Deep, inasmuch as it
is Life it self, the first unbounded Life, which has no ground, no limit, the
fountain of Life, where endlesly spring up in an unconfined Circle, in a
bottomless Depth, forms of Glory innumerable, one within another. Thus St. Paul
speaks, That the Spirit of God, in the Spirit of a Saint, is a Spirit of
Revelation, which takes the covering off from this Deep of Light and Glories in
the Soul, searching out the Depth of God.

The Soul circleth round this Deep of the Divine Mind, not after a Corporeal,
or Local manner, but as one Spirit encompasseth another without Circumscription
extension or distance.

1. The Soul without consinement or adaequation, contains in its Unity and
Center this glorious Deep of the Divine Mind through the Angelical Mind, as the
Unity of its Unity, the Center in its Center.

2. The Soul springs forth by a continual emanation, a continual irradiation or
process from this Divine Mind, into an entire Image of it. As it ^ees the
various Glories in the circle of this Deep. So does it spring up within it
self, into the similitude and forms of the same Glories, in the same Order and
Harmony, to the filling up and completing of the same circle within it self.
The Lord Jesus in the Gospel, at his Transfiguration, appeared as the Sun in
its strength, and his Garments as the Light. Thus the same Jesus, the Divine
Mind is here a Circle, a Depth of substantial Light and Glories, filling the
Light with all Variety of forms. The Soul springs forth from him, all round
about him, as a Garment of Light, a Circle of Beams, all wrought with the
beautiful Figures of those Glories.

Plato says, That there are three Kings, round whose Thrones all things dance;
God, the Mind, the Soul; this continual procession of the Soul from the Divine
Mind, through the Angelical Mind, in the entire Image of it, with all its
Divine Forms, and their Order, their Harmony, their Unity in the whole compass
of their Variety, is the mystical Dance of the Soul round the Throne of her
King, her Bridegroom, by which at once she contemplates, enjoys, springs up
into his Divine Form in all its Beauties, and is filled with him. He in like
manner has her ever before him, as the Looking-Glass of his own Beauty, lying
and playing in himself, as the Image of a Flower, or Tree in the water, every
way circled in by him, as she is centered in him.

As the Divine Mind, through the Angelical is in the Soul, so are the Divine,
the Angelical Mind through the Soul in this visible World centring it in
themselves, riding forth upon the Circuit of the Heaven and the Earth, as the
lowest figure of themselves, at once standing up out of them, and standing in
them.

The Soul, as the Exemplar Form, as the Unity, the inmost center, the outmost
Circle, sends forth this Corporeal Image, as a figure of it self, forms,
moves, acts it throughout, sustaineth it in it self, fills it with it
self, every way boundeth and contains it within it self.

The vast all-containing Unity of the Soul figureth it self, the circular,
globous, round form of the Heavens and the Earth, in the Union and Harmony of
all the parts, suffering no where any discontinuity, or vacuity, nor any
deformity or discord in the whole.

From the variety of invisible Forms within it self, the Soul springs up into
all the innumerable Army of heavenly Bodies in the Celestial Orbs, into all
the diversity of Elementary shapes and figures in the Regions below. The
Harmony and Order of the Soul in all its forms and motions through them flows
forth, figureth it self, as a Light of Beauty shines, as a Divine Music
sounds through all the parts and changes of the Celestial, the Elementary
Spears, charming those Souls that have awakened and purified senses to take
them in.

As the Soul within it self springs up into each form, in its proper Order,
bringing forth it self at once with the entire Unity of its whole undivided
Essence anew, in that distinct form; so does the Soul from that Original, in
the likeness of the same Image, each new moment, spring forth anew according to
the innate Law of the universal Order and Harmony into the whole Heavens and
Earth, in a new posture and figure. Thus after the similitude of its own
circlings through all forms within it self, the Soul incessantly turns round
the Heavens, and the Elementary Orbs, which by their perpetual circling through
each other, turn about by day and by night the restless wheel of Generation and
Corruption, as of all change. Thus as the Soul danceth round the Throne of the
Divine and the Angelick King, these Heavens and the Elements dance round the
Throne of their King the Soul.

Before I pass from the Authority and Testimony of this great Philosopher,
concerning the nature of the Soul, give me leave to direct this Arrow, to the
white, and mark, which I aim at through this whole Discourse.

According to this Doctrine, the Divine, the Angelick Mind, the Soul, the
Celestial and Elementary Orbs, through all their powers, parts, forms, and
motions, meet in, make up one Universal and Divine Harmony, one Beauty, one
Music. All exactly in the lowest, the least, the weakest stroke, touch, or
shade, in most exact measure and proportion, answer one another; As the Face in
the water answers the living Face: So does every lower Orb or Circle of things
answer the superior. As the reflection of it self, in its own water or luster,
shining forth from it, and abiding in it; like the water of a precious stone.
Each Orb or Circle of things is filled with, knit together by, bounded in its
own Unity, which flows through all, as the Spirit, the Life of Order and
Harmony, disposing all the parts and motions in a most just measure to preserve
it self, and its figure entire in the whole. The supreme, the Divine Unity sits
upon every one of these subordinate Unities, rides forth in them, uniteth,
fills, binds up, boundeth in it self all the Orbs and Circles, all in them
all. This shines through them, runs with its beams, playing over every form, as
one universal Beauty, one sparkling Image of the supreme, universal Good, in
the whole face of things. This is a Music, sounding through all, where each
various form, the obscurest, the most minute, is a string upon the golden Lute,
of the whole Image of things. Each motion a touch of the chief, the invisible
Musician. The Spirit of the whole, the Spirit of Unity and Harmony; each touch
a part of the Music, exactly answering in all Musical proportions to every
other part, and to the whole, making perfect the Divine Consort, in which all
the Angels, all the Ideal, the first Glories in the Divine Mind bear a part
with every Worm and Dust on the Earth, every Wave and Drop in the Sea, every
Dragon and Owl in the Desert, every flake of Snow in the Air.

How beautiful now is the Work of God in all! how worthy of a God! As his Glory
is above all Heavens, the highest and purest forms of Light; so is his Name,
which is that Glory, in the full expression, and fair Images of it, excellent
through all the Earth, to the lowest shades.

Plato says, That there is that, which is the least of all things, which
comes between the lowest Divisions, the least parts of things, which uniteth
all one to another. Ficinus in his Comment teaches us, That this, in the sense
of Plato, is God, who by the absoluteness and simplicity of his Unity, is at
once, the Greatest and the Least, the Highest and the Lowest, the Outmost and
the Inmost of all things, the Band of all, that can no where be excluded.

If this be true, where, now through the whole Universe of things, is there
found a place for that Liberty, which breaks the Band of the Divine Unity and
Harmony, which discontinueth the Links in this Golden Chain by uncertain,
arbitrary, independent motions and forms arising from those motions? What
jarring Motion or Division springs up without its Divine Ground, without its
orderly Connection, without its Patterns, and Spring above, to which it answers,
without its fellow Notes, round about it, to which it is tuned? Where is this
motion which thus jarreth with, disturbeth and spoileth the universal Music?
Certainly, it lies without the supreme, the allcomprehending Unity, It excludes
from it self that Divine Unity, which fills all, which binds all up into
one.

Aristotle expresses the Soul, by a word, which seems to have a full and deep
sense to this present purpose. Those, that followed him have with great labor
and pains dug in it, with their sharpest wits, as in a Mine, from which they
expected much fine Gold of Divine Wisdom and Truth. It is reported of one,
That he raised a Spirit to intepret this word to him. It is (...), which
seems most properly and clearly to express that Divine Unity of the Soul,
replenished with all Variety Forms in the most beautiful Order, as we have
described the nature of it. It is that which has its perfection, its end, and
so its beginning, and so its whole way in it self.

This Perfection of the Intellectual Soul, is the comprehension of all Truth in
its Understanding, the fruition of all good in the Will. The universal Truth
and Good are then the beginning of the Soul, its Original, all forms of things
in the Beauties of their clearest and fullest Truth, which is the eternal Light
of their Ideal Glories, smiling in the face of them, all forms of things in the
sweetness, delightfulness, joy, in the unexpressibleness of Good, the true
Good, all Good, which is the eternal Life. The eternal Love of those Original
Beauties in their sacred Spring rising up fresh in the bosom of each Form;
this is the end, this is the perfection of the Soul. Thus all things were made
for Christ, in him, by him, who is the universal Truth and Good. How? St. Paul
explains it, All things are yours, and you are Christ's. All forms of things
meet and unite in the Humane Soul, as their Perfection, their Beginning, their
End. Jesus Christ, as he is the first, the fairest, the fullest Image of all
Forms in one, in their most exact Order and Harmony, is the Father, the
Brother, the Bridegroom of the Soul, her beginning, her exemplar Form or
Perfection, her End.

That Definition of the Soul, the Act of an Organical Body, contains the same
Doctrine of the Soul in it. An Organical Body, is a Corporeal, or visible
Image, composed of various members, various parts and forms, to be instruments
and expressions of the various Beauties, Powers, and Virtues of the Soul, by
which they propagate themselves in an inferior Birth, and figure themselves in
a new, but narrower Orb, in a new, but obscurer light of sense. Thus the whole
visible World, is one Organical Body, of which all particular Bodies are so
many Organical parts.

Beauty is described to be the predominancy of the form over the matter. A
substantial or essential Act is all form, a pure form separated from every
thing of Corporeal matter. The Soul then, as it is an Act, is all Beauty,
Beauty abstracted from matter, a pure Light of Beauty, the Essence, the
substance of Beauty, and so of Harmony, of Order.

It is a Maxim in Nature, That the last, the lowest, the least in a superior
Order, or rank of things, every way excels the first, the highest, the
greatest, in a lower rank and order. According to this Rule, every Soul in the
excellency, beauty, virtue, compass of its Being, transcends this whole
Corporeal World in the widest Circuit of its Form, and largest extent of its
Duration.

Thus the Intellectual Soul is the Act of this Universe of Sense, the whole
Corporeal World. The Intellectual Soul is all this World, with all Forms of
things contained in it, with all their courses and changes, according to their
Connection and Order from the beginning to the end, in one essential,
substantial, undivided Act; One pure Act of transparent Beauty and Order, which
is the Souls Unity and Essence. By this, the whole Celestial, and Elementary
World, in the emanation and springing up of all forms of things, in all their
motions and orders, are uncessantly acted; In this they subsist as shadows,
which have no ground of substance in themselves. In this they actually are that
which they are; As Mathematical figures in the mind, the Soul it self alone,
filling those figures, being all the Essence, Substance, Power, Virtue, and
Form in them. Like shadows they vanish, as they go forth from this Bosom,
where alone their Essences, which are so many distinct, substantial Acts and
Unities, shine and move together in a most beautiful Harmony, as fixed
incorporeal Stars in their proper Heaven.

Thus is each man a complete world in himself. Thus does each Soul cloth it
self with an Ethereal, Aerial Robe, on which it puts on this earthy Garment;
Like the Tabernacle of white Linen, wrought with all fine and rich Colors,
with the figures of Cherubims, which had three Coverings, one over another upon
it, of Goats-hair, of Ram-skins died red, of Badgers-skins.

Thus the Soul rides forth in her threefold Chariot, Heavenly, Airy, Earthly,
upon the Circuit of the Heavens, the purest Air, and the Earth, the true Venus?
the true Queen of Love and Beauty, by which all things spring, shine, live, and
love, through her Marriage-Union with her Lord and King, the true Adonis, or
Adonai, the Lord Jesus, who died, and lives again with his beloved Bride, in
the secret of Paradise, in the midst of the Field of the Celestial Light, the
pure Air, in the bosom and nethermost parts of the Earth. This is the Soul in
its first make and proper state.

Plotinus teaches, That the first Soul, which is the immediate Workman of this
World, in the order of its procession, from the separate Intelligences or
Angels, and from God, the only supreme Father of all, has its face ever turned
to the face of God, and unmoveably fixed upon it, from his Face, it continually
takes in, as the Nectar of the Gods, the Divine Light, the Divine Life and
Love, it continually takes in, as at an heavenly Feast, as the heavenly
Ambrosia, the Ideal Beauty, the first, the Archetypal Forms in their most
immediate, sweetest, freshest, fullest Effulgency or Images. This God-like Soul
thus bred, thus divinely formed, thus nourished, thus impregnated, sends forth
from it self this whole visible World, in the figures of those first Glories,
in the similitude of their Unity, Variety, and Order, without thought, care, or
trouble, without ever turning a look to this World. As a Person with his Face
to the Sun, casts his shadow upon the ground behind him. There is only this
difference, as this great Soul casts the shadow of this Corporeal World from it
self, there is no ground for it to fall upon, besides the Soul it self.

All these Heavens, this Earth, and Sea, with all their roulings, springings,
fadings, and floatings are then the soul it self in her lowest Form, bearing
the figures of all her superior Glories most curiously and delightfully wrought
in deeper shades. The Soul in this her lower form is her own living
Looking-Glass of shadowy, shaded Light, in which she sees with a grateful
Variety, with a pleasing Reflection of her own Divine force and fruitfulness,
her own Beauties in a weaker, fainter, fading Image, maintained only by
continual beams from her self.

All Souls, as they flow in their Order, and successions from this first Soul,
by virtue of the first production, bring forth to themselves, and bear within
themselves the whole World in its fairest and fullest measures.

Object. If any ask these Philosophers, what sign or appearance there is of
this sublime state, this amplitude, this majesty in the soul of Man, they will
give you such answers as these?

Answ. 1. The Soul has now lost her wings, by which she flies through the
whole Heavens and Earth. She now lies languishing, contracted, clouded,
divided, wounded, sick, dying, upon the ground of this earthly Body. You can
take no more any measure of the true nature of the Soul, of the Soul in her own
proper Divine Form and Image, by her present state, then you can of the humane
Form, Spirit, and Life, by a worm grown out of the putrified body of a man dead.

Answ. 2. As the Soul of a man sleeping, is to the Light of this World; so is
the Soul in this Body to the Light of its own Intellectual, Invisible, Divine
Form and Beauty. As a Prince sleeps in some private Room, with the Curtains
drawn about him, within his own Palace, in the midst of all the splendors and
splendid Persons of his Court, seeming to himself in his dreams, as he sleeps,
to be a naked, forlorn Prisoner, at the bottom of a dark and deep Dungeon. In
such a dream does the Soul appear to her self, sleeping in this Body, in the
midst of all her own Immortal Beauties, in the Palace and Court of her own
Divine Unity and Essence.

But I have now done with Humame Authority and Philosophy in its Testimony. But
as I part, I will leave Philosophy with this Honorable Testimony. The only and
true Philosophy is the Light of Nature, in its primitive purity, as the
scattered Beams, and dispersed remainders of it in the midst of the ruins of
Nature, are collected, strengthened, and reflected from the most excellent of
natural, or Divine Spirits, like Sunbeams, centered in a burning-glass.

The second Authority.
I pass now to the Divine Authority, which is the testimony of the Holy
Scriptures. I shall cite only two Scriptures, one from the first of Genesis;
the other from the first of the Romans. I being with the last, which seems
clearest and fullest.

1. Scripture. The first Testimony from the Scriptures, is Romans 1. 19, 20. From
this Text to the end of the third Chapter, you have the Soul, with a profound
Depth; Like a River rouling along, with all her various serpentine windings,
from the Sea of Love, the Divine Bosom, till she return thither. This Divine
Philosopher, after a Divine manner, sets the humane Soul before us, in the
whole compass of her Essence, in all her circlings, through all forms of
things, as he saw her by a Light of Revelation, in the eternal Design, in her
Idea, in the heart of the Father, the Fountain; in the Bosom of the Lord Jesus,
the first seat of all Divine Designs and Ideas.

This Design is divided into three parts,

1. The Soul in its primitive and pure state of Nature, presented to us, Chap.
1. verse. 19. and 20.

2. The Soul in her fall, as she passes through the shades beneath, of Sin,
Suffering, Death, and Wrath, from the 21. verse of the first Chapter, to the
20. verse of the third Chapter.

3. The Soul in its return, and re-ascent to a greater Glory, from the 22.
verse of the third Chapter to the end of that Chapter.

I shall very briefly, with all the perspicuity that I can, point out the Heads
of things in these three parts of the Souls course and design in the Divine
Mind.

1. The Soul in its primitive and pure state of Nature is presented to us, Romans
1. 19, 20. That which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has
manifested it to them. For the unseen things of him from the Creation of the
world are seen, being understood by the things that are made, both his eternal
Power and Godhead. I shall make two Notes upon the Grammar of the words,

1. That which may be known of God, is manifest in them. This relates to the
pure state of Nature, not to the Corrupt. For of that it is said, verse. 21.
Their foolish heart was darkened. Things are manifest only in the Light. The
expression runs in the present time, after the manner of the Divine and
Prophetic style, which sets before our eyes all forms of things, as they
appear in the Divine Light, where all things are ever present, and appear at
once in one. Besides this, as Paradise, so the pure Image of God in the Soul,
seems to some not to be lost or destroyed, but hid beneath the ruins of the
fall. Thus Knowledge springing in the Soul, seems to be a remembrance, the Life
of all good, an awakening by reason of the primitive Image of pure Nature
raising it self by degrees, and sparkling through the Rubbish, the confusions
of the present state. Thus also has the Sou^n her self the measure of all
Truth and Good in this pure ^age, which hidden in the Center of the Soul,
contains all Forms of Truth and Good in it self.

2. That Clause in the 20. verse. From the Creation of the World, relates not to
the sight, but to the invisibility of God, as appears by the place, the point,
the sense. For otherwise there were a Tautology in the Creation of the World,
and the things that are made. There is a Scripture like to this, Ephesians. 3. The
mystery of Christ is there mentioned, which is the unvailing of God, that he
may be seen in the Light of his own essential and eternal Glories, in his own
proper, naked, and sweet form of Love, unmixt, unlimited. Thus he appears in
the Face and Person of Christ, who as he is the Godhead, in its essential and
eternal Image, comes in the Spirit of the Gospel, full of Grace, or Love, and
Truth; the Light, the Life of the Godhead in its unvailed Sweetnesses and
Glories.

This mystery is said to be hid in God from the foundation of the World. The
Creation of the World was a Vail cast upon the Face of God, with a figure of
the Godhead wrought upon this Vail, and God himself seen through it by a dim
transparency; as the Sun in a morning, or Mist, is seen by a refracted Light
through the thick medium of earthly Vapors.

But I shall now attempt from the Life, in this Scripture, to draw the Picture
of the Humane Soul in its natural Perfections, and paradisical Beauties. In
order to this, I shall present to you three Propositions, into which this Text
seems naturally to resolve it self.

1. 1. Proposition. God is present, and shines forth in the Soul of Man, in the
highest and fullest appearance, in which any created Understanding is capable
of receiving him, in which he is capable of being manifested, or communicated
by any Image beneath or without himself. This is the plain sense of those
words, That which may be known of God, is manifested in them. Every Being, in
every kind and degree, is a Beam or Emanation, and manifestation of the first,
the supreme Being, which is God.

The whole Creation then, all the Creatures in it, with all their Essences,
Substances, Accidents, in all their Orders, Places, Postures, Motions, with
every Circumstance of Being, are as real, in their full proportion, as much
according to the life in the Humane Soul, as in themselves. They all, as so
many lines and features, drawn from the Face of God, form the Essence of the
Soul, by forming it into a living Image of God.

God himself, as he is the Author of Nature, is as a Sun with all the
Creatures, as a Ring of Beams round about him, which at once hide him and
discover him. So the Sun, the Figure, with a Vail of Beams, hides from every
eye the too bright Glories of that naked Body of Light: But by the same Beams
is himself seen in a most beautiful, though shadowy Image.

Thus this eternal Sun, surrounded with this Ring of Beams, forms a Pare^s, t^
similitude of himself by himself in the Soul of Man. In the mean time God
himself, as he is before this similitude of himself, shining upon it, is also
within it, the vital Center in the midst of it, the Root, the Truth, the Life
of it. Thus are these two Suns, two Eyes, full set each with other, as they
look forth through this Image, this Vail of Beams.

The Soul by its senses takes in only the accidental forms of each Creature,
the shadow of the shadow. The Understanding takes hold of, takes the essential
Form, the Substance. The whole visible World is the World of sense, the Object
of sense. The Invisible, the Angelical World is the Intellectual World, the
proper Object of the Understanding.

If that, which may be known of God, be manifested in the Soul, if every
distinct degree of Being be a distinct manifestation of God, a distinct mode or
form of the Divine appearance, then does the Humane Soul contain the whole
World, visible, invisible with it self, in its full greatness and glory, in all
its most exact Distinctions and Varieties. It penetrates it, it fills it all
within and without with its Intellectual Light; In its Unity, as the Divine
Center, it sits, and unites all. In its Variety, as in the full majesty of its
Divine Essence, it spreads it self into all Forms, and so many Divine Figures,
in a most beautiful and Divine Order.

All Being in its whole compass, is Intelligible, the adoequate Object of the
Understanding. The Understanding is all in potentiality in its natural
capacity, tendency, and desire. These are the Doctrines of the Schools. The
Understanding then in Act, in the perfection of its primitive state, is
actually, perfectly all. It is married by an Angelical marriage, as in the
Marriage of Spirits into a most intimate Union of Essences, into a most
essential Unity with the whole Creation, as it is one Divine Figure of the
Divine Beauty; and so through this figure, with Jesus Christ, with God, who
lives and appears in it.

2. Proposition. All these forms of things spring up to the Soul, from within
it self, from its own Fountain, from God the Fountain of the Soul, in the
Center of it, the Fountain of all in the Soul to the Soul. That which may be
known of God, is manifest in them, for God has manifested it to them, verse.
19. The last Clause, well observed, in the force of the words, and the
Connection, will appear to every judicious eye, as I humbly conceive, to have no
common or vulgar sense. They seem to contain in them this twofold mystery,

1. God, the proper Idea of the Humane Soul, that is, its most inward
inseparable Principle, which has in it self the Pattern, the exemplar form of
the Soul, sends it forth from it self, forms it, furnishes, fills it with
all forms of things.

He also comprehends, and conserves it, in himself, as its own proper place and
habitation, as a Light sprung from him, and abiding in him, the Father of
Lights. He fashioneth it into an Understanding, as an Intellectual, Angelical,
Divine Sun. This is the greatest Light in the Soul, its utmost Center, and
outmost Circle, encompassing the whole Essence of the Soul, the whole nature of
things, in all their Forms, Operations, and Motions. This shines in the day of
the invisible World. This, as the Region of Angels, contains the Essences and
Intellectual Forms of all things in it self, as so many Angels, or Angelical
Spirits, each of which is a distinct Sun, a distinct world of Angels, of all
Angelical Spirits, and Intellectual Forms.

In the next place, God figures this Light, which is the substance of the Soul,
into the inward, the common sense, the phansy or imagination; Now it is as a
full Moon in the night of this visible and Corporeal World. It is replenished
with all the shady Forms of this night, which shine in the face of it, as in a
Glass, where they all meet and make one pleasant Night-piece.

Last of all, The eternal Spirit, the inward former and workman of the Soul,
contracts it, and divides it into the outward senses, into innumerable
particular Forms. These are as so many living Stars, or Star-like eyes,
sparkling and dancing round about the Queen of this Night, the Moon, the common
sense or imagination.

Through these Stars, and this Moon, in the Night-piece of these shady and
Corporeal Forms is seen, as in a Perspective, as at a great distance, the
Intellectual and the Ideal Land of Angelical, of Divine Glory, which seem to
cast forth these less and contracted Lights, as faint-glimpses of themselves,
or like small sparks, the seeds of the great flames.

As the Soul accompanied with her Original Pattern and Principle, by its force
thus descends: so does it, by the same force, in like manner ascend. All the
particular Forms of the outward senses, the Beauties of the Eye, the Music of
the Ear, all Perfumes and delightful Odours, the various Delicacies of the
Taste; the softnesses, firmnesses, the agreeable rests, motions, aequalities,
inaequalities in the Touch. All meet more pure and heightened in the common
sense, in the inward senses, as in that Moon, which is described to be an
heavenly Earth, or an earthly Heaven. From thence they raise themselves,
resining themselves, as they rise, to the Intellectual Region. As some believe
the Sun, to be the Habitation of the Blessed, and to have the Blessed Fields
Paradise in it: So here in this Intellectual Sun, all shady forms break up out
of the mists of matter, and corporeity, into clear Suns, into Angelical
Essences and Spirits.

From hence the Soul, as a bright Sky, set with innumerable Suns of sweetest
Light, and most temperate, pleasant, vital warmth, or as an Heaven replenished
with Angels, entertaining each other in a Divine Consort, with Dances and
Songs, returns into its first Nest, and its final Rest; the Bosom of its Idea,
the Bosom of Christ in God. In this Bosom, of a truth, has it ever abode,
has it circled round, descending and ascending without going forth from it.
Thus has God manifested himself in all possible Forms, to the Soul, according
to the first part of the Apostles sense.

2. God, as the Souls proper Idea, or exemplar Form, every where present with
it, in every Form, sets himself as a seal upon each form, and upon the Soul in
that form. So he is to the Soul the Impression, the Evidence of the truth of
each appearance by himself, and of himself, in each appearance. Thus it is said
of the Lord Jesus, as he is the eternal word, the Idea of all Ideas, the proper
Idea of man, In him was life, and that life was the light of men, Joh. 1. The
first life, as it is in its Ideal Spring, in the Person of the Lord Jesus, the
first, the essential Image of God, (and so the Fountain of all Images) shines
forth into a Light, of which is framed the Substance and Essence of the Soul.
Then it figureth this Light with its own Glories, in their Divine Harmony and
Order.

This Light, these Figures, are in themselves empty without force or efficacy.
All fullness dwells in Christ, the Ideal Life in him forms and fills them. This
is the face of Beauty, that looks forth through these Lattices. This is the
never-fading Flower in the heavenly Paradise, which springs and puts forth it
self through these Windows. This rides forth upon every form into the bosom of
the Soul, and gives it self reception in the Soul.

As this first life in Christ is the Divine Seal upon every Form, upon the
Soul, through every Form, so is it the Divine ground in the Soul, which
receives and sustains this Seal, which dissuseth in its Divine force and
impression through the Soul, by virtue of its Ideal Unity and Omnipresence.

The Original and Exemplar Life in Christ is the light of man, objectively and
formally; It is the light in the Object which sheds it self on the Humane
Spirit. It is the light in man, the form of his form, the eye in his eye, the
power in his powers, which takes it in. All sense is founded in a suitableness
between the Object and the Faculty, all suitableness in an Unity.

3. Proposition. God clothes every created form, in the eye of the Soul, with
an Intellectual or Angelical Image of himself. By the things that are made, are
seen, (being understood) the invisible things of God, his eternal Power and
Godhead, says our Evangelical Philosopher, that word [understood] is carefully
chosen, and emphatically brought in.

The word is (...), derived from (...), the peculiar and proper word, by which
the most Divine among the Philosophers in St. Paul's time expressed the Angels
or Angelical Minds.

These Spirits were the chief Springs, Powers, Glories of the whole World, in
the number of the Creatures. They were the Gods of this Creation, and had the
name of Gods given to them in the Holy Scriptures. The Presence, the Power, the
Authority, the Glory of the Godhead, next to Jesus Christ, resided in them.
Jesus Christ, the Lord and King of all, reigned, acted, and appeared in these
Angels of Might and Glory, as the highest Representation of himself in his
Divine Form and Majesty. All this was not for their own sakes, but for man, as
they were Guardians and Tutors to this Heir, the Lord of all.

Each Angel was a diverse Figure of a distinct Variety in the eternal Glory, in
that diversity the full Glory in its Universal Image rested upon every Angel,
as a ministering Spirit, to minister to man, the full Glory. He was the Heir of
God, the perfect Harmony, the Unity, in the which the whole Variety was most
perfectly one, married together, with the Unity, into the most perfect Beauty
and Melody of the Universal Image of the whole Creation, most exactly, with the
most charming agreeableness, answering the Beauty, the Melody of the Divine
Nature, as the Face in the Glass, the living Face, the liveliest Echo, the
living Voice.

Each Creature has (as its Ideal Glory, in the Divine World, so) its Angel in
the World of Angels. In the pure state of things, every inferior Creature had
its Angel visibly, sensibly present with it. Its Angel formed it a Figure of it
self in the diversity of its own proper Essence. Its Angel clothed it with an
Intellectual, Angelical Image of the Supreme, the Universal, the Divine Beauty.
Its Angel dwelt constantly within this Image, and shined through it.

After the same manner the Ideal Life and Glory in Christ made the Angel its
Tabernacle in the Heavens, and through the Angel each Creature below on Earth.
Every Angel, every Creature, was a Garment of Light, sweetly shaded in
different degrees and manners of diverse Fashions, but all Divine, in which
Jesus Christ, the essential full Image of the Godhead, walked in the midst of
Paradise. Thus in all the Creatures, as in diverse Figures of his distinct
Glories, he walked forth, conversing with himself, and entertaining himself in
the compleatness of his Divine Person through all.

Thus as all things were made by Christ and for him, so nothing was made
without him, apart from him, until Sin made the wound, which let out the Divine
Life of all Beauty, Love and Joy, to let in Death with its deformity and
horrors. The Divine Unity was entire every where. All things stood together in
Christ.

Christ with all his Glories in every Angel, with all the Angels in every
Creature, rode forth as in his Chariot. The whole Creation was as a Contexture
of Angels; As the Chariots of the Lord, thousands and ten thousands. All were
every where composed into one Chariot. All were as wings of pure Light, and
perfumed Air, on which God flies through all, spreading and scattering abroad
the ravishing Glances, the Divine Impressions of his Beauties and Sweetnesses,
as he flies.

What a Paradise, transcending all Description, by any words, the richest Image
in any fancy, was the whole World now in its primitive state? What a Paradise
was the Humane Soul, when it comprehended, when it enjoyed this Paradise with
its full and distinct Glories within it self? Now the Soul within it self saw
within it self the eternal Power and Godhead, with all their invisible Glories
in an Angelical Light and Form, together with all the Angels in every thing
that was made.

4. Proposition. The Soul, sees within her self, God in his own distinct and
Divine Form shining forth through the Intellectual, Angelical Image, in the
universal Composure, in the full Harmony of all created Forms, and through the
particlar Angel, or Intellectual Image in every diverse Form. Those are the
words of the Apostle, By the things that are made, are seen, (being understood)
the invisible things of God, his eternal Power and Godhead. This is brought in
as an Argument, to illustrate and confirm the foregoing assertion; That which
may be known of God is manifest in them.

Those two words have an aspect of deep Wisdom, of a lively sweetness upon
each other, (...). Things not seen, or incapable of being seen, are seen. The
word (seen) imports a twofold sense,

1. A distinct discerning sight.

2. The sight of an Object, through a diverse intervening form. God is seen
through the form of the Creature in his own Form, infinitely distinct from it,
and transcendent to it.

In that Character of the Fall, [They glorisied him not as God.] It is clearly
employed, that man in the pure state of nature glorified him as God, which could
^ot be, if he saw not his Glory, as the Glory of God, in its distinction from
all the Creatures, from all Similitudes, and Representations in his supreme
Unity and Infiniteness. This is that which is clearly presented to us in those
full expressions, His eternal Power and Godhead. Power, says Proclus, is an
Unity, which like a spring comprehends in it self variety of Forms, sends
them forth from it self, appears in them, without, as it pleases. An eternal
Power, which is not lessened by any Acts or exertions of its self, is an
infinite Power, never to be exhausted, ever fresh, full, and flourishing. This
is an absolute, unlimited Unity, spreading it self within it self, after a
Divine manner, distinctly, without any Division or Diversity, into the glorious
and majestic amplitude of an unbounded, equally-beautiful,
ravishingly-harmonious-variety. This is the eternity, as it is the infiniteness
of the Divine Nature. These two, Eternity and Infiniteness, being the measures
of the Essence, and the Existence or Duration of the Godhead; are both one in
this Unity, inasmuch as the Essence, and the Existence, or Duration, are here
the same. This Unity, in which both these meet, is also the Godhead it self,
which describes it self to us by no Character like to that; The Lord thy God
is one God. These expressions [His eternal Power and Godhead. Eternity, Power,
(in its absoluteness and infiniteness) the Godhead] are exegetical explications
of each other. All these are names of one thing, the supreme and sovereign
Unity. God in the High and Holy Place of his own proper Form, set infinitely
above the Head and Eye of every Creature, in its most exalted Glories.

Object. How is the Soul capable of the sight of God, or any Intellectual Image
of transmitting his Divine Form. All Sense, Understanding, Commerce is founded
in suitableness and similitude. The ground of this, is an Unity, a meeting in
some one thing. God is infinite, every Creature is finite. Between infinite and
finite there can be no proportion?

This Objection lies so plain before every common Eye, that it is not easy to
miss it. I wish the Answer were as near, or capable of being made as clear, to
the Understanding of every Reader. I hope, and shall use my best skill, that
every Understanding may see some light breaking through this obscurity, which
may be at once sweet, and in some degree satisfactory.

Answ. 1. I shall first give a general Answer, which I shall afterward make
more plain in two particular Answers.

We are taught by our Masters in Divinity, That God is the subject, of no
Relation to the Creature: For then he were compounded, and not a simple, unmixt
Unity; yet does he terminate in himself Relations to the Creature. Upon the
same ground it is unsafe and unsound to say, That God is like to man. It is
very sound, and very safe to say, That man was made in the Image and Similitude
of God. A finite Creature may bear a similitude, and so a proportion to the
infinite God, although there be no mutual proportion or likeness between them.

God in himself converseth with nothing without himself. All things to him are
himself, a pure, undivided Unity. God in the Creature clothes himself, as the
Scriptures and the Jewish Rabbis speak, with Garments of Light and Darkness,
Similitude and Dissimilitude, Unity and Contrariety. He turns the Heavens and
the Earth as the Clay to the Sea. He first himself puts on every form, so he
forms every Creature, as the reflection, or shadow of himself, upon himself.

The sight of the eternal Power and Godhead in the Soul, is the work of that
eternal Power and Godhead. God in the Creature bears a proportion to himself,
and has an Unity with himself, as he is above the Creature. By the same
absolute Unity and Infiniteness, by which he is present with each single dust
in the fullness of his undivided Glories and Godhead, does he also appear in the
Soul. His presence is suitable, and suitably virtual to each degree of Being,
whither it be essential, in mere Being, Vital, Intellectual, or
Superintellectual, more then Intellectual. All things according to their
several Natures, have their Being, their Life, their Motions, or Operations in
him, as their proper Element, their Root, their Exemplar Form, their
terminating Object and End. As he is the term from which all their motions
flow: So is he both the medium or way, and the term, the bound, to which they
tend, in which they end. By him, their radical principle, in the power and
virtue of which Act the exemplar form of their Essence and Actions are they
suited, and proportioned to him, as the Object, End, Fruit, and Perfection of
their Operations. God in every Form is like Adam in Paradise, the Father, the
Brother, and the Bridegroom. Each Creature is like Eve, the Daughter, Sister,
and Bride, from her Bridegroom. This Bride flows, to him she turns in all her
motions, in him alone she terminates, in her production, progress, end; all
along this Bridegroom and Bride are joined by an inseparable Marriage-Union,
their Faces ever turned to each other.

As God by his absolute Unity and Infiniteness comprehends all forms of things
within himself, in a most simple and undivided Unity. So by the same
transcendent Unity and Infiniteness, does he in this undivided Unity accompany
all forms of things in their procession from himself, turning them to himself,
essentially, vitally, intellectually, or super-intellectually, in a manner more
then Intellectual.

This Unity fills all, is all in all, the Eye, the Light, the Glass, the
Object, or Image, the Union, the Light. This Unity is the power of sight in the
eye, of shining, of uniting the Eye and the Object in the light, of receiving
and transmitting Images in the Glass, of being and appearing in the Object. The
Union of all these, and the Act, in the Act of vision or sight. This Unity is
the first principle of seeing, and the last, the terminating bound of sight.

This is the general Answer. Now follow the two particular Answers, which are
more distinct applications and explanations of this general one.

Answ. 2. The Humane Soul, according to Philosophers, they say, rouleth it self
into a fourfold Orb, or Globe; The Sensitive, Rational, Intellectual, or
Angelical, its Divine Unity.

1. The first, the lowest Orb of the Soul, is the Sensitive. The Soul in this
part is all set and adorned with the sensitive and shadowy forms of things, as
a Meadow with the Trees, and Flowers by a Riverside, are seen, by their shadowy
Figures, playing in the water. So this visible World, with all its Parts and
Ornaments in their Order, as the sh^dows of invisible and immortal Forms
inhabit this obscurest and most shady Region of the Intellectual Spirit.

2. The rational Orb is the second, a more ample and more Lucid. Yet here the
Angelical Forms and Essences of things are seen through the grosser and cloudy
medium, through the material and corporeal shades of sensitive Images. This is
as the Face of Heaven, or the Trees and Flowers of the Neighboring fields seen
from beneath the water of an adjoining River.

3. The Intellectual part of the Soul, is the Orb or Sphere of Angels. This is
the Souls Angelical part. Here the Soul's abstract, and separate from the Body,
(which is called the Divine Death of the Soul) beholds the Intellectual Forms
of things, the immortal Essences and Substances, the Angels in their own bright
and universal Glories, in their own Intellectual Air and Light, which is the
Air and Light of Paradise. As a man sees the pleasant Plants of a flourishing
Land, walking upon the Land in the midst of them. At the same time, while the
Soul thus walks in this paradisical Land, she enjoys the pleasure of seeing
the River, as a shady luster or water cast from her self, within her self, the
shadowy figures of this Paradise, with her own reflection playing in these
waters, and her self from beneath them, with the same Land of Gardens and of
Angels, answering exactly, looking to her self above them.

Give me leave to interpose one word in this place, for the sake of the more
learned Reader; This is the Intellectus Agens, or the Actual, and Active
Understanding of the Schools. The Soul in its Intellectual part above the
River. This is the Passive Understanding. The Soul in its Intellectual part
beneath the River. As that above, like the living Face before the Glass,
appears at the brink of the waters, upon the shore, with all its Angelical
Glories round about it, in their Paradisical Region, which lies within the Soul
it self. So the Soul beneath appears, looking up from its pearly Cave, at the
bottom of the River, like the God of the River, answering and meeting it self
above.

4. The last, and Divine Orb, the highest Point, and amplest Circuit of the
Soul, is its Unity. In this it has the most immediate resemblance to, and
Conjunction with the supreme Unity, the Divine Nature.

The Soul according to this its Divinest part, its Unity in birth, in
similitude, in place, if I may so speak, in order of approximation is nearest,
most immediately joined to the Divine Essence in the absoluteness, the
incomprehensibleness of its most secret, most sacred Unity.

Here the Soul, as by a Divine Contract or Touch, takes hold of God, takes in
the sense of him, in his Divine Form, after a Divine manner, far transcending
all Sense, Understanding, or Expression.

Here the Soul, in its Divine Unity, sees, feels, enjoys God in his Unity,
which is his proper Essence, in which he is most himself transcending all
similitudes, all commerce, all bounds, by a Divine sympathy, the sweetness, the
reality, the divinity of which no Humane, no Angelical Understanding can form
to it self any Image of, or raise it self to any sense of.

This Unity of the Soul is the most immediate reflection of the Divine Unity
without it self, and so at once a Divine Looking-Glass, in which it most
immediately contemplates it self, and a Divine Eye, which it feasts with it
self, setting it self fully in it.

All this while, this still is to be understood that there is a threefold
Immediateness, 1. Of Persons. 2. Of Power or Virtue. 3. Of Form or Appearance.
St. Paul teaches us, That the invisible things of God are seen, being
understood by the things that are made.

God and the Soul in their Unities, which are their Essences, at their utmost
height, in their highest Glories, meet immediately in a sight of each other,
above all sight or understanding. This immediateness in the Perfection of
Nature, is an immediateness, not of virtue only and power, but of person; yet
is it mediate in respect to the Form or Appearance. These Unities which
penetrate and fill all in all their several Orbs, with their immediate virtue,
person, and essential presence, see not each other in the Air, and light of
their own naked, eternal Beauties; But through that Garment of Light, the
Intellectual, Angelical Image, which they put on, as they come forth into this
Creation.

Some imperfect figure of this you have in two Swimmers, seeing and embracing
each other beneath the waters; or in the Beams of the Sun, passing through a
colored Glass, and so uniting it self to the Eye: Or in a Royal Bridegroom,
which, in the habit of a Shepherd, presents and marries himself to the
beloved Maid in the midst of the Woods.

Answ. 3. The Soul acts, as it is, not in it self, nor by it self, nor
according to it self; the Idea, the first eternal Pattern and Principle of the
Soul in God, is the Root, all the force, the only measure of the Soul in its
Being, and in its Operations.

St. Paul says, I live not, but Christ lives in me; This was spoken of the
New Creature, and so has its peculiar sense. It is as true proportionably of
every Creature, especially of the Soul in primitive and pure nature. I have
said before, that Christ is the Idea of Ideas, and so the proper Idea of the
Humane Soul or Person. Upon this ground, He affirms of himself, I am the
Truth and the Life.

The Idea is the truth of each thing. Nothing is that, which it is, but in its
Idea, by its Idea penetrating and filling it in every the least part. The
Conformity to the Idea, is in the Schools, defined to be the first, the most
proper truth of each thing. This Conformity is imperfect, where there is any
Diversity. A perfect Unity alone makes a perfect Conformity.

The Idea is the only Unity of each Person, Essence, or Form. The Soul is one
in all its parts, is one with it self, in all the parts of its duration, only
by the Unity of its Idea. The Soul (as every Creature) is a perpetual
Emanation, flowing fresh every moment from God, as a Beam from the Sun, as the
stream of waters from its Fountain. If it subsisted one moment in it self, it
might subsist eternally so, and have a Godhead in it self, by having in it self
the first Principle and Fountain of Being. The Soul like a Beam, or Stream,
flows forth from its Spring, in Diversity of parts. If it were a pure Unity, it
had a Divinity in its own Nature.

The Soul then, as every Creature, is one in it self, one with it self, the
same in each part of its Being and Duration, in all the parts of Life, in
Death, in the Resurrection, only by the Unity of its Idea, which alone is
absolutely indivisible, unchangeable.

Accordingly the Soul lives and moves in its Sensitive, Rational, Angelical,
and Divine Life, by the force of its Idea, containing it in it self, and
communicating it self to it.

The Idea, contains the Soul, communicates it self to the Soul, not mediately
or partially. The Idea is the Truth, the Unity of the Soul; therefore are they
most intimate, most immediate, most intimately, most immediately united to each
other. The Idea is a simple Unity, indivisible, unchangeable, incapable of
being communicated in part.

The Idea is not received, or participated by any thing, as without it self,
for then it were both divisible and changeable.

The Idea then communicates it self to the Soul, immediately in its entire
Unity, as by a Divine, unexpressible Generation or Propagation within it self.

Thus the Soul subsisteth and operateth in its Idea, by the force, and
according to the measure of its Idea in it self. This is that seed of
infiniteness in the Soul, and in all its Operations, from which they receive
touches, glimpses of Infiniteness, Eternity; of infinite eternal Joys and
Glories, which are altogether invisible to every Eye, incapable of being
represented by any Image sensible or Intellectual. This is that seed of
Infiniteness and Eternity, which by an irresistible instinct inclines the Soul
so evidently, so forceably in all its Desires, in all its Operations to
immortality, and to an unbounded good, nor suffers it to rest in any the
softest or dearest Bosom on this side these. This is that Seed, the Idea of the
Soul in its entire Unity, which is in it self Infiniteness, Eternity, the
purest unmixt good, every where full of it self, every way uncompounded,
undivided, and so necessarily unconfined.

This Idea, as it is the root, the force, the measure of the Soul, so is it
also its ripe fruit; When gathering up all the parts of the Soul into its
Divine Part, unto its highest Point, its Unity, it at once heightneth that to
the most perfect Image of it self, and brings forth it self into it, fills
it with it self, takes it into its own embraces, in its purest Form, by a most
perfect Union, as an heavenly Marriage, eternally established in its own
unconfined Unity.

But I will now conclude this Point. Thus the Soul, by the force of its Idea,
which has an infiniteness in it, is capable of taking in that which transcends
all Capacities, of seeing that which is invisible to every eye of Men or
Angels, the eternal Power and Godhead.

Behold! What a Divine spectacle of Beauty and Delight in Paradise, in the
primitive state of things? What an Universal Paradise Nature is? the Soul is?
as it is in it self, the whole nature of things, from the head of Nature,
crowned with Intellectual, Angelical Light in the invisible World, to its feet
upon the ground of the lowest shades in corporeity and matter. Jesus, the
first, the full, the essential Image of the Godhead, and so the Idea of Ideas;
the Soul, the first, the fairest Reflection, and the dearest Offspring of this
Jesus, and so the Divine Image of Images. These two, as Bridegroom and Bride,
by an Union transcending all Unions, Natural or Moral, among Angels or Men; Yet
being of all most natural, the Fountain of Nature, lie inseparably shining and
smiling in the embraces of each other; They perpetually seek and find, see and
enjoy themselves in the Face and Bosom of each other; They perpetually seek and
find, see and enjoy each other within themselves, in their own Face and Bosom:
They spring up together in all forms of things, in an Angelical Image within
themselves. The Angelical Image is as their Chariot, in which they ride forth
together into all forms of things within themselves. They present themselves
unitedly in the whole nature of things, in each distinct form of Nature, with
continual changes, clothing all, themselves in all, with the Angelical Image,
in a new Light and Glory; That their Loves and Beauties may be ever fresh and
full, ever a fresh and full entertainment to each other in new and varied
shapes of Delight.

Judicious Reader, be pleased to Contemplate awhile the Unity and Harmony of
the Soul in this its pure, its primitive state. See how the Idea of the Soul,
and the Soul; See how all the Orbs, all the parts of the Soul, are knit
together into a Divine Harmony, a Divine Unity, by which it becomes an
Universal Beauty, an Universal Music. See how the Idea and the Soul, the
superior parts of the Soul answer one another, lie infolded each in other, the
inferior in the superior, as the Copy in the Original, the Plant in the Spirit
of the Plant, in its seminal power and form; The superior in the inferior, as
the Original in the Copy, as the Spirit of a Flower, its seminal power and form
in the Flower, where it appears, as a Flower from beneath the water of a
pleasant stream.

Judicious Reader, can a place be found or imagined here for any Arbitrary
Liberty, for any extravagant Liberty, for any Liberty, besides that only true,
only desirable, only agreeable Liberty, the Liberty of the Harmony and Unity?
Is there any Liberty besides this, the Liberty of the part, in the Harmony of
the whole, keeping its proper place, order, course in the whole, with all most
pl^asing, most charming agreeableness to it self, to the whole, to every part;
and the Liberty of the whole in the part, freely, fully, pos^essed, enjoyed in
each part, by the virtue of the Unity in the Harmony?

Object. But you will say if there were not in the primitive state of the Soul
another Liberty, a Liberty of Discord, a Liberty of breaking the Unity and the
Harmony. How was the Harmony ever changed into Enmity? How fell the Soul from
the Heaven of this Harmony, from the heavenly Throne of this Divine Unity, in
which it reigned over all, through all, with such a full Joy and Glory to it
self to all?

Answ. I shall attempt the removal of this Difficulty, in my Discourse upon the
Soul in her second state. I hope there to represent the Fall springing from the
Divine Harmony and Unity in the Essence of the Soul, contained in it, and a
part of it.

2. The second state, into which the Soul passes, is the Fall. This is the
second Scene, which opens it self in the Soul, a Scene of Trouble and Tumult,
of Darkness and Storms, of Witch-crafts, Devils, Death, and Wrath; of
Privations and Contrarieties, which make the Variety more full, which heighten,
set off, enlarge the Harmony and the Unity. In this Scene all this World rises
up, and appears.

This the Holy Spirit, with Divine skill, clearly and fully opens to us, in
this Scripture, which is the ground of this part of my Discourse, Romans 1. 21.
Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, etc.

I will only touch the Heads of things, lightly passing over them. I shall
comprise that which I have to say of the Fall in these four Propositions,

1. Proposition. The first change at the Fall of Man, was in his Understanding.
All the expressions in this, and the two following verses, plainly and alone
describe the Disorders in the Understanding, as we shall clearly see.

The first Instance in the Fall, is the not glorifying God as God. T^lly
affirms, Glory to be, as it were, the Echo of Virtue. Glory is the Image of
some excellent Object, shining forth from it, reflecting upon it, and upon all
things round about it. Thus Christ is the Glory of God, a Saint is the Glory of
Christ. Man glorifieth God as God, when the true and proper Image of God, in
the Excellencies and Perfections of the Divine Nature, shines in his
Understanding, from thence reflecteth and multiplieth it self in its be^ms, in
its continual shinings upon God himself, upon all Understandings, all Spirits
round about it. Contraries are seated in the same subject. The glorifying of
God, is the Act of the Understanding. Accordingly the not glorifying of God, is
a defect in the Understanding, the want of the Divine Image, and its
reflections there.

The holy Apostle, in the following words, sets forth the Fall, by fuller
expressions of that Defect, which is opposite to the glorifying of God; But
they became vain in their imaginations, (...), properly reasonings, their
foolish heart was darkened.

Every word here points to the Understanding, as the seat of the first, the
principal, the leading change in the Fall of Man.

They became vain in their reasonings. Vanity is an emptiness. It is the same
with falsehood, in the Language of the Scripture, an empty, false show, without
the substance, the truth. Reason is the Divine Image, which is the only Light
of all Truth springing and shining in the Understanding, or the Understanding
it self.

The reasonings of man in his primitive state, were the several Parts, the
several Truths in this Image, calling to, answering one another by virtue of
the Sympathy and Unity, comparing themselves in that Unity with each other.
This Image in the Fall vanishes into a counterfeit Image, breaking it self
into innumerable false Images full of disorder, confusion, and contradictions,
ever fighting with each other.

The foolish heart in the Text, as the Greek word imports, is the Heart without
Understanding, deprived of the Divine Image, which is the Light. Upon this
immediately follows Darkness, which is the privation or absence of Light. Thus
their foolish hearts were darkened.

The Concomitant and formal effect of this Darkness, or rather the proper Form
of this Darkness, is further amplified by a twofold Illustration, if we may
attribute forms or effects to privations.

When they professed themselves to be wise, they became Fools, verse. 22. How
manifestly is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil here figured with man
eating of it. The Divine Image withdrawn, the false Image, composed of
darkness, is embraced in the Soul, as the true Light, the true Image, the true
Wisdom, in which Man now seems to himself, to have the power and the
perfection of his own Being in himself. Now the false show of a counterfeit
Liberty in the Will, springs up through this Darkness. Thus is the Wisdom of
Man become Foolishness, verse 22. They turned the Glory of the Incorruptible
God into the similitude of the Image of a corruptible Man, of Birds, etc. verse
25. They turned the truth of God into a lie. Man was made a total, but a
shadowy Image of God. The rest of the Creatures were as several parts of this
Image, partial Representations of that Glory, each a differing Figure from the
other, in which something of the Glory was seen, which appeared not in the
other. The Divine presence in its own proper and eternal Image, stood in this
shadowy Image, filled it, shined through it, was the Light and Truth of it; As
a Sunbeam penetrates, fills, enlightens, appears through a shady colored
Glass, so was the Divine Form in the Form of Man. The Truth in its shadow.

When the Divine presence in its own Divine Form withdrew it self into it self,
the ensuing Darkness fills the shadowy Image. As he, that looks through the
clear glass in a Window, sees the face of Heaven. When he, who casts his eye
upon a Looking-Glass, beholds only his own face, the shadow on the backside of
the Glass, terminating the beams and the sight upon the Glass. So the Darkness,
in the Fall, terminates the eye of the Soul upon the shadowy Image, the shadowy
Figures of the Divine Glory, as the true Glory, the true God.

Yet these Forms, which now appeared, were not the true shadows, the true
Figures of the Divine Glory, nor the true Forms of Man, or of any Creature.
These disappeared, together with the Divine presence, and the Glory. The
darkness, now in the place of these, formed it self into false, deformed,
monstrous Images in man, in every Creature, which had indeed some resemblance
of the true and primitive Images, which were in Paradise. As a Monkey has the
similitude of man, but in proportion, height, beauty, life, greatness, power,
majesty, differed from them, as a lie from the truth. The expressions of the
Holy Ghost seem skilfully chosen, to declare this change to us, verse 23. He
says, They turned the Glory of God, not into the Image, but the similitude of
the Image of Man; verse 25. They turned the truth, not into the Image or
shadow, but into a lie.

These false Images of the Night, and the blackness of Darkness, were inhabited
and acted by so many Devils, so many dark Spirits, the first Springs and Seats
of this Darkness. As an Angel filled each Form in Paradise, figuring it self
upon it, so were all forms in the Fall filled ahd figured by Devils. Thus they
became Idols, of which St. Paul says, They that worship Idols, worship Devils.
Angels in Paradise were pure and sweet Lights springing freshly forth from the
Divine Glory, rendering every Creature pure and transparent, with a Light of
Glory shining in it, as clear Crystal, all over replenished, enriched, and
heightened with the Sunbeams. This Light every where transmitted the eye, and
the glory through each Creature, to each other, married them one to another, in
each Creature. This was a Paradise indeed of Divine Plants, full of Divine
Beauties, Fragrances, Virtues, and Fruits.

The Devils, as Clouds of Night and Darkness, resting on each Creature, suffer
not the Light from above, nor the sight from below, to pass through them. They
at once exclude the brightness of the Divine Glory, and draw the eye to
themselves in each Form, to rest in themselves. This is the Head, the
Wellspring, the Mystery of all Idolatry, whether it be of the grosser or finer
sort.

But I pass now from the first, to the second Proposition.

2. Proposition. The immediate cause of the first change made in the
Understanding at the Fall, was the Divine Glory withdrawing or withholding it
self. The immediate, the proper cause of the deformity and disorder in the
change, was the defectibility, the nothingness of the Creature, of it self,
sinking down to nothing, as the Glory removes it self from it, or the Variety
of the Divine fullness, the Order in the Divine Wisdom, the Harmony of the
Divine Beauties, by the power of which the Unity descending to its lowest
state, to a shadow of it self in Paradise, and having there acted all the parts
proper to that shadowy scene or state, having carried it to the utmost, now
passes from that shadowy Unity into a new Scene, or state properly arising out
of the darkness of the shadow, and the lowest degree of Unity, which is that of
Contrariety. As the Unity is the scene of Light, Life, Love, Harmony, Beauty,
Joy, all Good; So is this of Darkness, Enmit, Death, Deformity, Disorder, all
Evil.

But I touch this transiently here, and return.

The Perfection of the Understanding is Light or Truth. The Corruption of the
Understanding is darkness or falsehood. That which makes manifest, is Light,
says St. Paul. Every Image then, so far as it is an Image, is Light. Each
Image is a composure of Beams, sent forth from every part of the Object,
represented by the Image. The first Light, is the first Image, the Image of
God, the brightness of the Glory of God. As colors, which are shaded Lights,
are constituted by this Light, and actuated in their appearance to the eye; so
is every other Light, Light only by, and in this Light, as a shadow of it.

Darknese is the absence or privation of Light. Privations have no proper, but
accidental causes only. Thus the Divine Glory, retiring from the Understanding,
or ceasing to shine in it, is by accident the cause of the Darkness there; As
the setting or departing of the Sun is the cause of Night, which is not a
blemish to the Sun, but its Glory; that in its presence are all the Beauties
and Joys of Light, in its abscence all the Disagreeablenesses and Melancholies
of night and darkness.

But, if at the ebbing of the Tide, when the Sea sucks into it self again the
streams of water; which at the Flood it powered forth from it self in the River
Tagus, or Pactolus, a beautiful Form of golden sand present it self to our
eyes, in other Rivers a black ill-sented Mud offend our senses. The emptiness
of the Chanel, the absence from the Waters is indeed from the Sea; But the
pleasing or displeasing Forms appearing in the absence of the waters, are from
the Rivers themselves. In like manner, all Defects have deficient Causes. The
change in the Fall, is from the Divine Glory drawing into it self that stream
and tide of Beauties, which it powered forth upon the understanding of man. The
Darkness, Deformity, Disorder in this change, proceeds from the nature of the
Creature, from its natural tendency to that nothingness, which alone is its
own, and its native Element, as it is in it self. This nothingness has the
same relation to the beautiful Essences, the essential Beauties of all Forms of
things, of all Creatures, while they stand in the Divine Image, as the
Contrariety has to the Divine Unity.

A Cloud loses all its luster in a blackness and darkness; a cold of Earth
has no more any sweet light to entertain the eye, when the Sun takes his
golden beams off from them. But the Stars and Diamonds sparkle and shine in the
absence of the Sun, in the depth of night. The reason of the difference, is the
opacity or shadiness in the nature of the Cloud and clod of Earth, the native
light in the Diamond and the Stars. Thus the Creature being nothing in it self,
tends to nothing, as the eternal Sun goes down upon it. This tendency to
nothing is the proper, the formal cause of all Deformities and Disorders, as
the springing of the Light in the Morning is of all those lovely colors, which
then adorn the Sky.

But thus much for this second Proposition.

3. Proposition. The change in the Will and Affections follows the change in
the Understanding, as its immediate and proper Cause. This lies plain in the
Text, verse 22. They turned the Glory of God to the similitude of a man, etc.
verse 24. Wherefore also God gave them up to their hearts lusts, to all
uncleanness, etc. verse 25. Which turned the truth of God unto a lie: verse 26.
For this cause God gave them up to vile affections. But you have this most
fully asserted and amplified, verse 28, 29, 30, 31. As they liked not to retain
God in their knowledge, God also gave them up to a Reprobate mind, to do things
not convenient; being filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness.
So he goes on enumerating in the three following verses, all the Evils of Sin
in the Will of Man from thence breaking forth in his life.

As Nature is distinguished in Natura, Naturans, and Naturata; that is, Nature
in the Fountain, God, the Divine Nature; Nature in the stream, the Copy to that
Original: So the Scripture attributes that to God, which he in the natural
order of things has connected and linked, as in a Chain, for its proper cause.
Thus God is said to give up men to all disorders in their Will, for the
darkness in their Minds.

The phrase has also this depth of sense in it, That God, as the first cause,
is every where in the whole Chain of Causes most intimately present, and
immediately operative in every effect. He is the Spirit, the Beauty of the
Order in the whole. He is the band in every step or joint of the whole Order,
tying each Link to the other, each Effect to its Cause, each Cause to its
effect. He is the sole force in every Cause, the sole Cause of every Effect in
particular.

Thus God gave them up to vile affections, who had changed the truth unto a
lie. All Imagery is the furniture of the Mind. All Images are formed there. The
motions of the Will are raised and governed by the Images in the Understanding,
as their formal Cause, from whose impressions they flow as their final Cause,
to which they tend, in which they end.

The Understanding is a Power in the Soul of generating Images of good within
it self, which Images are the only Truth, the only Beauty of it. The Will is
the Spring and Seat of a mutual Love-Union and Love-Communion, which the Soul
has with it self in these Images, infusing, and taking in a mutual Sweetness,
Complacency, and Joy. They the Images in the mind are the Objective Cause of
all the motions of the Will, raising and laying them, as the Winds do the
Waters.

So God gave them over to vile Affections. This manner of speaking has a clear
signification of that principal mystery in Divinity, so sweet, so sure, so
deep. All good is from the presence of God, the shine, the smiles of his
unvailed Face, the Reflections of him, as he appears in his own Likeness, in
his proper Form. This makes all Light, Beauty, Joy. All Evil is from the
absence of God, from his Back-parts, from the Clouds and Disguise upon his
Person, without the Vail.

I cannot well proceed any further, until I have cleared my way, by removing an
Objection or two, which may be made against the Interpretations, which I have
made of these Scriptures, and the Propositions drawn from them.

Object. 1. The Apostle seems to make this the ground of the inexcusableness
of men in their sins, that they knew God, yet sinned in the Face of that Light.
Upon this ground sin seems to arise first in the Will, rather then in the
Understanding.

This Objection is confirmed by the Apostles attributing this knowledge of God
to man in his fallen Estate. To the Heathen, as he seems clearly to do.

Answ. 1. If man has this knowledge of God in his fallen state, yet was that
Perfection, in which we have described it only in Paradise.

Answ. 2. The Holy Spirit seems expressly to place the Knowledge of God
antecedent to the first Sin; the not glorifying him as God, for this was either
the same, or Concomitant with, or resulting from the vanity of the reasonings
in man, the want of Understanding, the darkning of his Heart.

Answ. 3. There is indeed a constant Glory from the Face of God shining in man
through all changes and states. A Light, which can never be extinguished by any
storms. But this Light of Divine Glory shines in the midst of the Darkness,
which arose upon it, within which it withdrew it self in the first moment of
the Fall, and has ever since dwelt. This Darkness comprehends not the Light,
receives it not, rejects it, as a Reprobate, a false Light, so casts it down
from the Throne in the dominion of the Soul, and reigns it self in the place
of it.

This truth is with Divine Authority affirmed, with a Divine clearness and
elegancy illustrated, in those words, As they liked not to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to a Reprobate mind, to do things not convenient.
What a manifest Connection of these four things have you in this Scripture?

1. A Knowledge of God in the Mind.

2. A Rejection or Reprobation of that Knowledge.

3. A Reprobation or Corruption of the Mind, in the Rejection of this Light of
Glory.

4. All Evil generally mentioned under the Character of Inconveniency or
Uncomeliness, in the end of this verse, particularly and distinctly recited in
three following verses, flowing all from this Reprobate or Corrupt Mind.

But we shall more evidently, more delightfully behold this mystery of the
Fall, this Mixture, this War of Darkness, with the Divine Light, its triumph
over it; the presence of the Divine Light, in the midst of this Darkness,
maintaining its Glory unshaken, unstained in a constant opposition to the
darkness in the mind of fallen man, if we observe and unfold the elegancy of the
Holy Ghost in these words.

Those words, [They liked not to retain.] A Reprobate Mind,] are in Greek the
same in their Root and Essence. They manifestly allude to each other with a
great power and pleasantness of sense.

The Original word primarily and properly signifies the trying the truth of
any thing, as the Gold is tried by the Touchstone, or by the Fire.

God, in the presence of his Glory, resides in every Creature, beneath the form
of that Creature, as a Vail wrought with a Figure of himself. Thus he
constantly resides in each Creature, as the Root, and Being of its Being; In
the pure nature of man, he shines through the Vail of the Angelical or
Intellectual Image, as a transparent Vail of finest Lawn, or sweetest Light,
sprung from his own Face.

In the Fall, God drawing in the Beams of his Glory, by the mysterious
Operations of the Divine Wisdom, in the place of this pure and pleasant Light,
thick Darkness fills the Angelical Image of God in man.

The Divine Presence and Glory stands in this Image, presenting the Light of
its unchangeable Beauties to the eye of the Soul, in the midst of this darkness.

The Understanding now taking in the Divine Glory through this dark medium,
through the darkness, takes in a dark and falfe Image of it. It tries and
touches the Glory in this false Image upon it self, now darkened and depraved.
It receives the Image as a true Image, but rejects the Glory, rejects God, as
reprobate Gold, as a false counterfeit Divinity and Glory.

God, in like manner, by the presence of his Glory, touches and tries the
Understanding, rejects that, as a Reprobate Mind. This Reprobate Mind he
leaves to it self, and man to this Reprobate Mind; from this source issues
forth all the Evils of Sin and of Sufferings.

Object. 2. How in this order of things is man rendered inexcusable, which seems
to be a principal Care and Work of the Holy Spirit in this Scripture?

Answ. An excuse is the removal of just blame, by the removal of the cause. As
Praise and Glory are the Echo or Reflection of Virtue, of some good; so Blame
and Shame are the Echo, the Reflection of some Fault or Evil.

The fault in man is the deficiency, which arises from the defectibility or
nothingness inseparable from the nature of the Creature in its shadowy state,
in the purity of its first Creation.

This defectibility and deficiency, this nothingness and tendency to nothing in
the Creature, is evidently discovered, past all denial or excuse. For when God
has clothed the Creature with the Glory of his own Image, in all Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Blessedness. The Creature has no power in it self to retain
or maintain this Glory, or the least glimpse, the least stricture of Light from
it one moment. In the same moment that God withholds his Beams and Influences,
the Soul sinks into the depth of darkness, in which darkness it springs up the
same moment into all the evils of Sin, Deformity, Death, Wrath, Torment. Thus
man in his best state is Vanity, a shadow, which has nothing of its own, but
nothingness, a tendency to nothing. Thus being in Honor, he continues not,
but sinketh into his own nothingness, when once he is left to himself.

This nothingness, in the nature of the Creature, is not to be understood a
mere simple nothing; for this has no existence, no expression, no attribute,
no effect, nothing can be said or thought of it.

This nothingness, of which we speak, or Not-Being, is a contrariety to Being;
so to all the Beauty, the Blessedness of Being. This is the Contrariety it
self, which is a part of the Variety of things in the Unity of the whole. This
taken apart in it self, is the breach of the Unity and the Harmony, the first
and blackest ground of all Discord, Division, Darkness, Enmity, Death, of all
the evils of sin and sufferings.

Object. 3. How is God inexcusable, who frames a Creature with this
defectibility, this Contrariety, this Necessity of all Evil in its nature, then
leaves it to it self to fall inevetiably into all Sin; then condemns it, and
casts it into all manner of Torments, into all the Evils of suffering for Sin?

Answ. Sufferings are the immediate, inseparable Companions of Sin. The
Contrariety, when once it has broken the Harmony of the shadowy Image of God
in the Paradise of pure Nature, by the withdrawing of the Divine Unity, which
by its presence tuned it to, and bound it up in a Divine Harmony, now breaks
forth, overruns all with all manner of Evils of Sin, of Shame, of Sufferings of
all kinds.

But that, which seems to me alone, to justify God, is the design in the
whole. My desire is here, with all humility and submission, to conceive and
express so high mysteries, the way, and the Glory of God in so great and Divine
deeps.

The design, which with all humility I conceive not to clear God, but to
represent him through all his way most glorious in the Beauties of Holiness, in
the most spotless, the exactest Justice, in the richest luster, the highest
sweetness, the most exalted Grace of all Goodness and Love, has several steps
or parts.

1. The first step is, the Discovery of man, and the Creature in its primitive
nature, in all its good and glories to be shadowy, an earthly and shadowy
Image, in an earthly, a shadowy Paradise.

2. The second step is, the Declaration of God to be the only fountain and
fullness of all good, in whose Face and Presence alone are the Beauties and
Pleasantnesses of all good, whose absence makes the Night of all trouble and
evil.

3. The opening of new, fuller, higher Glories in God, then did shine forth in
the first Creation, in the most exalted Natures of all the Creatures, of Men or
Angels.

These new Glories of the Godhead open themselves in the last step, the full,
harmonious, triumphant close of the whole design, after this manner.

1. The height of the Contrariety between the good in God, and the evil of
Sin, between the purity, the beauty of Holiness in the Divine Nature, the
filth, the deformity of sin, display the Beauties in the Face of God with a new
heightning, a new luster, infinitely more sweet and ravishing.

2. The Power of the Divine Wrath brings forth a new Scene, a new World, full
of new Forms of things; New Wonders in Heaven, and eternity, in the Divine
Nature, the Divine Wisdom and Work.

3. What is the Glory in the force and riches of the Divine Unity, spreading it
self into so vast a Variety? unto so remote a distance from it self, to such
Contrarieties, to such Extremities, comprehending them all in it self,
gathering them up, tuning them all, and binding them up into a Divine, most
agreeable, eternal Harmony of all most ravishing, most pure, most perfect
Beauties and Sweetnesses in it self; discovering them all to be most melodious,
musical parts of the Divine Variety and Harmony, eternal Varieties of Beauty
and Sweetness in the Divine Unity?

4. Lastly, The shadowy happiness of the Creature is changed into a substantial
one. There is wrought out by these changes a far more exceedingly exceeding
weight of Glory in Man, a Glory infinitely transcending that of the first
Paradise. Now open themselves all these newer, fuller, higher Glories of the
Godhead to man in man: Now is man formed to a Divine Image, infinitely newer,
fuller, higher, in the most immediate similitude and fruition of these highest
Glories. Now is man brought from the shadowy Union with God, in the shadow of
the Angelical Image, through the dissolution of that Union and Image, to the
most intimate, immediate, inseparable Union, the most perfect Union with God,
in the utmost Perfection of all his Excellencies, wholly unvailed, in the
purest Essence of all his Glories, in the eternal Spirit, the Spirit of all the
Divine Beauties, Loves, and Joys; in the most heightened Unity, in the most
ample and unconfined Variety of the Divine Nature; in the highest and sweetest
Union of both these.

Now man sees, enjoys God, as he is, in his own Likeness, perfectly without,
transcendently above all Vails, all Clouds, all Shadows, all Mixtures, or
Mutability. Now is man, as he is in the same Likeness together with him;
without, above all Vails, Clouds, Shadows, Mixture, or Mutability* Now God and
Man awakened together, as out of a sleep, and the dreams in the sleep, into the
same Righteousness, are satisfied with the same likeness in each other,
reflected from man as the Son, the Image of God, the Father of Lights, the
Original Glory.

But I now am sliding into my last Proposition, and have indeed, in a great
degree, prevented my self in it.

4. Proposition. The change in Man at the Fall, did fall from the Divine
Harmony, in the Universal Design; was comprehended in it, and part of it. I
shall add to that which I have already written above, only one Scripture, with
a short gloss upon it, for the establishing of this Proposition.

St. Paul thus discourses, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22. For the earnest expectation
of the Creature, waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. For the
Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but for him who has
subjected the same in hope. Because the Creature it self shall also be
delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Children of God. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, and travaileth
in pain together, until now.

Observe here, that Creature and Creation are both the same word in Greek.
Where you read the Creature in the 19, 20, 21. verses, you may as well read it,
the Creation, that which you read the whole Creation, verse 22. is as properly
every Creature.

There are two Questions which here naturally arise, and are absolutely waved
by me, as having no necessary Connection with my present purpose.

Quest. 1. The first Question is this, In what sense the Creature or Creation
is understood by the holy Apostle. Is the whole Creation one entire, living,
sensible Image of the Divine Nature, in which every Creature, as a part of this
Divine Image, partakes of the same life, according to the Doctrine of
Campanella? Shall we say with Plato, Every thing that is, is an Act of Life,
and so nothing of Being without life?

Or may it seem agreeable to the Scriptures, that all the Creatures stood
together at first, before the breach, made by the Fall, in the Unity of the
Spirit, in Christ, the Head of the Creation; without whom, or apart from whom,
nothing was made that was made, as St. John teaches us? Did every Creature
stand now in Union, with its proper Angel, through its Angel with its proper
Idea in Christ, the Divine Mind, and the Universal Idea? Was every Creature
thus clothed with the Angelical Image, partaker of the Angelical Life? Did it
through these receive the Divine Image, the Divine Life of its own Idea? That
the whole Creation might seem a Contexture of Angels, filled with Ideal Lights,
all meeting together in one chief Angel, and one Universal Idea, which is the
Lord Jesus? Had every Creature thus a sight and sense of the Divine Design in
the Fall? was it thus capable of a willingness and an unwillingness in its
submission to it, as it considered that particular state, or the general design
with the Divine end of all; As it considered it self in this dark part, to be
acted by it, or the eternal Spirit in its universa^ ^ontrivance, and the Mark,
the height of Glory, to which it directed all? Do the Creatures still, though
bound in Chains of Darkness, retain so much of this Angelical Ideal Light, and
Life, as to hope, to groan for a return from their Captivity, into these
Angelical, Ideal Forms, and so into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
whom St. James says, to be the First Fruits of the Creation?

Whether this be so, or all these terms of Will, of Hope, of Groans, be by a
figure attributed to Subjects without life or sense; or some other sense be
righter than either of these, I consider not now, as being unconcerned?

Quest. 2. The second Question is, whether the individual Creatures did all
pre-exist, being together in Paradise, before the Fall, in their Angelical
Spirits and Forms? Was among these Mankind, with all individual Persons, not
only in a Representative, but a Collective Adam; unto whom Adam in his own
distinct Person was the Head, and the first born? Did those thus, who now groan
under the ruins of the Fall, then foresee it, in the Divine Design, having an
aversion to it in it self, yet subjecting themselvns to it for God? Are these,
who now through all Generations groan and travel in pangs, for the delivery of
the Divine seed in them, unto the Birth of a new Glory, the same who then had
this Divine Seed of a sure Hope sown in them for their return? And not for
their return only, but for their Resurrection, unto a sight of the Face of God
with a new and fuller Glory, shining forth without any shadow or Vail, purely,
and immediately upon them all, through them, taking them up into it self, as a
new, Super-Coelestial eternal Paradise, as far excelling their first Paradise,
as the Heavens are above the Earth, as Eternity transcends Time?

But these then, where have they been since the Fall? Were they thrust down to
the nethermost parts of the Earth, imprisoned in the deep shades of the Earth
below, and bound there in Chains of Darkness? Are they there reserved in the
silence and sleep of that Death which came upon all by the Fall, until, as Seed
buried in the ground, they, according to their several seasons, spring up into
Corruptible Forms, and a wretched Life, for a moment upon the stage of this
World to act new parts, in order to a refining, through a Baptism with Christ
in the fire of his Sufferings, of his Death, and the making of all new by this
refining, in the Glory of his Resurrection?

Dear Reader! these Questions may be thought by some curious and difficult,
without use, fruit, or ground in the Word of God. To others, perhaps they may
seem of great moment to open the mystery of God, to unvail his Glory in the
wonder of his Works, which are sought out by all those who love him. Some may
esteem them of great advantage, to enlighten the Daknesses, and make easy the
Difficulties about Principal Doctrines of the Christian Religion, as that
fundamental Truth of Original Sin, that most sweet and sacred Mystery, which is
the Antitype to this Type. Our justification by Jesus Christ, the Return of all
to life in the last Adam, as all died in the first. Others may believe, that as
God sheds abroad richer Anointings of the Light of his Spirit, we shall see
lying fair before us greater and stranger things than these, which now like
fresh colors in a beautiful Object, appear not at all, for the want of light
in the Air, in our Spirits. As the eternal Sun shines, as the Heavens in the
Scriptures, and the Spirit shall open themselves; they expect to see the Angels
of Glory, and of God, the Divine Glories descending and ascending upon the Son
of Man, the Person of the Lord Jesus, as a mystical Ladder, reaching through
the whole Creation, from the top to the bottom, where each rank of Creatures is
a step in this Ladder, a Divine Glory, in the Angelical Form, upon the Wings of
its proper Angel, descending and ascending.

But I leave these things to the freedom of every Spirit, as bringing no
weight to my present purpose, begging thy pardon, Christian Reader, for this
mention of them, as being fairly led to by the present Scripture, and willing
to take the occasion of diverting thy self and me, as I hope, not without some
spiritual pleasure and profit, through the candor of thy Mind.

I shall take hold of that alone, which seems to lie clear in the words of the
Text, and gives a full confirmation to my Proposition, which is this,

That the Fall springs from the Harmony of the eternal Design in the Divine
Mind, being comprehended in it, as a part of it.

I shall proceed by a few short steps,

1. The Intellectual soul, in the first Man, is manifestly, eminently
comprehended in this Scripture, by a Reason from the stronger. This not only is
a principal part of the Creation, but contains in it self, according to its
primitive state, the whole nature of things, together with the complete Image
of God in Nature. This is the Essence of the Intellectual Soul.

2. This Soul, in this Image, and so in its own Essence, as in a Glass,
beholds the Harmony of the Divine Work, as it has the Harmony of the Divine
Nature figured upon it in its Perfection, from the beginning to the end.
Through this Image, as a finely-shadowed Vail, it has a view of God himself in
the invisibility of his Power and Godhead. In the same view it takes in the
Universal Harmony of the Divine Work and Design, as it lies in its first
ground, in his invisible Power and Godhead; Invisible to the purest eye of
Nature in their own naked Glories, but visible through the Divine Cloud or Sky
of the Natural, the Angelical Image of God in Man.

3. In this Image, light and view of the Godhead. The Soul now sees the Fall
in the Divine Harmony, in the Harmony of the Divine Image, and its own Essence;
it sees this, as the next Scene, ready to open it self, as the next state into
which it is immediately to pass, by the force of the Divine Harmony.

The Soul sees this state, in this Glass, apart by it self, as a state of
highest Contrariety to the Purity, the Light, the Peace, the Calm, the
Incorruption, the Virtues, the Joys, the Harmony, the Life, the Love, the
Divinity of its present state. It has a Prospect of it, as a Scene of
monstrous Defilements, Shames, Confusions, Troubles, Darknesses, Tempests,
Horrors, Enmities, Deaths, where there is no Light, no Rest. Thus the Soul has
the highest aversion to this state.

But at the same time, the Soul has a view of this Scene, as it stands in the
Universal Harmony, so it sees shadowed out to it through the natural Image, in
this shady light of Nature, a Glory of the Godhead springing up through it, by
the Power of the Divine Harmony incomprehensible to the Soul in its purest
Light, infinitely transcending all those Divine Glories which have hitherto
appeared to it in the Godhead, and all those which it is by any means capable
of figuring to it self.

It became him, (says the Author to the Hebrews) being to bring many Sons to
Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through Sufferings. Thus
the Soul in Paradise beholding (in the Glass of its own Essence) this state of
Sufferings to rise up out of the unsearchable depths of the incomprehensibly
ravishing, and transcendently perfect Harmony in the Divine Essence,
understanding also the Harmony to be made perfect, and the Glory of the Godhead
raised to its utmost, its purest height, and beyond the reach of every
Intellectual or Angelical Eye, by this Variety in its proper place, Now, for
God, is subject to this bondage of Vanity and Corruption.

This Soul in like manner sees in that same Glass an Hope that cannot fail, set
before it. The Seed of a Divine Hope, Jesus the Hope of Glory, the force and
power of the Universal Harmony sown in it. A sure Hope that shall accompany it
through this Wilderness of Wastness, Tempests, and Horrors, where no water is,
no Light (...) Life, no Truth of any good, but empty and black shades in a dark
and dreadful Night. In this Hope it sees the assurance of a passage out of this
Wilderness into a good Land, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, a Land flowing
with Rivers of Waters, and full of Springs, A Land of Rest and Bliss.

4. The Soul thus, by this prospect in Paradise, is submitted and subjected to
its change and fall, with an unwilling willingness. God now according to the
Law of the Divine Harmony in his own Image, and in the Essence of the Soul,
withdraws the Light of his Presence, within a dark Cloud from this Cloud, falls
a deep sleep, the sleep of Death, a death to the only true, the Divine Life
upon Man. The Soul now like Abraham falls into a terrible dream, a blackness of
darkness, full of horror passes over. It sees it self, the whole nature of
things, visible, invisible, within it self, dead, divided, dissolved, all
broken and scattered into pieces. A burning Lamp, the burning Torches of Lust,
Rage, Divine Wrath, pass between these mangled pieces.

Thus the Soul lies in this sleep and dream, with hope only, as a gleame of
heavenly Light, now and then breaking upon it, through these melancholy shades,
until Christ, the Seed of Hope, revive in it. When he awakens himself in the
Soul, he awakens the Soul by his Voice, sounding through it; Awake thou that
sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. At the
awakening of the Soul, the dream flies away, as if it never had been. The Soul
now sees her lost Paradise, her lost Purity, her lost Peace, her lost Love and
Joy, her lost self, with the whole nature of things in its Virgin-Image present
with her, as if they had never departed from her. All past seems as the dream
of a moment, while she slept upon a Bed of Spices in Paradise, in the Bosom of
her Beloved.

But her Beauties and Paradise are not now as before. They are no more shadowy
Images, shady Lights, and Mediums, or means, through which her God appears to
her, which his Glories dimmed, and refracted by the Vails, through which they
pass. No, being now awakened into the Resurrection of Christ, God himself in
his naked Beauties, in the purest and sweetest Light of his Divine Essence,
appears to her as to himself. He in the Light of his unvailed Glories, is both
her beloved Object, and the blissful Medium or means through which she sees
him. The Soul now is in the Light, as He is in the Light, his Face shining like
the Sun of Eternity in the strength of all its Glories, the Glories of his
supreme loveliness, and Loves, is the Glass in which she sees her self, her
lost Purity and Paradise, the whole nature of things within her self, as they
all lie in the Harmony of the Divine Nature. In this Glass she sees and enjoys
her Fall it self, as a part, and the perfecting of this heavenly Harmony. All
the storms and darknesses in that Scene have now their Vizors taken off, and
appear to be living Glories, glorious Spirits, glorious Varieties in the Unity
of the eternal Spirit. Thus the Soul enjoys her self with all past, present, or
to come, as eternally present with Christ in God.

Now this Bride repents not of her subjection to the Fall, by which she has
passed into this last state more excellent then the first, which indeed is the
first. Now she sees that all her changes were but circlings through the
various parts of the Divine Harmony within her self, within the heavenly
compass of her own Divine Essence. While all that while, she with her beautiful
Essence and Form lies in the embraces of the Divine Essence it self. There
completing in her self the circle of the Universal and Eternal Harmony
returning thither, as into the Bosom of her Beloved Bridegroom, from whence
she first came forth, as from her everlasting Father, and first Cause.

Thus I have endeavored to bring to the Eye, the Ear of our Understanding, the
Beauty, the Music of the Divine Harmony in the discords of Humane Nature, in
the Fall of Man; which excludes all undetermined Liberty in the Will, as
altogether inconsistent with this Harmony, and the Divine Unity, the band of
this Harmony.

I pass now to the Essence of the Soul, in the third Scene, into which it opens
it self, or that third state into which it rouls it self within it self. My
design is the same here, to show how the sacred and irresistible force of the
Divine Harmony restores the Soul, without any thing of Free Will in the sense,
in which we have stated it, intermingling it self in this Work.

3. State. This third state of the Soul is its return or restitution. This is
clearly and completely described by St. Paul, after the lively Picture which he
has given us, of the storm in the Fall; But now the Righteousness of God is
made manifest without the Law, being witnessed to by the Law and the Prophets,
Romans 3. 21. Even the Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ on
all that believe, verse 22. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, verse 24. Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his own Righteousness for
the remission of Sins, verse 25. To declare, I say, at this time his own
Righteousness: that he (by his, his own Righteousness, or Justice,) might be
just, and by the same his, his own Righteousness) the justifier of him which
believes in Jesus, verse. 26.

Take here four brief Notes upon the words,

1. The Righteousness of God is with great care and skill distinguished here,
and specificated in its distinction from the Righteousness of Man under the
Law, in the state of Innocence. You have this distinction emphatically set out
and sealed with a deep impression four times over. The Right eousness of God
without the Law, verse. 21. Even the Righteousness of God, verse. 22. God to
declare his own Righteousness, verse. 25. To declare, I say, his own
Righteousness, or Justice; That he may be just or righteous, and the Justifier,
or the Maker righteous, by his own Righteousness. This is the Righteousness of
the Gospel, by which we have the pardon of Sins, and are justified. This the
Law, the Prophets, Nature in its Purity, in all its natural Improvements point
out to us, in shadows and pictures; But cannot set before us, nor give to us no
more than the Picture can give a sight or fruition of the Life, the living
Beauty.

2. Grace, free Love alone, without the Conjunction of Free Will, discovers and
brings in this Righteousness. This Righteousness is the Beauty of the Divine
Harmony; Grace or Love is the sweetness, the sweet force of this Harmony, or
the Unity in this Harmony, which alone carries it on through all things, and
makes all things perfect in it.

3. Jesus Christ with his Blood, and Faith in him, are means to this end, the
declaration of the Righteousness of God. This Divine Harmony, which is the
Beauty and the Righteousness of the Divine Nature, as the last end, is the
first Mover, carries on it self by its own sweet, most agreeable and
irresistible force, which is the Grace and Love in the Godhead. This forms and
fashions all its own means, brings forth Jesus Christ to die for us, to live in
us by Faith, and it self in this Jesus, through the death and the life of this
Jesus.

4. The essential Righteousness of God, as it brings forth it self through
Jesus Christ, is that in which we have the pardon of Sin, and Justification. It
is his own Righteousness, or Justice, by which God is just himself, and makes
us just. In Greek the words are all the same, his Righteousness, that he may be
just, and the Justisier. You will understand this, and the elegant force of
this Scripture, which is very much lost in English by the change of the word in
the Translation from Righteousness, to Just and Justifier; When you know, that
in Greek, Righteousness and Justice are both one word; as in the sense, and in
nature, they are both one thing.

This essential Righteousness of God alone, has an infiniteness of value and
virtue in it, to be a satisfaction for the infinite Demerit and Guilt in Sin;
to make a Saint infinitely amiable and lovely, that it may be proportioned to
the Eye and infinite Love of an infinite Spirit.

We say, our Jesus was Man, that he might Suffer; God, that he might Merit by
suffering. We are rightly taught, That it is the Person in Christ which gives
the value to his Active and Passive Obedience; That gives the value and virtue
to the whole work of his Mediation. The Person in Christ is God, the second
Person in the Trinity, the essential Image of the Godhead, eternal,
unchangeable, infinite. It is then the essential, eternal, infinite Beauty,
Value, Virtue, Righteousness of this Person, which declares it self through the
Humane Nature of Christ in the Humiliations, the Exaltations of that, unto the
Remission of Sins, unto Justification, to make us infinitely amiable in the eye
of an infinite God, the worthy Objects of an infinite Love, the worthy Subjects
of an infinite Glory and Blessedness, in the eternal, unlimited, free, and full
fruition of an infinite Object, infinite in Loveliness and Delights.

But let us endeavor, according to the meanness of our capacity, in taking in
so great Glory, to give some Light to this so sweet, and so high a mystery.

Righteousness and Justice in Greek are the same.

Justice is defined, that which gives every one its own. That is, to every
thing its own, due, and proper to it, which makes up the Harmony and Unity of
the whole in that part. The Harmony and Unity of the whole is the perfection of
the whole, and of each part. Every part is in order to the whole, as its end.
As it is perfection, which is due to each thing: So the end of each thing is
its perfection. Thus Justice consists in the Harmony and Unity of things.

Righteousness is that by which we are right, and do right. Right is a
conformity to its rule. The first in every kind is the measure and rule of all
the rest. God is absolutely, universally the first of all things: so is He the
absolute measure and rule of all.

The Righteousness of God then is the conformity of the Divine Nature to it
self, in its Essence and Operations, in its self, and in all its works. Thus is
Righteousness also as Justice, the Harmony and Unity of things. The Divine
Righteousness is the Divine Harmony and Unity diffusing it self through all
things, and knitting all things together, as Links in one Golden Chain.

The perfection of Harmony is the Unity in Variety. The Harmony is perfect,
when the Unity is entire, and the Variety full. A full Variety is that, in
which nothing of Variety is wanting. A principal part in the Variety, extending
it to a greater amplitude, is the Contrariety. This then is the Divine pleasure
and glory in the Harmony; when the Unity by its Divine fruitfulness and force
brings forth it self through all degrees of Variety, into the remotest forms,
the most opposite Contrarieties and Extremes: When it brings forth it self
through these into it self again, and reigns triumphantly at once, as over the
whole, so over each part of the Variety; residing on the whole, as one Throne,
one Kingdom, and on each part, as a distinct Throne, a distinct Kingdom, equal
with the whole.

The Divine Harmony is Threefold.

1. The first Harmony is that of the Godhead, of the Divine Essence in it self.
This is the essential Righteousness of God. As it is the Righteousness, so is
it the Love, the Joy, the Loveliness, the Wisdom, Power, Glory of God. All the
Excellencies of God in one, one and entire in every Excellency by the Unity.
Yet in every Excellency most highly distinct by the Variety in the Harmony. The
Harmony of the Divine Essence is that sacred and adorable mystery of the
Trinity, the mystery of God.

2. The second Harmony is the Harmony of the Divine Nature, as the Original;
And the Harmony in the Nature of the Creature, as the figure, married together
into one Divine Harmony, by a mutual and mysterious Union. By this Union these
two mutually subsist in each other, shine upon, shine in and through each
other. The Original Harmony is the Principle, of subsisting and shining. This
is the Head, the Person which gives Being, Beauty, Subsistency, Luster to its
own Figure in the created Harmony, shining upon it self in and through it.

This is the Mediatory Righteousness, or the Righteousness of God in Christ,
the Righteousness of the Gospel, of our Justification, Sanctification,
Glorification.

This Righteousness in Christ, as our Head, comprehending us in it self, by
virtue of the mutual Union clothing us, filling us, overflowing us, is our
Justification, the Beauty of our Persons shining in the Glory of our Head,
entire from the first moment, and unchangeable.

This Righteousness, by virtue of our mutual Union, with our Jesus in the Unity
of the Spirit, as our Root, springs forth in us, transforms us into its own
heavenly Image, carries us up into a Communion with it self, in its own Divine
Life, Beauties and Joys. Thus by the gradual growths of this Righteousness in
us, are we gradually sanctified; through all changes of life, does this Plant
grow in us, by Night and by Day; In Death it arrives at its perfect growth. Our
Sanctification thus in Death made perfect, is the glorification of our Persons.

In one moment does this Divine Righteousness, this heavenly Harmony take us up
into it self, unto the justification of our Persons in its spotless, eternal,
universal Beauties, to the filling of us with the unexpressible Peace and Joys
of its most sweet, eternal, universal Music, and in the same moment it springs
up in us unto our Sanctification, to the framing of us by degrees unto the same
Beauty, and the tuning of us to the same Music in our selves. This is the
moment of our New Birth, our Marriage-Union with our Jesus, our believing.

This is the second Righteousness.

3. The third Righteousness, is that of the shadowy Image in the primitive
state of the Creation. This is the Righteousness of Man, a shadowy
Righteousness, the shadow of the eternal Harmony. This is the essential Form of
Man in pure nature. This is the Reason of Man, the shadow of the eternal
Reason, the Word, the essential Harmony in the Divine Mind.

The Lord Jesus being the first, the supreme, the essential Image of God, is
also the first, the supreme, the essential Harmony, the Essence of Harmony in
its eternal Spirit, the essential Harmony, the essential Righteousness of the
Divine Nature.

The Lord Jesus is the Original, the Universal Image, the Image of Images, the
Idea of Idea's, the Spring, the Seat, the Truth, the first of all Ideas. He is
the Idea of the Godhead, of the whole Creation, of Man, of every Creature. Thus
is he the Root, the Rule, the Harmony, the Righteousness of the whole Creation,
of Man, of every Creature.

Having laid these grounds, for the illustrating of the Doctrine of St. Paul, I
will now from St. Paul, and upon these grounds, sum up into a close, this part
of my Discourse, concerning the nature of the Humane Soul, or Man.

The Essence of the Soul contains the fullness of all thing in it, in one
substantial, indivisible Act. The Soul opens it self into this fullness of
things, by a three fold Revolution within it self, within the spacious Palace
of its own glorious Essence.

1. From the Bosom or Womb of its own Ideal Glories, which are the Original,
the Measure, the Bound of the Souls Essence and Perfection; the Soul descends
into a shadowy Image. Thus it first appears upon the beautiful Stage of this
World in its first Creation.

God himself in his invisible Glories with eternity, in his eternal Power and
Godhead is now in the Soul, is seen by the Soul, but shadowed by this shadowy
and vailing Image within which he resides. Thus has the Soul within her self
her Idea in Christ, in God, in Eternity, as her Fountain in Eden, which flowing
forth all through the Soul in this shadowy Image, makes it all a
sweetly-shadowed Paradise. This is the first Revolution.

2. As in the Harmony of this shadowy Image lies the Contrariety, a part of the
Variety in the Harmony. So from the Divine force of this Harmony, acted by the
Ideal Harmony lying hid in it, the Soul rouleth it self out of the lowest and
remotest degree of the Unity into the Contrariety, as a Note in a Musical
Lesson upon the Lute, struck and sounding in its proper time.

Now is the Beauty, the Integrity, the Sweetness of this shadowy Image, in
Deformity, in Ruins, in Bitterness and Enmity, Sin and Death swallow up all.

The Soul stands in a Contrariety to the Divine Purity, Love, Light,
Immortality. In the place of Purity, is Filth; of Light, Darkness; of Love,
Enmity; of Immortality, Death.

God now being the Supreme Unity and Harmony, opposes himself, as most
directly, most highly, most irreconcilably contrary to this Contrariety, to the
breach of the Unity, to the discord in the Harmony, that he may subdue it, and
reduce it unto an Unity, for the making up of the Harmony, and so making it
more full by the Contrariety, more sweet by the Enmity.

Thus the Divine Love in the shadowy Image, having lost it self in the enmity
at the Fall. The Divine Love it self in its eternal Image disguiseth it self in
a form of wrath, flaming forth with unquenchable burnings, until it have
devoured the Enmity, and the shadowy Image it self in the Enmity, unto the
discovery of the eternal Love, veiled beneath its shadow, and buried in the
Enmity. All thus consumed meet again in the triumphant and pure flame, in which
the Divine Love meets with and embraces it self.

But thus much of the second Revolution.

3. Now the Soul with the whole nature of things in the shadowy Image, the
shadowy Harmony, the shadowy Righteousness of its first Creation is lost, by
the dissolution of the Unity in discord and Deformity, Sin, Death, and the
Divine Wrath.

Now G^ in the essential Image, the essential Harmony, the essential
Right^usness, which is Love it self, loveliness it self, Power, Wisdom, the
Essence of God, declares himself our Jesus, our Savior. He declares himself,
without the Law or the Prophets, not from any Merit or Power in the Creature,
but of mere Grace, from the sweet innate force of the Divine Harmony in
himself, by the beauties of which he is powerfully attracted and acted, to the
Music of which he moves in all his actings with highest pleasure.

This essential Image and Harmony, from the beginning lies hid beneath the
shadowy Image, at the bottom of it, as the substance to the shadow, which has
no possibility of subsisting in any point or degree of Being without it. St.
Paul calls this, The mystery hid in God from the foundation of the World; that
is, hid beneath the foundation of the World, which was a Vail cast over the
eternal Glories, while they figured themselves in Divine shadows upon this Vail.

But now our Jesus, the second Person in the Trinity, the essential Image, the
essential Harmony, the Righteousness of God, becomes a Creature, springs up
from beneath the foundations of the Creation into an Humane Soul and Body in
the midst of it ruins.

This Jesus is the Original Image of the Creation, of Man, of every Creature,
the Root, the Rule, the Actor of all, who virtually, eminently comprehends all
in their distinct Ideal Forms within himself, as so many eternal Beauties in
his own eternal Beauty, who brings them forth from himself, bears them in
himself, as Flowers in their Garden-beds, who figureth himself in the riches of
his glorious Varieties upon them, to make of the whole one beautiful Figure of
his own Beauties, a Daughter, Sister, and Bride to himself.

He therefore now, the Seed of Hope, of Promise sown in the Soul, dying
together with the Soul in the Fall, now comes up through this death in the form
of a man, fallen man, the Image of the whole, which contains the whole in it self.

Thus he reduces the Contrariety to the Unity. He restores the Harmony, he
atones and reconciles all, all manner of ways,

1. He brings all the Contrariety into the Harmony, by bearing the Fall,
Guilt, Shame, all Deformities, all Deaths, the Divine Wrath, the ruins of the
Fall in himself, who is the eternal, universal Harmony and Righteousness. Thus
eternal Life dies without Death, giving an eternal Life and Glory to Death in
his Person. Thus the Righteousness of God is made Sin for us without Sin. He is
altogether lovely; every thing of him is not only lovely, but loveliness it
self. Yea more loveliness, a knot, a spring of loveliness. So sings the
spiritual Bride of her Beloved in that Song of Loves, The bushes of his Hair
black as a Raven, (the Bird of Death) in their order and place springing forth
from his head of finest Gold (the purest light of Glory) encompassing it with
their deep shade, and setting it off, are Divine Beauties.

2. This Person, the eternal, the universal Image and Harmony of the Godhead,
of all Glories, of all things gives hims^ in the extremities of all Sufferings
unto Death, to be a Sacrifice to the Holiness, Justice, Wrath and Glory of God.
He is a Sacrifice of infinite value and force, a Sin-Offering, expiating all
Sin, with a transcendency of Merit. A Peace Offering, which charms the most
offended spirits, which changes into a Golden Calm of Divine Love and Joy, the
most raging tempests of wrath, raised through the whole nature of things, from
the breast of the eternal Spirit.

3. He bears in his own Person the whole Contrariety, the Contrariety of evil
in the enmity of Sin, to the Divine Good in its Love and Glory: The Contrariety
of the Divine Good in its Love and Glory to the evil in the deformity and
enmity of Sin. All the fiery darts of both these Contrarieties, in their utmost
force and fury, meet in his Bosom, the Bosom of Div^e Beauty and Love,
exposed nakedly to them both. Thus he fills up the design of his Father, to
make known the power of his Wrath. Thus he draws forth to its largest compass,
and heightens to its utmost point, this Scene of wrath, to make the Variety
full, and the Harmony absolute.

4. Jesus, the supreme Harmony, the everlasting Righteousness, by dying,
carries the descent of things to the lowest point. He makes an end of Sin,
Sufferings, Death and Wrath for ever, by the dissolution and end of the seat,
the subject of all these, the shadowy Image, the Creation of Nature in his own
person. The death of Jesus Christ is as the midnight of things. The Sun of the
eternal Image and Glory, having by its course, in the shadowy Image, touched
the utmost bound of distance from it self, now begins its return to it self
again.

5. This Jesus by his Resurrection carries up with him, in his own Person, all
things, the whole Creation, the shadowy Image, with its Primitive Purity and
Paradise, the shadowy Image, with its fall, ruins, and deaths into the Glory
of the eternal Image, unto an Union with it, immediate, naked, entire, eternal,
in one Light, in one Spirit. Where there is now no more any vail or shadow. Now
all appear Beauties and Glories, divinely-harmonious, being seen in their
proper place and order in the Divine, the Eternal, the Universal Harmony.

6. Lastly, The Lord Jesus now, in an humane Soul and Body, being risen from
the Dead, and ascended up on high, comprehends, reconciles, fills all things,
shining through all, assimilating all to himself in the spiritual Glory of his
own essential, eternal Image in his own Person, the most glorious, unbounded
Head of all. Now according to the fullness, the fruitfulness, the Divine Order
of the Ideas; the Original Images of all things, in the most ample and blissful
Harmony in his Person; He comes up, he springs forth in his Spirit; in the
Spirit of this Divine Image, this Harmony and Glory, with the fullness of his
Person, of this Divine Image, Harmony and Glory in the Soul of Man.

As he springs up, he rends the Vail, behind which he ever resided, he reveals
himself to the Soul in the Universal Harmony of his Person; and his whole work,
from the beginning to the end. He presents himself to the Soul, as its Idea,
its Original Image, its beginning; its way, and itsend; in whose bosom the
Soul has always lien; there meeting with every change, every scene of things
springing up within it in that bosom, while the same Jesus has lien in its
bosom, as the seed of its Being, and of every Change. This is the Souls
Father, Brother, Bridegroom and Perfection.

As Jesus Christ thus appears and unvails himself within the Soul, he at once
gathers up the Soul into the most intimate, the most entire Union with it self.
He transforms it into the likeness of the same Image with himself, in the full
Glory of the Divine, the Universal, the eternal Harmony, in the Unity of the
same Spirit, the Spirit of this Harmony and Glory.

The Lord Jesus, as he is the universal, the eternal Image and Harmony of the
Divine Nature, of all Variety in the Divine Nature, as he is the Idea of Ideas,
thus is he the Original Image, the Idea of the Intellectual Soul, or of Man. As
then he forms himself in this Soul; he also forms all things in it, that man
comes forth from the bosom of his Idea, replenished with the Ideas of all
things. He is now the whole Creation, the universal Nature within himself.

This Jesus then, being risen, springs up into Man in the virtue of his
Resurrection, and together becomes the Resurrection of all things in man to
man. In like manner through man; as the head of all, he rises again in all the
particular Forms of things, as they stand without man in themselves in their
own proper Existencies.

In the Lord Jesus, God, through Christ, the universal Image inhabiteth in the
proper Ideas of each Creature, with the fullness of his Divine Glories, in the
Unity of the blessed Spirit. According to this Original, Jesus Christ, the
Universal Harmony through the humane Nature, his immediate, his full Image, his
complete Birth and Bride, rests entirely and distinctly upon each form of
things; as the Divine Race of this heavenly Marriage Bed in the Resurrection.
As all together make up the Universal Harmony in the Soul, in Christ the end of
them all: So each one enjoys the whole Harmony in it self, being upon its own
proper Form, clothed with the Universal Form, the Form of the heavenly Man,
and of Christ in Glory. So all dwell together in the Unity of the same Divine
Spirit, the Spirit of a Saint and of Christ. In the Unity of this Spirit, all
mutually are Divine Palaces each to other, clearly, completely comprehending,
and comprehended by each other, eternally feasting upon the heavenly Beauties
and Virtues, drinking in the Sweetnesses, the Lives, the Spirits of each other;
And of Jesus Christ, of God, the Unity, and the Variety in all.

This is the Kingdom of God, which is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost. Jesus Christ, the essential Image of God, the Divine and eternal
Harmony, is the Righteousness, the mutual Peace and Joy of this Kingdom.

In this Kingdom Jesus Christ comes with his own Glory, the Glory of his
Father, and of all his holy Angels united in one, in each form of things. The
lowest form of things here is an Angel, an Angel made new in the Resurrection
of Christ, where each Angel being only a distinct part of the Harmony, yet has
the Universal Harmony resting upon that part.

This is that new Jerusalem, where the street, the lowest form of things, is as
Gold and Glass. The pure Glory of the eternal Spirit, as the finest Gold,
shines in each Creature, like the Cherubim, or the Angels standing up out of
the Mercy-Seat, made of the same piece of massy Gold together with it. The
lowest Creature here is an Angel of Glory, the street that sustains us is
composed of Angels, Angelical Glories. In every Angel as a particular Glory,
all the Angels with their several Varieties of Glory; the Glory of Christ, and
all the Saints, which is the full, the Universal Glories of the Divine and
Humane Nature, the Original, and its best beloved Image in Union. The Glory of
God, as the Father, in its simplicity, in its paternity and transcendency over
all; meet all in one. This Unity of the Spirit in each Creature renders it
divinely transparent, like the finest glass. In the beauty of every Face, we
have the prospect of Eternity. We see in each single Face fresh Beauties, all
Beauties, with an endless Variety opening themselves one within another, one
beyond another, all equally clear, present, and pleasant in every one.

Thus Jesus Christ becomes, according to St. Paul, the firstborn from the
dead, and the firstborn among his Brethren the Saints. The Saints in the
Language of St. James, are the first fruits of the Creation, which is brought
forth in its proper time and order, into the liberty of the Glory of the Sons
of God.

Thus is our Jesus the great Jubilee, where all Debts are remitted, all
Servants go free, all persons return to their Inheritances, to the free
Possession, the full fruition of themselves and them. In the Resurrection of
the Lord Jesus, from him, as the Root springing up into the Body of the Saints,
through them into the rest of the Creatures as Branches of the same Tree. All
Sins are pardoned, the whole Creation is set free from its bondage to Vanity
and Corruption. All things return to a free fruition of themselves, of all
Beauties and Joys in their native Inheritance, their Original Images, their
proper Ideas in Christ; first Christ, then the Saints through them, Heaven and
Earth, and the Seas, with all things in them, are made new, by being married
anew, by being newly reinvested with the Glories of their Original.

The Reader is again desired to take Notice, That neither the remainder of this
Fourth Argument, nor any thing upon his Fifth could be found amongst the
Authors Papers.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Freedom of the Will. The SECOND PART.
Wherein the Arguments for it are considered and answered.

HAving finished those Arguments ranked under their several Heads, in
opposition to that Liberty of the Will, which is placed in the determining of
its power, received from the first cause, unto a Contrariety or Contradiction
in its actings, with an independency upon the first cause, the order and
connection of Causes, and the Understanding,

We pass now to a consideration of the Reasons, upon which that Opinion of this
Freedom is established. These Reasons are taken,

1. From the Will it self. 2. From the nature of Sin, and the Divine Justice.
3. The Language of the Scripture. 4. From the end of Laws. 5. From the order
and nature of things.
1. Reason. The Prerogative and Excellency of the Will consists in this
Liberty.

1. How otherwise does man excel bruit Creatures and natural Agents?

2. How otherwise is man free, and not necessitated in all his Actions? To that
I shall give two several Answers.

1. Answ. This Freedom of the Will, of which we speak, and which is opposed to
necessity, is no perfection.

I shall make way for the explanation and confirmation of this by
distinguishing necessity into a 1. Necessity of Coaction. 2. Necessity of
Nature.


1. A necessity of Coaction is from an outward power, restraining the subject
from acting according to the principles of its nature, or constraining it to
Actions besides, or against its nature. This necessity is indeed contrary to
true freedom. A freedom from this necessity, or from a capacity of being thus
necessitated is the perfection or excellency of man.

2. The necessity of nature is that, which is founded in, and flows from the
Essence it self, the essential and internal principles of each nature. This
necessity is so far from being inconsistent with Liberty, that it is the
establishment and firmness of the subject in its proper freedom. The
demonstration of this is clear in the Divine Nature; for as God alone is Ens
perfect liberum, A Being most perfectly free; so is he according to the
Doctrine of all the Schools, alone, Ens absolute necessarium, A Being
absolutely necessary. And as is his Being, such is his Understanding, such is
his Will, such are all his Acts, necessary and necessarily good, as they are
most perfectly free. For his Being in the absoluteness, and simplicity of it,
is his Understanding, his Will, one pure, simple, and eternal Act, goodness it
self.

The learned Prideaux, in the Chair at Oxford, rightly teaches us this, That
God in those his first Acts of Election, although he be not moved by any Causa
(...); that is, any cause from without, giving occasion for these
distinguishing Acts; is yet determined to them by a Causa (...). A reason from
within, from the glorious secret of his own Essence which has so much the more
of a Divine force in it, by how much the more it is incomprehensible to us.

2. Answ. The freedom of the Will, if it be rightly understood and stated,
will, as I humbly conceive, appear far more beautiful, glorious and divine in
these three Circumstances.

1. The Liberty of the Will is truly Divine in the amplitude of its Object,
which is goodness in its utmost latitude, and fullness, in its utmost height
and glory. The Will of Man is not determined or confined to a particular good,
or an inferior good, to that of mere nature or of sense. It has its freedom to
range through the flowery and spacious Field of all good, in its richest
Variety; yea to soar up to that blissful Paradise of the supreme good it self
in the third and highest Heavens, there to spread it self, and roll it self in
the midst of all the Treasures, of all the distinct Beauties and Joys of every
good, as all meet here with the highest luster, with the purest and most
perfect sweetness in the bosom of this first and chief good.

2. The Will of man is in this, divinely free, that it always acts after an
irresistible manner, according to its own proper Nature, so that nothing can
move it, but per modum interni principii, and secundum morem objecti propositi,
after the manner of the inward Principles, of its own Essence, and the proposal
of its Object. As the Divine Will is goodness it self, in its greatest
amplitude and perfection: so is the Will of Man, which is the Birth and Image
of the Divine Will, goodness in the seed, which as the Divine Goodness is
presented in various appearances, so it can by no means, by no power, beneath a
power of creating, and annihilating be restrained from springing up and
flourishing, and flying into the bosom of that appearance, to become perfectly
one with it, as a most chaste and affectionate Bride, with her most beautiful
and beloved Bridegroom. If this Bride, the Will of Man, embrace a Stranger, or
an Enemy in the place of her own Beloved, it is by being first deceived, by his
coming and presenting himself to her in the appearance of her Bridegroom. The
woman being deceived, was first in the Transgression. Sin deceived me, and so
slew me, says St. Paul. Thus is the Will of Man not like to that figure in the
Poet, Monstrum inform, cui lumen ademptum. A rude, unformed power, acted
without Light, without Order, without Principle or End, by a rash uncertainty,
in an unformed darkness. This were no liberty, but the greatest servitude of a
Spirit, bound in Chains of Darkness, and hurried by the Power of Darkness it
knows not how, nor why, nor whither. No, the Will of Man is in its own
incorrupt state a beautiful Virgin, with fair eyes like Doves, washed in Milk by
a Divine Love, carried in a Divine Light to the Arms of her Beloved, the Divine
Beauty and Goodness.

In its fallen Estate, while in the midst of false Lights, and false appearances,
raised by that great Inchanter, the Prince of Darkness, it is held in the
Serpentine embrances of false Lovers, as in nets and bands; yet is it its own
Beloved and Bridegroom, which she loves and seeks in all these.

It is also its essential inclination and love to the Divinity of the true
loveliness, the true good, which is abused, and by which advantage is taken for
it self, to be abused by all these Impostures and false loves. Good is that
which all things desire, says the Philosopher. That God whom ye ignorantly
worship, that God preach I (says St. Paul) to the Athenians. The highest piece
of Worship is the inclination and motion of the Will, our Love.

Object. But you will say, What pre-eminence has man by his freedom? the
inclination and sensitive Appetite of bruit Creatures may be allured, but
cannot be forced no more than the Will of Man?

Answ. I give two Answers to this,

1. The Civil Law says, That he is free, who is sui juris, in his own power;
the freedom of each thing is a power of acting, according to the Principles of
Nature, and the Law of its own Essence. As then the excellency and pre-eminence
of each Essence, or Nature is, such is the dignity of the freedom or liberty
of working, according to that nature. As Reason, the essential form of man,
which is the Universal Harmony of all good, transcends the life of sense
confined to the inferior and shadowy Image of good in its immortal substance:
So does the rational Appetite in its freedom, which is as ample, as reason it
self, and diffuseth it self at liberty upon the blissful Bosom of the Universal
Good, excel the sensitive Appetite, tied up to the narrow and fading Objects of
sense.

2. The Will of Man is a rational inclination to the rational, intellectual,
eternal, and supreme good. This is the Celestial Love, which is born up upon
its two wings of Rational; that is, Celestial delight and desire. While it
continues in its naked state of Innocence and true Freedom, it has a liberty
and power in it self, in despite of all impressions of outward force, to fly
above them all, upon these golden wings, into the Bosom of the Divine Will,
which is the universal and supreme good; there cleaving to, and becoming one
with that blessed and triumphant Will, it has no more any sense of opposition
or force; all things now round about it make a pleasant Music to it in the
Harmony of the Divine Will, and shine upon it with a most ravishing and
heavenly luster, as they lie together in the Divinely-beautiful Form of the
first and universal good.

This is that true Liberty of the Will of Man, in which he transcends all other
Creatures here below, by which he triumphs over all Chances and Changes, over
all Confinements and Com^lsions, over all the extremities of Force and Fury,
while it keeps these wings unlimed, uncloged, unclipt by the filth or guilt of
fleshly lusts, while it preserves it self from the Chains of Vice.

3. I come now to the third Circumstance of the Liberty of the Will.

Man is to be considered in three states, 1. Of pure Nature. 2. Of the Fall. 3.
Of the restitution by Christ.


1. Man in the state of pure Nature, is an Image of God, an earthly Image, Genesis
1. God said, let us make man in our own likeness, after our own Image let us
make him. Some interpret this of God, in the three Persons; others of God, Cum
indumentis suis, as the Jews speak, of God in his holy Angels: Both together
make a proper and full sense. God in the holy Trinity, God in all the various
Virtues of the Divine Nature, spread first through the innumerable company of
Angels, and by them through the whole Creation, sets himself as a seal upon
man, in whom, as the Consummation and Crown of his whole Work, by this
impression, he unites all into one Nature and Essence, which is a complete
Image of himself, and a comprehension of the whole Creation.

Thus now the Essence, the Faculties, the Operations of Man, are a shadowy
similitude and figure of the Divine Essence, the Divine Virtues, and the
Operations of the Divine Nature. Thus the Will of Man is a shadowy figure of
the Divine Will; and its freedom, a shadowy resemblance of the Divine Liberty,
like the colors of a Rainbow in the Cloud, which are so many reflections of
the light of the Sun.

That which we say in natural Philosophy, Exiisdem nutrimur, ex quibus
gignimur; We are bred and nourished, composed and continued by the same things,
is most true in its application to the first or universal cause, with its
effects. As the Sun is the formal, efficient cause of its beams, which are its
shadowy Image in the air, and as the living face is the formal efficient cause
of the face in the Glass, so is God to man, his Image and shadow. The continued
out-shinings and Operations of the Sun, make, maintain, and act anew its beams
every moment. The continued stream of Species, or beams from the living Face,
every moment, form anew the Face in the Glass, with all its mien and motions.
So does the Divine Essence, the Diviue Understanding and Will every moment, by
the continual influences of each moment, compose and conduct their Image, the
Essence, the Understanding, the Will of Man, as the Face in the Glass, in their
whole make, manner, and motions.

This is not a diminution, but the perfection of Liberty in the Will of Man;
For God in his holy Angels, as superior and universal Causes, works upon the
Will of Man, or rather in it, after the manner of an internal Principle. So
that well known Maxim of the first Philosophy assures us, That the first and
universal Cause, is of all Causes most intimate, with every effect. As in
logical Definitions, the summum genus, or the highest nature, enters into the
Definition, and so into the Essence of the lowest Species, or kind of things,
inasmuch as it enters into, and constitutes the next genus, or nature, together
with all the intermediate natures. For examples sake, Substance, and so Being
it self, in its highest and most absolute form, is comprehended in, and
constitutes the nature of man, descending into it, by the intermediate steps of
Corporiety and Animality; that is, becoming first a Corporeal Substance, then a
living Corporeal Substance, lastly, a rational, and so a man.

In like manner, so is the first and universal Cause the most internal and
essential Principle of every effect, of all humane Operations, of all the acts
of the Will. For it is the Essence of every Essence, the Being of every Being,
the Act of every Act, the first, the formal Cause, the most immediate, the most
intimate Cause of every Effect.

Let me add to this, for a Conclusion, as the Crown upon the liberty of man in
pure nature, that his conformity to God, as an Image to his Original, is his
Perfection; in this does his Will become a most beautiful figure of the
ever-glorious life, the Divine Will, that its Liberty is the free-springing,
flourishing, and fruitfulness of it in all good, through the whole Latitude and
Amplitude of the most spacious and blissful sphere of good; and so that a most
pleasing and agreeable necessity of being good is inseparable from this sweet
and ample freedom, while it continues in the state of a Divine Image and Figure.

2. In the Fall of Man we read, according to the Language of the Scripture, of
his being deceived, being brought into servitude, being a Captive, in bondage
to Vanity and Corruption, and of being dead. While they boast of Liberty, says
St. Peter, they themselves are servants to sin. For to that, of which a man is
overcome, he is a servant. It is the Observation of Plato, That the names
importing any thing of good, natively, signify a freedom of motion, as (...),
good, from (...), to run swiftly. On the otherside, the names of evil, express
a restraint from motion, as (...), malice, from (...), to lie down upon the
ground. In like manner, the Hebrew word for Darkness signifies restraint, and
confinement by force. All Liberty being an enlargement of Being, is
comprehended in the nature of good alone. Neither is there any thing so
inconsistent with Liberty, as evil, which is a privation of Being. Plato
therefore rightly expresses the Soul in her fallen state, by the loss of both
her wings, which are an Intellectual Light, and an Intellectual Love; or the
Light of Reason in the Mind, spreading it self with a clear brightness, as one
of the golden wings; and the force or freedom of the rational Appetite to good
in the Will, extending it self in a pure flame, as the other of the golden
wings.

To this I might add the testimony, which the Scripture gives of another seed,
that of the Serpents springing up in the Soul unto its fall, in its fall, and
through its fall; of the Soul being now the Child of the Devil, being implanted
into the Powers of Darkness, of being acted by the Prince of the Power of the
Air, the Spirit, which is now become its Root, its Head, its inward Principle.

3. The Soul of man in its Restitution by Christ, has Jesus Christ as a
quickening Spirit in him, as the principle of its Life, as its life it self. I
(says Christ) am the Resurrection and the Life. I (says St. Paul) by the Law
am dead to the Law. I am crucified with Christ, and now I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me. He (says St. Paul) that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit. Man is now become the heavenly Image of God, and one Spirit with Jesus
Christ in Glory. As he has now the Understanding of Christ, according to St.
Paul; so has he also the Will of Christ. This heavenly Bridegroom and heavenly
Bride are one Divine Spirit, bear one Divine Image, have one Life, one
Righteousness, one Glory, one Understanding, one Will, and dwell together in
one Light, as God is Light, in one Love, as God is Love, in one immortal Joy,
unspeakable and glorious.

The Soul now is a chaste and spotless Bride, which brings forth all the rich
and heavenly fruits of her Spirit, her Understanding, her Will, her whole Life,
inward and outward, by her own heavenly Husband alone, by the sweet force of
her Union with him, and the Divine Virtue of his embraces, that they may be
fruits to God; that is, Divine Fruits, having the life, virtue, and sweetness
of the Divine Nature in them, the form, and beauty of the Divine Nature upon
them for a feast of Joys and Glory to God himself, to feast both his Eyes and
his Heart.

If then the Soul restored be one Spirit with Christ, as in the Spirit of
Christ, so in the Spirit of a Saint, the most pleasant liberty, and most potent
necessity meet in one. The Divine Harmony of the supreme and universal good is
at once the spacious and blissful Field of this Paradisical freedom, and the
golden Chain of this most grateful and most glorious necessity.

The Spirit of Christ is eternity it self, which as it spreads it self beyond
and above all consinements to a Variety, endlesly fresh and flourishing, is the
sweetest Liberty: As it comprehends all things in a most entire undivided
Unity, the supreme Crown and Circle of all true Life and Glory, is the highest
necessity. Eternity has nothing past, or to come, in respect to it self, being
far above all Changes, all Beginnings and Ends of things. It is the supreme
Power, which rules them all, and the supreme Wisdom which measures them.

The Soul then now become one Spirit with Christ, is in that Spirit, together
with Christ, seated upon the Throne of Eternity; by its Union with this Spirit,
it reigns upon this Throne over all things; by having this Spirit in it self,
by being one Spirit with this Spirit, it has in it self that sovereign Power
and supreme Wisdom, it is one with that sovereign Power and supreme Wisdom
which rules and measures all things.

Thus the glorious Bride of Eternity, having her heavenly Bridegroom in her
embraces, clothed and crowned with the same heavenly Image, being now in the
true state of her own proper person, in her sirst and last state, in her own
proper unvailed Substance, and Original here with her Bridegroom, is her own
rule and measure in this heavenly Image, which is her true substantial self,
her Eternity. She is also a rule and measure to her self in the earthly and
shadowy Image, and in all her Pilgrimage, through the Regions of time below,
whether they be the sweeter shadows of the Light above, or the melancholy
shades of a deeper Darkness.

This is the true Liberty of Man, and the freedom of his Will, which is as the
liberty and freedom of the true eternal good, diffusing it self into all the
unsearchable riches of its manifoldly various Varieties, varying, setting off,
sweetning and heightning it self by all the ravishing excesses of Harmony, of
Light, of Love, by all the extremes of Darkness, Discord, Contrariety, and
hate, reducing, and binding up these also into a most ravishing Harmony, by the
excesses; by the victories and triumphs of the Divine Light and Love: So
keeping together with this sportful Liberty, the golden, the firm Adamantine
necessity of being it self still through all, that is good, the true and
eternal good.

This Divine Liberty of the spiritual Bride, which is her Kingdom in her self
over all, is divinely expressed by the blessed Bridegroom himself, in that most
mysterious Song of himself, and his Love composed by himself in the Person of
Solomon. He there in one place charge the Daughters of Jerusalem; that is,
all the holy Angels and spotless Spirits, by which the affairs of the whole
Creation are administered. By the Roes and Hindes of the field; that is, by all
those Pleasures, Loves, and Lovelinesses with which he sports himself in the
midst of them, in the Paradise above, who alone is the lovely Roe, and the
lovely Hind, That they awake not, nor stir up his Love until he please, Cant.
2. 7. Thus it is manifestly in the Hebrew, although our Translators have
changed the Feminine into the Masculine, and set the Bridegroom in the place of
the Bride. But the sense which the words grammatically import is this; That, as
the heavenly Bride is one Spirit with her Bridegroom, she sits above together
with him upon his Throne in eternity from thence together with him, gives to all
the heavenly Ministers their Commissions, that nothing moves in her own person,
or round about her here below, as she is in her shadowy disguise and
pilgrimage, but as it is ordered by her self above in the bosom of her
Bridegroom. And according to that order executed by the heavenly attendance,
which wait continually round about the Throne of her Bridegroom.

2. Reason. If the Will of Man be not free, and do not freely determine it self
in all moral Actions, being undetermined in its own Principles, or by any
superior Causes, what entrance does sin find? How does any thing of a stain or
guilt lie upon the Soul? How is God just in the effects of his Wrath upon those
that sin, if they sin by an inevitable necessity of Nature, and a
predetermination by the connection of Causes, or by the immediate and intimate
operation of the first and universal Cause?

I shall give my Answer by several steps.

1. Sin has no positive being; if it has, God, who is the first and universal
Being, the Fountain of Being, is directly, by himself, and not by accident only
the Author of Sin, in its formality, as Sin. Otherwise we must with Manes set
two Gods upon two distinct Thrones; one of Light or Good, the other of Darkness
or Evil. Or we shall be forced with some Heathen Philosophers to establish two
first Beings equally Uncreated, and eternal; One, God the Agent; The other,
Matter the Patient. So where the Agent subdues the matter to it self, all Forms
of Goodness, Beauty, Life, and Joy spring forth: where the matter invincibly
resists the power of the Agent, there are the Regions of all Evil, Darkness,
Death and Hell.

But this Heathenism and Manicheism are exploded, as by the universal consent
of all sober Christians; so by the voice of reason it self. For if there be two
first Beings, these agree in Being, they differ in being two. Being it self, as
it is One, making both these one in its self, as it is pure, is before and
above that state, in which it is allayed and abased, by being mixed and
compounded with those differences which make it two. This then alone is the
first and supreme Being, the eternal One, the only true God.

2. If God then be not properly and directly the Author of Sin, Sin is no
positive Being, but a privation only. So the Scriptures express it, which call
it (...), an irregularity, a falling short of the Glory of God, a missing of
the mark, (...). Divines generally teach us, That the Sin consists not in any
Act, but in the Deordination, in the privation, a want of the due order,
appertaining to the Act.

Sin then being nothing positive, but a mere privation, can have no efficient,
but a deficient Cause only. This deficient Cause is that defectibility, which
is inseparable from every created Nature. Darkness is the privation, or absence
of Light, which naturally and necessarily accompanies obscure and opact
Bodies, as the Air, the Water, and the Earth. While the Sun shines upon them,
this deficiency, or want of Light, discovers not it self. All things are
illuminated, and the natural obscurity of these Bodies illustrated by the
Sunbeams; when these beams are withdrawn, or intercepted, then the defect of
Light natural to these substances appears, and so the darkness is
predominant. Thus every Creature has in it self a tendency to annihilation;
being of it self like the Earth before the beautiful work of the first day,
which was light, void, and without form. Thus the Soul of Man in its
Understanding, and in its Will, has naturally of it self a tendency to
unreasonableness, which is a degree of Annihilation, the privation of that
two-sold Beauty; Truth in the Understanding, and goodness in the Will. While
the Face of God shines upon the face of the Soul, by a continued irradiation,
as in the first moment of the Creation, these Intellectual Forms of Divine
Beauty, Truth, and Goodness flourish in the Soul, binding up the natural
defectibility both of the Understanding and the Will, in the golden Chains of
an heavenly Light, and heavenly Love; but in that moment, in which God turns
away his Face, with-draws his beams, in the same moment the Soul of Man is left
naked, its natural defectibility prevails; the privation, or absence of Truth,
is now the darkness, the deformity of folly and falsehood. The privation or
absence of Goodness, is now the evil, and the disorder, into which, as a
bottomless pit, the Understanding, and the Will, and the whole Soul with these
miserably, endlesly sinks.

This is that horrible pit, out of which sin arises, the defectibility or
nothingness of the Creature in it self. This is the way by which it arises
upon the Soul, over-spreading it, and carrying it back into that pit of
horror, the deflectibility or nothingness of the Creature, prevailing in the
absence of the Divine beams. The Royal Prophet divinely sings the penury of the
Creature, and the Praises of the great Creator in this Mystery, Psalm. 104. 29.
Thou hidest thy Face, they are troubled, thou take away their Breath or
Spirit, they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they
are created, and thou renewest the face of the Earth.

It is a truth, asserted by all Philosophers and Divines, That the
Understanding acts necessarily, being infallibly and irresistably reduced
into act by its Object duly presented. The Scripture manifestly teaches us,
that sin enters into the Soul by the Understanding. Those two places which I
have cited above, are clear. The woman being deceived, was first in the
Transgression. Sin deceived me, and so slew me. St. Paul speaks in both these
places of the first entrance of sin into the World, in the person of the first
Woman, and in his own person, set, as a figure of all Mankind, as it was
collectively and representatively in the first Adam.

Musaeus joins these together, (...). The Light going out, and Leander
perishing. Man is deceived, and so slain by sin. As the Light of Truth goes out
in the Understanding, the Life of Goodness dies in the Will. As the sight and
light of the eye from the natural composition of the eye fails, as the
irradiations from the Sun, which it enjoys, either mediately, or immediately
from the body of the Sun it self, or from other luminous bodies depending upon
the Sun are obscured: So is the Souls eye the Understanding obscured, according
to the proportion, in which the Divine illuminations in the way of Grace or
Nature cease.

In these two first steps, I have endeavored to make clear the nature of Sin,
and the way of its entrance into the World, in which we see a most genuine
conformity to the dependence of the Will, and of the whole Soul in all its
changes and motions upon the first Cause, as a link in the mystical Chain of
the order of Causes. The beauty and goodness of the Soul in its Understanding
and its Will, flow in the golden Pipe of the order of Causes, as golden Oil
from the first cause, as the Olive Tree flourishing upon the Mount of Eternity.
As this golden stream from its Wellhead fails, beauty and goodness are no more
in the Soul. The deficiency or privation of these, is the evil of Darkness,
Deformity, Sin and Death, to this intellectual and immortal Spirit.

But the knot seems to be tied stronger: by this discourse man sins inevitably
by the necessity of his nature. The first and free withdrawings of the Divine
influence give way for the deflectibility of the Creature, to spring up into
those defects, which are properly and formally the evils of Sin, the first and
greatest evils, the fountains of all evils. How then does shame or guilt lie
upon the Creature? Why is God yet angry? How is he just in punishing? Is not
the evil of sin from these grounds clearly cast upon God, as the Author of it?
I shall endeavor to answer these Objections, and to remove these Difficulties
in the three following steps.

3. I shall endeavor here to bring in some clear light into the obscure shades
of this doubt, how shame and guilt lie upon the Soul, when it falls inevitably
from the necessity of its nature.

Shame is a fear of Infamy, from a sense of Deformity. Deformity is the absence
of the Divine Form originally present, and so proper to the subject. The
subject of the form or beauty, while it is present, is also in its absence the
subject of the privation and deformity. To the deformity is annexed the
reproach or disesteem.

Esteem or disesteem is a right judgment, and so a value of each thing
according to its proper state or nature. Where the sense of deformity is, there
will also be the fear of infamy, and so the shame.

When Venus and Mars were discovered in Vulcan's Net, an immortal laughter
arose among all the Gods, who were Spectators, as we read in Homer. When the
Soul once, in its first Creation, clothed with a Divine Beauty, and so placed
in the Paradise of a Divine Light and Joy, sees it self despoiled of this
heavenly Robe, in the nakedness of those deformities, of the darkness into
which, as hidden in the depth of its own nature, it sinks, when the Divine
beams, that raised it out of that dark Deep, and enriched it with its heavenly
Ornaments are retired, can it be without a sense of this deformed nakedness?
without shame, without impressions made upon it, by the apprehension of that
state, in which the innumerable company of heavenly Spectators now behold it,
with a disesteem and aversion suitable to that state?

Neither is the justness of the aversion and disesteem in all the heavenly
Spirits, or of the shame in this fallen Spirit lessened, but rather increased and
heightened by this, that the deformity springs up with an inevitable necessity
from its own proper nature; for the discovery of that, which this fallen Soul is
in it self, together with every Creature; and the distinction now manifested
between that, which is of God, as the Fountain in Eden, whence alone all
Paradisical Beauties and Joys flow in the Creature, and that which is of the
Creature it self, which is in it self a dark, horrid, and bottomless pit, where
all wastness, woe, disorder, deformity, confusion, desolation, Deaths and Hells
dwell together, and whence in swarms they break forth, as from a cursed womb,
like the smoke and the locusts from the bottomless pit in the Revelation; the
discovery of this, in the fallen Spirits, makes their shame and abhorrency of
themselves more just and high, as also the Songs of Praise which the heavenly
Spirits day and night sing to their Creator and Preserver, as more highly just,
so more highly sweet and glorious.

Thus much for the shame, let us now pass to the guilt. Guilt is the obligation
of the Sinner to the Justice of God. Justice, and so most eminently the Divine
Justice, which is the measure of all Justice, is that which gives to every
thing its due, that which is proper to it, its own. That is due to every thing,
which is proper and suitable to it according to its place in the whole, for the
preservation, restrauration, or perfection of the Order in the whole. When a
Spirit, by the abstraction of the Divine Beauty and Virtue, is now sunk into
its natural weakness and deformity; nothing now is any longer its own, nothing
now is suitable to it, but that power of darkness, that principle of waste
emptiness, of even dreaded and hateful nothings. Now the path in which the
supreme Justice, presiding over the Universal Order and Harmony of things, acts
most pertinently toward it, is to abandon it to those powers of darkness,
which rise up from its own proper Root, to display themselves more fully upon
it in their ugly and hateful shapes, in their tormenting horrors, in their
horrid torments, the dissolutions of the blissful Unity, in distracting
divisions and confusions; the extinguishing of the sweet and beautiful Light in
affrightful shades of amazing darkness.

The chief skill in Pictures consists in the evenness and justness of placing
the shades, that according to the degrees of the declining Light, the shades
may gradually increase, until they sink into the deepest obscurity, or be
bounded by a new light springing up out of these shades: Such is the Law of the
Divine Justice, which is the great and wise Spirit of the Universal Harmony, in
this Divine Poem or Picture, the work of the Creation, as the heavenly form of
goodness or beauty in the best and most beautiful season which draws it self
from any part of this work. Privation, the principle and form of all evil,
spreads its black-wings over it, increasing its hellish shades and darknesses
upon it, in the bosom of which it hatcheth all the ugly Births of deformity,
woe and horror, with an amazing interminating infiniteness, until the sacred
Light of the Divine goodness and beauty arising upon it, bound those unformed
shades, reducing all to, and binding up all with the Adamantine Chains of a
triumphant Harmony in the Glory of God.

In this third step we have endeavored to fix the shame and guilt of sin upon
the Sinner, but glory upon the Divine Justice in the sufferings which come by
sin.

4. Step. We are in our next step to give an answer for God to those, who in
their Expostulations ask, why he is yet angry? The solution of this doubt is
obvious and common. Anger rests in the bosom of Fools. Fury is not in him,
who works all things according to the counsel of his Will. His Wisdom and his
Will are both one. His Justice and his Power are both one, and one with the
other two, his Wisdom and his Will. As he is one pure Act of Omnipotency, of
Beauty, of Love, of Joy, of all Excellencies, at their greatest height, and in
one, so is he Wisdom, Will, Justice, Power, all in one. He is Power, as he is a
pure Act of Almightiness. He is Wisdom, as he is a pure Act of highest and most
Universal Harmony. He is Justice, as he is a pure Act of entire and most
perfect Order. He is Will, as he is a pure Act of highest and most diffusive
goodness, of the richest, sweetest, and fullest loveliness, which are the
proper Objects, and so perfections of the Will. He is Will, as he is a pure Act
of most heightened and comprehensive Love, Joy, Complacency, which are the most
proper and perfect Operations of the Will. Fury then is not in him, who thus
works all things according to the counsel of his Will, where Justice, Power,
Wisdom and Will meet in one, at their purest heights, in their greatest
freedoms, in their most proper and perfect Operations. Anger is then attributed
to God, per Anthropopathiam, while by the suiting of the Language to the
capacity of the Hearers; God is represented to us in the form, and in the
fashion of a man. It is also a metonymical way of speaking, which expresses
the effect by the cause. So the Scripture speaking with the Tongue of a Man, as
the Jews express it, represents those effects of the Divine Providence, by
the names of the anger of God, the wrath of God, which answer to those effects
that commonly proceed from anger and wrath in men. Job faith in one place, When
the scourge falls alike upon the innocent and the wicked, God laugheth at it.
When wicked men suffer for their sins, when innocent persons are refined by
their sufferings; the Eye of God is fixed upon his own Divine Loveliness and
Glory alike in both. The purest and most perfect Love acts him toward this
most pure and perfect Loveliness and Glory alike in both, from the meeting and
blissful embraces of these two; this Love and Loveliness in the Divine Nature,
his Joy and Complacency is alike in both, equally full, equally at the height.
A Divine Philosopher, with a pleasant and beautiful Allegory, teaches us, That
the expansion of Light, in the heavenly Bodies, which is the Act of the
Angelical World, in this their most beautiful Figure, is Risus Coelorum, the
laughter of the Heavens. God makes every thing beautiful in its proper place
and time, to kill, as to make alive, unformed, deformed privations, as the
fairest and most flourishing forms. In every Act of Providence, in every
accident from the beginning to the end of things, he equally preserves and
perfecteth the Divine Order and Harmony. This golden Harmony, extended like the
sweet Light of Heaven over all things, is as a Divine laughter, the complacency
of the Divine Nature in its Work, in its Image, in it self.

I have yet one thing more to say, before I take my other step. We learn from
Philosophers, That heat and cold, which continually fight in the Elements
below, are in the heavenly Bodies, but after so eminent a manner, that there
they meet and enfold each other with a most harmonious agreeableness. By the
Laws of Divinity we are answerably taught, That Anger and Love, as all forms of
things, most discordant in the Creatures, are first in the Divine Nature. But
they are there with an eminency, with a transcendency, in which they are
refined and heightened far above all imperfections. Here they all meet, as most
grateful and most agreeable Varieties in the entire and undivided Unity of the
same eternal Light, of the same eternal Love, of the same eternal God. As from
this height of a most perfect Unity, these Divine Varieties bring forth their
various effects in shadowy resemblances here below, they make the figure of the
whole divinely one, and divinely beautiful. As Divine Seals, they likewise
impress the figure of their own Divine Unity upon each single effect.

Thus the whole work in general, each single effect in particular, is a
divinely beautiful figure of the Divine Beauty shining with delightful beams
upon those Eyes and Spirits, which anointed with a Divine Knowledge, see the
golden and secret Seal, this glorious and sacred impression of the Divine Unity
upon it.

Thus we have spoken of the shame and guilt of Sin, as also of Anger, and in
part of the Justice of God; concerning which there remains more to be said.

5. Step. We have yet before us that great Deep, which swalloweth up all
Understandings, the face of which seems covered with a thick and impenitrable
darkness. Let us pray to the Father of Lights for irradiations from his eye,
that so this unfathomable Deep may discover it self to us, as a blissful Deep
of purest, clearest, and sweetest Glory.

If God first from the counsel of his own Will alone withdraw those beams,
which are all our Light and Beauty, and we then by the inevitable necessity of
our Natures wander as deformed shades in a wild darkness, through the Regions
of Sin, Death and Hell: Is not God, now in a moral sense clearly and fully, the
sole Author of Sin and Evil? This is the knot which indeed stands in need of
the Rosy Fingers of the heavenly Morning, the beams of the eternal Day to unty
it. How shall we in this place vindicate the Justice and Goodness of God? I
have here three things to propound.

1. Let us impartially and ingeniously consider whether the freedom of the
Will, to determine it self absolutely in all its Acts, reflect a greater Glory
upon the Justice and Goodness of God, than the Will predetermined in its
Essence, in its superior Causes, in the first and universal Cause. That we may
make a clearer judgment in this case, let us compare these two different states
of the Will, together with several Antecedents and Consequencies, by placing
them both in our view, one by another, as plainly, within as narrow a compass
as we can.

Let us set that Free Will in our eye after this manner. God brings forth an
Intellectual Spirit, with a Divine Light of Truth in its heavenly Beauties,
shining upon its Understanding, with a Divine Love of the true Good, with all
its heavenly Sweetnesses springing in its Will. He now sets down the will of
this Spirit upon such a ground of indifferency and absoluteness in it self,
that being undetermined into any forms of good or evil, the most heavenly, or
the most hellish, it is equally free for it in the face of all this blessed
Light shining in the Understanding, in the midst of all the heavenly
sweetnesses flowing from the bosom of the true Good, through the Will it
self, to cast it self forth from the bosom of the eternal Good. Appearing thus
in its own naked and Divine Form, and to cast it self into the embraces of the
foulest evil, the fountain of all evil; presenting it self, as evil, in its own
most direful and haggish shapes. A great part of Intellectual Spirits, far the
greatest part of humane Spirits, placed by the Divine Providence in this state,
refuse the good, choose the evil, so render themselves obnoxious to the Divine
Justice, and become by the pursuits and inflictions of that Avenger, the lost
Subjects of all horror and woes without end.

Let us now in the like manner cast our eye upon the Will, predetermined in its
Causes. God brings forth an Intellectual Spirit compounded, Ex aliquo Dei, and
ex aliquo sui; With something of God, something of its own. That of God in it,
is all the good of it, the clear Face of the eternal Truth shining in its
Understanding, as in a Crystal Mirror, the sweet flame of pure Goodness, and
as pure a love to this Goodness, burning in its Will, as upon the golden Altar
in the Temple of God, the beams of this Beauty, and the flames of this Love
unitedly spreading, varying, and forming themselves through the whole Person
and Life of this Spirit, into all Divine Virtues and Joys, by which it becomes
as God himself descended into a God-like Image of God himself. This is that of
God in the Creature.

That, which is ofits own in this Intellectual Spirit, is beneath all this
heavenly beauty and goodness, a deflectibility inseparable from the nature of
the Creature, bound up only by the heavenly charms of this Divinity resting
upon the Person of this Spirit. God in the depth of a design, perhaps too
blessed, and too glorious to be penetrated and fathomed by us; as the eternal
Sun ascends up on high, going away from this Spirit, and carrying away with him
his whole train of immortal beams with a Divine Light, Heat and Virtue. Now
like a mournful and hated darkness from below, the natural defectibility of
this Spirit covers the whole face of it, making it like Hell it self, the seat
of all evils both of Sin and Suffering, which lie eternally upon innumerable
multitudes. Let us now consider the twofold Law, or rule of Justice and
Goodness, by which this is to be tried. The general Rule, or Law of Justice is
this, To give to every thing its due, or its own. Solomon expresses this Rule
of Justice from the Mouth of God in his Proverbs, after this manner, Withold
not good from them to whom it is due, or from the Owners thereof, when it is in
thine hand to do it. Divines interpret those Owners, to be all persons in want,
all Subjects in any capacity of receiving any good from us. Beneficence, or a
disposition to do good to all, is with the Heathen Philosphers a branch of this
Virtue of Justice.

The Law of God, which is the Rule of Justice, commands to love our Neighbor
as our self. St. Paul interprets this Neighbor to be every other, Romans 13. 8.
He that loves another has fulfilled the Law. The Jews teach us, that the Law
is founded in the Name; that is, in the Nature of God. Man was made in the
Image of God. The Perfection then of the humane Creature, is the Image of that
Perfection, which is in the Divine Nature; the Law of the humane Nature is the
transcript of the Divine Nature. Our Lord Jesus interprets this Universal Law
of humane Commerce and Justice among men, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, after
this manner, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you. He lays the
ground of this Universal Justice in the Divine Nature, That you may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven. He adds for a clearer Conviction,
If you love them that love you, do not even the Publicans the same. He
concludes, by referring the perfection of men to the Divine Perfection, as its
Original and Law; Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.
Thus we see the Rule of Justice with God, and with men, to give our Love, and
all good according to our utmost power to every other, as to the Owner of that
love and good, to whom they are due.

2. The second Rule or Law is, that of Goodness. The Law of Goodness and its
Essence is to diffuse and communicate it self. The law of each thing is to act
according to its nature, of Light to shine; of sweet Waters, to send forth
sweet waters; of good, to do good. This Law is most deeply rooted, and highly
radiant in the Divine Nature, inasmuch as God is the Chief, the Universal, the
only good. Accordingly he makes his Rain, his Sun, both Celestial and
Supercoelestial in their season, to fall and to shine upon the Just and the
Unjust.

Having stated the Case between Free Will, and the Will predeterminated in its
Causes, and having set the Rule, by which the Case is to be tried; Let us come
to the Point, in which we must join Issue.

1. Both Cases agree in four grand Circumstances.

First, In both Cases, God makes man, and the Will of Man from nothing,
according to the absoluteness of his Will and Power.

Secondly, The event, which is eternal ruin and torment to the greatest part
of Mankind, is alike certain to both, by a certainty of infallibility.

3. God before, and in the making of his work, clearly sees, and perfectly
understands, that this will be infallibly the event of his Workmanship.

Can it then with any reason be thought that the event of the work of an
infinite Wisdom foreseen, should not be agreeable to the design of that
Wisdom, and the Will of that infinitely Wise Spirit, whose Power is as infinite
as his Wisdom?

4. God could have made man otherwise in a Divine necessity of being good and
blessed like himself, in a confirmed state of Grace and Glory, like the Elect
Angels and Saints. These are the Circumstances in which both Cases agree.

2. The grand d^fference between the two Cases, where they join Issue is this.
In that Case of Free Will Man perishes, because God withholds the good which
he has in himself, and might have given to him, that is a confirmation in
good. In the other case of the Will predetermined, Man perishes, because God
withdraws the good which he had once given him.

There are two Fathers, with their two little Children; one Father sets his
Child down so, that he may run into a pleasant Field, or a devouring Flood. He
fore-seeth, that he will certainly run, not into the Field, but into the Flood,
he suffers him to run and perish in the Flood, when he may as easily prevent
him, by laying his hand upon him, or taking him into his arms. The other Father
holds his Child fast and safe in his arms for a while over the cruel Flood,
then he casts him not in, but he takes away his arms, and leaves him by his
own weight necessarily to drop into the Flood and perish there.

I appeal now to every equal and impartial Judge, whether both these Fathers
seem not both guilty or innocent? Whether they be not both likely to be cleared
or convicted, if they be tried by those forementioned Rules of Justice and
Goodness? Is not the twofold Plea of both these Wills of equal force against
the Justice and Goodness of God? 1. Why has he made me thus certainly to
perish? What is it to me, whether this certainty be a certainty of
infallibility, only from the mutability of my nature; or a certainty of
inevitableness from the necessity of nature, while I certainly perish? 2. Why
is he yet angry? who has resisted his Will? Is not the certain event of his
Work clearly foreseen by him from the beginning, interpretatively his Will?

Which Opinion shall we prefer? That of the Will predetermined gives to God the
full Glory of his Sovereignty, Absoluteness, Wisdom, Power, making his work in
the whole, and in every part from the beginning to the end, one entire piece,
altogether dependent upon himself, wrought throughout by himself, and conducted
from one supreme principle, by one universal Form of the Divine Understanding,
and the Divine Image, to one Universal and Ultimate end, the Divine Glory. But
it seems to cast an imputation upon the Divine Justice and Goodness.

The other Opinion of Free Will seems to violate the Sovereignty and
Absoluteness of God, making his actings dependent upon the actings of Creature:
The Power of God, in giving to the Creature the determination of it self with
an independence upon him in these Cardinal Acts of the Will, upon which the
whole Circle and Globe of things, in the Divine Love, Justice and Wrath, in the
happiness or misery of Man from eternity, is turned about: His Wisdom, while
his work has breaches and gaps in it, like a Chain, whose links are not
fastened one in another, while the Harmony is thus broken, while all the great
effects and end of his work are casual, uncertain in their Causes and in their
Nature, inasmuch as all depend upon the free and fortuitous motions of the
Will, independent upon, and undetermined by all preceding, or superior Causes,
even the first and universal Cause it self. Together with all this Cloud which
the Opinion of Freewill casts upon the Glories of God in these other
Attributes, it does not at all excel the other Opinion in clearing the Glory
and Justice of the Divine Goodness. But while as with triumphant flourishes, by
Rhetorical Reproaches, it insulteth upon the other Opinion, as equalling God in
savage cruelness to the most arbitrary Tyrants, to the most inhumane and ferine
Man-eaters; It leaves God equally exposed to the same Reproaches, and it self
to the imputations of the same Blasphemies. I have now finished the first thing
which I had to propound in answer to that Argument against the predetermination
of the Will, which is taken from the goodness and justice of God.

2. The second thing which I have to propound is this, the holy Scripture in
many places seems plainly to assert the Divine Conduct, with a potent and
irresistible efficacy, in this dark part of things, the evil, as also the Glory
of the Divine Justice and Goodness in this conduct equal with that in the good.
I will instance in three Scriptures only.

1. My first instance is, that of Solomon, Eccles. 3. There is a season for
every thing, and a time for every purpose. A time to be born, and a time to
die. A time to kill, and a time to heal: A time to embrace, and a time to
refrain from embraces: A time to destroy, and a time to preserve: A time to
love, and a time to hate, from the first to the ninth verse. He, that is, God
has made every thing good in his time, verse 11, I know, that all which God
has done, this shall be for ever.

I shall draw forth this Scripture into a few brief Maxims, which seem to arise
naturally and clearly out of it.

1. There is all Variety in the Unity of the Divine work, a Variety extending
it self to the remotest, the highest Contrarieties Affirmative or Negative, to
the most distant perfections and privations. So the holy Spirit speaks
expressly in the general, every thing, every purpose, all that can fall within
the conception or comprehension of the vastest and most incomprehensible Spirit
has its season and time. So the holy Spirit speaks in particular love and
hatred, war and peace, embracing, and abstaining from embracing, life and
death, destruction and salvation, have their time and season.

Do not these particular instances expressly define the highest Contrariety
Affirmative, or Negative, of good, and evil, in their greatest Latitude, and
most universal Nature?

2. God makes all this Variety and Contrariety, and that in the lowest Region
also, even under the Sun, where it appears in a dark tempestuous scene of the
greatest disorder and confusion; There is a time, says Solomon, for all, and a
season for every purpose. The word Season signifies a set measured time, like
the times in Music; the time or season of each thing is its duration. Duration
is the mode or measure of the Essence, and so really the same with the Essence,
the Essence measured and bounded. As Essences and Habits, so also have
privations their measure and bounds, as Rests and Stops have time in Music.
Every Essence is the Birth of an Understanding, of which it bears the
impression and Seal. It is the work of an Understanding alone to give measure
and bounds to things. That then, which sets the time for all Varieties and
Contrarieties, Perfections and Privations, which consequently makes and
forms them, can be no other than the Divine Understanding, God in his
essential and eternal Word, which alone is above and before all things: So we
read here, concerning all these Contrarieties, That God has made them
beautiful (...) their time. God then has made them.

God makes all Contrarieties Affirmative and Negative, Perfections and
Privations; but after a contrary manner. He makes Perfections, as the Sun
makes light in the Air, after an Affirmative manner, by a positive presence,
power and influence.

He makes privations, as the Sun makes darkness and night, after a Negative
manner by his absence, by a drawing in his power, and binding up his sweet
influence. But this negation also, and so the privations, which flow from it
are called here by Solomon, (the Master of all Wisdom) Humane and Divine
Purposes. There is a season (says he) for every purpose; then he instances in
the Contrarieties following, Privations then are Divine purposes; that is,
Designs, Contrivances, Divine Forms, designed, contrived and measured in the
Divine Mind. Upon this ground some Philosophers teach us, That God is a
transcendent Good above all Beings, who comprehends Originally in himself not
only all Beings, but all privation of Being, which themselves also, as
darkness, night, absence and death in their place and time, are Forms of good,
although not Forms of Being and Divine Forms, Forms in Divinity, although not
natural Forms, nor Forms in natural Philosophy. But now I am passing to my
third Conclusion.

Thirdly, God makes all things, the Varieties and Contrarieties, beautiful in
their time. They are the express words of Solomon, from the height of all
created Wisdom, in its single state; They are the words of the Uncreated Wisdom
it self, speaking by Solomon, God has made all beautiful in his time, verse
11. This is manifestly spoken with respect to the general All in the first
verse, and the particular Alls of the highest Contrarieties, of the most
distant privations, enumerated in the following verses; the time of each Being
respects its relation to the whole. Beauty is an Harmony, and consists in
the suitableness or convenience of the several parts with each other, and with
the whole. Suitableness is a similitude, similitude is an Unity in Variety, an
Unity of Form in distinct Subjects, as the same sweetness and color in several
Flowers; The same beautiful light of knowledge, the same pure and lovely
sweetness of Spirit, which makes a Divine Friendship, the highest suitableness
and similitude. Philosophy teaches us, That the first Good, and the first
Unity, are the most proper Names of the most high God, having both the same
sense and force; It teaches us also, That the first Beauty is an effulgency
from the first Good; the first Good, or the first Unity shining out into a
distinct Image of it self, which is the first Distinction or Variety, and so
the supreme, the most ample Variety. All Beauty then in its kind and degree is
an Unity, diffusing it self, and shining forth into a Variety, where from the
whole, and from each part it reflecteth it self upon it self, with all its
united Virtues, Proportions, and Sweetnesses, meeting every where in each
point. Upon this ground we are taught, That the first Understanding is the
first Beauty, and that every Beauty is the Birth and Object of that
Understanding alone, at least in some impressions or footsteps of it. For
Beauty being the meeting of many parts or proportions in one undivided Point,
or an Unity in Variety, can neither be, nor be discerned, where there is not a
spiritual Form or Substance, which is it self an undivided Unity. Then does the
Beauty spring with a delightful sweetness both in the Subject and in the sense,
and all the various perfections or proportions of the whole, and of the several
parts concentring in each part, giving a perfection to it, and receiving a
perfection from it; and thus reflecting the distinct and united perfections of
the whole, and of all the parts, mutually and endlesly upon each other, and so
shine forth, carrying as in triumph upon every sparkling beam the multiplied
reflections, as so many Celestial Venus's exactly answering one another, and
all in one, into the beholding and ravished eye.

But this will be confirmed, and made more clear to us, in that which follows.

Fourthly, God makes all things for eternity, verse 14. I know that whatsoever
God does, that shall be for ever; God's ever is eternity. Eternity, as we learn
from Philosophers and Divines, is a perfect Unity, comprehending all Variety
within it self, even Time also, with all its successions, divisions, and
distances without and above time, succession, division or distance. It is
defined to be Tota totius boni simul, and semel possessio; A whole possession
of the whole good at once, and in one.

Thus God works all things from eternity in eternity, and for eternity; Thus
he makes every thing beautiful, as it is seen in the light of eternity, which
alone is the light of Truth: Time being the shadow of Eternity, and a Vail upon
it, for in this light, in which the Works of God are all wrought, in which
alone a true judgment may be made of them, every particular is seen, as it lies
in the whole, as a part of the Variety in the whole Variety, and in the Unity:
The whole Variety and the Unity appears entire and complete in every part, so
the fullness of the Divine Work, the fullness of the Divine Beauty and Glory,
spread through the whole Work, is united in every part, and fulfilleth all in
all.

Object. Perhaps you will say, Are moral privations as well as natural, is sin
also comprehended in this discourse? Has God also set a season for that, and
made that beautiful in its time? Then is it no more sin, if it be not a
deformity; Then is it a grace, if it be a beauty; A Divine Grace, if it be a
Divine Beauty; And a Divine Work, if it be made by God? How genuinely does the
Opinion of the Ranters flow from these Principles? That then only we see things
in the Light of the Gospel, the only true and eternal Light, when we see no
more any distinction between Good and Evil, Grace and Corruption, the deformity
of Sin, and the beauty of Holiness, the Works of God, and the Works of the
Devil, all (say they) seen by an eye truly illuminated is a Divine Work, a
Divine Grace and Beauty.

Answ. I reply first in general to ranting Principles and Practices, as St.
Paul does with abhorency and detestation, God forbid, far be it, far be these
Principles from the mind and life of every good man, as they are far from the
Divine Truth, from the Mind, Life, and Work of God, formed by the Devil, from a
Seed of enmity to God, unto the Glory of the Gospel, in the Womb of the
blackest darkness, in the darkest depth of the bottomless pit. But my more
particular and distinct Reply is this.

1. If sin be a positive Form of Being, then it is originally and eternally
comprehended in the first Being; the only Fountain of Being, it flows from,
it lies in the frame and order of the Universal Being; It bears upon it the
impression and character of the first Being with its Beauty, it bears a part
with the whole or universal Being, making up the perfection of the whole, and
clothed with it, crowning it, and crowned by it. All this upon that
supposition will necessarily be true of it, most properly, most directly by it
self, and not indirectly, or by accident only. But according to the narrow
compass of my knowledge or understanding, this supposition and consequent both
are contrary to the common current, and general stream, of Philosophy and
Divinity.

2. If sin be a privation of Grace, it is to be considered two ways: 1. In
Principio. 1. In its Principle. 2. In Termino. 2. In its Term or Subject.


1. The privation of Grace is to be considered in its Principle. As a privation
has no Being, so it has no Principle in a proper sense, if we may apply such
language to it. Privation, which is no Being with its particular modification
and bounds, has for its proper Principle Nonentity, or not Being, in its
universal sphere or compass, as the narrow and mid-land Seas are divided from
the vast unbounded Ocean.

But the Principle, from which the privation of Grace arises in its Subject,
by consequent and by accident, is Grace it self, in its first Principle,
withholding, or withdrawing it self. The Principle of Grace is God alone, the
Privation of Grace, as it is the withdrawing, or the withholding of this
Principle, in its Operations or Influences, so it is immediately consequent to,
originally comprehended in the Acts of the Divine Will, and the Divine Wisdom.
This privation of Grace, lying thus in the Principle of Grace, comprehended in
the Acts of the Divine Wisdom and Will, as their term and bound, has its part
and place in the Divine design: It is now and here in this Prospect, a part of
the Variety, as a Contrariety; It lies within the embraces of the whole
Variety, it lies in the bosom of the Unity, which is the Spring, the Seat, the
Throne of the Variety. So the whole Variety in the Unity, the Unity in its full
Variety, and at once, after the manner of eternity, spring up in it, shine
through it, look forth clearly and completely in the face of it, richly cloth
it all over. After this manner is the privation of Grace, in its Principle, in
the Acts of the Divine Will, and the Divine Wisdom, a Divine Workmanship, a
Divine Beauty. Agreeable to this, is that common Principle of our Divines, That
God has his influence upon Sin to order it, to bound it, in all its
circumstances, to reduce the disorder of it into order, to make it serviceable
to the order and the beauty of the whole.

In this sense Proclus affirms in his Divinity, That there is neither Privation
or Corruption, (...), in Totis, that is according to his sense. In Divine
Intellectual Spirits, which by the light of Eternity comprehend in themselves
in one view the whole Work of God, the whole nature of things, with all their
Varieties and Contrarieties, as an entire piece, an entire Image. The Divine
Workmanship, the Divine Beauty of the supreme Spirit, whose Unity is figured
upon. For, here the Divine Form and Beauty of the whole, resting upon every
Privation or Corruption, makes that also in the whole a Divine Unity and
Perfection.

2. Privation is to be considered in Termino vel Subjecto; that is, in the
Intellectual Spirit, as the Seat or Subject. Divines say, That the Act of
creating, as it is in God, its Principle is God; as it is in the Creature,
where it is terminated, is the Creature. In like manner, the Privation of
Grace, as it has its beginning in the Author of Grace, from an Act of the
Divine Wisdom and Will, designing, or determining the withholding of it, is
thus Divinely-beautiful and good. The same privation of Grace, as it is
terminated and seated in a created Spirit, is an evil of Sin, the highest
deformity, the first, the greatest evil, the fountain of all evils, most
properly, in its own nature, and in the Eye of God; As being the first and
foulest privation of the first Good, or the heighest Beauty, and the Fountain
of all following Privations, extending their poisonous and baleful shades to
the bottomless pit, to the nethermost Hell.

God says in the Prophet Isaiah of Nebuchadnezzar, he is a Rod in my Hand, but
he thinks not so. Nebuchadnezzar was, as in the hand of God, but as a
Musicians Quill. The Acts of Enmity, Tyranny and Cruelty exercised by him, and
upon the people of God, were from the Divine Musician, the Master of the
universal Music, skilful strokes and tender touches upon his Harps or Lutes,
which are his Saints, making the universal, the eternal Harmony complete in
their Persons, and in his whole Work. But the same Acts as they were from
Nebuchadnezzar, were a disorder, a breach of the Harmony, a Contrariety of an
enmity, which is the highest opposition to it. In the same sweet, and beautiful
sense of Divine Love, that loveliest figure of our Lord Jesus says to his
Brethen concerning their savageness, selling, sacrificing him to their envy and
malice, directed against the Divine Glory, declaring it self in him by heavenly
Visions; Ye thought evil against me, God meant it unto good, Genesis 50. 20. Thus
he comforted them, concerning their greatest sins, who were now humbled for
them.

After the same manner, to the same end, the Truth himself, the Lord Jesus by
his Spirit, strikes upon the heart of the Jews, who had crucified him, that
now themselves might bleed inwardly from the sense of that precious blood of
his, which they had shed, Act. 2. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and with wicked hands
crucified. See that Act, the most bloody and direful that ever the Sun saw, by
which the Suns Sun in Flesh, and on Earth suffered; the most mournful and
tragical Eclipse, attributed at once to the determinate Counsel of God, and to
the wickedness of men. Here that was eminently true, which was represented by
the former Scripture in the figure, that which men thought evil against their
Jesus, their only Joy, their God, their only Good and Glory; the same thing
(the cursed sale and cruel sacrificing of their God) he meant unto good, to
bring to pass, as at this day, to save much people alive, to bring many Sons to
eternal Life and Glory.

A learned man cites from Aristotle in his Metaphysics, a passage, in which he
affirms, That all the several parts are referred to the good of the order in
the whole as the end of all. Upon this he discants, that this good of order
depends upon the vilest, as well as the most precious things, that it
consists in the interval and proportion between these. That in respect to
this order the vilest things are determined and framed with the same most exact
skill, as the most curious things: Thus the sufferings of Joseph, the
crucifying of Jesus, as they lay eternally determinate in the determinate
Counsel of God, designed and fashioned there unto good, the highest Good, the
supreme End, the universal Order, the Divine Glory, which wraps up in it the
blessedness of all the Saints; so it self was a part of the Order, a part of
the Glory, a Grace, a Beauty, a Perfection, in the universal Order and Divine
Glory.

But as this proceeds from the hearts and hands of Men, the Instruments of it,
who like Nebuchadnezzar, thought not so, like Joseph's Brethren thought it for
evil, like the Crucifiers of Christ, were wicked in it; It is a deordination, a
disorder, a real evil, the worst of evils, not only a falling short of the
Glory of God, which is the Divine Image and effulgency in the Harmony of
things, as St. Paul describes Sin, nor yet a transgression and breach only of
the Law, which is the rule and measure of this Order, as another Apostle
defines sin, but an Enemy to it, as all sin is in its root and essence,
according to the Language of St. Paul in another place. So the discord in
Music is truly in its own particular nature, and apart a discord; so a black
crooked line, a dark shade, is in it self truly black, crooked, dark, offensive
to the eye, contrary to Light, Rectitude and Beauty; although the discord be a
part of the Harmony, this line and shade a part of the Beauty in the whole.

Object. But you will perhaps say, All these things seem hitherto to confirm
the Ranters in their licentious Principles and Practices. For, why should not
Sinners with the freedom of all sinful pleasures, rest and rejoice in the
absoluteness of the Divine Conduct, the Perfection of the Divine Order and
Beauty, which giudes them through all, which accompanies them in all, as the
Motion and Music of those heavenly Spheres, the Divine Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, comprehending all things with their courses, as Stars fixed in them;
what place is there here for shame, guilt, displeasure, or punishments?

Answ. I am sensible of the weight of this Work, in which I have by degrees
engaged my self, and how unfit my shoulders are for it. When that wise Queen of
Sheba saw the attendance of Solomon's Servants, and the order of his House,
there was no more any spirit left in her: What then is the order in the House
of God, in his Work from the beginning to the end of it? What the attendance
and ministry of all the parts of this Work, as the Servants in this House,
according to the Divine Order? What Cherubim or Seraphim would have any more
any Spirit left in it, while it contemplates this Order, which at the height of
its most ravishing Contemplations remains still, for the excess of Glory,
incomprehensible to it? This is that Wisdom in a mystery, which the most
princely Spirits, and Understandings of the whole Creations, in their natural
capacities, are unable to take in. What then is my spirit? what my faculty?
that I should be capable of taking off the Vail from this Divine Chain of
heavenly Pearl, so closely and curiously set; to behold in my self, by any
imperfect glimps; to present any glance of it, in its Divine luster and order
to other eyes, and to preserve it from the feet of Swine, or mouth of Dogs?
What am I? that I should attempt to take the Cloud off from this heavenly
Paradise, which is in the midst of us, before us, round about us, in which all
things, and motions of things spring and flourish as Divine Plants, in a Divine
Order, to open it to the view of the Sanctified Beholder, and at the same time
to defend it from profane Spirits, by the flaming Sword, by the sparkling,
penetrating, consuming, or refining beams of a Cherubim?

We will, therefore, penetrate so far as we may into this bright Deep, which so
delightfully swalloweth up the most Angelical Understanding: may our dependence
be upon that Spirit alone, which moves upon the shining Face of this Deep, and
is a Baptism of heavenly fire, purifying the beloved Soul, illuminating with an
heavenly Light the purified Eye, enflaming with heavenly Love the purified
Heart, and so initiating him into these holy mysteries; But keeping off every
profane Eye and Heart, by darkning, dazeling, affrighting, and burning upon
them.

Divine Truth is as a Rose-Tree, which as it has its beautiful and perfumed
Roses, so it has prickels to guard those Roses from rash and rude hands. My
Answer then to the forementioned Objection shall be divided into these gradual
steps.

First, No Sinner in a sinful state, no Soul in any act of sin, can see the
Divine Order in the Work of God, which Order is Jesus Christ, the Image, the
Wisdom, the Glory of the invisible God, figuring himself upon the whole Work,
from the beginning to the end, as one entire, lively, living Picture of
himself, himself being the Life of it, and shining in the face of it. Sin is
the Souls falling short of the Glory of God into the darknesses below, being
unable to raise its Understanding to the Beauty of this Light. Sin is the
violation or breach of this sacred Harmony, by which the Soul cuts off, and
separates it self from it, by which it over-casts the Glory, with a deep stain
and a black Cloud, which take it altogether out of its sight, all defilement is
an undue mixture. Every sin confounds the Soul, it wraps it up in an universal
confusion; sin is an enmity to this Harmony of things. It is a dark confusion
from below, rising up as a poisonous vapor to overspread the pure Light of
this heavenly Order. The Divine Order then and all things, as they lie in the
Divine Order, fight against sin and the sinner, their common and only Enemy; As
the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. St. John, the beloved
Disciple, having first declared God to be Light, without the mixture of any
Darkness at all; Then testifies, That if we say that we have fellow ship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. Sinners universally in
the Scriptures are styled Children of Darkness, and not of the Light. The Light
of the Divine Order and Glory, the acting of a part in this Divine Order, in
the light and truth of it, are inconsistent in any Spirit with the darkness of
sin.

2. If any Spirit by the highest improvement of its Intellectual Powers, by
Angelical assistances and heightnings, by the more sublime and supernatural,
though common illuminations of the Spirit of Grace himself, form to it self an
heavenl^ Image of this Divine Order, and that anointed by the same Operations
of the same Spirit with an heavenly Beauty, Sweetness and Virtue: This Spirit
thus far will be sanctified by this sacred Light, being taken up out of the
tempestuous Seas of its sins, into the sweet and pure, the calm and clear
stream of this Harmony, as into a River of Milk and Honey. But if this Spirit
do take from hence arguments to sin, encouragements to sin; now it no more
sees a right Image of this heavenly Glory, no not in the notion of it. As St.
Paul speaks of the Gospel, that which shines in this Spirit now, this Image
perverteth, and so the Order is changed into a disorder and confusion.

That Divine figure, sprung from the holy Spirit, is withdrawn, together with
that Spirit, a Spirit from below is sprung up, as by an hellish Magic or
Enchantment, into a counterfeit but perverted representation of that heavenly
Beauty. Thus sin deceives this Spirit, then defiles it, and so slays it, by
extinguishing the sweet of sight of its true Light.

Let such Spirits tremble, lest they be found in the number of those unhappy
Spirits, who having tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to
come, tread under their feet the Son of God; that good Word of God, that Wisdom
of God, that golden Chain of heavenly Harmony, in Divine Providence, and offer
injury and dispight to the Spirit of Grace, by which the Son of God sweetly
lives, and shines in the sacred order of things, and by which they were once
sanctified, having been washed in this Spirit of Grace, the Fountain of this
lovely Order, from the Pollutions of the World. Are not these the Spirits upon
whom wrath is to come so long as Christ shall Reign?

3. My two first steps have been as the preparatory to my Answer, like the
Porch to the main Building; my third step will bring you into the House it
self, which I shall endeavor to present to you as perfectly and perspicuously
as I can. In this will consist the strength, the beauty of the Answer: If I be
able to set it forth in its proper strength and beauty, I am sensible how far I
am below this; I therefore entreat those that read or hear this Discourse, for
their own sakes, and the Truths sake, to assist my weakness with the utmost
strength of their candor, attention and understanding.

Dionysius the Areopagite says in one place, That God reduces into order
those things which are out of order, and so establishes all in good and
beauty. There are two Rules and Maxims concerning Harmony and Order.

1. The Order and Harmony is there perfect, where the Variety is full.
Contrariety is an eminent part of the Variety, which enlarges the Variety, and
heightens the Harmony. Contraria juxt a se posita magis elucescunt, Contraries
illustrate and heighten one another.

2. The Order or Harmony is there most complete, where the Unity is preserved
most entire and conspicuous, in the fullest Variety. To this it is necessary,
that there be no where any leap or gap. This makes the Beauty, this makes the
Music, to which all Spirits sensual and Intellectual on Earth, or in Heaven,
spring and dance with sweetest and liveliest motions of delight and wonder,
when the Unity unfolds it self into its amplest Variety by just degrees, even
numbers, and exact proportions: When one extreme passes not to another, but
through all the middle terms that stand between these extremes. When one
passes not to three, but by two. Now the Unity is preserved, the middle term
being as the band, or the connection of the two extremes which joyneth them in
one. Now the Variety lies in the explication of the Unity, as it lies
complicated in the Unity, when as the Ternary by being first gathered up into a
duality, lies folded up in the bosom of the Unity; so the Unity from the bosom
of the duality, unfoldeth it self into the Ternary number. As in the blessed
Trinity, the Father shines forth in the Person of the Son, his Beauty, and
beautiful Object. Both these breathe forth themselves into the Spirit, the
mutual Love, the Marriage Bed of these two.

When thus the Varieties and Distinctions of things proceed by even and just
degrees, springing up naturally and immediately out of the bosom of each other,
as they lie naturally and nakedly in the bosom of each other, according to
their Divine Love-sport and play in the Palace of their Father, the supreme
Unity; now the Unity shines and triumphs with a full Joy and Glory in the Face
of the whole, and of each part. Now it flies, singing and sporting it self,
upon the golden wings of a most ravishing Harmony over all. According to these
two Rules, I shall proceed in my Answer, upon which it rests as upon its two
Pillars, Jakin and Boaz, Establishment and Strength.

God is the God of Order, says St. Paul. Order is the sacred Harmony of the
Divine Nature; the Divine Nature, the Divine Beauty, the Divine Music, all in
one; first, in their Architype, then figuring themselves upon the whole Work of
God; sweetly flowing through it all, shining, smiling, and playing every where
upon the face of it. This Order with a Divine skill, by just degrees, and
harmonious proportions, slides into its contrary, which is disorder, by which
it sets off, and heightens it self, making the Variety more full.

The first, the highest disorder, the fountain of all disorder is Sin. This is
the disorder of Intellectual Spirits, the chief of all the Works of God, the
Head, the Guide, the measure of all the rest. All the other Creatures are to
these, as light cast forth from the body of the Sun, which is the Sun's shadow,
or as shadows in this life, the shadows of this shadow. St. Jude expresses the
Sin of Angels by their disorder, The Angels which kept not their first state,
but left their own Habitation. State is in Greek Principle; they kept not their
first Principle, the supreme Unity; They held not the Head, as St. Paul
expresses it. They left their proper Habitation, the Divine Image, the Divine
Order and Harmony, their proper place in that Harmony, where they were
divinely-beautiful, and made an heavenly melody in the heavenly Consort and
Quire. The Psalmist says of man and his sin, Man being in honor continued
not, but became like the Beast that perishes. Honor is the delicate gloss, or
sparkling luster of a true Beauty, especially the beauty of Spirits,
delightfully shining forth, and reflecting it self upon all Spirits round about
it. The Divine Order and Harmony alone is the true beauty every where. This is
immortal.

Thus man by sin breaks himself off from, and so becomes like the Beast,
without any sense of, or sensible subordination to the Order and Harmony of the
whole. While he cuts himself off from this, he dies, his disorder is his death,
the true life of man vanishing, together with the Universal and Divine Harmony.

Every contrary supposes or constituteth its Correlate contrary: the contrary
to disorder is order. That then which the Scripture speaking with the tongue of
a man, gives the name of Displeasure, Anger, Wrath in God is no other than love
it self, in its naked and golden smiles; the Divine Beauty in the purity and
simplicity of its most native and unchangeable sweetness; the Harmony of the
Divine Nature, as a Glory eternal, calm, and Sunshine, opposing themselves to
the discord, deformity, enmity of Sin. As they say ill natures are tormented by
Music, as the evil Spirit in Saul was cast out by David's Harp: So is anger in
God, the most delicious, the most transporting melody, sounding through the
whole nature of things, from Jesus Christ, the Universal Image of the Divine
Nature, and the golden Harp of God, which either charms the Spirit of disorder,
or torments it.

Contrariorum remedium est contrarium, One contrariety is the cure and remedy
of another. Disorder is reduced into order by the Divine Harmony, setting it
self in an opposition and contrariety to it. While the opposition between these
contraries remains, they heighten one another. This state of opposition is in
the Divine Poem, or Work, as the scene of storms and tempests of Blood,
Confusion, of the blackness of Darkness, of Death and Hell. This scene coming
in, as a part of the Variety, sets off with a greater heightning, even to an
ecstasy of wonder and delight, the Sweetnesses, the Beauties, the Glories of the
Divine Harmony surrounding it, springing up, shining forth with a golden calm
and luster in the midst of it.

St. Paul divinely represents this to us, Romans 5. ult. The Law came in, that
Sin might abound; that where Sin abounded, Grace did superabound. That as Sin
had reigned unto Death, so Grace might reign through Righteousness unto eternal
Life by Jesus Christ our Lord. The Law which is the contrariety or opposition
between the Harmony of Divine Love, and the disorder, the confusion of Lust
((...)) came in by the by, or by the way, in the course or stream of the
heavenly Harmony, of the general and grand contrivance of Divine Love, to set
it off and heighten it, to raise and transcend all expectations, to extend and
surprise all Understandings, to make the melody of the whole more full, by the
Variety, and more gloriously triumphant by the Discords.

The evils of Sufferings, according to the Law of the Divine Harmony, which is
the Image of the Divine Wisdom, the first Beauty of Truth, the Image of the
Divine Will, the first love and goodness in the Creature, have their entrance
three ways.

1. Every Principle unfolds it self into all the powers and forms contained in
it; so the evil of Sin, which is the root of Disorder, springs up into all
manner of disorders, through Spirit, Soul and Body, into all manner of evils,
of blame, shame, pain, sorrow, torment. Lust when it conceives brings forth
Sin, Sin when it is perfect brings forth death. All Disorders, all Evils, all
Sufferings, are steps and forms of death.

2. The disorder of Sin, as it is the contrariety in the Harmony, is reduced
into order, and made harmonious in the whole, by the opposition and contrariety
of the Harmony, as in Music, the setting the Concord by the Discord, makes the
Melody. Now as the Harmony is all good, of Grace, Joy and Glory, every good, in
every kind, being a particular Harmony, in the universal Harmony; so where the
Universal Order, the Spirit of Order, which is the Spirit of Christ and God,
sets it self in a Contrariety to any disorderly Spirit; there all good of
every kind is withdrawn, all evil, as of loss, so of pain arises. God says in
Deuteronomy, If you walk contrary unto me, I also will walk contrary unto you.
Then all Plagues are reckoned up, the natural consequencies of this
Contrariety. Then says he several times over, If you go on to walk contrary to
me, I will yet bring seven times more Plagues upon you. As the opposition, and
disorder, and sin increases, so the Divine Harmony also is heightened in its
contrariety to it. All this is done, that the evil of sin and disorder, the
beauty and sweetness of the Divine Grace and Order, may set out the
Contrariety. This also is, that the distinction between the Ceator and the
Creature, the heavenly Image, the Original and Substance which is all pure
Light and Good, without any mixture of Darkness, or capacity of Evil. And the
earthly Image, the shadow, which is composed of a figure of Light and true
Darkness, from which sin, with all evils, spring and take life, according to
the Language of the Apostle, may be more clearly discovered. Thus by the
breaking in of sin, by blame and shame, and sufferings, which are as so many
Glasses to set before sin the deformity and ugliness of its own face; the
Creature, the shadowy Image is humbled, is broken to pieces, is brought into
the dust, that it may give all glory, and attribute all good to the Creator,
the Original, and eternal Image, that it may resign it self to it, seek its
rest alone in it, and that it may finally return into the bosom of the Original
Glory, which in these ways, by these degrees, through the breakings of it,
springs up in it, breaks forth through it, and brings it back again to
lie down eternally in that Bosom of purest Love and Light, where it was at
first from eternity, where it has been eternally hid with Christ in God. All
this God does, that he may eternally display the unsearchable Riches of that
Variety and Fullness which is in himself, that he may swallow up the
Understanding of every Creature, Man or Angel, into an admiration and adoration
of the incomprehensibleness of his Ways, his Wisdom, his Blessedness and
Glory, who at once brings forth these Varieties (which like Morning-Stars and
Sons of God in the purest unmixt Light and Love, dance and sing together in his
Bosom) into such fighting Contrarieties, upon the stage of the earthly and
created Image here below, making that the seat of deformity, shame, woe and
death, while it figureth out the highest Joys and Glories of eternal Life
above, who again gathers up all these jarring and tumultuous Contrarieties into
the first state and supreme Unity, where the Variety is far more vast and
boundless in the whole, far more full and distinct in each branch of it, where
the whole is all, an eternal Melody, an eternal Beauty, an eternal Joy,
unexpressibly Divine, pure and ravishing, where each branch, in its own
distinct Form, is a Beauty, a Melody, a Joy equally pure, perfect and ravishing
with the whole, being crowned with the Unity and Eternity, which is the highest
Unity. This St. Paul represents to us clearly and fully in the person of each
Saint, when he says, Heights and Depths, things present, and things to come,
this World, Life and Death, all things are yours, and you are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. All things are Divine, distinct eternal Glories in the person
of a Saint, as a Saint is taken up into the Glory of Christ, as Christ is in
the Glory of God.

3. The evil of Sufferings is the proper way, in the Universal Order, by which
the disorderly Spirit, with its disorders, returns into order, to possess and
enjoy in it self the Divine Beauty and Music of the whole. Guilt is the
Obligation upon each Spirit, from every Act of disorder, unto the Divine
Justice, which is the Law of the Divine Harmony, seated originally in the
Divine Nature from the opposing it self to the disorderly Spirit, and the
reducing it by the opposition into order.

This is done three ways, 1. By Expiation. 2. By Compensation. 3. By Abolition.


1. Expiation or atonement is the bringing in of something Sacred, Divine and
Perfect. The Heathen in their Expiations generally made use of brimstone, which
seemed to have something Sacred and Divine in it, as appears by the Greek name
(...), which signifies both brimstone, and something Divine, perhaps the
reason is its aptness to take fire, and its resemblance in its pure and fiery
flame to the Celestial Bodies.

2. Compensation is of like to like by an equality, this turns the Discord
into a Concord, and gathers it up into the Unity.

3. The Abolition is the effacing and blotting out the disorder, bringing it
forth now into order, where the deformity of the discord is swallowed up into
an amiable and beautiful Harmony. This is the chief part of the expiation or
atonement in which the Ancients to this end made use of a living stream or
fire, as things Sacred and proper for purification. But this whole work is
comprehended in the mystery of Christ, it is begun and finished in his Person
alone literally or mystically.

1. Expiation. Jesus Christ, the eternal Spirit of the Divine Order and Harmony
springs up in the midst of the disorder, and takes it all upon himself, by
taking Flesh. This is the beginning of the Expiation, this is the truly sacred
Divine and perfect thing, brought in to expiate the confusion and the
abomination: This is the supreme Unity, the supreme Harmony, Love it self, the
Prince of Peace and Harmony, the God of Order discovering himself, as a sacred
and eternal Root at the bottom of the disorder, in whom that also stands after
an orderly and harmonious manner, while he himself also is springing up through
it. This is the beginning of the Expiation.

2. Compensation. This Jesus, which is Divine Love it self, appearing in the
enmity, the Divine Harmony it self, in the disorder, seats himself, as the mark
of the opposition and contrariety, by which the Divine Order, in the Spirit of
Order, which is himself, sets it self against the Disorder, to subdue and
reduce it; he receives himself into his own bosom and heart, all the invenomed
arrows and fiery darts which the Justice and Wrath of God, that is Love it
self, casts forth in its highest opposition, and contrariety to the enmity.

This contrariety of the Divine Love to the enmity, which has violated and
slain this Love, in breaking the Harmony, is maintained by a War of Blood and
Fire, till it come to its ut most height, till the contrariety of Love to the
enmity be fully displayed and discharged, till the enmity and disorder, that
work of the Devil, be subdued and destroyed, together with the dissolution of
flesh it self. The earthly and shadowy Image, the seat and ground of sin and
enmity, by the death of Jesus Christ, who has taken our Sins and Nature upon
himself, as the first root and ground of all.

O sweet and Divine Mystery! O musical Discord, and harmonious Contrariety! O
peaceful and pleasant War! where the supreme Love stands on both sides, where,
as in a mysterious Love-sport, or a Divine Love-play, it fights with it self,
suffering for it self, dying by it self, and so it self sinking by death into
its own sweetest bosom and dearest embraces, the fountain of Life, the center
and circle of all Delights: O bitter Peace! disordering Melody! broken and
unpleasant Harmony! where Love suffers all evil, and is slain on both sides, to
make perfect the Harmony. But oh full Compensation! O full and sweet Harmony,
arising out of the Discords, swallowing up the Discords themselves into the
most pure, the most perfect, most pleasant melody; whereas Love first suffered,
and was slain by the disorder and enmity of Sin; so now Love again suffers,
and is slain for the enmity, for sin, by the wrath of God against sin, that is,
by the Love in its contrary to the enmity. Thus Love it self, in the place of
us all, most lovingly, and beauty it self, most beautifully is become a
Sacrifice for it self to it self.

3. Abolition. The last step in the way of reducing disorder into order, is the
Abolition or Renovation; this is the finishing of all in the Person of the Lord
Jesus. The Lord Jesus is the complete Image of the invisible God. Thus he
comprehends the whole Creation in himself, for all the Creatures are so many
expressive or manifestative figures of the Divine Glory. We read in Scripture,
That the things which are seen; that is, all the created Objects of Sense or
Reason, Humane or Angelical, stand up out of the things which are not seen.
Jesus Christ then being the first, and highest Image of the invisible God, as
he is in his own unaccessible Light, is the Root out of which, and in which the
Creation stands; the Lord Jesus, as this universal Person, goes down into the
Grave, and carries thither, into those lowest shades, at once with himself all
Images of things, the Original and the Copy, the Substance and the Shadow, the
Uncreated Glory and the created Figure. So Christ dies, and the whole Creation
dies with him, so he makes an end of Sin and Transgression. Here he sings that
triumphant Song, O Death, I am thy death. Here all the evil of Sin and
Suffering, of Disorder and Contrariety, which, as a grave, had swallowed up the
whole Creation, is swallowed up into Victory in the grave of Christ.

In this Divine Death, the whole Creation is dissolved, and comes to its last
end, in its last end it meets with its beginning, falling quite out of it self,
falling down out of its own empty, obscure shade and nothingness, it falls into
the bosom of its heavenly and eternal Mother, the Original Glory.

The Original Glory in the Person of Christ has descended thus low, together
with its Birth and shadow; Here it finisheth its descent in its shadow, here
diffusing it self and its eternal Light through these shades of death, and
through the whole Creation, in these shades it makes it self perfectly one, by
an entire and mutual communion in death with all the Creatures, whose life was
a continual War with it. The Light of the heavenly Image poured forth in these
shades of death, flowing through the created Image, overflowing and taking it
into it self, is that precious and Divine Blood, which by its mysterious
washings makes the crimson and scarlet sins or stains upon this Image whiter
than the whitest wool or snow.

In this Divine Death, the shadowy Image, with all its evils of disorder and
enmity, are now past away for ever, in respect to any reality, substantiality,
or subsistence in themselves; they remain only as figures, in the Divine shade
of this death, in which shade the heavenly Image bears all in its pure,
although obscured bosom. It is now the Root of eternal Love, and eternal Life
in Death, receiving into it self all the Creatures, with all their disorders
and enmities. They all now do here put off their Realities, and become only
mysterious shadows, through which the supreme Beauty and Sweetness springs
and sporteth it self. But the Original Glory, in the Person of Christ, having
now finished the mystery of its descent in the Creature, and in this final
dissolution taken the Creature again into it self as its first and proper Root,
begins now its return and ascent. As the Lord Jesus died, so he rises again
an universal Person, with both Images, created and uncreated, united in himself.

The eternal Glory, once in the first Creation, veiled it self beneath a
shadowy Image, to die in that Image; accordingly he died with it, and for it.
But now he rises again, in the brightness of his heavenly Image, he raises
the whole Creation together with himself, as his proper and immediate Birth, as
its purest and loveliest Bride, in the most intimate, entire, and mutual Union
with it self, in all its glories, thus to live for ever in the richest and
closest embraces of each other.

Here now ye have a threefold Resurrection in one:

1. The Divine Image, which is eternal Love and life it self, as it had been
veiled, as it had suffered and died in the Creature, rises sweetly and
gloriously from beneath all those shades into its own freshest and fullest
Beauties: Thus it rises in the midst of the created Image.

2. The created Image, was once a fair entire Picture, of the eternal Beauty,
living a Divine Life, breathing a Divine Sweetness, being a Divine Paradise in
it self, to it self, while it stood as a pure resemblance of its Divine
Original. But by its fall into the inf^rnal Deep of Sin, it stained it self, it
broke it self all to pieces, it buried its Life, Beauty, and Sweetness in a
dreadful and hateful death. Now having put off that death, in the death of
Christ, it rises again in the bosom of the Original Glory, not only in its
fullest Beauty and Sweetness, but a Beauty and Sweetness far more excelling. It
was before its fall, a sweet shade, an earthly Paradise. The shade vanished
into darkness, the Paradise faded and disappeared. But now it rises as the
^un-shine of the Godhead, as the sweetest Light, at once lying in the Bosom of
the highest Glory embraced by it, and surrounding that Glory with its embraces,
by a mutual, immediate, and eternal Union.

3. The fall, the disorders, the wounds and death of this shadowy Image, so
dreadful and hateful as they stood in time, now also have their Resurrection,
and put on a new appearance in eternity: Having now passed through the Death
and Sufferings of Christ, where they put off all their evil, by putting off all
their own proper reality; they stand in his Resurrection as figures of eternal
Glories, which are themselves also Glories in the Bosom of their Glorious
Original: They are seen now, as they eternally spring up and flourish in the
Garden of the Divine Mind, as they bear their part, and shine in the universal
Beauty of the Divine Image and Work. As the eternal Original with its
Paradisical shadow lay hid in them, like a Flower in its Seed in the Earth, as
both these Glories now are sprung forth through them, and bring forth them
again, as eternal Lights, in the light and circle of their own Beauties: So is
Christ in the circle of the Throne of God, as the Lamb that was slain, where
his wounds appear in his glorified Person; not as Wounds, but as Beauties; not
as Fractures or Stains, but as Diamonds or Pearls in the Crown of his
Righteousness and Glory. Perhaps I may seem too long upon this part of my
Discourse, but we read of a Sanctuary into which the Holy Spirit enters, when
it is perplexed with the outward face of the Divine Providence in the evil of
sin and Sinners, and of Sufferings to the Saints. There it sees the end of
all. There the mystery opens it self into an universal Uniform piece, and
prospect of Divine Beauty and Delight, Psalm. 73. If I be not deceived, Jesus
risen from the dead, in this order and manner is this Sanctuary, this Temple of
Grace and Truth. He has now rent the Vail of his Flesh, and opened himself
into an universal eternal Spirit. He now shines out with a sweet amiable
clearness and glory, into an universal eternal Light.

In this Spirit, which is this Light of Life, the whole course of his Work in
the Creation, and in Providence, his Incarnation, Sufferings and Death, present
themselves in all the smallest threads and contextures of them, as one Di^ine
piece, as full of Divinity every where. Here all in the whole, and in the
parts, present themselves to the spiritual Eye, as beautiful and blessed
Spirits, in numberless troops, by a Divine sport figuring their immortal
Glories in all Varieties of lights and shades, hiding their Glories beneath
these figures, breaking with their Glories out of these figures, as so many
Suns out of their Clouds, showing their figures themselves as Glories. Like the
Palms, and Lilies, and Cherubims of the Temple, carved first in Cedar, and then
covered with massy Gold. In the mean time all these numberless Spirits, in
their whole play from the beginning to the end, are comprehended in this one
Spirit, the universal Spirit of Harmony, Order, Beauty, and pleasantness in
all. Jesus risen from the dead, the first, and the last, the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever.

O the Wisdom! the Power! the Grace! the Glory! the unsearchable Riches of the
mystery of God in Christ! What a depth is this without any bottom? What an
height without any bound? What a breadth? what a length without any measure?
How does it stretch forth it self beneath all, above all, through all, beyond
all things, or thoughts? Who can ever satisfy himself with any the richest,
the fullest forms of words or conceptions, in conceiving or expressing this
Mystery, this Jesus.

But I have now brought to an end, according to my weak manner, the reducing
the disorder it self into order, in the Person of Christ, by these three sacred
steps of Expiation, Compensation, Abolition, of the Disorder in the Order, or
which is the same, the Renovation of the Order in all. I have endeavored to
show how every thing of part^cular order and disorder, has been made beautiful
in its season, keeping its time in the Universal Harmony of this Song of the
Lamb, in the Music of the eternal Word.

I have also attempted to open that mystery, how this Work of God, in every
part of it, with its Beauty, is for eternity, the light of eternity, being the
only light of Truth, with a golden Calm, an unstained Sunshine, of purest
perpetual Peace, Pleasantness and Glory. In this light of eternity alone, is
the Work of God seen aright, in the entire piece, in the whole design, from the
beginning to the end. As all times appear in this Light, less than a moment, a
point, nothing, being as eternity in the undivided Unity of eternity; so are
all the disorders of time, no more, not so much as a shadow in a dream that is
past, but as the highest and sweetest Harmony in the undivided Unity of the
eternal Harmony.

All this is true in the Person of Christ, to which the Scriptures give a clear
Testimony. All things are gathered together in one in Christ, both which are in
Heaven, and which are on Earth, Ephesians. 1. 10. Having made peace through the
blood of his Cross, God has by him reconciled all things to himself by him,
whether they be things on Earth, or in Heaven, Col. 1. 20. These are true in
us, as Christ springs up in us. Then only are we our selves baptized. Then only
do we see all things unto us, together with us, baptized into the sweet,
shining, boundless, bottomless Sea of this universal and eternal Harmony, when
we are baptized into Christ. As many of us as are baptized into Christ, are
baptized into his Death, and into ^is Resurrection from the dead. How then can
we live any longer in sin, being now dead to it? How can we live any life
besides that of Holiness and Heaven, being now risen again with Christ into the
Glory of God? Thus St. Paul excludes all pleas of the Flesh, for a
licentiousness in sin, from this Doctrine of the free and rich Grace of God in
Christ, Romans 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.

I am now come to the end of my design upon this Scripture, Eccles. 3. I have
been large in the prosecution of my design upon this Scripture; my purpose was
to reconcile the absoluteness of the Divine Sovereignty, Wisdom and Power,
through this whole Work, with the Divine Justice, Goodness and Glory, in the
determination of the Will, by its essential Principles, by the uninterrupted
order, and connection of causes; by the first and universal Cause, which is most
intimate to every effect, and works most of all; Secundum modum naturae, in a
natural way, as being the n^tura naturans.

I promised two other Scriptures, for the making good of this design; I will
lightly touch them, and so hasten to an end of my Discourse.

The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the Wicked for the day of
evil, Prove. 16. 4.

There are four parts clear and distinct in this Scripture.

1. An efficient cause or beginning, The Lord Jehovah.

2. The final cause or end, For himself.

3. The universality of the effect, and influence of these Causes, The Lord
has made all things for himself.

4. A confirmation of this universal influence of these Divine Causes upon
every Effect, by a particular and most eminent instance; Yea even the Wicked
for the day of evil.

Three things are remarkable in this particular instance:

1. It is brought in as an anticipation of an Objection, and with a twofold
Asseveration; Yea, even. Here in this point men are apt most of all to doubt
the continuation and universality of the Divine influence. What, say they, has
God made all things for himself? What the evils of Sin and of Suffering? Here
men of greatest wit through all Ages have been at a stand, not knowing how to
fasten the golden Links of the Divine Chain, in the Work of God, one within
another. Here they have broken the Chain of the holy and heavenly Order. Here
therefore the Divine Wisdom by Solomon peculiarly fasteneth the Links, and
makes the Chain entire, that he may enclose the whole Work, as one complete
piece, within the same Divine beginning and Divine end, knit together by the
same Divine influence, running equally through all parts, and making all one;
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the Wicked for the day of
evil.

2. The effect in this particular instance is remarkable. This effect is, every
wicked person under the formality of a wicked person. As a Creature, an Angel,
or a Man, he cannot be the subject of any question or doubt. The evil of sin,
by which he is constituted, and denominated wicked, is clearly designed by this
emphatical instance. I have often already expressed the manner of the influence
and operation of the Divine Power and Providence, upon the evil of sin, and so
of a Sinner, under the formality of sin. All evil being a defect, depends upon
the first Cause, together with all intermediate Causes, in their deficiency
only, and in the ordination of circumstances.

3. This instance brings in this particular effect in its inseparable connection
with its subordinate end; The day of evil. The Lord has made all things for
himself; yea, even the wicked person, who becomes wicked by the evil of sin. He
has made the inseparable connection between the evil of sin and the evil of
sufferings. He has made this evil person by an inviolable Order for the day of
evil, the evil of Sufferings. He has made this evil person, this evil of
sufferings, the connection between these two, as the effect and next subordinate
end; For himself, the Ultimate and last end, the blessed, the glorious Crown of
all. I will finish this Subject with two or three brief and clear Observations
drawn from this Text.

1. The beginning and the end of all things, are the same. God in his most
glorious Essence, the only, the supreme, the universal, the essential Good, an
infinite Good.

2. The end is the first and chief Cause, moving all other Causes, and
directing their motions from the first, to the last motion.

3. All things are bounded by these two; The first beginning, and the last end.
All things in every step of all effects, of all subordinate ends, are in
motion, and in the way to the last end. They rest not, they attain not their
mark, to which they are designed, from the beginning by the first and universal
Mover, till they arrive at this their last end.

4. ^he last end gives amiableness, beauty and perfection to all things, as the
means of bringing forth this end. It gives this beauty and perfection to them
three ways:

1. It self runs along through all things, in their whole way to it, as the
first universal Mover, as the first and universal virtue and force which moves
in all, and moves all throughout from the beginning to the end.

2. It comprehends all in it, as the bosom, or nest, in which the whole is
designed and formed.

3. It rests upon all things in every part of the work, and step of the way, as
the life and light of the universal Order and Harmony; which attracts, directs
and conducts all to it self.

4. It gathers up all things at last into its self, as the term and mark to
which all things move, in which alone all motions cease, and are changed into
rest. Every thing in its Ultimate end gains its perfection, its true and
proper self. Every thing is so far it self, as it is perfect; so far as it is
imperfect, it falls short of it self; every imperfection being a privation of
being, and so to each self a privation of it self, according to its degree.
This is the sweet and musical close. This is the bright and beautiful crown of
all things, the beginning and the end meeting in one.

5. The end it self, as it is the first Mover, so does it last of all cease
from its motions, and terminate them in its own beatifical Rest. This is the
end perfectly accomplished, when all things tending to this end, meet in the
perfection of the end. The end therefore never returns to its rest, till it
rests with its full perfection in every part of the Work, in every particular
form directed to it self. Our Divines teach us, That the Glory of God is the
Ultimate end of all things, not the essential, but the manifestative Glory; so
the Glory of God, then only finds rests, when it rests with a full revelation
of it self, unvailing all its Beauties, unfolding all its Sweetnesses in the
bosom and face of each part of the whole Work of God. So the Divine operation
and motion cease not in any part of this Divine Work, until all rest in the
bosom of this Glory, perfectly displaying all its Pleasures and Delicacies upon
it: For this manifestative Glory is the end of all. The end mutually gives to,
and takes from all the means to the end, rest and perfection. Thus God has
made all things, all effects, with all their subordinate ends, yea, even the
wicked also, for the day of evil, his subordinate end; for this Great and
Ultimate end, himself, in the brightness and full out-shinings of his Glory.

I pass now to the third Scripture, Romans 11.

If I deceive not my self, I seem to my self to discern in this Scripture a
rich Mine of Divinity, of Divine Truth and Glory, in which no Workman has yet
labored. But it is not agreeable to my present time, or purpose to open, or
point out this Mine, if I were furnished with an heavenly strength and skill
sufficient for it. I shall now only touch at some verses in this Chapter, which
contibute to my present Design, verse 23. God has shut up, or as it is in the
Greek, God has locked up together all in unbelief, that he may have mercy upon
all. St. Paul in this Chapter sets before us, God as the most skillful Painter,
sweetning and beautifying his Work in the whole, and in the parts of it, by the
mixtures and interchanges of Light and Shades, Grace and Severity, still
terminating all in the sweetness and light of the Divine Grace, as the end of
all.

From this Contemplation he raises himself into, and loses himself in the
pleasant heighths of a Divine Ecstasy, verse 33. O the depth of the Riches, and
the Wisdom, and the Knowledge of God: How unsearchable are his Judgments, and
his ways past finding out? Every Work of God has a threefold Depth of Riches.

1. A Depth of Riches, the riches of Power, Purity, Beauty, Love, Goodness,
Grace and Glory.

2. A Depth of Wisdom, of Divine Contrivance, of perfect Harmony.

3. A Depth of Knowledge, comprehending all endless and infinite Varieties in a
clear view at once.

In every part of the Work of God do all these Depths meet, which swallow up
the most capacious Spirits of Saints and Angels into themselves, but can be
fathomed by no Spirit. The distinct judgment in which any one, the least piece
of this Work is wrought, has so boundless a depth, height and compass in it,
that it is altogether unsearchable. The way of God in it is a Divine secret,
and mystery of Grace and Glory, which has such recesses, such endless
Varieties in it, that it cannot be traced by the Foot, or discovered by the eye
of any Creature.

St. Paul foundeth this incomprehensibleness in the Work of God, upon the
incomprehensibleness of the Divine Mind. He foundeth this unbounded Treasure of
Divine Goodness and Glory in the Work of God, upon the absoluteness and freedom
of the Divine Nature, ver. 35. For who has known the mind of the Lord? and who
has been his Counselor? or who has given first to him, that it may be given
again to him, by way of return or exchange. As are the Riches of the Divine
Mind, which first forms in it self the Ideas of all its work, and then forms
every work according to that Idea which rests upon every Work, as the Seal upon
the Print in the Wax; such are the Riches of God in every part of his Work. As
is the absoluteness and unlimitedness of the Divine Nature, which consulteth
with nothing, considers nothing in the Creature, but takes the measure and
the manner of all his Works from eternal patterns, in his most glorious
Essence, and is put on, and takes the rise of all his Works, from the
ever-ful, ever flowing, overflowing fountain and boundless Riches of his
Godhead; such are all the operations and emanations of the Divine Nature. Thus
St. Paul concludes, and justifies the Divine Wonders of incomprehensible
Riches, Wisdom, Knowledge: The Divine Wonders of an absolute, unconfined
freedom in all the Works of God, by the cause of all, verse 36. Because of him,
and by him, or through him, and to him, are all things.

Plato makes three Causes alone, the Efficient, Formal, or Exemplar, and Final.


St. Paul wraps up all these in one, in God alone. He is the beginning, the
way, the end of all. He is the Fountain, out of which they all arise in their
several streams: He is the Chanel in which every stream runs along; He is the
Sea, into which they all flow; where they lose not their Distinctions, but rise
up to the perfection of them, in this Marriage, with the first, the full and
unbounded Glory.

To what unbounded expectations of Divine Riches, surmounting all expectations
in every Creature, may we now raise our thoughts, when the beginning, the way,
the end of every thing, thus lies in the Godhead? when this Bosom, the
Treasures of all Glories and Sweetnesses, is to every thing its Fountain, in
which it rises; its Chanel, in which it runs along; its Sea, in which it ends.
How justly does St. Paul set a Crown of Glory upon the Head of the Deity in all
its Works, To him is glory in the Generations, so may we most properly read the
words. How sweetly does he seal up his own Faith, Understanding, Love, in
sweetest Rest, and fullest Joy, with this Glory, Amen. Of him, through him, and
to him, are all things; To him be Glory for ever, Amen.

Thus, this last Scripture in a clear Harmony, with the other two, seems to
give a sweet and full close to the Divine Music of this heavenly Truth, and
leaves these divinely-delightful touches upon our Spirits.

1. God, the only Good, is equally absolute, entire, universal, in shutting, or
locking up all men in Unbelief, the Prison, the Dungeon of deepest darkness; as
in showing mercy, which is the opening to them, the taking them into the Palace
of eternal Light, the Light of Life, the Light of Love, the Light of Glory. He
shuts, and none can open; he opens, and none can shut. These are the two
Cardinal Acts, the shutting up under belief, and the showing mercy. Upon which
the whole work of the Divine Providence moves through Earth, through Hell and
Heaven, through Time and Eternity.

2. Showing mercy is the end, shutting up in unbelief is the means or way to
this end. Mercy is one of the sweetest names of Love, the shutting up in
unbelief is then an Act of Divine Love: For all motions to the end, are in the
virtue of the end; the end is the light, the life, the loveliness of the means.
All means and ways to the end, are first comprehended in the end. The end by it
self immediately forms them upon the Spirit of the Agent: The end through the
Spririt of the Agent brings forth it self into them, as so many tendencies to
it self, as so many gradual, orderly springings forth of its self. The end at
the last comprehends them all again in it self, as making up the perfection
of the end, and having their perfection in the end. Thus the severity and wrath
of God, in its severest Act, the shutting up men under unbelief, is Love, and
divinely-lovely.

3. God, and Love, in this Work of his, appear to be both one. For Love is the
end of Wrath; By being the end, it is also the beginning, and the way. So also
is God, For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things; to whom is the
glory through all Generations. The highest expression of God, unto our
capacity, as he is in the simplicity of his Divine Essence, is Love. This is
his Glory, as he is unvailed, unclouded. This is that that darkens and thickens
it self into every Vail or Cloud. This is a sweetning, a gilding upon every
Vail, every Cloud. God, as he is Love, is the beginning, the way, the end of
every Work, through every Generation; and so the Glory in every Work, to all
generations.

4. God in his Work is absolute, and absolutely free; He takes no counsel, he
is touched with no motive from any thing without himself. The reason and rule
of all his Works, is alone from himself from within: All within is the Unity,
the simplicity of the Divine Essence, incapable of any mixture or composition;
all mere, clear, pure Love.

5. The Work of God, in shutting up in unbelief, and showing mercy, is an
unfathomable Depth: But is a shining Depth of most perfect Beauty and sweetest
Light. For it is a Depth of Divine Wisdom, it is a Depth of Glory and
unsearchable Riches. It is a most delicious Depth of Divinest Love, the
unsearchable Treasure of all the most lovely, and most loving Sweets and Joys.
The work of God is unsearchable, incomprehensible, infinite; but an
unsearchable ^ncomprehensible, infinite Love and Glory. Let us therefore e^pect
in this Work to meet with Difficulties too great for our Understanding. Let us
be content to say, Here is a Depth unfathomable, not to my Spirit alone, but to
every finite Spirit of Man or Angel. Then let us add from our knowledge of
whom, whose the design and the work is; It is a lovely, a delightful Depth; a
Depth of purest Glories, and richest Loves: So let us gladly cast our selves
into it, to be swallowed up by it; concluding all with these words, I cannot
receive, nor comprehend thee. Do thou receive and comprehend me. O Depth
infinitely too glorious to be comprehended by me! O my self infinitely blessed,
in being comprehended by thee!

I come now to the third Reason I am to answer.

Reason 3, The Language of the Scripture, in the whole current of it, seems
generally to run along upon this ground, of an undetermined freedom of the Will
of Man. The Divine Will is cleared from the evils of Sin and Suffering. The
Will of Man is charged with them. Agreeable to this, are the Divine Precepts,
Prohibitions, Promises, Threatenings, Admonitions, Reproofs, Complaints,
Expostulations, which compose a great part of the sacred Writings.

Answ. I answer by a distinction; This manner of Language, As I live, I desire
not the death of a Sinner. Why will ye die, O house of Israel? with all
expressions like to these, are either,

1. Proper and plain. 2. Figurative and mysterious.
1. If they be proper and plain, two great Difficulties arise.

1. The true and living God, thus represented, appears like Homers Gods, and
the Gods of the Poets. Weak, querulous, passible, ever in contentions and
combats.

2. While the Divine Will in that, on which it fixes it self with so great
truth and intention, is capable of being opposed and defeated, it appears
destitute of Wisdom, Power and Blessedness.

2. If they be figurative and mysterious. The figures first are to be
determined, and the mystery veiled, beneath the figure, to be discovered;
before we can establish any certain, or clear sense upon them.

1. The figure made use of in this manner of Language, is, by the consent of
Divines, complicated of an Anthropopathy, and a Metonymy.

2. The Anthropopathy is then, when passions proper to man are attributed to
God.

2. The Metonymy is of the cause set for the effect; and the things signified
in the place of the sign.

So those changeable passions in created Spirits, which bring forth and express
themselves by changes of good or evil; the effects and signs of those passions
are applied to the unchangeable God, when he brings forth the like changes in
his Work. So the Jews say, That the holy Scriptures speak with the Tongue, and
in the Language of a Man; But all such figurative expressions concerning God,
are to be understood with this Caution. Every thing indeed in the Creature is a
figure, which has its Original pattern answering to it in the Divine Nature:
But all imperfections attending the figure, are to be removed: All perfections
in their utmost heights, and most absolute fullness, are to be attributed to the
Original pattern, when by the shadowy figure in the Creature, you look to the
exemplar and primitive truth in God. So by these changeable and diverse
passions in man, you are to represent to your selves in God, a Goodness, a
Power, an unsearchable Riches of Variety, and manifoldly various Wisdom; and
all these apart, and together, with the most absolute simplicity, and highest
Unity in the Divine Essence, producing all diversities of accidents, all
changes of good and evil in the Divine Design, which comes forth at once, as
one piece, divinely Rich, in all Varieties from him, and as one entire Image
filled with the riches of all distinct Beauties of him, who is unchangeable,
and most perfectly one.

2. Having thus determined of the Figure; Let us try to lift up the Vail, and
discover the Divine Mystery beneath this Figure.

I shall endeavor to take a Prospect of this Divine Secret, and hidden Glory,
by several steps or degrees.

1. The letter of the Scripture, in the general ^ream and current of it, is the
Ministry of the Law. So St. Paul in diverse places distinguishes the Law and
the Gospel, or the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
Who has made us able (speaking of God) Ministers of the New Testament, or the
New Covenant, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives life. In the following verse, the engraving of the Law in
Tables of Stone, and Moses are mentioned. Again, in prosecution of the same
Discourse, Moses with his Vail is brought in; To this are opposed in the 17.
and 18. verses, The Spirit of the Lord, the liberty of the Spirit, the sight of
the Glory of the Lord, with an unvailed Face, the tranfiguration of the Soul
into the same Image, from glory to glory, and all this by the Lord, the Spirit.

These things laid together, seem to make it clear, that in the sense of the
holy Apostle; the letter, the proposal and pressing of any truth or goodness
upon us, in a literal and moral way only, whether outward or inward, amounts
to no more then the old Covenant, the Ministry of the Law: on the other side
the new Covenant, the Gospel is the Spirit himself ministering himself through
the letter to us, taking off the Vail which lies upon the letter, and upon our
hearts, bringing us forth into the Liberty, the open Light, and the Divine Life
of the Spirit, giving us a naked view of the Face of Christ, in his spiritual
and heavenly Glory, and by this view transforming us into living Images of the
same Glory, springing up, and increasing in us unto the perfect day of
eternity. Suitable to this, is that of St. Paul, Romans 10. 5. Moses describes
the Righteousness which is of the Law, That the man which does these things
shall live by them. Whatever imposes upon us any thing to be done by us, as an
antecedent condition to any consequent good, is the Law opposed to the Gospel.
The Law makes Precepts the ground of Promises; He that does these things shall
live by them. But the Gospel makes Promises, the sure, the sweet, the precious
pleasant ground of Precepts. So St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. teaches us, That by the
Glory and Virtue of the Godhead calling us to it self, most great and precious
Promises are given us, that by these we may be made partakers of the Divine
Nature. So St. Paul engrafts Evangelical Precepts upon Evangelical
Communications of the Divine Nature through Evangelical Promises. Work out,
says he, your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in
you both to will and to do, Phil. 2.

2. The proper end of the Law in the design or effect, is not Love,
Righteousness, Life, and Blessedness; but Condemnation, Death, and Wrath, 2
Cor. 3. 7. It is called the ministry of Death. At the ninth verse, The ministry
of Condemnation. St. Paul in another place speaks plainly, That, if there had
been a Law which could have given Life, Righteousness should have been by the
Law. St. Paul instructs us in two eminent essential differences between the
Law and the Gospel. First, The Law by Descriptions, Commands, Allurements,
Terrors, sets Righteousness before us; but infuseth not a new Nature, a new
Life into us, which may of its own accord bring forth Righteousness, as Plants
sp^ing up out of the ground, and out of their proper root. Secondly, the Law
not giving Christ himself to us, to be a quickening Spirit in us, to be our
Life, to be one Life with us, cannot give us Righteousness, either to the
acceptance of our Persons, or to the Sanctification of our Natures.

3. The Law which is the Ministry of Wrath, is not the first or chief design of
God: that in which he begins, or with which he ends. The Divine Love, the
Beauties of Holiness, and the Divine Nature, Immortality, the Glory of God,
founded and wrapped up in that one Seed, which is Christ, from whom, together
with whom, for whose Joy and Glory sake, they spring freely, fruitfully,
irresistably, subduing all things to themselves. These are the first and chief
design of God, the good pleasure of his Will. So St. Paul teaches us, Gal. 3.
That the promise in the Seed was first, and the Law came after that; which
cannot therefore frustrate the design of the Promise and of the Seed.

There is a beautiful and rich Scripture opening the Glory of the Divine Design
of the Lord to us, Romans 5. 20, 21. But the Law came in by the by, that Sin
might abound; but where Sin abounded, Grace has abounded much more: That as
sin reigned unto death, so Grace might reign by Righteousness unto eternal
life, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Two things are remarkable here. 1. The way of the coming in of the Law. 2. The
end of bringing in of the Law.


1. The way of bringing in of the Law, is most elegantly and amply expressed in
that one word ((...).) The Law was not brought in first from the beginning, nor
for its own sake; that it should be the end. Grace, the Divine Love, the
everlasting Righteousness, eternal Life in the Seed, the eternal Son of God,
the Image and fullness of the Godhead, the brightness of his Glory; Jesus Christ
was the great design, for which all things are constituted, to which all things
serve: In which God begins and ends all his Works, all his Counsels, and
in which he eternally rests. In the stream and current of this Design, the
Law it self is brought in as subservient to it. In Dramatick Poems, which have
the design laid in some one entire, great, and glorious action; the continuance
is set off, heightened by two eminent parts in it. (...), and (...), a knot tied
fast in the course of the action; then the uniting of this knot, which makes
the action more full of Variety, more glorious, more delightful. Thus in this
great action of time and eternity, the bringing of the Sons of God to Glory, by
their glorious Captain Jesus Christ; the Law is brought in, in the course ofit,
as a knot tied fast, which no created Power is able to unty, or to understand
how it should be loosed. This is the way of bringing in the Law.

2. The ends of the Law are of two sorts:

1. The proper and next ends. 2. The extrinsecal and Ultimate ends.
1. The proper and next ends of the Law, are Sin, Condemnation, Death, and the
Divine Wrath. So that St. Paul says in this Scripture, That the Law came in,
that Sin might abound.

1. The Law let in Sin, so St. Paul teaches us expressly, Romans 7. 8. Sin taking
occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all concupiscence. Again, as the 11.
verse, Sin taking occasion by the Commandment drceived me, and slew me.

2. The Law heightens Sin, so that expression testifies, The Law came in, that
Sin might abound.

3. The Law by bringing in Sin, brings in upon us a spiritual Death in Sin.
St. Paul speaking as by a figure of all Mankind, in his own person, Romans 7. 9,
10. I was alive once without the Law, (that is in Paradise) but the Law coming,
sin revived or sprung up into life; but I died. These three ends of the Law
flow from it, not by it self, nor from the nature of the Law; but by accident,
from the weakness of the Flesh, and of the Creature. So you read, verse 10. The
Commandment which was unto life, in its own nature, was found to me unto death,
in the effects of it, verse 13. The holy Spirit opens the design in these
effects of the Law, Is then that which is good (namely the Law) made death to
me. But sin, that sin might be made manifest, wrought death to me by the good,
that sin might become excessively sinful by the Law.

God having a design which he intended to enrich with the fullest, the highest
Glories of his Godhead, brings forth in the course of this design, a dark scene
of all evils, Sin, Death, Wrath; The evil in this scene is carried on to its
utmost extent and height; Thus the Variety becomes more full in the whole
design, and the chief design is heightened in its sweetest Glory. God through
his infinite Wisdom, so brings in this scene of sin and evil, that himself is
perfectly pure, and good in the contrivance and conduct of it. He sets up a
Law, good, holy, and spiritual, but such that sin inevitably may take occasion
from it through the frailty of Flesh, and of the Creature, to spring up by it
unto an overflowing Flood, to display it self over all things in its fullest,
foulest Forms and Births.

4. The Law has for its proper end, the conviction, condemnation and death of
all men.

1. The conviction of the Law is twofold:

1. Man is convinced of his frailty and consequent mutability in his Primitive
state, before the Fall. So says the Psalmist, Man in his best state is
altogether Vanity: He is the shadow, not the very Image, the true Glory. He
has a shadow of Righteousness, of Wisdom, of Power; a shadow only of Life, a
shadow of Being: Christ only in his heavenly Image, and eternal State, is the
Life it self, the truth of all these. Man in Paradise had no Being, Life, or
Motion of himself, or in himself: As a mere shadow is no more than it is in its
proper substance on which it depends. If it be any thing in it self, it is no
more a shadow, but the substance. The Spirit says of the Heavens and the
Earth, That God turns them, as the Wax to, or by the Seal. The Divine
presence and appearance in man newly created, was the Seal to this Virgin Wax,
which as it changed, changes the impressions upon it together with its whole
form.

2. The Law convinces man of his fallen state, of the evil of this state, that
there is no good, or power of good at all in him. That the whole person and
nature of man is only evil, and altogether evil. Thus St. Paul charge Mankind
universally, Jews and Gentiles; There is none that does good, no not one. The
poison of Asps is under their Tongue, they are altogether corrupt: They have
not known the way of peace. He presses this charge universally by these words;
Now we know, That that which the Law says, it says to those that are under
the Law. Now we know that all Mankind, according to the state of nature, and in
the first Creation, is under the Law: if there be any difference found among
men, it arises not from nature, or the principles of Creation; but from common
Grace, supernaturally communicated by virtue of the heavenly Seed, all along
sown and springing up in the nature of man.

Now to this conviction, as to their proper end, are directed; The precepts,
the vehemence of exhortation, expostulations, comminations, and allurements
which God makes use of to man through the whole Scriptures: That man may be
sensible (if he be capable of any sense) that he is dead in sin, that there is
no principle, no power of good at all in him, which may be a ground to receive
this good seed cast from without upon him; that it may take root in it, and
bring forth fruit by it.

2. The Law is a ministry of condemnation, so St. Paul expressly styles it. This
conviction and condemnation both, the holy Apostle presents clearly to us,
when he says, That the end of this whole ministry is, That every mouth might
be stopped, and the whole world become guilty before God.

3. The last end of the Law is Death. Death upon all Mankind, upon the whole
person of man, a spiritual and natural death; Death here, where man is truly
dead, while he seem to live: Death in the departure out of this life, death
after this life, in Hell, in torments: This death is without any Ransom or
Redemption within the compass or power of the whole Creation.

These are the proper and next ends of the Law: Before I come to the remote and
Ultimate ends, I shall make my way clearer, by answering an Objection, which
may here set it self in our way.

Object. Is it not the proper and next end of the Law to be a rule of Holiness,
and a guide to it?

Answ. Indeed not rarely, the form of each thing, being its perfection, is
called the end of it. But if we distinguish the formal and the final cause,
this is not the end, but the essential form of the Law. The true form and
essence of the Law, is a proposal of good and evil to man, as the object of his
choice. In the Law we have before us the good of Holiness, with its Divine
Nature and Beauties, with its attendant joys and blessedness; The evil of sin,
with its hateful form, and the monstrous disorders in the nature of which an
Angel becomes a Devil, and which is the proper constitutive form of a Devil,
together with the consequent horrors and torments extending themselves to the
nethermost Hell. Thus is the Law (as now we speak) in its essential form, a
convenant of works, presenting to man holiness and sin, with life and death
accompanying them: that he may make his choice, by embracing holiness, taking
life in it, and together with it. Or by entertaining sin, receiving death into
his whole person, and all his solaces round about him.

From this essential form of the Law, see how the Law is directed to the
forementioned ends. Man is composed of the light of God, and his own proper
darkness. These two, the Schools call the Act, and the potentiality; the form,
and the matter; being, and not being, which constitute every Creature.

The darkness or nothingness, which is the Creatures own, is the proper ground
of sin; which is its own form, and is a privation, or deficiency, a falling to
nothing. While the Divine Glory shines upon man, tempering, forming and
confining this darkness, by its own light to an harmonious Union with it, it
becomes the Daughter, and Image, and Spouse of this Light. Now sin lies dead in
us, but the man lives. This Divine Life shining in the darkness, and through
the darkness, is to him a Divine shadow of the Divine Light.

While these two stand undivided and undistinguished to man in the Unity of the
Divine Image, and in the simplicity of this Divine Unity; sin finds no way, can
take no occasion to bring forth it self into life. The Law comes, this
distinguishes between the Light of God, and the darkness of the Creature in
man. This is the temptation, and the state of trial. Abide, says the Lord to
man, with thy darkness in the Divine Light, as a shadow of the Divine Glory, in
the simplicity of the Divine Unity; so shall this Unity, this Glory be a Tree
of Life to thee; thou shall eat of it, and live for ever: Thou thy self shall
be as the fruit upon this Tree, which shall never fail, nor fall. But if thou
choose to thy self thine own darkness, if in this darkness thou distinguish and
divide thy self from the Divine Light, seeking to captivate this Light in thy
darkness, and to turn it to a glory to thy self, as if thou had in thy self,
and in thine own darkness, the root upon which this Divine Light, with all its
beauty, force and sweetness grew. This division in thy self will prove to thee
the forbidden, and that cursed Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, in eating of
it, thou shall immediately die.

God thus in the Law presents this trial to man; That he may discover man in
the earthly Image of the first Creation, with all his Strengths and Beauties to
be altogether shadowy: That he may make way for the dissolution of this shadowy
Image, (in order to the springing up of the heavenly Image, as its proper seed,
through it, into its ripe fruit and perfect form,) God withholds his Divine
presence, appearances and influences from man, during this trial: Now the
darkness which alone is man's own, discovers it self in its own proper
deformities and confusions; it predominateth in man, captivateth man entirely
to it self, becomes his choice, and his Lord.

Thus now sin springs up, thus it takes life to it self, bringing forth death
together with it, which is the perfection of sin, and of the Original Darkness,
dividing it self from the Divine Light, heightning it self to an enmity against
the Divine Light, making it self by this means as a Mark and a Butt of
opposition to the Divine Light, against which it shoots all the fiery Arrows
of the Divine Displeasure and Wrath.

This seems to be the proper meaning of St. Paul's words, before cited; I had
not known concupiscence, if the Law had not said, Thou shall not covet. I was
alive once without the Law, and sin in me was dead: But when the Law came, sin
lived, and I died. Sin taking an occasion by the Law, deceived me, and so slew
me. That of man's own, the darkness, was the Womb, out of which sin, the
delusion of sin, and death by sin, spring forth into life.

There is one note upon this Scripture, which is very necessary for the
enlightening of the whole sense. Some Copies read in the 9. verse. (...), Sin
revived; this supposes a former life of sin, this seems incapable of any
sense agreeable to the Text, the Context, the Design of the Apostle in this
place: But other Copies as that interlineary Greek Testament of Arias Montanus
reads it, (...), sin lived, now first took life. This reading alone
furnishes us with a sense, in which all the expressions of the holy Apostle,
scattered throughout this place, fall into a most beautiful Harmony.

St. Paul here sets himself in the place of all Mankind, in Paradise. He
describes to us, as in a figure, the nativity of sin, its esssential form or
life, (if we may have leave so to speak of a privation) the occasion and manner
of its first appearance, and taking life.

I have now finished my Discourse upon the ends of the Law, which are of the
first sort, proper and immediate: which are called by Logicians, the ends of
the work. I pass now to the remote and Ultimate ends, which are styled the ends
of the Workman. I shall make my transition by this consideration.

A Poetical History, or work framed by an excellent Spirit, for a pattern of
Wisdom, and Worth, and Happiness, has this, as a chief rule, for the
contrivance of it, upon which all its Graces and Beauties depend. That persons
and things be carried to the utmost extremity, into a state where they seem
altogether incapable of any return to Beauty or Bliss: That then by just
degrees of harmonious proportions, they be raised again to a state of highest
loy and Glory. You have examples of this in the Divine pieces of those Divine
Spirits, (as they are esteemed and styled) Homer, Virgil, Tass^, our English
Spencer, with some few others like to these; The Works of these persons are
called Poems. So is the Work of God in Creation, and contrivance from the
beginning to the end, named (...), God's Poem. It is an elegant and judicious
Observation of a learned and holy Divine, That the Works of Poets, in the
excellencies of their imaginations and contrivances, were imitations drawn from
those Original Poems, the Divine works and contrivances of the eternal Spirit.
We may by the fairest Lights of Reason and Religion thus judge; That excellent
Poets in the heighths of their fancies and spirits, were touched and warmed
with a Divine Ray, through which the supreme Wisdom formed upon them, and so
upon their work, some weak impression and obscure Image of it self. Thus it
seems to be altogether Divine, That that work shines in our eyes with the
greatest Beauties, infuseth into our Spirits the sweetest delights,
transporteth us most out of our selves unto the kindest and most ravishing
touches and senses of the Divinity, which diffusing it self through the amplest
Variety, and so to the remotest Distances, and most opposed Contrarieties,
binds up all with an harmonious Order into an exact Unity; which conveyeth
things down by a gradual descent to the lowest Depths, and deepest Darknesses;
then brings them up again to the highest point of all most flourishing
Felicities, opening the beginning in the end, espousing the end to the
beginning. This is that which Aristotle in his Discourse of Poetry, commends
to us as the most artful and surprising untying of the knot, (...), or by a
discovery. This is that which Jesus Christ points at in himself, who is the
Wisdom of God; The manifold Wisdom of God, in whom all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge lie hid, in whom all the Divine contrivances are formed and
perfected. What will you say, when you shall see the Son of Man return there,
where he was at first.

In this God himself seems to place the highest Beauties, the sweetest
Graces, the richest Glories of his whole contrivance and work, in bringing
things down by the Ministry of the Law, to the last point, to the lowest state,
to the most lost condition, to the nethermost part of the Earth, to the
nethermost Hell; And in ways unexpected by, uncomprehensible to Men and Angels,
to raise things again by the Gospel to that first supreamGlory, which was their
Original Pattern in eternity. The Law was brought in, that sin might abound;
That where sin had abounded, grace might superabound. So the Wisdom of the
Heathen, and of the Scripture, both instructs us, That God entertaineth
himself universally, and divinely, with this great and pleasant Work of making
high things low, great things little; of making little things great, and low
things high. He sends the rich empty away, and fills the hungry with good
things. He grindeth man through pain to d^st, and then he says return again ye
Sons of Men.

But I have made a long transition. I come now from these proper ends of the
Law, which were the deepest descents, which comprehended the reign of sin by
the Law unto Death, an Universal Death, the most killing death, a spiritual,
never-dying death of immortal Spirits, as well the natural death of Bodies,
separate from their Spirits, to the Ultimate ends of the Law, in which some
glimmering lights begin to dawn of the most desired and delightful day shining
from this black and hellish night.

All these Ultimate ends of the Law are generally comprehended in Christ, the
Ultimate end of the Law. The end of the Artificer, and of the Agent, of the
eternal Spirit in the Law, is Christ. So says the Spirit in the Scriptures,
The end of the Law is Christ, Romans 10. 4. He may well be the end of the Law,
who is the end of all things; for whom all things are made. The Law was given
by Moses, but Grace and Truth were by Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ came full of
Grace and Truth, says St. John in the same Chapter, Joh. 1. 14, 17. Grace is
the Divine Love opposed to the ministry of wrath by the Law: Truth is the naked
Face and Beauty of the Godhead, the Light, the brightness of the Glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ, as he is opposed to the Vails and shadows of the
Law. Thus Christ, that is, God in the nakedness and simplicity of the Divine
Essence, as he is Love, as he is Light, the Light of Immortality and Glory, in
which there is no darkness, is the end of all the darknings, dividings, and
destructions, of all the shadows and severities of the Law.

But this general end is to be subdivided into its several steps or degrees.

1. The end of the Law is to be a prison for fallen man, till Christ comes. This
is the language of St. Paul, Gal. 3. 28. But before the Faith came, we were
kept in custody under the Law, being shut up unto the Faith, to be revealed.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen, and the substance of things hoped
for. The Divine Faith, is a Divine evidence of Divine things, divinely
invisible from an excess of Divine Light and Glory, too great for every natural
eye, or understanding. The Divine Faith is the Divine substance of Divine
things, the objects of a Divine hope. Christ is said by St. Paul to be the hope
of Glory, and the end of the Faith of all the Saints. He also is the Light and
the Life. This then is the Faith, and the Revelation of the Faith of the Gospel
in the Saints; Christ the Light of the Glory of God, eternal Life, the
quickening Spirit, the fountain of Life, the heavenly eternal truth and
substance of all Good, our Hope, our End, comprehending all the Objects of our
Hope, all our blessedness in himself. This Christ thus coming to us, forming a
Divine Nature, a Divine Light, a Divine Eye, a Divine Understanding in us,
shining forth in the midst of us, setting all things good and desirable in an
invisible and eternal Glory, in their heavenly truth and substance before us,
open and manifest in the midst of us, with their naked shining flowing Beauties
and Sweetnesses to be possessed, to be enjoyed by us, to become one Spirit with
us, to form themselves upon us, to transform and to translate us into one
Spirit and Image with themselves, in the fore-tasts and first fruits, as the
earnest and pledge of our hopes springing up to a full fruition; This is our
most holy, and most precious Faith, the Faith of the Gospel, opposed to the
Works of the Law. This coming of the Faith in this verse, is expressed before,
verse 9. by the coming of the seed, why then was the Law? It was added, because
of Transgressions, until the Seed came. The Law then is a Prison. In this
P^ison all men are kept bound in Chains, shut up with Locks, and Bolts, and
Bars, which no force can break, until the Seed, which is Christ, come. This
heavenly Seed alone springing up into a new Nature, a new Creature, a new
Person, into an heavenly Image, and a Son of God in him, alone brings him forth
into the Liberty of the Glory of the Sons of God. Now, before this Jesus thus
springing up, and shining forth in him, the Prison of the Law is dissolved, and
vanishes like an enchantment. The place in which it stood is known no more,
for all is covered and filled, with the Light, Liberty, and Love of the eternal
Spirit overflowing and encompassing this Son and Heir of God, this fellow-heir
with Christ. So says St. Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. The appearance of Christ
in the Gospel abolisheth death, and brings life and immortality to light.

2. The end of the Law is to be a shadow of Christ, and a Vail upon Christ. In
the Epistle to the Hebrews we read, That the Law had a shadow only of good
things to come, not the very Image, Chap. 10. verse. 1. Jesus Christ the Image
of the invisible God, is the very Image of all good things to come in the
Spirit, and in eternity. The Law had a shadow of this Jesus, with these good
things contained in him: The Law was also a Vail upon this Jesus, who with all
these invisible eternal beauties and blessednesses, lay hid and lived after an
hidden manner in these shadows and figures of the Law, as beneath a Vail. You
may see this, 2 Cor. 3. 15, 16. St. Paul says of the Jews, While Moses is
read, the Vail lies upon their hearts. But when there is a turning to the
Lord, the Vail is taken away. He goes on, But the Lord is that Spirit; where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; that is, freedom from the Vail:
There is a beholding with open face, the Glory of the Lord Jesus; a
transforming of the Soul into the same Image, with an increasing Glory, by the
Lord, this Spirit. Thus Jesus, with all his Glories, was veiled in the Law; By
the removal of the Vail, the Law becomes Gospel: The naked Glories of our
Jesus flow forth upon us, and form us into one Glory with themselves. St. Paul
teaches us, 1 Cor. 1. 10. That the Fathers were all baptized into Moses in the
same Cloud, and in the same Sea, eat of the same spiritual Bread, drank of the
same spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Upon the same
account that Bread, that Sea, that Cloud was Christ. Christ was shadowed upon
all these, and veiled beneath all these. The Clouds, Thunders, Fires,
Tremblings, and Earthquakes at Mount Sinai were shadows of Christ, and vails
upon Christ in his most glorious Person, suffering and dying. The top of Mount
Sinai, where God and Moses conversed familiarly with Faces shining mutually one
upon another, being mutual Feasts one to another, was a shadow of Christ, and a
Vail upon him in his Resurrection and Ascension.

Divines teach us, That the Law is the Gospel veiled, and the Gospel the Law
unvailed. The Jews say, That the Ten Commandments are founded upon the Name of
God. The Name is the Image of the thing; Christ who is the very Image, is the
true Name of God, and of all true things comprehended in God. The Moral Law,
with all the Precepts and Duties of it, is Christ in his heavenly and Divine
Nature in us, but veiled with the Letter, with the darkness of the Letter, yet
in that darkness does the heavenly Image figure it self, making the darkness it
self a shadow of its Glory.

How rich, and how sweet is our Jesus, and the mystery of God in him, through
all his works? The Law it self has no Darkness, no Death, no Fire; so full of
Dread, Horror, and Destruction, which looked upon with a right eye, is not
unexpressibly beautified and sweetened by this, that Jesus Christ, with all the
treasures of eternal Love, Beauty, and Joy, is shadowed upon it, and veiled
beneath it. The Fathers under the Law acquainted with this mystery, conversed
with Christ, saw his day, grew up into him through this shadow, beneath this
Vail, seeing and embracing him shadowed also in their own persons, and lying
hid as under a Vail in their Hearts and Loins, in their Flesh and Spirit.

3. The Law prepared the way of Christ. John the Baptist, who came to restore
all things to their Primitive purity, in the Ministry of the Law, is
represented as an Angel sent before the Face of the Lord, to prepare his way.
The Law is a threefold preparation for Christ.

1. By Conviction, Condemnation, and Death; which all discover a necessity of
Christ, make him precious, make him the desire of all Nations, make all wait
for him, as the only blessed One, and their only Blessedness, Crying, Blessed
is he, blessed is the Messiah, the Christ, blessed is Jesus, who alone comes in
the Name of the Lord, in the Form, Power, and Glory of the Godhead.

2. The Law is a preparation for Christ by the Righteousness of Morality, and
of the Letter.

3. By setting Christ before us in a shadow, and under a Vail. So the Law fills
up the Valleys, and makes the Mountains plain. It humbles and brings down
every high thing, it raises up every dejected and dispairing spirit. It
turns all reliance or glory in our own Righteousness or Strength, in our own
Reason or Will, into shame. It takes away our distrust and despair, turning
that into hope, and a joyous expectation. It first burieth all the beauty,
strength, excellency, and life of the Creature, in a grave of Sin, Death and
Wrath, as deep as the nethermost parts of the Earth, as the nethermost Hell;
Then it shadoweth Christ upon this Grave, and shows him hidden beneath it, as
under a Vail, and as a Seed of eternal life sown in it.

4. The Law is an heightning to the sweetness and beauty of Christ. The Law
came in, that sin might abound: That where sin had abounded, Grace might super
abound. The Law is a threefold heightning to the sweetness and beauty of
Christ in the Gospel.

1. The Law heightens the Glory of Christ, by an Antiperistasis. As in hard
Frosts, the Lights of Heaven shine brightest, and look with sweetest Glories
upon us: As in the coldest season, the Fire burns brightest, and refeshes our
Spirits with the liveliest warmth and heat: So Darkness, Death and Wrath, in
the Ministry of the Law, by their opposition being carried to the greatest
extremity, excite and stir up the Godhead to pour forth it self from all its
richest and unconfined Depths, in the most full, the overflowing Seas of all
his sweetest, richest, most exalted Loves and Glories.

2. The Law heightens the sweetness and beauty of Christ, by being a soil to
it. There is more joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents, than over ten
righteous persons continuing in their Righteousness. The Father of the Prodigal
in the Parable gives this reason for the excess of Joy, the unwonted Triumphs,
with all the heightnings of Feasts, and of Music; This our Son, which was
lost, is found; which was dead, is alive. The Violets and Roses of the Spring
are the sweeter, and more beautiful for the Winter going before them. How sweet
and amiable is the light of life arising upon those who sit in darkness, and
under the shadow of death? As a foil beneath a Diamond, so do the darknesses
and deformities of Sin, the hateful stains and insupportable guilt of Sin; the
terrors, the horrors, the torments of Death, and the Divine Wrath under the
Law, make the freedom and fullness of the Divine Grace, the Righteousness, the
Life and Glory of God in the Person of the Lord Jesus appearing to a lost
forelorn Soul, in the midst of these black shades, unvaluably precious,
infinitely amiable, pleasant, far surpassing all the sweetness and beauties of
the loveliest Morning, all the Lights and Glories of the purest Sun arising out
of the darknesses of the most melancholy and tempestuous night.

3. The Law heightens the brightness and delightfulness of Christ in the Day of
the Gospel, as fuel to that heavenly and blessed flame of Divine Love. As Sin
has reigned unto Death, (says St. Paul) so Grace reigns through Righteousness
unto eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord. Sin exalted its black and fiery
Throne, by subduing to it self the first man in all his Primitive powers and
purities; The first Paradise with its sweet peace and pleasantness, the first
Creation in the whole Compass of its Divine Glories, sprung forth from, and
resembling the Divine World in eternity. How great and deep is that darkness,
bottomless as Hell it self? How bitter is that death, as the poison of Asps, as
the poison of the old Serpent, the Dragon himself, which has extinguished the
light of so much Beauty, which has corrupted so much Sweetness, which has
devoured and swallowed up into the black and bottomless Abyss of a first and
second death, an unsearchable depth of confusion and woe, such a world of so
Divine Sweetnesses and Beauties, with all their amiable light and life?

But now what Tongue can express, what Heart can conceive the unmeasurable
heightnings of that Divine Grace and Love, the unparalleled unbounded Beauties
and Glories of that Righteousness, the infinite purities, pleasures, powers,
perpetuities of that life, the inestimable, incomprehensible Sweetnesses,
Beauties, Virtues, and force of that Person our Jesus, in whom all these
united, who by all these uniteth in his own Person, reigns over these
devouring Powers of darkness and death, subduing them all unto himself, and
carrying this whole captivity, captive, into the Kingdom of Light and Love,
unto which he himself returns as he ascends.

The fire at once increases its own force and flame by the great quantity of
fuel on which it feeds, and converts the dead fuel into one glorious
spreading ascending flame with it self. Shadows seen alone, have little grace
in them, but skilfully mixed with the bright colors in a Picture, and
presenting themselves to the eye in one view together with them, increase the
beauty of the Picture, are themselves a sweet part of the Beauty, and a rich
Variety in it. Discordant touches upon a Lute offend the Ear, but in a Lesson
of Music, they are themselves harmonious, and enrich the Harmony of the whole
Lesson.

Thus the first Adam (who was only an earthly Image, a shadowy similitude of
the Divinity, and made under the Law,) the Fall, the whole reign of sin unto
death, by the Ministry of the Law, with all its Clouds and Storms of shame,
terror and torment, are in themselves a melancholy Image, filling us with the
afflicting Forms of deformity, confusion, desolation and woe: But when these in
the Gospel become fuel to that pure, potent and pleasant fire of the Divine
Love, the eternal Spirit, the Spirit of Grace and Glory; now they enlarge and
heighten this beautiful and blessed flame, now themselves are become spiritual,
immortal flames of highest sweetness and beauty in this Divine flame. Now these
discordant notes, these dark lines and strokes in the Evangelical melody of the
eternal Word, in the unvailed Face of the heavenly Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus,
in the Music of the eternal Love, in the beauty of the Righteousness, the
unvailed Glory of the Godhead, in the Person of Christ, become themselves most
rich heightnings, most pleasant and beautiful parts, most dear and delightful
Varieties in the eternal Melody, and unfading Beauty of the Divine Loveliness
and Love.

I have now finished my Reply to this Reason, for Free Will in man, taken from
the Language of the Scripture. In which Reply, I have endeavored to set before
you in their clear distinctions, the difference between the vail of the Letter,
and the mystery of the Spirit, hid beneath this Vail. I shall now conclude this
Discourse, by offering humbly to you three Rules, for the right understanding
of those expressions in the Scripture, which are most of all pressed, and
pressing in this Point.

1. God planteth and establishes man upon natural Principles of rectitude in
the Divine Image; he leaves him to the force, and to the trial of these
Principles; he ministers to him outwardly, inwardly all moral assistances, for
the strengthening, actuating and heightning of these Principles to their utmost
perfections. Thus God who properly has no Will, nor any thing common to the
Creature, or proportionable to the Creature; But as a Will with other faculties
and forms, proper to the Creature are given to him, by a fit figure, and
according to the manner of the Creature, says of himself, I will not the death
of a Sinner, but rather that he return and live.

2. When God appears unvailed in the Face of Christ, who is the brightness of
his Glory, Righteousness, Love, Life, Immortality, Joy and Glory, attend upon,
and flow from his unvailed Person, his naked presence and appearance; As the
Sun carries along with him in his Circuit, a sweet flourishing Spring and
Summer. When God withdraws himself behind clouds of darkness, and of night,
when he withholds the sweet beams and pleasant influences of his own face and
person behind thick coverings, strange forms and disguises. Now man withers and
dies away in all the beauties and sweetnesses of the Divine Image: in the place
of these, Deformity and Death spring up from that deficiency which is
inseparable, to the natural principles of the Creature, which then discovers it
self and overspreads the whole man with the shadow of Death and Hell, when
those principles are no more fed and supplied from their eternal springs in the
bosom of Christ. In this sense these words are most properly true, Thy
destruction is of thy self, but thy Salvation is of me, O Israel, says the
Lord.

3. God in himself, and in the person of the Lord Jesus, as he is the essential
Image of God, is a most simple Unity, comprehending all Varieties within
himself. In this Unity, he is Love it self, the first, the supreme, the most
pure, the most potent unconfined love. All pleasantnesses are in his Face and
Presence, he is the Bridegroom, entirely fair and pleasant, altogether
delightful, the Object of all Loves, Desires, the Seat of all Delights and
Glories, the Spring of Immortality and Eternity. As himself is, such in the
highest affinity and resemblance is his work, as it springs immediately from
him, his principal design and contrivance, with which he begins, in which he
ends, and rests eternally, which he carries along as his first and Ultimate
design throughout all things.

This then is one entire universal piece, comprehending all Variety in it self;
this is one entire piece of sweetest Loves, of riches Lights, of purest
Glories; All scenes, all forms of darkness and death are subordinate and
subservient to this, are parts of this, are comprehended in this, drawn forth
from it, terminated in it, by a Divine and delightful skill set with a shining
amiableness in their proper places, overspread with a sweetness and luster in
the Unity of the grand design, and finally in a manner most pure, most
harmonious, most ravishing, swallowed up into the eternal Lights, in which the
whole piece terminateth. Of him, and through him, and to him, are all things,
who is blessed for ever. How true is it? how exceeding large now is this truth
in all senses, in all languages, Humane or Divine, That God wills not the
death of a Sinner? That Destruction is not of him? As the Understanding of God
is Truth it self, the highest and most universal Truth, the measure of all
Truth; so is the Will of God, which is himself, the first, the highest, the
most comprehensive, the unconsined Good, the only reason and measure of all
good.

We have passed through those Reasons which seem of greatest moment, and to
have greatest difficulty in them. We hope that we draw near to our Haven, and
that with easy and gentle strokes, we shall now soon arrive at it. The Reasons
on this part, which now remain, seem to be rather mistakes, arising from vulgar
or general conceptions unexamined, undistinguished, than from the exercised
judgments of wise and learned Spirits. They are derived from the nature of
things, Moral, Physical, or Metaphysical; I shall continue them in the same
order with the precedent Reasons.

4. Reason. If the Will of Man be not free, all Laws seem useless.

Answ. The force of this Reason seems to be entire and powerful on the
contrary part. If the Will of Man be free, undeterminated by the dictates of
the Understanding, Laws have no more any signification or efficacy. For the
intent of these, is clearly to work upon the Understanding. Precepts and
Prohibitions are Rules propounded, Lights set up to the Understanding, to
inform what road or course is to be followed, what to be carefully avoided in
our Navigation through the Sea of this World, that we may pass safely, free
from the danger of Rocks and Shelves to our desired Port. Rewards and Penalties
are to be weighed and judged by the Understanding, according to whose standard
and estimate they have all their value. Vexatio dat intellectum. The proper end
of Punishments and Rewards, is to excite the Understanding. The proper end of
Precepts and Prohibitions, is to enlighten the Understanding.

The excellency and efficacy of every Law, is to impress upon us the sense of
Good and Evil. So Moses the Lawgiver among the Jews, says to them, I have set
before you this day, Good and Evil, Life and Death. What effect has the sense
of Good and Evil seated in the Understanding, if the Will be guided by an
absolute ungoverned arbitrariness within it self, without Order, without
Harmony, without Connection, without respect to the dictates of the
Understanding? How useless, how fruitless are all impressions of Good or Evil,
if the Will be not by the Law of its own Essence, by its own essential
Principles determined to good, sub ratione boni, under the formal appearance of
good?

5. Reason. Who meets not with this frequent experiment in himself, which the
Poet expresses in the person of Medea, (as I remember) Video meliora proboque,
deterior a sequor.

Better things I see, approve;
The evil yet I choose and love.
Answ. This thin mist is easily scattered and cleared into a pure Air, by the
beam of one distinction between good, propounded in the Thesis, in its
abstracted and general nature, or in the Hypothesis, clothed with all its
practical and individuating circumstances. In the first, it is the subject of
the Dictamen practicum intellectus, of the Understanding in its proposal of
general Rules of practice to the Will; In the other, the good is the subject of
the Dictamen practice practicum, of the Understanding in its dictates and
directions to the Will in arena, upon the place, in the singular and individual
action, now this moment lying before it, with all its circumstances. The
Schools well distinguish between Act us signatus, and Act us exercitus. An Act
marked out and described by the Understanding, or an Act now immediately
presenting it self unto a real existency out of all its Causes.

Whoever vieweth and distinguishes exactly the sentiments of his
Understanding, the commerce between those and the motions of his Will, makes
this clear discovery, if I be not very much deceived; That in the general
conception and rule in the practical dictate and direction, in the exactest
contemplation and description of a moral Act, one thing seems good to us,
when after this, when we come upon the place to exercise the Act it self, our
sense is altogether changed. The practically practical dictate of the
Understanding, its sentiments now in the moment of action, in the presence and
immediate impressions of all Circumstances, differs from the precedent Rules,
and passes quite to a contrary Point, to present that, as the present good,
the good of the present moment to the embraces of the Will, which was condemned
in the general Rules, as a most dangerous evil, a most certain ruin.

Two circumstances upon the place, and in the moment of action, are cast into
the balance upon the place, or in the moment of an action or temptation, which
weighs it down with a great force.

1. One is the difficulty and pain in resisting the alluring evil.

2. The other is a flattering hope of enjoying the false sweetness of the
present Action, and being delivered from the unhappy consequences threatened;
while they are looked up, either as uncertain or contingent, or capable of
being diverted by the Divine Goodness, or by a succeeding repentance and change
especially for this one adventure.

We may seal up this Answer with the impression of this golden Truth mentioned
formerly; Good under the form of good, is the Object of the Will. This alone
attracteth the Will, this alone moves it. The connection then is inviolable and
immediate between the Ultimate proposals of the Understanding, presenting any
Object to the Will under the formality or appearance of good, and the motions
of the Will toward that Object, to receive it with mutual embraces.

6. Reason. What do most persons upon this Subject say? Can I not walk, sit, or
stand, when I will, at my pleasure? Can I not choose or refuse? Can I not Will
as I will? Is not my Will then free?

Answ. This Argument indeed is formed Crassa Minerva, from a very gross
conceit, from the want of distinguishing between a spontaneity in the Acts
themselves; and an vndeterminedness in the essential Principles, from which the
Acts flow. The question is not concerning the power or pleasure of the Will in
Actibus imperatis, in governing the Loco-motive faculty, and the Instruments of
motion, the members of our Body: Neither is it about the Elicit Acts of the
Will, its own immediate motions of loving or hating, whether these be in the
power and pleasure of the Will. That which is the subject of the Controversy,
is the root of this power and pleasure in the Will, which it puts forth in
its immediate or more remo^e Acts, the Essence, the essential form and
principles of the Will it self. However the Will in its essential form and
principle be determined by superior and universal Causes, which as essential
Principles, and as nature it self are complicated in the essence and nature of
the Will, yet does the Will move in all its Acts with no less power and
agreeableness. Yea, rather the sweet and harmonious concurrence of the superior
and universal Cause, in the Essence and Operations of the Will, by the
combinations of all Celestial, Angelical, Divine Virtues, make the motions of
the Will more potent and more pleasant. In truth, the Will of man in a
temptation, may be like a Ship in a storm. The Ultimate dictates of the
Understanding, the appearances of good and evil, in the moment of Action,
clothed with all its circumstances, may suddenly and violently vary; They may
be like contrary Winds and Waves, carrying the Ship in several moments unto
contrary motions. As the last gust of Wind, and the last motion of the Waves,
so the last dictates, the last appearances of good, carry the Will away,
whether it be upon a Rock, or in a safe course to its Haven. Yet still this is
true which Aristotle says, (...), (...), Election or choice is a desirous
Understanding, or an Intellectual Desire, or (...), A desire from deliberation.

7. Reason. I have met with this Argument for the freedom of the Will from a
learned pen. The chief ground on which the predetermination of the Will is
built has been this Principle, That sin is a privation, and no positive Being.
Thus God is believed to be cleared from the evil of Sin, in the Acts and
Motions of the Will, while evil being a deficiency, is capable of no efficient
Cause. An instance is brought to overthrow this Principle, from a Spirit hating
God. Here this Act of the Will, the hatred, as it is formally drawn forth by,
and terminated in this Object, the Person and Nature of God, is formally, in
its positive Being a sin.

Answ. 1. If sin in any Subject or Act, be a positive thing; I know not how by
any skill or understanding, Humane or Angelical, God can be acquitted from
being the Author of sin. For this is without controversy the sense of all
Divines of all sorts, except the Manichees, and those who with them establish
two coordinate Godheads of Good and Evil, that he who is the only true God, is
the first, the universal Being, the Fountain of all Being, the Being of every
Being.

2. Here seems to be a plain mistake, for want of distinguishing this
individual Act of hating God, as it is considered in genere moris, and
ingenereentis; In its moral, and in its natural capacity.

1. While we look upon this Act of hatred in a complex proposition, as it is
determined upon this Object the Divine Essence; we consider it not naturally,
but morally, we rightly pronounce it to be morally evil: But this moral evil
arises from a moral circumstance, which is the undue determination of the Act
upon an undue Object. The evil here lies in the irregularity and obliquity of
this Act morally considered in the determination to its Object. This
irregularity and obliquity is a privation of the due rectitude in which
principally consists a right determination of the Act, upon a right Object.
Thus is the evil of sin, no more any thing positive here, but altogether
privative.

2. If you consider this Act, ingenereentis, in its natural capacity, you
abstract it from all its moral circumstances: you take a naked view of it, as
it is a natural motion in the will of aversion or opposition. Thus it is
clearly good. It has a natural, or physical goodness, as it answers the
proper and immediate Principles of the Form or Essence from which it flows, and
those formal essential Principles by which it is constituted. It has also a
metaphysical goodness, as every thing; that is, is good in its conformity to
the Divine Will, which, as the Seal, sets the impression of being upon every
thing that has Being.

3. There is also in this case before us, a deception of our Intellectual
sense, by a mist cast before our eyes, in which appearances are taken for
realities. I humbly conceive, that there is no greater contradiction to all
Principles of Truth and Knowledge, than this assertion; That any Spirit hates
God as God, as he appears in his own proper Form. God is that, which all
things desire. God alone is Good, says Jesus Christ. If God alone be good, he
is the first, the supreme, the universal Good; The general Good of the whole,
the proper good of each particular; All Good in one, the only Good in all; the
only Suitableness, the only Agreeableness to every Spirit, Person, and Nature;
the Truth, the Perfection of each Being; That which all things desire, that
which equalleth and transcendeth all desires. As St. Paul says to the
Athenians, That God whom ye ignorantly worship, I preach unto you. So by these
unquestioned Principles, it seems unquestionable, That God, as he is in his
own proper Form, is alone that Object which all things in Heaven, on Earth, and
under the Earth, love, seek, and adore. If he shall please to lift up his Vail,
and discover his Face to be seen by all eyes of mortal or immortal Creatures,
all casting away their several Idols, would run swiftly and unanimously into
his Bosom alone; crying out with an universal shoot, This is he, whom our Souls
love, This is our Beloved. This alone is the Good which we have pursued in all
things, through all things: Here is our Rest for ever. If any Spirit then hate
God, it directs its hatred not against God, but a false Image, which it has
set up to it self of God, as an hater of him, as a cruel one, as extending
himself to a larger compass in severities and wrath, than sweetnesses and
loves; as an hard Task-Master requiring Brick, when he affords no Straw; as
an enemy or a neglecter of the joy and felicity of his Creatures, as raising a
pleasure and glory to himself in the shame and ruin of his own Work; or at
least from a want of natural goodness and kindly affection, leaving his own
Work, his own Birth to shame and ruin, when it is every way in his Power to
make it good and great in Blessedness and Glory. So now it is no more God,
which this Spirit hates; but an Idol set up within it self, in the place of
God. So sin deceives it first, and then kills it, by a misplaced hatred upon
a mistaken Object. So this Spirit sins, by falling short of the Glory of
God; and manifests its sin by this to be nothing positive, but a privation
only.

8. Reason. This predetermination of the Will places Man in the same rank with
Automata, the self-moving Works of Art, as Clocks and Watches. These are
determined by the Workman to a certain motion, which they cannot vary, and
being put into motion by the hand of the Workman, they continue it without any
power over it unto its designed period. Such a piece of work Man seems to be,
if the motions of his Will upon which all other Humane motions depend, be not
in his own power.

Answ. What if Man be not allowed that Prerogative, in respect to the superior
and universal Movers, which these works of Art have in respect to the
Artificer? He frames his pieces for their motion, he puts them into motion;
they now continue their motions without any assistance from the Workman, the
Author of their frame and motion. Man lives, and moves, and has his Being in
God: Every distinct moment of his Being, Life, and Motions, are new and
distinct emanations from God, as in their first Beginning, as at their first
Creation; yet are the preheminencies of this self-mover, the Soul of Man, many,
great, and glorious, above the self-moving works of Art.

1. The motions of the Will are Intellectual. The Soul in the actings of the
Will understands, reflecteth upon its own motions: It comprehends the
beginning, the end of them, their causes out of which they arise, their nature
and differences, their course and stream in which they run along, their effects
and consequents in which they determine.

2. The motions of the Will are with a relish and agreeableness. They all flow
from Love, the love of Good, the love of Beauty, which is good in its proper
Image or appearance. This is the first and great wheel in the Will, which puts
all the wheels of the other affections or passion sinto motion. The motions of
the Will tend all to delight and joy as their mark, to the delightful and
joyous fruition of the beloved Beauty, the beloved Good, in the which the
Will, together with the whole Soul, and the whole Man, has its rest and its
end.

3. The Soul of Man in the motions of the Will is acted by superior and
universal Causes, not as an external hand or power, but as internal Principles,
as the springs of Being and Beauty, of Life and Light, of Activity and Motion,
of all power, sense and relish, which are essentially comprehended in the
Essence of the Soul and Will, which continually feed it.

Give me leave here again to cite those uncontroverted Maxims, in the
Metaphysics; the universal cause is most truly, is most of all the Cause in
every kind of casuality: So is it most truly, most of all the essential, the
formal cause of the Soul and of its Will. The universal Cause is most intimate
to every effect. It is then most intimate to the Will, and to the operations of
the Will.

We read in Proclus, That the Soul contains all things in it self, (...),
that is after the manner of a Soul. The subordinate and supreme kinds of things
are comprehended in the inferior kind, entering into the definition and essence
of each specifical nature together with it. Thus man comprehends in his
Essence the superior forms of a living Creature, of a corporeal substance, of
substance it self in its abstracted eminency of Being, the Fountain and Head of
all these. After the same manner, the Divine Ideas their eminencies and
virtues, the Angelical forms in their powers and properties descending and
forming themselves into an inferior Image, in which they are all united,
constitute the Essence of the Soul, and are complicated in it.

But to conclude my Answer to this Reason. Does this darken the glory of the
Will of Man? Does this confine it, destroying its freedom and its Joy? that it
acts and moves in conformity to, in communion and fellow ship with the
Divine Will, from the same Principle, in the same amplitude, to the same end,
by the same necessity of good alone, of the supreme, the universal Good,
comprehending all things in it self, unchangeable in all. This is the proper
nature of Man, and of his Will, that Divine Similitude and Image in which he
was first created.

9. Reason. But the Variety of things, that it may be entire, requires it, that
there should be in nature a free agent, undetermined to motion, or a cessation
from motion; to this or a contrary motion, having the disposal of it self, of
its own acts independantly, entirely in it self.

Answ. 1. I do not remember, that I have hitherto read or heard this pleaded,
That the Will is equally undetermined and free to Good, or to Evil, presenting
themselves in the formalities or appearances of Good, or of Evil. This were to
affirm that evil equally with good is the Object of the Will: That all things
desire evil in its own proper form, as much as good. Yet this Variety here
asserted, clearly asserteth this.

2. A full Variety is directed to the most perfect Harmony, as its end. It is
the Unity preserved entire in the Variety, which composeth the Harmony, and is
the Soul of Harmony. Variety it self being a singular name, is an Unity. Things
absolutely divided and separate one from another, make not a Variety: This
arises from the Unity in which they agree, in which they are bound up
together, like Flowers in a Posie, and presented in one Form, in one view to
the eye, or to the mind. A part of the Variety then, which by its independancy
upon the whole breaks the Unity, dividing it self from it, destroys both
the end and the essence it self of the Variety, which are the Harmony and the
Unity.

3. Nature is the Law of Being. Variety is Being varied. Is not this a
contradiction in the terms? that the Law of Being, that Being varied, should
call for as its Perfection, a Being independent upon Being it self, the first,
the universal Being; that is, should call for a Non-ens, a not Being. Such does
that Will seem clearly to be in its essence, motions, and actions, which in
these, in any moment and point of these, in any circumstance, is absolute in it
self, independent upon the first and Universal Cause, the Fountain of Being.

Being thus cast into the bosom of the Divine Variety, in which Nature and
Grace, the Fall and the Exaltation of things, things visible and invisible, of
the Creature and the Creator, lie and spring together, as in their Garden-Bed:
Here with this Variety we will close our Discourse, and in this Bosom take up
our rest. Jesus Christ in his Discourse to Nicodemus, represents the
spiritual Birth by this similitude, Joh. 3. 8. The wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. St.
John says, 1 Epist. 2. Chap. 10. verse. He that hates his Brother is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes. O that all the
Lord's people, O that all Mankind were enlightened with the heavenly brightness
and splendour of the Divine Love, anointing their Spirits with the heavenly
perfume of the same love to their Brethren; that is, to every other Person or
Spirit, as St. Paul explains it, Romans 13. 8. He that loves another fulfils the
Law. That which the other Scriptures call a Neighbor, a Brother, is here
Another, every other person. This Love would be an anointing of light upon the
eyes of our mind, giving us a clear and sweet prospect round about us, in which
we should not only hear a sound or a voice, but see whence we came, whither we
go, where we are, the truth of all this, and the way. By the practice of this
Divine Command, To love one another, we should, as by a shining hand from
Heaven dropping Mirth upon our Spirits, be lead to the reason and the root of
this Love, which is the Divine Variety now mentioned, the Jerusalem above, the
Mother of us all, free, and unconfined. This is to love another, according to
the heavenly Command, and to love another as my Neighbor, my Brother, to love
every other person and thing, as a fellow Branch with me in this Variety.

But if we will see the sweet and glorious Light of this heavenly Love, we must
not take the Variety alone, but join to it the Unity, and the Union of both
these, which are integral, essential and primary parts of the Variety, which
are every way equal to the Variety, and distinctly, essentially comprehend it
in themselves. Thrice happy is that Spirit, which by the Initiations,
Sanctisications, and Anointings of the eternal Spirit, has been admitted to
this Sacred and Supreme Mystery; To behold this Trinity, the Variety in its
first, highest, and unbounded form; The Unity, most absolute, entire, and
undivided; The Union of both these, every way mutual, and perfect. O what Joys?
what Glories? how pure? how high? how universal? filling all in all,
transcending all things and thoughts open themselves to this Spirit, who now
sees himself a Variety of the same joy and glory, in these joys and glories,
who now sees himself one eternal Joy and Glory, with all these Joys and Glories
in their Divine Unity? What an eternal Marriage-day does this Spirit now enjoy;
while at once by the bond of this Divine Union, it sees it self a distinct
beauty and blessedness in the midst of all these innumerable glories, equally
distinct from him, and one from another, with the first, the highest, the most
full distinction, which is the perfection, the compleatness, the life of the
Variety; and yet in the same Scene, in the same appearance and person, one with
them all, as they all are one in the first and highest Unity.

This Spirit now sees those Divine beauties and truths shining upon it with a
most ravishing amiableness, which we have touched in our former discourse, as
the Divine ground, on which the determination of the Will is built, from which
spring up those great and Sacred mysteries of the Gospel and the Law, together
with all the several Seeds or Forms of Light and Darkness, Life and Death,
Nature, Sin, Grace, and Glory comprehended in them.

The Seed of God, which is the Seed of the Divine Unity, and by St. Paul called
one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. Has been first before the world was in the Bosom of the
Father, in the Arms of Christ. So says Jesus to his Father, Thine they were,
and thou gave them me. This Divine Seed is brought down into a shadowy Image,
as a sleep, and a dream in a sleep. It still descends lower by the Fall, not
only to the remotest distance from the Purity, Pleasantness, and Glory of its
Original, but to the greatest estrangedness from it, and opposition to it, as a
tragical dream of some excellent Person or Prince in a troubled sleep. God
several times mentions it with several senses and applications, as a Sacred
and Divine mystery, That he calls his Son out of Egypt. It is his own Seed,
his own Son which first descended into Egypt, the House of Bondage, a Land of
darkness; and of Devils, where almost every Creature was an Idol-god, and so a
Devil. By an heavenly and Divine Call, as by the returning of the Sun in the
Spring to the Plants; This Seed of Glory and Eternity sown, and sunk so low, by
degrees comes up, and returns again through all the beautiful, the various, the
increasing Forms of Light and Love springing up out of Darkness and Wrath. So
at length it arriveth at its first habitation of Glory and Delights in the Arms
of Christ, in the Bosom of the Father. It now flourishes in the prime, in the
full blown Beauties and Joys of that life which it had at first, which it ever
has had hidden with Christ in God, the Life of eternity.

Thus is the Variety complete, thus is the whole Variety fully displayed in the
heavenly Seed, being carried along through all distinctions, diversities,
contrarieties of forms and states of Good and of Evil. Thus is the Seed it self
preserved pure through its whole Pilgrimage. Thus is the eternal Spirit and the
Divine Wisdom unstained, conducting this heavenly Seed through all these
diversities and contrarieties, while they keep their spiritual, their Divine
Beauties entire, by keeping the entire Unity, and so the Order, the Harmony of
the Divine Variety.

We read, Romans 8. That the Saints which are in the heavenly Seed, are
predestined to be conformed to the Image of the Son of God. Of this Son, we
read Ephesians. 4. That he who ascended, is the same who descended first. That he
descended into the nethermost parts of the Earth, and ascended far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all. That the Variety might be full in his Person,
and that he might fill each part of the Variety from the nethermost parts of
the Earth, to an height above the highest Heavens, by carrying the Unity, and
so the full Variety, and so the Universal Harmony into each step and form of
this Variety, whether it were as a shade or a light, as a crooked or straight
line in this Divine Face, whether it were a Discord or Concord in this
Universal Music.

In this Divine Glass we see the Law, in the midst of the love, contrivance,
and glory of the Gospel rising up as a tragical scene, with all the black and
fiery shapes of sin and wrath, acting their parts to the uttermost in this
shaded scene, spring up from the womb of darkness, opening it self in the Bosom
of the eternal Light, as it was now opening it self in the Gospel to an
heavenly Marriage-day between the ever glorious Bridegroom, and this spotless
Bride. All this was done that the Variety might be full, That he who comes
after this King, might find nothing to add to his Work.

Yet through this whole scene of the Law, with all its mournful and affrighting
Apparitions, the purity, the sweetness, the life of the Gospel runs along
sowing it self in it, vailing it self beneath it, casting it self into this
shade, and sleep, and dream, springing up through it, making it all a shadow, a
Divine, though obscure Figure of it self; by which also it heightens it self,
while the Unity in this part of the Variety also preserves it self entire,
tuning it, and composing it, binding it up into one Universal Harmony of the
Divine Beauty and Melody in the whole Variety, in which it is set, according to
the Order, which is the Divine Unity, diffusing it self through all in its
proper place and time.

Here the Author concludes the last part of his Discourse of the Freedom of the
Will, but the Reader will in the following Pages find the the enlargement which
was before promised, upon the Argument taken from Christ's Mediation, which is
here continued under the same Title, because it aims at the same design with
the rest of the whole Book.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Freedom of the Will.
An enlargement upon the Argument taken from the Mediation of Christ.

I Intended to have passed lightly over this Argument. But being moved by some
Friends, who by their Understandings have an authority with me, and by their
Loves a power over me; I reflected again upon it in my thoughts, and found, as
I humbly conceive, that nothing would more confirm and illustrate the Subject
of which I treat, than the Mediatorship of our Lord Jesus rightly understood. I
do therefore resume it, and shall attempt to unfold its Glories in order to my
present design, as clearly, completely, and compendiously, as I shall be able.

I shall take for the ground of this part of my Discouse, that Scripture,

Colos. 1. Verse. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of
every Creature; or, of the whole Creation.

Verse. 16. For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven and in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or
Powers: all things were created by him, and for him.

Verse. 17. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

Verse. 18. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church: who is the beginning,
the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

Verse. 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell.

Give me leave to make some notes upon the version of these words, verse. 15. In
Greek it is, (...), which signifies both; the whole Creation, and every
Creature. Verse. 16. That which we read by him, is (...), in him. This in the
beginning of the verse. In the end, for him, is (...), unto, or into him. Verse.
17. By him all things consist, is (...), All things stood together in him.

In these Verses we have in a lively Draught, or Portrait with incomparable
Sweetness and Glory set before us Jesus Christ, with a twofold Mediatorship;
One, in the Work of Nature; The other, in the Work of Grace. In respect to one,
he is styled, The firstborn of the whole Creation; In respect to the other,
The firstborn from the dead, verse. 15, 18.

The first Mediatorship is described, verse. 15, 16, 17. The second, ver^. 18.
Both are crowned with a double Epiphonema, or Conclusion v^. 1. That he in all
things have the pre-eminence, verse. 18. 2. It pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell.

In order to my treating of the Mediatorships of Christ, I shall lay down
briefly these four grounds.

1. There is no va^, no breach, no gap in the Divine Wisdom or Work. Wisdom is
defined by Proclus, (...), A fullness of things. If there were any (...) in the
Wisdom or Work of God, which is the ^rth and Design of his Wisdom: There would
be a wound upon i^, and a deformity in the face of it, by the dissolution of
the Continuity, of the Unity, of the Harmony.

2. There is no leap in the Divine Work, no passing from one extreme to the
other, without a passing through the medium, the middlespace or middle-state.
This would make that vacuity a breach in the whole, which we beforementioned,
as altogether unsuitable to a Divine, or to any wise Contrivance.

3. There is a two-told Medium, or Mediatorship; One, Medium participationis; A
Medium of participation; The other, Medium abnegationis, A Mediator of
separation and abnegation. In this last sense, the Seas are Mediums between the
Lands, which they divide and keep from meeting. So sin is a medium of
separation between God and the Creatures; partaking of neither, inasmuch as it
is a privation of Being; dividing both, as an unpassable Gulf between them,
while it remains. After the first manner all middle-colours are mediums of
Participation and Union between the two extreme colors, white and black. So
the Soul is a medium of Union, and Participation between things invisible and
visible, comprehending both in it self, and so joining both in One. Such a
Mediator is Jesus Christ.

4. The Lord Jesus then, as a Mediator of Union by Participation, touches both
the extremes of infiniteness and finiteness; of God and the Creature,
comprehends both in One in himself; fills up the middle space between both; is
the way, by which God descends into the Creature, and the Creature comes
forth from God; by which again God reascendeth together with the Creature, and
the Creature returns unto God.

Having laid down these grounds, I shall now upon them build up and establish
the Mediatorship of our Lord Jesus in the Work of Nature, by these three
Propositions, as so many stories in this Divine Palace of our Savior's Person
raised one upon the other.

1. Jesus Christ is essentially, eternally, the only true God, infinitely
transcending all Created Excellencies or Powers.

2. The Lord Jesus stands in the middle between God and all Creatures,
comprehending both entirely in One in himself, with an admirable Beauty and
Harmony; uniting both by himself with an incomparable Love and Sweetness.

3. Jesus Christ is the Way by which God descends into the Creature; by which
the Creation comes forth from God.

The first two Propositions seem to lie in those words; The Image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature. Here I hope to discover them,
lying clearly and beautifully infolded in the embraces of each other. I will
begin with the Godhead of Christ.

1. Our Savior, our Jesus is essentially the eternal, the only true God. I
shall endeavor to set before our eyes our Jesus unvailed, and shining in the
pure unmixt Glories of his Godhead, by the Lights of two Principles, which, I
think, will be granted to me by all who acknowledge a God.

1. God is eminently, transcendently a vital Act. 2. God is eminently,
transcendently an Intellectual Act.
1. God is eminently, transcendently a vital Act. The Psalmist says to him,
With thee is the Fountain of Life. St. John in the close of his first Epistle
says of him, This is the true God, and eternal life. He is life it self, life
pure, absolute, unmixt, unconfined, eternal, infinite, a Fountain ever equally
unexhaust, a Sea unbounded.

Life is a perpetual Generation. The chief, and most essential Power of life is
to bring forth its like; to propagate and multiply it self in Images of it
self. The most perfect Life brings forth it self into the most perfect Image.
The most perfect Image has two Properties: 1. It is most perfectly distinct
from its Original. Take away the Distinction, and you take away the Generation,
the Relation, the Representation, the Image it self. As the Distinction is more
or less perfect or imperfect, clear or obscure; so are all these. 2. The most
perfect Image is the most exact Representation of its Original, most exactly
answering it, neither exceeding, nor falling short, nor varying in any part.

Thus the most perfect Image is most perfectly One, and the same with its
Original. Thus God is a vital Act.

2. God is eminently, transcendently an Intellectual Act. In every Intellectual
Act three things meet in One, Life, Light, Love.

1. The Intellectual Life brings forth it self into an Image of it self, within
it self in one Spirit, one Essence, one essential Act and Form with it self.

2. The Intellectual Light gives the Intellectual Spirit a seeing, knowing,
understanding, comprehension, and possession of it self in this Image.

3. The Intellectual Love is the mutual Union and Communion of these two, the
Original and the Image; a continual, sweet, pleasing, intimate, essential, and
most agreeable motion of tendency, or inclination to each other, of
unexpressible joy and complacency in each other.

The Life here is the Generation ever in Act, ever perfect. The Light is the
Image ever actually springing, ever actually complete. The Love is the
conspiration, or the meeting of these two in One, as they are Distinct and One.
Where these are most perfect, they are most perfectly distinct, most perfectly
equal, most perfectly One, and every One most perfectly and most distinctly all
Three in it self. The Original, and the Image most perfectly adaequate to, and
exactly in all parts, all properties answering each other, do alike mutually
embrace, comprehend, bring forth each other within themselves, and within each
other. The Love being the mutual embraces and selffruitions of each other
equally comprehends both, is equally comprehended of both.

These Three are therefore called Persons, being all equally One; equally
Distinct, equally Complete in one Intellectual substance and subsistence, in an
Intellectual Essence and Existence, having equally their Root or Original,
their essential Form or Image, their operation; that is, their Life-Spring,
their Light, their Love entire in themselves, all infinite, eternal, without
Beginning, End, or Bound.

Behold here our Jesus in the high and holy place of Eternity, the Image of the
invisible God, equally God with his Father, having his Father in Himself,
equally invisible to every created eye, or finite capacity by the same excess
of Light and Glory.

Behold here the Jesus of the Christians, at once the Son of God, and God the
Father of all; at once the second Person in the Trinity, and the Trinity
complete in himself, which is the Godhead gloriously displaid in the admired,
adored, beloved fullness of Power, Beauty, Majesty, of all transcendent
sweetnesses of Life, Light, Love and Joy; a Life ever bringing forth it self, a
Light or Image ever springing up in the Bosom of this Life, which is it self; a
Love, by which this Life and Image are uncessantly, eternally in an endless
Circle bringing forth each other, springing up in the Bosom of each other,
multiplying themselves into ever-fresh, unsearchably rich Varieties in the
mutual embraces of each other, with sweetnesses and delights unexplicable, ever
new, ever full, ever the same.

This is the first and principal sense, in which our Jesus is the Image of the
invisible God.

This Image is the most perfect Birth of the Godhead within it self. All
Images, all Forms of things, which lie wrapped up in the infinite Virtue or Power
of the Godhead, all which it ever brings forth through Eternity or Time; all
which it is capable of bringing forth the whole fullness of the Divine Essence
or Nature with all the unbounded, innumerable Virtues and Powers, which as so
many fresh everliving Springs open themselves in it, flow forth most
distinctly, most completely into their first, their most true, their most
proper Forms and Images here in this Image of which we speak. This Image
comprehends them all in One in it self, and so becomes the Paradise of the
Godhead in the heighths of eternity.

Our Jesus, as he is this Image of the Godhead in the Godhead, the second
Person in the Trinity, the Birth of the Father, is the first Distinction, the
first Variety. He is then the supreme, the absolute, the most absolutely
unconfined Distinction or Variety; the Fountain of all Variety and Distinction.
This is the Wisdom of God with its unsearchable Riches, the first, the most
exact Distinction and Distinguisher.

All Distinctions and Varieties of things, which ever do exist, or are capable
of existing any where, exist first here most perfect, and most perfectly
distinguished. Here they are all most perfectly One in the most entire Unity of
the Godhead in the Father, and together with the Father in the Son. Here they
are in this entire, most absolute and undivided Unity, as entirely, as highly
various and distinct, as they are One. Here by the transcendency and simplicity
of the Unity, which is entire through all, and every where undivided, each
Distinction, each Variety is an absolute unconsined Unity, comprehending most
perfectly the whole fullness of the Godhead, with all its endlesly new and
various Varieties in its own proper Variety and distinct Form. This is the the
amplitude of the Godhead, its Majesty and Glory in its own essential Image
within it self. Aristotle, as I remember, in his Ethics defines Glory or
Majesty to be (...), Beauty with a greatness or amplitude. What is the Glory of
our Jesus? what is the Majesty of our God, when he appears in his own Image,
casting off every Vail, and discovering his open Face in our Jesus? How does he
with every glimpse of himself fill all the senses, all the understandings, all
the capacities of Men and Angels, with the overflowing Pleasures of his Beauty
in the height and amplitude of it, transcending all Glory, all Majesty in
their most exalted heights, in their most extended amplitudes? The supreme and
most entire Unity, the first, the fullest, the most ample and unconfined
Variety meet here both in One. Here they make a Beauty infinitely high,
infinitely ample, in the Face and Bosom of which all Beauties, endlesly new,
endlesly various spring up, and shine, and smile together; while each distinct
Beauty presents the entire Form of the Universal Beauty, with all its distinct
Beauties entirely, infinitely new and distinct.

Our Jesus in this Divine Image is the Divine Understanding, the internal,
eternal Word in the Divine Mind. In this Image then stand together in One all
forms of things, according to their most exact natures and distinctions, as
they are ever known to God, as they ever appear before him, whose Knowledge is
the only measure and ground of all Truth, both in Being and Knowing.

To what tends this Discourse? To this. Our Lord Jesus in this eternal Image is
the Universal, the entire Idea of the Godhead, the Treasury of all Ideas. He is
all Ideas in general, each distinct Idea in its proper Unity and Distinction.
He is all those unlimited Glories in their most exact Ideas or Images, in which
the infiniteness of the Divine Nature is incapable of being any way figured or
shadowed in the finiteness of the Creature. He is all those Glories in their
proper Ideas, yet still with an infiniteness of Glory, which cast forth their
beams, and their shadows, which compose the whole Creation, and constitute
every particular Creature.

Now you see our Lord Jesus, the Image of the invisible God, and the firstborn
of every Creature. As he is the Godhead in its full Idea, or essential Form and
Image; so is he the whole Creation, every distinct Creature, every distinct
Form, Circumstance, Motion, Variety of each Creature in its eternal Idea or
Pattern, in its first and most exact Truth, as it is known of God, as it is
seen and contemplated by him in that beatifical Glass, where all things appear
at once in their most exact Truth, and most exalted Beauty. This Glass is the
Idea, or the essential Image of the Godhead within it self. This is our Jesus,
our God in the highest and fullest Glories of his Divine Essence.

I have now finished my first task in the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, his
Godhead in its simplicity and absoluteness, the most pleasant and rich ground,
the most beautiful and blessed Crown of his Mediatorship. I am sensible how
large I am upon this Subject, into how vast a Sea I have cast my self. But, I
hope, my Reader, thou find it a Sea of Divine Beauties and Pleasures, where
both our Spirits together swim, dive, and bathe themselves with a sense of
unexplicable sweetnesses and satisfactions from the Floods of Light, and of
Love at once refreshing and swallowing up into themselves our whole Spirits,
our Understanding and Will.

I hope also, if I deceive not my self, as how apt and likely I am to deceive
my self in all things, I desire at all times to be sensible; But if I do not
now deceive my self, I hope thou see how pertinent this part of my Discourse
is to my principal Theme, for the illustrating and confirming it.

How beautifully, how delightfully do we see in this glorious Image within the
Vail, now unvailed by its own Beams, as the rosy Fingers of the Morning of
Eternity dawning in the Gospel drawing aside the Vail, the highest Necessity
and the greatest Liberty matched and united? What Liberty is equal to this,
where a full and pregnant Unity from its own spring within it self, diffuseth
it self unto an endless, boundless Variety, triumphing every where, through all,
in each imaginable point, with the undivided, unconfined fullness and freedom of
all its Glories? What necessity so great as this, where this Unity by the
eternally unalterable Law of its own nature brings forth it self unvaried into
all this Variety; where this Unity, as Links of a golden Chain, joins all these
Varieties by an immediate, immutable order, and connection to each other; where
this binds up all this unbounded Variety in its own straight, and sweet
embraces? What Beauty so beautiful, what Delight so pleasant, what Harmony so
agreeable, as this Divine Marriage between the most absolute Unity, and the
most ample Variety in the Palace of Eternity; between the most unalterable
necessity, and the most unconfined freedom in the Divine Nature? The Schools
say, That God alone is Ens necessarium, A necessary Being, the highest
Necessity; and that other Beings compared with him are contingent in respect to
themselves. They also teach us, That all this which this supreme adorable Being
is, in the infiniteness of his Divine Powers and Virtues, in the infiniteness
of his Divine Essence, all this he is in a pure, immutable Act. Yet is he in
this highest necessity, and most immutable Act, the freest Being the freest
Agent.

Do we not in like manner by contemplating this all-charming Person of our
Jesus, this supreme Image in the Godhead, the Seat of all Beauties and Truths?
Do we not see the Liberty of all things in their most proper, most glorious
Heads and Springs, in their eternal Originals, their Ideas, the firstborn
Images of themselves? How do they here each of them reign and spread themselves
through the amplitude, and infiniteness of the Divine Variety, seated upon the
Throne of the Divine Unity, in the Palace of this Universal Image, or Idea of
the Divine Nature, every one in its own distinct Form? Is not this the ground
of all Liberty, this the truth of all Liberty, in the inferior Forms, and
orders of things, not a freedom from the force, or conduct of their Ideas,
their Divine Heads and Springs in the Bosom of the Divine Being; but the Spring
of these Ideas in them, forming them, figuring themselves upon them, acting
them, diffusing themselves through them in all their growths and fruits.

The Metaphysical Truth of things comprehends all kinds and degrees of Being,
Divine, Natural, Moral, Mathematical; all kinds of Truth, Divine, Natural,
Moral, Logical. Every thing, as it is, is metaphysically true. The metaphysical
Truth of things is defined to be, the conformity of each thing to its first
Truth, to its Idea in the Divine Mind. So far every Logical Truth, the truth of
every Proposition Affirmative or Negative is true, as it answers its Idea in
the Divine Understanding, which is our Jesus, the essential Image, and so the
essential Wisdom, the essential Truth, the essential Liberty of the Godhead,
the Mediator of all Births, all Images, of all truth and liberty through the
whole nature of things. But let us now proceed.

The Lord Jesus being a Mediator, uniting two extremes, touches both, stands
in a middle state between both, filling up the middle space, and so makes both
One. We have already seen the Lord Jesus in the heighths of the Godhead, in the
excesses of Glory. Let us now take a view of him in his middle-state between
both.

2. I shall endeavor to prepare the Way of the Lord Jesus, as he comes forth
in the Mediatory Glory of this Middle-state by two general discoveries of his
Person and Beauty here.

1. Our Jesus in this middle-state is the Divine Union of Unity, and Diversity;
of the Unity of the Divine Nature, of the Diversity of all Created Natures in
One Divine eternal Person and Spirit. One of the two Extremes is the supreme
Unity, comprehending all Distinctions in it self, preserving it self absolutely
entire, eternally undivided in all. The other extreme is the Diversity of the
Creatures, where the Unity is broken into all manner of Distinction, being
every where imperfect, and at its highest point but the shadow of it self. The
middle between these Two is the Union of these extremes, where all the most
differing, distant, divided Diversities, the most diverse forms of things dwell
together in one Divine Image, in one Divine Spirit and Person; where the
supreme, and most absolute Unity spreads it self through all the Diversities,
unites them all in one undivided Glory, shines entirely in the whole, and in
each part.

2. Our Jesus in this middle-state, as our God, appears in an allravishing,
all-admirable, all-adorable Beauty; in a Beauty distinct from that of the
Divine Essence in its simplicity, distinct from that of the Divine Image in the
Creation, joining both in a new Beauty, presenting all the various Beauties of
both in a new Variety.

How pure, how pleasant are the Glories of the Godhead in its own essential
Image? How pure, how pleasant is the Image of God in the whole Creation, with
all the differing Forms and Motions in their whole course and compass from the
Head to the Feet, from the first rise to the last end, and rest of all seen in
one view at once? How unexpressibly, how divinely transporting sweetest
excesses and raptures of most glorious joys is the Harmony between these Two,
when they are seen together in one Divine piece, in one Divine Person, in one
undivided View and Spirit? This Person, this Prospect is our Jesus in his
middle-state. This is his Mediatory Kingdom. This indeed in a Divine, most
desirable, and most blissful sense is the Personal Reign of the Lord Jesus.
Here does he in the Divine fairness and fullness of his blessed Person sit upon
a Throne of Grace and Glory, through the whole Variety of all Uncreated and
Created Forms of things, in the whole, and in each part, as in the whole. Here
is he the Marriage, and the Marriage-day of God and the Creature, of Eternity
and Time, with all its divided Forms, successive Motions, disagreeing changes
of Lights and Darknesses, Lives and Deaths. Here is he the Marriage of each
thing, with its Idea in his most spacious and most glorious Bosom, where all
the Fountains of Being and Beauty, of Life and Love open themselves. Here all
things, the highest Lights of Glory, and the lowest shades; the most contracted
and obscurest Form with its Idea, infinite in Majesty and Glory, lie together
mutually infolded in the inseparable and joyous embraces of each other, shining
through, shining in each other, mutually set, as Seals upon the Bosoms and
Hearts of each other.

This is Jesus, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, standing in the
middle-space between Eternity and Time; joining in one Eternity with all its
Glories, and Time with all its diverse Births and Successions. This is the
first Procession of the whole Creation, and of every Creature in the Person of
Christ, before any Creature comes forth into its own proper and single created
state. Thus is Jesus Christ in a second sense the Image of the invisible God,
and the firstborn of every Creature. Thus all things are made by him, and he is
before all; as he is the Divine Draught, and Platform of the whole Creation,
with the whole Contrivance and Conduct of it from the beginning to the end, as
God first brings it forth from his own Mind into a most beautiful and exact
model, where he has it ever before him in its Union with the general and
distinct Ideas of it in his own Mind, that he may compare them, and with a
pleasure worthy of God himself behold them in their mutual, most exact and
Divine Correspondency.

Here Jesus Christ manifestly has in all things, even in every created form of
things, as it is the emanation of some Divine Beam, the pre-eminence. He is
first in every Form. He is there indeed with the excess of a Divine Glory. Here
all fullness dwells, with a perfect and full complacency in our Jesus. All
Uncreated Glories, all created Forms, as the Births and Images of those Glories
dwell together here with incredible Joy, as the fullness of each other, as the
Divine Mother and her lovely Child, exactly like its Mother mutually clasping
each other with tenderest and immortal embraces.

Having thus prepared my way, I will pass to the more particular Explications
of this Mediatory Glory.

1. God, as he is in the simplicity of his Divine Essence, in his first and
supreme Glory, is the Head of our Lord Jesus in this middlestation. The Head of
the Woman is the Man, the Head of the Man is Christ, the Head of Christ is God;
according to the Doctrine of St. Paul. Philosophers and Divines frequently
express the weak, the shady, the passive, the material part of things by the
Female, the Woman; the virtue, the brightness, the active, the formal part by
the Male, the Man. If we may so far have respect to an Allegorical or an
Anagogical sense in this Scripture; We may interpret the Apostles words after
this manner; The visible and corporeal frame of things has for its head the
Angelical Nature and World, which contains all vital and substantial Acts,
all Spirits, all Forms in their separated state. Here are the Essences of all
things in their abstracted Beauties. Jesus Christ in his Mediatory Kingdom and
World is the Head of the Angelical Image. The Head of this is the Divine World,
the Divine Essence.

Plato says, All the Members were made for the Head. The Head in that
spiritual sense, in which we have spoken of it, is the inmost Center, the
utmost Circle, diffusing it self through all, incompassing, enfolding, and
comprehending all. It is the beginning, the end, the strength, the truth, the
glory of all with a transcendency of excellency in every kind surmounting all.

Thus is God, thus is Jesus Christ, as he is the essential Image of God, the
Divine World in eternity, the glorious Head of his Mediatory Kingdom, shining
with infinitely rich and delightful splendors above all, over all, in all. Thus
is God the Person, the Unity, which brings forth this Divine Image, which
spreads himself through it, lives and subsists in it, gives it its life and
subsistency in himself, joins it altogether in one Divine piece, by the Unity
of one Life, one Spirit, one Person.

2. God is here in a Created Form, appearing with a middle-glory, between the
shade of the Creature, and the unapproachable shinings of the Godhead; uniting
both by a Marriage, which all things in Heaven, in Earth, in the Seas, beneath
both, celebrate with Divine Feasts and Triumphs.

God in the Creature is seen by a shadowy Image alone, which lie as a Vail upon
the pure Glories of his Divine Face and Person. He now shines forth like the
Sun in a cloudy day, by that obscure Image of his Celestial Form, a reflected,
refracted Light.

God in the Kingdom of the Father, (the Father of Lights in the simplicity of
the Divine Nature) is the eternal Sun at its height, at its Noon-sted, in its
Meridional Glories.

God in the Mediatory Kingdom, (which is properly the Kingdom of Christ in his
personal Reign) resembles the lovely Morning, the golden Hour of the Day, when
there is no more shades or pure Light, but both are mixed, and sweetly married
into the pleasant Flowers of Saffron or Roses, breathing their sweetnesses
through the whole Air and Universe. God in Jesus Christ is now the Sun
ascending, shining forth in its strength, but not at its full height. God and
the Creature are like two Lillies or Roses joined upon one stalk in a fair
Morning, or a bright Forenoon; or like two Friends in this sweet season, in a
Garden of Roses embracing. These mutually possess, enjoy the full Beauties, the
full sweetness each of other, but not fully, clearly, but not completely, until
the Sun come to its full height.

In the Schools, the knowledge of things is divided into three kinds:

1. Meridianam, the Meridional, or Moonlight of Knowledge.

2. Matutinam, The Morning-Light.

3. Vespertinam, The Evening-shade.

1. The Noon-Light of Knowledge, is the sight of things in their eternal Ideas,
in the eternal, essential Idea, or Image of the Godhead, which is the eternal
Word, our Jesus.

2. The evening shade is the Creature appearing in its self by its own obscure
and fading Light.

3. The Morning-Light of Knowledge is applied by some to the second quire in
the first Order of Angels, the Cherubims. These are the Lights flowing from the
Second Person in the Trinity, the Light of eternity, and of the Divine Essence;
as the Seraphims the first quire are Love, the Love-Unity, the Angelical Figure
of the Father, the Unity in the Trinity, the Fountain of all Divine Births, of
all Divine Loves and Lights; the Love-Spring, and so the Life-Spring in the
Godhead.

In these Angelical Loves, the Seraphims are all forms of things, as in their
first, their sweetest created Love-Springs, and Love-Unions.

In these Angelical Lights, the Cherubims are all forms of things, as in their
first, their richest created Beauties and Ideas.

But these Cherubimical Beauties, these Angelical Ideas are too faint and
fading to be the Morning-Light. All created Glories, the most heavenly, are no
more than Evening-Glories, which the setting Sun has left behind him. They all
by degrees sink into the darkness of the night, and disappear for ever.

Our Jesus alone is the Dayspring from on high, the Rosy Morning, and the
rising Sun. In him alone all created Loves and Beauties, Cherubim and Seraphim,
rising again from the depths of night unto a new Sweetness and Glory, have
their eternal day.

Thus the Spirit speaks to the Lord Jesus in the Psalmist, and the first of
the Hebrews, The Heavens wax old as a Garment: thou changest them, and they are
changed. But thy throne, O Lord, endures for ever and ever. See in the
Heavens, in the powers, sweetnesses, and beauties of Heaven, a night of old
Age, and of Death. See in this Death a Dayspring of new and immortal Glories
in the rising of the Lord Jesus upon them, and their rising in the Circuit of
his Throne. He alone sits upon that Throne of ever-new, ever-springing, eternal
Light. But thus much of this second Character of Jesus Christ in his
Mediatorship or Middle-state.

3. God in his essential Image replenished with the eternal Ideas and Patterns,
the Original Forms of things, is in this second Image, through the whole,
universal Form, in all the particular and distinct Forms, the Root and Seed of
all. This is the Vis plastica, the Ratio seminalis, the formative Power, by
which, the formal reason or proportion according to which, all things in their
created Image spring up, are framed, are acted in their essential, accidental
Forms, Powers, Operations, and Motions.

The Father has sent me forth, and I live by the Father. All mine are thine,
and all thine are mine. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. This is the
Language of Christ concerning his Father, and to his Father. The eternal Idea
of the Godhead, which is our Jesus in the heighths of his Divinity, the
distinct Ideas in the Bosom of this Idea of the Divine Essence are respectively
the proper Places, the Parents, the Patterns, the Husbands of Jesus Christ in
this Middle-Image, and in all the particular Images, which shine here, as Stars
in their native Heaven, as Flowers in their Garden-beds, to which in the Song
of holy Loves, the Cheeks of this Jesus are compared.

Thus is our Jesus in the Gospel divinely drawn in an admirable Picture,
representing him after his descent out of this state rising again in it. He is
presented to us in his transfiguration on the Mount, with his Face shining like
the Sun in its strength, and his Garment as the Light. O most admirable and
Divine Figure of our Jesus in his Mediatory Kingdom and Glory!

The Face, the Person of our Jesus is the Sun it self, the eternal Sun, the
Divine Nature shining forth in the strength of its light and heat, its Beauties
and Loves. The created Image is, as the Raiment upon this Person, but a Raiment
of Light, of the Flower of Light, Sunshine of the Godhead; a Garment made of a
Contexture of Beams, living in, and springing immediately, freshly every moment
from this entire Person, which is all one most clear and lively Face of the
most complete and Original Beauty.

The Divine Person is not hid, but shown by this Garment. Mi Jesu pelluces, Our
Jesus shines all clearly through it; far more clearly, than a beautiful Person
swimming all naked in a clear stream, or the richest Diamond in a Case of
purest Crystal.

The Person here, the Divine Sun is at once the eminent Head of all the Beams
shining above them; the vigorous Root of all the Beams springing up in them;
the pleasant and glorious flower flourishing forth from the end of every Beam;
the full Glory filling with it self each part of the Beam, and every where in
every Beam presenting it self entirely to every eye.

All the Beams in One are one entire Image of this Sun. Every distinct Beam a
distinct Birth and Figure of a distinct Ideal Light and Glory in this Sun. Yet
is the Sun in that full compass of all its Glories seen by every eye in every
Beam.

For so is this Divine Sun, the essential Idea of the Godhead, the same, one,
undivided, entire, full, in all the Ideas, in all the Original Forms, and
Patterns of each Creature.

The Beams here are Daughters, Sisters, and Brides, to the Sun. They flow forth
immediately from it. They stand upon the same root of the Divine Nature and
Personality. God is the only Person in this Jesus. Both are clothed with the
same Image. Both by mutual embraces lie in the bosoms of each other, wrapped up
together in the same Joys and Glories.

Yet are the Beams and created Beauties in this Mediatory Image, not only
distinct, as the Ideas in the Godhead, where the most perfect Distinction is
married to the most absolute Unity, with a most exact equality. But all the
Forms of created Glory here have besides a distinction from their Sun, the
Divine Glory, and from each other; a diversity, also an inequality, a
subordination in an hypostatical or personal Unity. But I now anticipate my
self; This will have a more proper place in the following Character of our
Jesus in his Mediatory Kingdom.

4. Christ here in his created Nature is a Spirit, a great and universal
Spirit, comprehending the whole Creation eminently in himself, before it have a
subsistence in it self. The whole Creation is here in greater majesty, in
greater clearness and glory, than in it self, when it is freshest and fairest.
It is the very Iustre and effulgency of the Godhead it self, all transparent;
the Divine Essence at once shining through it, filling it, clothing and
comprehending it; as a Temple founded upon it self, framed by it self of its
own most immediate Light, and clearest brightness.

The King's Daughter is said to be all glorious within, and her Garments of
wrought Gold, Psalm. 45.

The first Marriage is that of the most High, and holy Trinity, to which
eternity it self is the Marriage-day celebrated with Joys and Glories,
transcending all measures or bounds. The Father and the Son are here mutually
the Bridegroom and the Bride, while both are in both, the Father in the Son,
the Son in the Father; the Love-Spring in its lovely and beautiful Image; the
Lovely-Image, the first and highest Beauty in its Love-spring, the first, the
sweetest, the fruitfullest Love and Fountain of Loves. The Holy Spirit, the
conspiration of both these in One, is their Marriage-band and Marriagebed,
where they preserve entire their Unity, and their Distinction in a most
blissful Union to make their Loves and Joys more full. From this Marriage Bed
does flow the God-like Race of Divine Ideas surmounting all numbers and natures
of things.

The second Marriage is in this Middle-Glory between the Uncreated and created
Beauty, joined together in one Divine eternal Person and Spirit. The Divine
Nature is here the King and the Bridegroom; this created Spirit is the Kings
Daughter, his Queen, and his Bride.

This Queen is described to be all glorious within, and to have her Garment of
wrought Gold.

The Hebrew word within, signifies properly in her Person, in her naked Face,
which are within all her Garments and Vails. Her God, her Bridegroom, Jesus in
his essential Image, her eternal Idea, is her Person, her Face, her internal
Form. Thus is she all glorious within; For the Lamb himself, her Bridegroom is
her Glory. The Glory of the Lord himself in his eternal Splendors enlightneth
all within.

This Queens Garment is all of wrought Gold. The word Wrought, signifies
properly a work of Eyes set all over the Garment. So Dr. Hammond expounds it,
Her Garment was all over set with round Oes, like so many Eyes or Suns wrought
in Gold. The created form of this Spirit being the pure luster of the eternal
Sun, the Divine Essence, is the Queen's Garment. The numberless Ideas of the
Divine Nature, in each of which the Godhead it self is entire in its Sacred
Unity, comprehending all its Ideas, or Variety in a Variety entirely thorowout,
infinitely fresh and new, form in this Garment secondary Ideas, their own most
immediate, fairest and fullest Effulgencies, or Life-Pictures. In every one of
these is this Queen also, according to the Original Patterns in her Father,
King, and Bridegroom, complete with all the full Glories of her Person, and
equally distinct in a new Variety of all her Glories, as a new Queen, a new
Person, a distinct Spirit. These are the Divine Suns and Eyes in the Garment of
this Queen, in which the eternal Eyes and Suns shining in the Divine Essence
look forth, as through Casements of pure, living, and immortal Crystal. Each
Form, each distinction of every kind in the Creation here below is such an eye,
such a Sun wrought in Gold, such a Spirit of incorruptible Glory, such a Bride
and Queen to the eternal King. Every one in particular is a spiritual and
heavenly Member; all together make up the spiritual and heavenly Body of our
Jesus in this Personal Kingdom of his, where he in his own Person is a Kingdom
to himself, containing the Creator with the Creation in all their Amplitudes
and Varieties, married together into one Person, Spirit, and Glory, which is to
it self Bridegroom, Bride, Offspring, and All.

See if this be not that heavenly Jerusalem, the Jerusalem above, which is
indeed free in the spacious embraces, and unlimited Amplitudes of the Godhead;
which at the same time is by the inviolable sweetness of a sweetly-invincible
necessity, the eternal Law of supreme Love confined to these embraces, in which
she becomes the glorious Virgin Mother of us all.

Is not this the Jerusalem, whose heavenly transparencies, whose Divine
luster, whose unstained, incorruptible Beauties and Virtues are figured by
Gold, Pearls, precious Stones, and Glass, Glass of Crystal? Is not this that
Bride of the Lamb which comes down from God, out of the Heaven of the
essential Image of the Godhead, as out of the Bosom of her Father and
Bridegroom, with this Character, in which the perfection of Beauty, and the sum
of all Perfections is divinely seated; Having the Glory of God?

But let us here a while feast our Understandings and Affections, our whole
Persons with all our Powers upon our Jesus, whom all our desires cannot equal.
Let us endeavor to take a more distinct and exact view of the Mediatory
Glories of his blissful Person in this divinely-admirable piece, his created
Image.

For this end we will fix our eye for a short season upon the threefold Riches
of this Work:

1. The Variety.

2. The harmonious Order in each part of the Variety.

3. The Unity of the whole, of each part with the whole, and with it self.

Now, gentle Reader, let me humbly fore-warn thee, that I may not seem too far
to transgress the laws and limits of that Method, which I have prescribed to my
self, in treating of the Mediatorship of our Lord Jesus, by touching here in
this part, and taking in all things of the Creator and the Creature, of the
Fall and the Recovery, of Nature and Grace. I entreat thee therefore to
consider and bear in thy mind, when thou meetest with this, these three things.

1. The Person of our Lord Jesus in this Mediatory Image, of which I speak,
unites all. Here God is come down somewhat from the heighths of his
unapproachable Light nearer to us. Here God is with a delicate and transparent
Veil of his own clearest Beams, not hiding any of his Glories, but tempering
them after the sweetest manner to a more pleasing suitableness unto us, that we
may with a more agreeable familiarity, and a more familiar delight feed the
eyes of our minds with them.

Here is the Creation in the whole Circuit of it, with an Amplitude and Glory
far beyond, far above it self. Here it lies together all, as one piece not only
in it self, but in the most richly heightened Light of Christ's Divine Person
and Spirit. Here it lies in Union with the Divine Nature in its essential
Image, filled with the eternal Ideas, the numberless Original, and exemplar
Glories of all things, composing one piece, subsisting and shining in one
Person together with these.

No Form or Person in nature drawn with greatest care and pleasure by the hand
of the most skilful Painter, a Titian, Portogenes, or Apelles; or contemplated
in its Idea, shining in the Intellectual Light of some excellent and Divine
Spirit, so far transcendeth it self, seen by a common eye in it self: As the
whole Creation, with each minute, part and motion, is glorified here in the
Spirit and Person of our blessed Jesus, with an heightning far transcending the
most exalted Beauties of its own proper state.

Here the Creation appears as the Sunbeam, where it is immediately united to
the Sun, being far more full, far more bright, and crowned with the Sun.

This is that Divine Glass, which God in his supreme Wisdom has framed, that
himself may have ever before him all his Works, as they are presented here in
one most lively and lovely view; as also that his Work, his Creature in this
Glass alone may take a view and measure of it self, of him, of his way, and his
glory.

Think then, Christian Reader, that all things here treated of, are now before
thee in this Divine Spirit and Person, as Flowers of Spices in those beds of
Spice, which are the Cheeks, the Face of thy Jesus, thy Beloved, thy Delight,
Thine and Ours.

2. This Discourse of the Creation and Redemption, as they lie here in the
Person of Christ, their efficient, exemplar, and final Cause, prepares our way
for our contemplation of them in their proper places. We know things by the
knowledge of their Causes.

3. Our stay here will be compensated with the compendiousness of our way in
the following parts of our Discourse upon the Mediation of Christ. He that has
newly seen a Rose flourishing upon its stalk and root in the Garden, with a
more easy and transient view takes in the beauties of a painted Rose, so far
as he respects nature alone.

It is now time to come to a Distinct Contemplation of that threefold
excellency which we mentioned; The Variety in this Divine Piece, the Order of
the Parts, the Unity of the whole, and of each part.

1. The Variety, which renders the beauty and the delight in any piece more
full, is, that it self be most full. The things, which make the Variety any
where full, are these:

1. The Variety from its highest state extends it self to the most remote
distance, by even and united steps, that all the distances be full.

2. The Variety passes into, and loses it self in the Contrariety carried to
its greatest height, and to the utmost point. This most enlarges the Variety;
most heightens and sets off the Unity, the Beauty; most excites, enlarges, and
heightens the Understanding. This is of so great a moment, this contains so
Divine a secret, so high a mystery of something surprising, transporting,
beyond that, which is understood: that no Work of God or of man wrought with
any skill wants it, or rather has not the greatest skill laid out upon it to
carry it farthest. No Work pleases our Eye, our Ear, our Mind, all falls flat
to all, where the Shades, the Discords, the Contrarieties are wanting. The
wisest man says of the wisest God in his Ecclesiastes, That God has set one
thing over against another, that man may find nothing to add to the perfection
of his Work: Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Contraries one opposed to
another. How in an History, in a Theater do we take the greatest pleasure to
have afflicting passions of pity, fear, grief raised in us even unto sighs, a
real melancholy, and tears, while we know, that this is only a part in the
whole; a Scene, which adorns and heighthens the beauty of the whole, and then
loses the melancholy of its shade, and discord in the universal luster and
sweetness?

3. In the last place, that which makes the Variety full, is the return of the
whole through the Contrariety by a sweet and full close into its Unity; the
return by the Contrariety from its low estate, to its first and most perfect
height.

The Lord Jesus in his Mediatory Person, is the fairest, the richest Draught or
Portrait of the Divine Design and Work, as it lies in the Divine Mind; animated
and heightened by the most immediate, intimate, mutual Union with the Divine
Mind. Here therefore is to be expected the most ample Variety.

The Lord Jesus is styled in the Scriptures, The Wisdom of God. He is the
Wisdom of God in every sense.

1. He is the Wisdom of God in the Divine Mind.

2. He is the Wisdom of God in the Divine Work brought forth from that Mind.

3. He is the Wisdom of God in the Divine Model of that Mind, and Work,
intervening between both, and uniting them.

Proclus defines Wisdom to be (...), a fullness of things. Our Jesus is the
highest Wisdom, the first, the fullest, the richest Variety. St. Paul gives to
this Wisdom the Epithete of (...), a large Gallery, or Porch in Athens, painted
at the cost and order of Pericles by the most skilful Artists, with the most
exquisite skill, and with that which is the most heightened point in this skill
for life and delight, the greatest Variety, was called from this peculiar
excellency, the Variety in the Pictures, (...).

Our Jesus is replenished and adorned with the richest Variety of Divine Forms,
which that Divine Painter, Naetura Naturans, the eternal Nature, the eternal
Spirit is capable of bringing forth. Thus is our Jesus become not (...), but
(...), a Porch or Gallery of Divine Variety, for God himself, and all his holy
Ones to walk in. Here do they contemplate themselves, the Ideas of their own
Spirits, all their Works in their liveliest and sweetest Figures. Ah! how is
the King, how are all his glorious train tied eternally in this Gallery!

But thus much for the first excellency in this Mediatory Person of Christ.

2. The second is the Harmonious Order of all the Parts. These are five.

1. Divine Love in its eternal Original; or the Divine Unity at its full
height. This is Jesus Christ in his Godhead, as he is the essential Image of
the Godhead, One with the Father; as he is the Head, the Root, the Bridegroom.
To himself in his created Image, sprung forth from, subsisting in the Bosom of
the essential Image and Glory.

All Forms in the height and exactness of their several Distinctions, in their
first, their fullest Variety, are here at the height, in the absoluteness of
the Divine Unity, which is most heightened purity, the perfection of Light and
of Love.

2. Divine Love descending into an Image of Light; or the supreme Unity in a
clear and sweet Union with Diversity. This is properly our Jesus in his
Middle-state, in his Mediatory Image. Here are all forms of things, with all
their Distinctions, at once in the most perfect Unity, and in a Diversity with
a subordination. Yet is this a clear and shining Diversity, a Diversity without
distance or division, every where full of the Divine Unity.

3. The third Part in this Glory of Christ, is, the Divine Love declining into
a shadowy Image; or the Divine Unity shaded with the Diversity, yet sweetly
figuring it self upon the Diversity, and subsisting with all its Glories
beneath it. This is the Divine Love in a sweet sleep filled with a pleasant
dream, where all the Divine Forms, veiled with the shading Diversity, seem to
act a Divine Masque to the Divine Music of eternal Love, seeming to sound at a
great distance through these shades.

In the first of Genesis, a deep darkness is the ground of the whole Creation.
This is expressed by Bohu, and Tohu. Bohu, He is in it. Tohu, the last bound,
ultima linea rerum. This is the Chaos, the ground of the first Creation, a
Divine shadow which the Divine Glory casts from it self, with which it
surrounds and vails it self, in which himself with all Divine Forms does lie,
as the glories of a Plant in its seed under the Earth; or as Man with all his
Intellectual, Angelical, Divine Powers, Notions, Glories in a deep sleep. This
the Jews call the darkness round about the Throne of God, and apply to this the
black Locks like a Raven upon the Bridegrooms head of fine Gold, in the
Canticles. This is the Philosopher's Materia prima Metaphysica, first
Metaphysical Matter, out of which Angels, Celestial Bodies, Elementary Forms
sprung, as Flowers out of the ground of Paradise.

Out of this Darkness God called the Light of the first Day, the Primitive
Light of the Creation, which by varying it self with the Diversity of shades
from this ground of the Divine Darkness, springs forth into all the several
Lives, Forms and Motions, through the whole Nature of things.

This is not the true Light, which has no darkness in it; but the shadowy
Image of that Light. The Darkness, out of which, and in the midst of which this
Light shines, is the sweet sleep of the eternal Love. The Light is the
pleasant dream in this Divine sleep. Thus Man the Diapason, or full Music of
the whole Creation, composed of all the several Forms, as several Notes, is
said to be made Betzelem, in a shadowy Image of God. The same word is used by
the Psalmist, where man is said to walk in a vain show. In which respect the
Holy Spirit pronounces the purest Beauties and Joys of the earthly Paradise to
be Vanity, Dreams, and no more; the shadows or figures of things in a Dream;
Man in his best state is altogether Vanity.

I beg thy leave, Christian Reader, here to make use of that History, if not in
an Allegorical, yet an accommodated or Allusive sense. God cast Adam into a
deep sleep, and then divided Eve from him, and brought them together again, no
more as one person, but two. Before the Spirit had said, God made man, Male and
Female made he him; As if Man had been then like the Angels, which neither
marry nor give in marriage, but comprehend both Sexes, with all their Progeny,
as a full Quire in one Person, in one Spirit. For thus they say of Angels.
Every one is both Male and Female in himself, a God-like Unity, diffusing it
self within it self into all Variety, with a Divine amplitude, without division
or distance.

But thus our Jesus first is both Bridegroom and Bride within himself; he
comprehends the Divine Nature, the Universal Image of the whole Creation in
one Divine Person, Spirit, Life, Image, Joy and Glory. But then by the Law of
the eternal Harmony in the Divine Nature, in its essential Image, he falls into
a sweet, and deep sleep. In this sleep, as in a Divine dream, is the Bride
divided from her Bridegroom. Now they with their Race of Divine Forms meet in
diverse Persons, as shadows of themselves. Yet do they in their Persons, in all
their Motions, bear the Divine Impressions, and amiable Figures of their
eternal Ideas, in the Love and Light of eternity. These eternal Ideas, while
they sleep in these shadows, yet awake beneath them, above them, to act them,
to shadow forth their own Sweetnesses and Beauties upon them.

These shadows of this dream are indeed shadowy, compared with the eternal
Glories: yet have they a real Being, a real existency in their own place and
order. But we will now pass to the fourth part of this Divine Piece.

4. This is the Divine Unity, opening it self in the shadowy Image into a
Contrariety, the utmost point of its Variety. This is the Divine Love in a
storm, in its dream and sleep. The Divine Love is here in a disguise. God, who
is Love, calls the Work of Wrath, his strange Work. The ministry of the Law,
and the Letter, which casts a Vail upon the Face of God, is the same in the
Language of the Scriptures. We read in the Revelations, Of the Wrath of the
Lamb. Wrath is the darkest disguise upon the eternal Love, the eternal Meekness
and Gentleness, the Lamb, our Jesus.

In this state of Contrariety, Sin and Death have their entrance. Our Jesus,
the Lamb, eternal Love is here slain and crucified by the Sin of the Creature.
In this death of his the whole Creation dies. Here this Lamb, the Divine Love
in the region of Death, in the midst of the Powers of Darkness, and Death
becomes a Sacrifice for every Creature. By dying for sin, as he dies by sin, he
makes an end of sin and death; he takes away the subject, the ground of Sin and
Death, the mutability of the Creature, the shadowyness of the shadowy Image in
its dissolution and restoration. He at once scatters the fearful dream, and
awakens it out of its sleep, that it may dream no more, but see the light of
Life.

Divine Poets (which with most inspired and acquired skill, raise, refine, and
delight the best Minds, by awakning in them the richest, the liveliest Images
of the Divine Work, and the Divine Mind,) place the greatest, the sweetest
life, and heightning of their Figures in the (...), and the (...), the knot,
and the untying of the knot. This part in the Divine Design and Work is both
these, the knot, and the untying of the knot. The Law lets in Sin, Sin brings
in Death, the shadowy Image is the Root and Seat of all these. The death of
Jesus Christ makes an end of Sin, swallows up Death into Victory, dissolves the
shadowy Image, sows it again by its dissolution in the Bosom of the Divine
Love, as they lie down together in its grave. Here it springs up again
immediately into a Child of Light, in the Image of Light, the heavenly Image.
In this Light it springs up an Immortal Bride in the Arms of its Bridegroom,
the eternal Love. Thus the Grave of Love is changed into a Bridal Bed.

O that I had the anointing of Bezaleel and Aholiab upon me, to draw the Divine
Model of the Tabernacle of God in this part of the heavenly Image, the
Contrariety, the Scene of Wraht! We should see without Badgers skins sullied,
parched with dust, sand, and Sun. We should see it in the midst of a desolate
Wilderness, round about it a Land of Graves, and fiery Serpents. But all this
while within shine, flourish and flow all the precious, the pleasant things of
the whole Creation, and in the Bosom of these, as Divine Figures unfold
themselves all the blissful and glorious mysteries of the eternal Beauties and
Sweetnesses of the Divinity unvailed. Within are the richest materials,
colors, works: In the midst of all, as the Center, the Spring of all is God
himself upon the golden Mercy Seat, the Thrones of Grace and Love, within the
golden Wings which the Cherubims of Glory spread round about it to make a
Pavilion for it.

Thus true is it, that the Law is the Gospel, eternal Love veiled; the Gospel,
eternal Love and Beauty shine forth with naked Faces in the Law it self, when
the Vail is taken off.

But let us trace more exactly the steps of Divine Love, which all drop Myrrh,
incorruptible Sweetnesses, as he passes through the Divine Mazes, the curious
Windings of this Divine Labyrinth. To this end we will consider this state of
Contrariety, or of Wrath in its several Causes; efficient, material, formal,
final.

St. Paul lays a clear and rich ground for us, when he treats of this Subject.
His words are these, What if God willing to declare the Power of his wrath?

Having such an Idea of the Divine Goodness of God, that he is the supreme
Love, the supreme Unity, the supreme Good, which are all diverse words
expressing one thing: Where I meet with the darkest, the dreadfulest appearance
in his Births, his Works, I find my Spirit excited to seek the sweetest and
delicatest Roses among these Thorns, a Face filled with the richest smiles
beneath these Vails, the Divinest Wealth, Skill, and Figures in the Vails
themselves, as in that before the Holy of Holies.

Those Scriptures on such occasions sound with an heavenly Melody in mine Ears,
awakning and calling forth my Spirit to the expectation of some
divinely-beautiful, transporting and transforming sight: He puts the
greatest comeliness upon the most uncomely parts. It is the Glory of God to
hide the Matter, the Word, the eternal Word or Wisdom, the Divine Beauty and
Love: But it is the Glory of a King, of the Royal Priesthood, the Kingly and
Priestly Mind, to find it out, to enter within the Vail, to draw aside the
Vail, and discover the Glory.

These words, What if God willing to declare the Power of his Wrath? present to
us this whole state of Wrath, as it comprehends the Law, Sin and Death, in its
threefold Cause, Efficient, Exemplar, Final.

The Idea of Wrath in the Divine Mind is a Variety in the gloriouslyample, and
delightfully-vast Variety of the supreme Unity, the eternal Love. This Ideal
Wrath in the Idea of the Godhead, the Person of Christ, as he is the essential
Image of the Father, in the Bosom of the Father, is a beautiful and blissful
Variety in the Beauty, and most high blisses of the Godhead. It is a Love-part
in the triumphantly-joyous and glorious Variety of the eternal Love. This
Sun-like Idea in the supreme and eternal Sun of the Divine Essence, is the
efficient, the exemplar, and final Cause of this Contrariety, this wrathful
state. This is its first, its most universal, most intimate efficient. This,
its Original, exactest Pattern. This, its Principal, its Ultimate End.

Eternal Love it self in this Idea, is the Divine Framer, the Divine Actor, the
Divine Close of the whole Scene, of this Wrath-part in the Love-play. Here it
begins, here is its way, here it ends in its Divine Ide^, in the Bosom, in the
Face, in the midst of the Varieties, the Beauties, the Blisses of eternal Love.
Without this part in the Variety, they were all imperfect. Love it self without
this Lovespot, this beautiful and delightful Wound would have an eternal Cloud
and Wound upon it.

A great Philosopher teaches us, That Power is an Unity, containing manifold
Forms in it self, which it shoots up, and sends forth from it self according to
the Law of its own proper Harmony. Every Idea in the eternal Mind is a Divine
Unity. The Ideal Wrath there, is an Unity comprehending in Divine Images all
the Forms, all the Varieties of this Love-part, the Divine Wrath, in it self.
This is the eternal Reason of the whole Ministry of the Law, and of Wrath in
the Creation; the displaying of this part of the Divine Variety by Divine
Figures in its proper place in the Divine Work. Thus God shows the Power of his
Wrath. He seals the Creature with this Idea, with the impression of the Divine
and eternal Glory in this Divine Idea also.

According to the Language of St. Paul; Now Grace, Divine Love, overflows us in
all Wisdom and Prudence. Jesus, that essential, complete Idea of the Godhead,
is the Divine Wisdom. The innumerable Ideas in this Divine Word, or Mind, in
this Univeral Idea make up that, which the holy Apostle styles, All Wisdom.
When Jesus the essential Image of all Lights and Loves, in the Father of Lights
and Loves, has wrought upon the Creature the clear and full engravings of all
the Ideas in the Divine Mind; then has he finished it unto a complete Image of
himself. Now does this Spirit of Grace, of Love, and Beauty flow forth upon it
in all wisdom, in all the various Lights of heavenly Beauty, in all the various
sweetnesses of the heavenly Love.

When this work of wrath shall be seen in the whole piece of the Divine Design,
when it shall be seen in Union with its Divine Idea, in the light and
brightness of its eternal Pattern: What a pomp and triumph of Divine Love, Joy
and Glory, shall we see it; how will it increase the pomp and triumph in the
Godhead, and its Work? So we see it there, where I now treat of it, in the
heavenly Image, in the Mediatory Person of Christ.

St. Paul presents this Joy and Glory to the Disciples of Christ: All things,
says he, are yours, things present, and things to come, this world, Life and
Death; all things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So far as
we by Jesus Christ are united unto our proper Idea in the Divine Mind, which is
our Mansion, or Apartment in our Fathers House; we through the Unity of the
eternal Spirit, which by a Love-Union binds up all the Ideas in every one,
behold, possess, converse with, enjoy all things in their eternal Ideas, their
Original Truths and Glories. All things here are clothed and filled with the
richest Lights of Divine Beauty, the purest Sweetnesses, and sweetest Joys of
Divine Love. But thus much for the Universal, the Ideal Cause, efficient,
exemplar, final.

The material Cause of this Contrariety is the subject, where it is immediately
seated; the ground, out of which it immediately arises. The shadowy Image, the
Creature in its shadowy state, is the subject, and seat of this wrathful
appearance. The ground is the shadowyness, the darkness, the ground of
defectibility and mutability.

The form of this legal or wrathful state is composed of many Circumstances.
God, who is the eternal Truth, the only, ever-glorious Life and Substance,
appears in a shadowy Image. God, who is Love pure, unmixt, perfect,
unbounded, who has all pleasantness in his Face and Person, who is all of him
in every part, in every glance, the Spring and Center of all desirableness and
delights, covers this most amiable, most attracting Face and Person with a
Vizard of Clouds, Tempests, and Fires, as on Mount Sinai.

In this Form he divides between himself and the Creature. He sits upon the
Throne of his Sovereignty and Dominion founded on Righteousness, and attended
with the Ministers of his Justice. He sets the Creature upon the root of his
own shadowy Temporaries, faint and fading Principle, clothed with the Beauties
and Purities of an heavenly Image in an earthly Form. He imposes a severe Law
upon him, urged and pressed with terrible Menaces, a Law to be observed and
performed by the shadowy Power of this fading Principle.

The Law imposed is, that by the virtue of this temporary Root, he preserve the
Beauties of the heavenly Image in himself eternally pure and entire; that he
keep his heart chaste, unstained from all the Glories appearing in this shadowy
Image, which alone are ever present with the senses, and all the powers of the
Soul; that he place his Heart, all the love of his Heart to the eternal Truth,
the unseen Glory hid beneath the shadowy Image, and appearing from the midst of
dreadful Tempests, devouring Flames, encompassing and guarding the Beauties of
the shadowy Image.

The Creatures sading Root, no more fed from the rich ground of Eternity, now
fails; the shadowy Beauties wither, the Darkness springs up, and over-casts
all. Sin from this bed of darkness springs up, and takes life. Sin by
occasion of this shadowy Image, in which God appears, turns all heavenly Love,
all Divine Charity into Lust and Concupiscence, by terminating it upon the
shadow. From the vizor of severity and wrath which God now puts on, sin takes
occasion to bring forth in the Creature averseness from God, enmity toward
him, the fiery soarce of all hellish passions.

Thus, as the Wax is turned to the Seal, eternal Love by the force of the
eternal Idea treasured up in it self, in the midst of the rich Varieties
putting on a form of Contrariety, becomes an occasion for a form of
Contrariety and Enmity, (which is the Root and Essence of all sin,) to spring
up in the Creature.

The Contrariety on both sides heightens it self unto the utmost extremity,
that the Idea of Wrath may fully display it self in all its forms and forces to
make this part of the Divine Variety full.

So is accomplished that which St. Paul speaks of himself, as a figure of
Mankind: Sin taking occasion by the Law, taking life from the Commandment
deceived me, and so slew me. The shadowy Light of the Divine Beauty: the
shadowy sense and life of the Divine Love is now extinguished in the Creature,
or, which is worse, corrupted and depraved. The whole face of things is covered
with a foul and horrid tempest of darkness, lust and wrath. This tempest rises
to its height, when Jesus Christ, the God of Love, with his essential Image,
with his Mediatory Image, with his Angelical Image, in which he is the first
Creature, the immediate Head of the shadowy Image, with the full Glories of all
these veiled beneath the fleshly form of fallen man taken from the Virgin Mary,
and espousing it to one person with himself, in all those beautiful and blessed
Images, rises up, and appears in the midst of this Tempest, and is slain by
the fury of it. All the Contrarieties, the enmities of God, and the Creature
meet in him, as the mark of them all. The rage of the Creature, heightened to
the utmost height of all sinfulness, burns out upon him, sealing up the s^ of
all guilt.

The Wrath of God in i^ ^tmost force, set on by the Divine Justice, Holiness
and Glory, descends upon him at once satiating it self, and making him a
Sacrifice for all the World.

Thus is the knot in the Divine Design at once tied faster, and united in the
Death of Jesus Christ. This part of the Divine Variety the Contrariety now
carried to its utmost point is finished. In the Death of Jesus Christ, the
first, and Universal Creature, the Head, and Spirit of the whole Creation in
the Divine Workmanship, the whole Creation dies. The shadowy Image, the seat,
the ground of Sin, Death and Wrath, is dissolved in the Grave of Jesus Christ,
that, as eternal Love in him rises again, returning to its own proper form and
place, it may carry up all the Births of Love together with it self, opening it
self in its own Divine Sweetnesses and Beauties, as a new ground and root
beneath all. This is the form of the wrathful state.

The ends of eternal Love, as it acts this part under a disguise, next to the
Ultimate end, the eternal Glory in the Divine Idea, are these. The shadowy
Image, beneath which the true and eternal Glories lie as in a sleep, is
discovered to be a shadow, and then dissolved. The darkness of its ground
arising to swallow up the Light of the Divine Figure in this Image, when it
has so manifested it self, vanishes away in a moment, being swallowed up into
the eternal Light of the Divine Love. Eternal Love in the Person of Christ now
sings that Song; O Death, I will be thy death.

The Ideal, the eternal, the truly Divine Lives and Beauties, from the
Mediatory Person of Christ, which lay hid beneath the Foundations of this
World, and shadowy Image, now spring up in the shadowy Image by its
dissolution. Now the shadowy Image rises again into its Ideal, Divine Life and
Form. Now is it with a solemn and universal Joy married to its eternal Idea,
its Original Pattern, and Archetype in the Bosom of the heavenly Image, the
Mediatory Person of our Lord Jesus. Now is that shadowy state of the Creature,
and the scene of wrath in that shadowy state, (like a Masque at Midnight, when
Princes are married) a triumphant enlargement of the Varieties, a Divine
heightning of the Beauties and Sweetnesses in the Joys of this Bridegroom and
Bride, the Creature, and its Ideal Glory, its Original Form eternally united in
Jesus Christ.

Thus I have endeavored to represent the proportion, and harmonious Order of
the parts in this heavenly Person of our great and glorious Mediator. The
supreme Unity is the supreme Love and Light. This descends by just degrees
through all steps of the Variety unto the lowest figure, and obscurest shadow
of it self. Through the darkness of this shadow, it brings forth it self into
the remotest distance of Contrariety. Through this Contrariety dissolving the
shadow and breaking up the darkness, it returns by even degrees to its own
first heights.

Now, gentle Reader, stay a while, contemplate with me the divinely admirable
Order, Harmony, Beauty of this part the Contrariety, which is the proper Seat
of all Dis^der, Discord, and Deformity.

1. This is the Wrath of the Lamb, the eternal Love and Meekness, which makes
it self a Sacrifice to its own Wrath. This is eternal Love in a disguise. All
pleasantnesses in the Face of the supreme Love and Beauty, our Jesus, our God,
lie hid beneath this Vail.

2. It is in the deepest shade, and darkness of the most shadowy Figure of it
self, that Love springs up into this strange Form. In the holy Gospel we read
of the Kingdom of Heaven, That while the men of the Kingdom slept, the Enemy
came and sowed tares. In the 73. Psalm, It is said of this state of wrath at
the 20. verse, As a dream, when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest,
shall thou despise their Image or shadow. Eternal Love seems sweetly to sleep
in the earthly Paradise, by its descent with all its true and substantial
Glories into a shadowy Image. In the depth of this sleep, this state of wrath
springs up, as a troublesome dream. By the trouble of the dream is Love it self
awakned, by which awakning the trouble, and the dream both vanish, and as
empty, unsubstantial things, lose themselves in the sweetness of eternal Light.
Ficinus esteems him a great Person, who says to himself of all things here; It
may be, that all this is a dream.

3. This is a new scene of Variety, which the Divine Unity opens in it self,
by which it declares its amplitude and greatness. Here are all forms of things
again entirely new, at the greatest height of Variety in their Contrariety.
Here also are all Forms of things anew, in a new and Divine Figure, inasmuch as
the Contrariety also bears the Divine Impression of its own proper Idea in
the Divine Mind. As the fullness of the Divine Mind with all its Ideas and
glorious Forms meet in that Idea above: So does the Divine Image, with all its
Glories, form it self into a new Figure with a Divine Variety in this state of
Wrath.

4. See how the Goodness, the Justice, the Power, the Wisdom, the Holiness of
God are here illustrated and glorified. The Divine Goodness and Love by
descending through a shadowy darkness into the Contrariety of Divine Wrath,
gives occasion to the Creature to rise up into its Contrariety of Sin; that
this may be the mark of the Divine Displeasure. This is the Glory of the Divine
Goodness and Holiness, that sin can take no birth, and have no place, but in
its Wrath, when it is veiled beneath this strange Form of Contrariety and
Enmity. As this Enmity has no Object, but the evil of Sin: So sin has its
birth and place to this alone, as its proper end, that it may be the mark of
the Divine Wrath; that the Goodness, Purity, Love of the Divine Nature may be
manifested in its high and irreconcilable opposition to the Evil, the Filth,
the enmity of Sin.

Now these two Contrarieties heighten themselves one by the other, till they
come to their utmost point. Then the Contrariety of the Divine Wrath, as an
unquenchable flame, swalloweth up in it self the enmity of Sin. Then does this
Wrath also having lost the force of its opposition by losing its Object, lose
it self also in the Beauties of the Divine Goodness, and in the sweetness of
the Divine Love.

Yea, the fire of this Contrariety not only consumes it self, but the darkness
also, and the shadowy Image, where it has its seat and root. By this
dissolution, the eternal Love re-ascends to its Throne, where all this scene of
wrath and shadows rise again into a Life of Glory, and remain as eternal
Beauties and Sweetnesses in the unsearchable rich Variety of the Divine Beauty
and Love. Here they remain as eternal heightnings of all their Sweetnesses and
Glories.

How unexpressible is the Wisdom, and the Love in the contrivance of this
Scene, by which all these things are brought to pass in it? Eternal Love it
self, our Jesus, in its own Divine Person and Form, comes forth into the midst
of this Contrariety. He heightens both to the utmost extremity, by making
himself the Object of both. He comes full of Grace and Truth. So he raises the
evil of Sin, which has its Kingdom in shadows, lies, and enmity, to the
highest rage of opposition against himself. Then he takes the guilt of all Sin
thus heightened upon himself, exposes himself, as a Sacrifice for it, to the
fiercest flames of the Divine Fury.

While these flames seed upon his Sacred Person, they at once consume all the
evil of Sin, by consuming the whole shadowy Image in its Divine Root. In this
blessed Person the fire of Wrath meets with all the Beauties, all the
Sweetnesses of the Divine Holiness, the Divine Love and Goodness. In these it
meets with a Divine Satisfaction, a Divine Atonement. The Wrath and the
Contrariety now cease, being reconciled and charmed by these Divine Harmonies
into the Unity of eternal Love.

Thus is the Cross of our Lord Jesus the utmost bound of things. In this Cross
the Divine Design is finished, the Mystery is finished, the Vail is rent; all
things in Heaven and on Earth are reconciled, and gathered up into One, tuned
to a Divine and Universal Harmony, which is the Music of Eternity. Now is that
Song sung, O Death, where is thy sting: O Grave, where is thy Victory. The
sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law: but thanks be to
God, who gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ on
his Cross has swallowed up the Law, Sin, and Death in the Victory of the
Divine Love, the Divine Purities, the Beauties of Holiness and eternal Life.

Eternal Life, eternal Love; that is, our Jesus now cries with a triumphant
shout, O Death, I will be thy Plague and Death!

This is the Day of the manifestation of the Righteous Judgments of God. Now in
the close and end of all, the Divine Design through all the parts and passages
of it, clearly opens and unfolds it self. Now it appears unto all Eyes and
Hearts to be all throughout in every point of it divinely-beautiful and
pleasant, transcending the Understanding, the Affections, the Expectations, the
Desires, the most unbounded Imagination of all Men or Angels, proportioned only
to a God, and that God, which is so Light, that there is no darkness in him: So
Love, that there is no Fury in him. Now is that found clearly, completely true.
All his ways are ways of peace, and all his paths are pleasantness.

This is our God, and we will praise him: our Fathers God, and we will exalt
him. This is our Jesus, whom our Soul loves, we will rejoice in him, and wait
for him.

Pardon me, courteous Reader, if I seem something longer in this tract of my
Discourse, describing that most beautiful and Divine Harmony, with which all
things lie together most delightfully in this shining Seat of all Truth, and
enflaming Object of all Love, the dear and adored Form and Person of our great
Mediator. This is the Eye, the Heart of my design and work. If the entire and
naked Face of Divine Truth were rightly drawn, and set before us in any degree
answerable to the Life in this heavenly Image, how powerfully would it attract
all Understandings into its embraces? how pleasantly would it subdue them to it
self, far beyond the force of all Disputes and Syllogisms, which gather up only
small divided and dead parts of this Divine Form; like Ae as collecting the
scattered members of his Son Absertus, thrown up and down at diverse distances
by his bloody Sister Medea, to retard his way; Or like the Philosophers in
Boethius, which take hold of the Garment only of Divine Truth, and tear that
into deformed shreds, of which they possess themselves, and in which they glory.

If I could entirely conceive that of which I seem to my self to have some
little, but rich, and pleasant glances; If I could clearly express and conveigh
into the Minds of men, that which I conceive of the nature of God, and his
Work, which, appears to me, to have been gathered from all things Humane and
Divine; from Poetry, Philosophy, and Theology: From Nature and Grace; the
letter of the Scriptures, and the Spirit, according to my little acquaintance
with them, and less understanding of them: I am, perhaps too vainly, apt to
persuade my self, that I should make the noblest Conquest, a Conquest of
Hearts, which would be equally Conquerors with me, partaking equally in the Joy
and Glory of the Conquest.

For what Understanding would not gladly be swallowed up into the richly
unfathomable Depths of the Divine Wisdom; if it were touched with this sense,
that the whole Understanding and Mind of God in its utmost and unlimited
compass is taken up, and filled with a Love of equal extent to it, and equally
unlimited? What Understanding would not joyfully lie down for ever, and lose it
self in the gloriously soft and bright Bosom of the Divine Wisdom, if it once
by the least sweet glimpse perceived this, that the Divine Wisdom throughout is
no other, than the beautiful and blissful Harmony of the Divine Love, that all
the Work of his Wisdom within and without is a deep, delightful, God-like
contrivance of Love, on which the whole Godhead lays out it self to the
utmost of all its unbounded fulnesses and treasures; For this Love to bring
forth, and express it self with all possible advantage, with all beautifyings,
sweetnings and heightnings, as in the whole contrivance, so in each part and
point of it; through all which this Love, by this Wisdom conducteth it self
with an inevitable force and sweetness. This is that which the holy Apostle
has testified, speaking of things which he had seen, when the Father revealed
Jesus Christ in his Spirit, that God by Jesus Christ in his Grace, that is, his
Love has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.

What Will of Man or Angel, if it had in it self the greatest Arbitrarin^s, and
highest Sovereignty over its own Actions, would not with unexpressible pleasure
resign its Arbitrariness, its Sovereignty, its self, and all, to the Divine
Will, when this Will should appear unto it in nothing Arbitrary, but Goodness
it self, its own Object, Rule, and Perfection, a Goodness eternal, unalterable
and inviolable: The supreme and universal Goodness, containing in it self all
kinds and degrees of Goodness at an equal height with it self: A Goodness,
which brings forth it self into the supreme and universal Beauty, its proper
and essential Image, to which every Will by its own Principle, and most
essential activity and motion is carried with a necessity and irresistableness
most rational, and most voluntary; that is, most divinely-harmonious and
agreeable.

What Spirit endued with an Understanding, and a Will, can forbear from casting
it self with most enamoured, and most sweetly forcible transports into the
Arms, and absolute Conduct of this our Jesus, this our God, when by the first,
and most obscure beam of his own Light it is awakned unto this Divine Sight,
that this Jesus, our God, is Goodness it self, most pure, most perfect, whose
continued Birth and essential Image is Truth it self; Beauty it self: Truth and
Beauty in their clearest Glories, in their highest Sweetnesses, in their
fullest Amplitude, Extent and Majesty; Truth and Beauty comprehending all
things within themselves, as one Truth and Beauty with themselves, bringing
forth all things from themselves, as Flowers from their Garden-beds, filling
all, shining through all, forming themselves upon all? Shall not the
Understanding and Will of every Spirit now be as Wings of Divine Light and
Love, on which the Spirit flies with a sweet and a swift strength into the
Bosom of the Lord Jesus, that here by its Understanding it may feast it self
with an Appetite and Delight ever new, upon the supreme Goodness in its
heavenly Image of the eternal Truth; that here by its Will it may lie down for
ever with a most blissful Rest, with the fullness of all unexpressible
complacency, in the fruition of the supreme Goodness shining forth upon it,
immediately clasping and enfolding in its own naked, immortal, most precious,
most pleasant Form, the perfection of Beauty, the Essence of all Beauty, Truth,
Goodness, and Love in One? But it is time now for me to pass from this second
Excellency in the Mediatory Form and Person of our Jesus, the Harmonious Order
and Proportion of the parts.

The third Excellency in this Mediatory Form of Christ is the Unity of the
whole, and of the parts, as in themselves, so with the whole. The ground of
this Unity is twofold: 1. The Spiritual Nature. 2. The Divine Person.

1. One ground of this Unity is the Spiritual Nature of all things here. St.
Paul speaking of the Lord Jesus in this his proper Kingdom and Glory, says of
him, The Lord is that Spirit. That Spirit in the same place he describes to be
the Spirit, in which the Vail, the Shade, and Cloud of Flesh is entirely
removed; where all things are with open face in the Liberty of the Divine Light
and Glory. The Lord Jesus faith of himself, The words that I speak unto you,
they are Spirit, and they are Life. It is the Spirit which quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing. Jesus in his Mediatory Kingdom and Glory, casts off the Vail
of Flesh, as from his Divine, so from his Humane Nature. The days of his Flesh
are now past. He is a quickening Spirit, all Spirit and Life. His Humane Nature
is now all Spirit; and by having the Godhead, has the Fountain of Spirits and
Life in it self. All his words in this spiritual state, are substantial,
living, immortal Spirits, springing forth from, and abiding in himself, as
their heavenly Root and Element. After this manner do all Forms of things arise
and flourish in him, being his words of Power and Glory, as the Images in
Humane or Angelical Understandings are the words of those Minds.

Spirits are Unities. There is with them no distance of Space, or division of
Parts. All Spirits intimately, entirely, throughout, penetrate, possess, and
inhabit each other, transcending all this Image, and measure of space, of
place, of corporeal extension. The streets in the heavenly Jerusalem, are said
to be Gold and Glass. If I conjecture aright, Jesus Christ in his Mediatory
State is this glorious City, where the great Assembly of the Firstborn, all
Spirits born of the Father of Lights, Humane or Angelical, on Earth or in
Heaven, dwell together in One. It is expressly said, That this City has the
Glory of God, that the Glory of the Lord (...) it, and that the Lamb is the
Light thereof. How agrees all this with that Description of Christ, the
brightness of the Glory of God?

In this City of glorious and immortal Spirits, which is it self the Spirit of
Unity, and of Glory, where Jesus Christ is built up, not only into a Temple,
but into a City in this Spirit, the streets, the lowest Forms of things are
Gold and Glass. Such gold as has the transparency of glass. Such glass as has
the substance, the solidity, the glory, the incorruptibleness of Gold. Thus is
the Unity in the spiritual Nature of things most beautifully, and most
agreeably figured to us. Like Gold, it is every where full of it self, compact
and uniform, sending forth continually all various Forms, as Beams of Glory.
Like Glass, it discovers all Forms of things within it self; in every point
of it self, by a perfect transparency, all Forms of things endlesly appear in
each form. At every single view, at every single glance the eye of the Spirit
is every where terminated, no where bounded, every where at rest, no where
restrained.

2. The second ground of the Unity in this heavenly Image is the Divine Person.
All things here are joined by an hypostatical, or personal Union: all are one
Person. A Person is an Intellectual Unity, an Intellectual Essence completely
existing and subsisting in it self. The Unity here is not that only of an
Intellectual, but of a Divine Person: God is the Person here. As is the Person,
such is the Unity: both are supreme. The eternal Spirit, God himself in the
height of Eternity, makes both Natures, the Uncreated with the Created, one in
our Lord Jesus, without any confusion, or lessening the Distinction between the
Natures themselves.

The Unity of a Person is understood by these three Maxims concerning it in
Metaphysics.

1. The Person is the Subsistence, or the Existence: that Unity which is both
the Spring, and the Chanel, the Center, and the Circle of the whole Essence or
Nature, by which it is one by it self, and distinct from all other things,
distinct from it self, as it lies in its Causes, and is there one with them.

2. All Operations are from the Person.

3. All denominations belong to the Person.

The Person then is the indivisible Unity, which within it self, according to
its amplitude, springs up into all Varieties of Forms, Operations,
Denominations through the whole Essence and Nature in its utmost extent. This
is that which works all in all Operations, which appears in all Forms, which
has all names and denominations, which in all these is one, and the same, has
one Form, one Name, which comprehends all entirely, clearly, distinctly,
undividedly.

According to these grounds we shall see a threefold Divine and Personal Unity
in this Mediatory Form of Christ.

1. The whole is one, entire, and Divine Person, altogether complete, all over
divinely beautiful and pleasant. All Distinctions, Diversities, Distances,
Divisions, Contrarieties meet here without distance, diversity, or division in
the supreme Unity of one Divine Person, onc all-glorious Spirit, one Life, one
most harmonious Image, one Love, one eternal Joy. Behold the Beauty of this
more than heavenly Person in these several Elements, which compose all Beauty.

1. Here is the Variety of lines and colors. All forms of things in their
richest Variety lie together here.

2. Here is Light; The substance of the created Image in this Person is the
Flower of Light, the most immediate, sweetest, freshest Sunshine from the Face
of the Godhead it self.

3. Here is Life esteemed the chief part of Beauty. Here is the Life of Love.
As it is Life which heightens; so is it Love which sweetens all. A Divine,
eternal Spring of Life and Love opens it self in every part, and from every
part with most pleasant intermixtures diffuseth it self through the whole. Thus
are all the Beauties here perpetually in sweetest motion in the liveliest and
loveliest activity of mutual fruition, and the delightful exchange of their
Divine Sweetnesses, their never-fading Pleasures.

4. All this Variety, Light, Life, and Activity, are composed into, and
governed by the most charming, the most exact, the most universal Harmony.

5. The eternal Sun of Beauty it self, the eternal Spirit of Harmony, the
Godhead it self with open Face, with all its unclouded Sweetnesses, all its
unvailed Glories fills all, springs, shines forth with golden smiles, in every
part clothes the whole Image, is the Unity of all, the Person in all. This is
the first Unity, the Unity of the whole.

2. The second is the Divine, the Personal Unity in each part. Such is the
Virtue, such is the undivided simplicity of the Spiritual, the Divine Unity in
this Person, that the Unity, the Person, the Variety of the whole, is equally,
perfectly entire, and distinct in each part, in every point of the whole. Thus,
as there is one Body, and many members; so is Christ in this his spiritual and
heavenly Body. But such is the spirituality, the heavenliness of this Divine
Body, this Divine Person, that in every distinct Member, the Unity of the
Person, and of the heavenly Body; the Person in its full Amplitude, in the
greatness of its Majesty, the whole Body in all its glorious Variety, is most
completely the same, and distinct in every member. Thus we read, that in the
Throne of God, and the Vision of his Glory represented by Ezckiel, and St.
John, The Lamb was in the midst of the Throne, as the Center dissusing it self
through the whole Circle. There appeared also in the midst of the Throne four
living Creatures, which are interpreted by learned Divines, to be four
principal Ideas; the fourfold Spring and Head of all Ideal Lives and Glories,
into which the supreme and universal Idea, the Lamb immediately distinguishes
it self, like the Fountain of Eden in its four great streams. These four living
Creatures are so described, that every one has its own distinct Form, that yet
all are said to have one and the same Form. Every one is said to have the form
of a man, which is the entire and universal Harmony of all forms; the form of
that man which rides in the Firmament above the heads of them all, the Lamb
himself. This is the second Unity.

3. The third is the Unity of all parts with each other, and with the whole.
Every part equally subsisteth, and shines in all the other parts, and in the
entire Face of the whole, as in it self, being every where most perfectly
distinct, and the same. So we read concerning those four living Creatures,
Whithersoever the Spirit of the living Creatures was to go, they still went
forward, and never turned. This is the force of the Unity of each part, and
with the whole. Without change, at once every part stands distimctly in every
form of Beauty, Pleasantness, Glory; In all the richness of their Divine
Motions, and Activities ever full, ever new. The beautiful and Divine Face of
each part, of the whole in each part, stands and looks at once every way in
every part of the whole, and in the whole. Now have I finished the threefold
Excellency of our Jesus in this Divine Image and Mediatory Glory.

Before I pass from it, let me entreat you to cast your eye for a little space
upon two Divine and delightful sights here.

1. There is no particular Form so little, or so low; there is no privation so
empty, or so dark, which has not its twofold Idea or Archetype here. We read,
That Death and Hell are open, and manifest before the eyes of the Lord. Where
are the Forms of things so divided and broken, as in the dust of Death? What
privations so shady and black, so empty and desolate, so deformed, horrid and
dreadful, as those of Death and Hell? Yet are Death and Hell manifest before
the eyes of the Lord. Is not this Jesus the Divine Glass and Light, in which
alone all things appear to himself, and to his Father? Are not these
Archetypes, or Ideal Patterns in Christ, both the Divine Eyes, with which the
eternal Spirit looks upon all things; and the Divine Objects, which alone he
beholds with these Eyes, the Divine Images in these Eyes?

Then Death and Hell, all particulars, all privations are evidently and
eminently here in the beautiful Form and Person of our blessed Mediator.

Here they are in their proper Ideas, in their distinct and heavenly Patterns,
their eternal Truths. But here they are no more particulars or privations,
inasmuch as every part, every point of this Divine Image, where these Ideas are
seated, is both the Center diffusing it self through the whole Image, and a
Circle comprehending the whole with its full Majesty and Glory in its own
distinct propriety and form. Thus the Psalmist sings divinely of this heavenly
Mystery to Jesus Christ. The Darkness hides not from thee, but the Night
shines as the Day; the Darkness and the Light both alike. This is the first of
those heavenly sights, to which I invited thee.

2. See if our Jesus in this Mediatory Image be not the Jerusalem above, ever
new, altogether heavenly, our Mother, which brings us forth under the
Apple Tree, the Tree of Love in the heavenly Paradise, which bears us upon
her sides, and dandles us upon her knees, through our whole course, in all our
motions and changes of our Birth, Life, and Death; which milketh forth from her
Breasts abundance of Glory upon us. See if this be not that City of the living
God, having the Godhead it self for a Foundation, where all things dwell
together in their heavenly Patterns, and eternal Spirits. See if this be not
Jerusalaiim, two Cities in one, compacted together by one eternal Love, into
one eternal Spirit and Person, the created and the Uncreated Image, where the
First-bron, the whole Creation in general, all Creatures in particular in their
firstborn Original Images and Truths dwell together. See if this be not that
Kingdom of God universal over all, the last of all, without end, eternal, which
is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy. The Righteousness of all Divine incorruptible
Harmony and Beauty; the Beauties of Holiness, the Beauties of the Divine Nature
in its most unstained, unmixt, highest Purity; that Peace and Joy which is the
most ravishing Harmony of all things, as they spring, shine, and sing together
in the Unity of the Divine Light, Life, and Love, in the ever dear and
delightful Person of our blessed Mediator.

I have proceeded thus far in our Discourse of the Lord Jesus, as he is the
Mediator of the Creation, the way by which God descends into the Creature,
and the Creature comes forth from God. To this end, he necessarily touches
both the extremes, is immediately united to both, and unites both in himself in
a middle state between both. I have spoken of the Lord Jesus, as he touches
the extreme above, and is God with God, the essential Image of God, the
Original Seat and Image of all Forms of things in their first state. We have
treated of him in his middle state, where he is the Union of God and the
Creature, of all Forms of things uncreated, created, joined together in one
Light and Spirit of Glory.

I now pass to the third Consideration of our Mediator, as he touches the
lower extreme of the Creature, as the Creature comes forth from God into its
single and proper state through him.

3. Jesus Christ, as he is the Mediator between God and the Creature; as he is
One with God, so also is he One with the Creature, that he may bring forth the
Creature from God, bring back and home again the Creature to God, to make both
one in himself. I shall endeavor to make plain this part of Christ's
Mediatorship, the immediate coming forth of the Creature through Christ by
several steps.

1. Jesus Christ having descended with his Original and essential Image, into
an Image of Light, all clear and transparent, in every point of which his
essential Glories shine brightly forth: Next to this, he comes down into a
shadowy Image. There all the Glories of the two former Images are altogether
obscured, and hidden beneath this Vail. They appear only by a shadowy Figure of
themselves formed upon the darkness of this third Image.

In this shadow of himself, the Lord Jesus retains entirely the Unity of his
Divine and eternal Person. All the three Images, the Lights of Glory, and their
shadow dwell together in the Unity of the same Person. So do they mutually
enfold one another. So do they mutually subsist, appear, and act in each other
according to the proper Form of each Image and state. The shadow shines, and is
a substantial Glory in the Glory of the Images above. The Images above, with
all their substantial Glories, are shadows in this shadow: As St. John says,
The Word was made flesh, so is God here become a shadow of himself. God is the
Person in this shadow. This shadow subsists in the Person of God.

The superior Images spread forth the darkness of this Image from themselves,
over-spreading themselves with it. They themselves, with all their Glories, are
as a Divine Seed in it. They are the seminal Virtue, the seminal Reason or Form
springing up through this darkness, and filling it throughout with Divine
Figures of themselves. As the Plants, Flowers and Fruits, which God made to
spring up out of the ground of the Garden in Eden. Thus is this shadowy Image
divinely-beautiful and rich, all an earthly Paradise, bearing the Figure of the
heavenly Paradise, which it has for its proper Seed and Root hidden within it.
Jesus Christ in his essential Image is as the substantial and Divine Body of
all Glories. In his Mediatory Image as a Garment of Light, with which that Body
clothes it self, all composed of its own richest Beams. In this third Image, as
a shadow cast from both these.

2. Jesus Christ in this shadowy Image is the first and universal Creature, a
created Spirit, the immediate Head and Pattern of the whole Creation in
general, of all Creatures in particular, Men and Angels. He is the first
Draught, or Life-Picture of the whole Creation, from whence all the Creatures
are taken, as so many Copies of this Original. The superior Images are the Life
it self, by which this Original and Life-Picture is drawn. Thus is Jesus Christ
in a third sense the Image of the invisile God, and the firstborn of every
Creature: St. Paul seems in that place, Coloss. 1. 15. to have intended this
as the principal sense: For he immediately adds, That all things were made by
him, whether visible or invisible, and that he is before all things, and in him
all things did consist, or stand together. Then, when in the consequence of
this, he had said, that Christ is the Head of the Church, the firstborn from
the dead; he gives this as a reason relating to both states of Nature and
Grace, of the Creation, and the new Creature in the Resurrection, that he in
all things might have the pre-eminence: The word is there (...), that he might
be the first in all things, the first in Order, Dignity and Power: The first
Creature in Nature, and in the Creation; the Head of Nature, and the whole
Creation: The first new Creature in the Resurrection from the dead, when Nature
and the whole Creation was fallen under the power of death, and the Head of the
Resurrection. The Jews seem to represent Jesus Christ to us in this station of
the Creation, as the first and universal Creature, by two mysteries of theirs:
For they teach us, That the Soul of the Messiah was one of those things, which
were before the World was. They say also, That the Light of the first Day was a
pure and clear Light, in which the whole Creation in its whole compass with all
Forms of things contained in it, through its whole duration from the beginning
to the end, with all Revolutions and Changes, universal or particular, were all
clearly seen at once in one View and Prospect, as one entire, most beautiful,
Divine Image or Picture. They say also, That at the Fall of Man, this Light was
withdrawn and hidden beneath the Throne of God, until the days of the Messiah.

The Arians of old acknowledged Jesus Christ in this state as a created Spirit,
the first and universal Creature above, and before all things, the Head of
Angels, and of the whole Creation. Thus they acknowledged him to be God by
representation, deputation, denomination and generation; as being immediately
begotten and brought forth from God, as the first created Image of the
Uncreated Glory, comprehending all other created Images originally in himself.
They ascended right thus high, if they had not rested here, but by this shadowy
Image had been pointed to the Mediatory Image in Life, and by the beams of that
guided to the essential Image in the Godhead. Our natural senses teach us, That
there is no shadowy reflected and refracted Light, where there is not first a
pure Light and Sunshine; that the purest Light of the sweetest Sunshine has
above it the Original Light, the essential Light in the Body of the Sun, which
is indeed the Body of the Sun, the Sun it self in its essential Form and Image.
But let us pass to our third step.

3. The Lord Jesus in this shadowy Image is immediately the efficient, the
exemplar, the final Cause of the whole Creation. As Light, and all the beams
flow from the Sun, their formal Cause, as immediate Figures and Images of him:
So does the whole Creation in general, and each Creature in particular flow
forth from him by continued emanations. He is the ground out of which they
rise, in which they grow and flourish, on which he figures and forms himself,
according to his various Excellencies, as the proper fruit of them all, into
which they sink down, and return with all their Life and Sweetness, when they
disappear. Thus are all things made by him, and for him, that he may live and
shine forth in all. In him, says St. John, was Light, and that Light was the
life of man; where he speaks of the Creation of things by Jesus Christ.

4. I am now come to my last step. Jesus Christ in this shadowy Image is in the
whole Creation and in every Creature, as its proper Seed. He is the seminal
Virtue, which puts forth it self through the whole Creation, from the beginning
to the end, in every Essence of each Creature; in all the powers of every
Essence, in all the operations of each Power. He is the seminal Reason, the
seminal Form and Proportion, which springs up equally in like degrees in each
Creature, together with it in all the states and modifications of it, forming
it and figuring it in all. Thus says St. John, when he treats of him under
this term (...), Ratio, the Reason of all things, and that in order to the
Creation, that without him, or apart from him, nothing was made, or came to
pass, that was made, or came to pass. He lives; he dies; he flourishes, he
falls; he triumphs, he suffers in all with all: In him was Light, says St.
John, and that light was the life of man: The Life of Christ, as it was in
Christ, the Seed of every Creature, was the Life of the Humane Form, the Light
of all Forms, as they meet together harmoniously in the Humane Form, or as they
appear distinctly in their proper places to man to serve and entertain him.
This was the Light of every Form, as it sparkleth forth in all its Qualities
and Acts; as it appears in all states and changes. This Light of Life in
Christ was the Life and the Light of every Beauty, every Sweetness, every Form
of things in every Creature: Together they did spring, together they did fade,
being ever inseparable. So was the Creature continually figured and framed in
all states by the immediate, inseparable presence of the Lord Jesus with it.
When the Creature falls and dies by sin, then also is Jesus Christ slain in it
and by it.

If the Life in Christ be the light of man, and so of all things, then is the
retiring of this Life like the setting of the Sun, the darkning of all, the
over-casting of all with the shadow of Death. But then this eternal Love, the
Lamb, our Jesus, dies by our death together with us, that he may become in
death a Sacrifice to expiate the guilt of his blood lying upon us: So he
becomes also the Seed of immortality and the Resurrection from the Dead, that,
as he rises, we also may rise in him, together with him. Yet is the difference
great between his manner of dying, and ours. He knows what he does in both
these Deaths. We know not at present what he does, nor what we our selves do in
either of them. He sins not, falling short in nothing of the Glory of God,
which ever fills his Heart, his Eye, and his Hand through all darknesses and
deaths, he carries on the Ideal Glories of both the Archetypes, his two
superior Images, and so the universal Design and Beauty of the whole Work in
the Creation, which is to be a complete figure of these, having its beginning
and ending in them. By virtue of the Personal Union, he at once carries down
with him the Light of all the Glories, the Music of the universal Harmony in
both these superior Images, into these Deaths, and also comprehends these
Deaths in the Light of these Glories, in the Music of this Harmony, as part of
the Glory and the Harmony. This he does as the Head, the Seed, the First Fruits
of the whole Creation. Thus he lives and dies in every Creature. Thus they that
are new born into him, most beautifully, most blessedly live and die together
with him.

2. I pass now from the first part of the Mediation of Christ, that in the
first Creation, the descent of things, the coming forth of the Creatures from
God. I come to the second Part, the Mediation of Christ in the new Creation,
the Redemption, the return of the Creature to God.

I shall endeavor to set before you this Mediatory Work of our Jesus, of our
God and Savior.

First, In the parts of it, as they lie in the Person of the Lord Jesus, the
Head and Pattern of the new Creature.

Secondly, In the progress and propagation of it through the whole Body
belonging to this Head.

1. The parts of it most commodiously for my purpose are contained in this
threefold Division: 1. The Incarnation of Christ, and his Life in the Flesh.
2. The Sufferings and Death. 3. The Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord
Jesus.

1. The first part of the Mediation of Christ in the Redemption, is his
Incarnation and Life in the Flesh. We have seen the eternal Light and Love, our
Jesus, our God, gradually descending in a threefold form: 1. We have seen him
in his essential Form and Godhead, comprehending all Varieties of things in
their Original and eternal Glories. 2. We have seen him in his Mediatory and
spiritual Form, the Marriage of God with the Creature in one Spirit and Glory,
where all the Uncreated Glories, and all the Creatures according to their
distinct Essences in spiritual and incorruptible forms, as two are one. 3. We
have had a delightful view of the same Jesus in both these Divine Forms, set
with innumerable and distinct Glories, descending into a shadowy Image of
himself, where he becomes the proper and immediate Head of the first Creation,
in whom all the Creatures consist and flourish together, according to their
shadowy Originals in the firstborn strength and beauty of this created state.
4. Our Lord Jesus with these universal Beauties subsisting together, and
mutually enfolding each other in the Unity of the same Divine Person, goes
down one step lower from the beautiful face of the Earth into the dark places,
and nethermost parts of it. This last step of his descent is at once also the
first step of his Ascent and Return. Together with man, and the whole Creation
falling by sin, he also falls, but altogether without sin. He subsists in the
whole Creation, and in each particular Creature beneath the universal Ruin,
being the weight of all. Here he is the Seed maintaining the Remainders of the
Divine Image in nature obscured, deformed, wounded, broken and slain. Obscured,
deformed, wounded, broken and slain in it, together with it; He maintains the
Relics of the Life of this natural Image in the midst of death. This he does
by a new spring of Grace opening it self in fallen Nature, by the virtue of his
Mediatory and essential form now putting forth themselves through his shadowy
form in the Creature thus lapsed. Thus is he both in one the old Seed of the
first Creation, and the new Seed of the new Creature, which thus in the
heavenly Image of the Mediatory Form of Christ makes its way, and breaks forth
through the ruins of the earthly Image. This is the promised Seed, the Seed of
the Woman, the Seed of the Divine Image both in Nature and in Grace, which
gives a new Birth to Nature. This Seed propagating it self through all
Generations in the fullness of time, when the season is now for Eternity to
shine out through the extended shadow of Time, and to break it up into its own
clear Light, springs forth from the Womb of the Virgin Mary into Flesh and
Blood, in the dejected form of fallen man; Made in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted.

The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, or tabernacled in the midst of
us, John 1. The Word was made flesh. See there the Incarnation of the Son of
God; He tabernacled in the midst of us; behold his Life in the Flesh. Two
Natures meet in one, the Word and Flesh, God and Man: The manner is expressed,
the Word is made or become Flesh, not by transmutation. The Word cease not to
be the Word. The Godhead in its essential Image retains all its Glories, its
immutability and eternity in Flesh; neither is the Word made Flesh by any kind
of composition. The Divine Nature in flesh retains its simplicity, its
purity, its absolute, all-comprehending, incomprehensible Unity. The Word is
made flesh by assumption, taking the Humane Nature into the Unity of the same
Divine Person with it self. God in his essential Image, in the entireness,
absoluteness, and Unity of his own undivided unconfined Person with the fullness
of his eternal Glory descends into Flesh. The eternal Spirit, which is Jesus
himself in his Divine Form and Power, comes down upon, over-spreads the Virgin
Mary with his Ideal force: He also becomes the seminal Virtue in her. So he
springs up out of her Womb into a distinct individual man, a frail, fallen man,
though without spot, in the Person of God. Thus is he Father and Son to
himself; Father, and Husband, and Son to his Mother. Yea, he is also his own
Mother in his Mother, of his own flesh taking flesh from her, inasmuch as he
alone fills all in all, and is the Truth of all.

The Word was made Flesh. God in his essential Image and Glory, is the entire
and complete Person in the Humane Nature. This is the Unity in it: this
subsists in it: this appears in every part and state of it: this acts and
suffers all in it: this is named by every name of it: these are all proper to
the Person. Thus all the Glories of the essential, of the Mediatory, of the
shadowy Image of Christ in their most universal Latitude, as according to their
several Orders they comprehend all Forms of things in themselves, being united
in the simplicity of this Divine Person, do all meet in this Flesh, fill it,
shine through it, become one with it, pass through all states and changes, live
and die with it and in it. In like manner this Flesh subsists in the Unity of
this Divine Person in the midst of all its Divine Forms and Glories. In the
fellowship of these, surrounded with these it acts and suffers all things, it
appears in every part and state, under every name it bears the name of these,
passing through all the changes of Mortality in their Divine and immortal
unchangeableness. We saw his Glory, says St. John, speaking of Christ in the
Flesh, the Glory as of the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1. Thus is Jesus the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, amidst all the changes of Flesh, and Time
unchangeable in the Unity of this Divine Person.

The Word made Flesh, is the whole Tree of Being Uncreated and Created, the
Root, the Body with all the branches putting forth themselves into one little
top-branch now withering, that through its death they may renew all unto a
fresh and flourishing spring.

The Lord Jesus now being an universal Person, as the essential Image of God,
as the spiritual and Mediatory Image, as the shadowy Image, the Head, the
Original frame of the whole Creation in its utmost Latitude, as the Seed of the
whole Creation spread through all the parts of it, running along through all
Generations, bringing it forth, and sustaining it in it self, by taking Flesh
and the Nature of fallen man upon himself, sets himself in the place of us all
in our lowest estate. He takes our Sins and Sorrows, all the Diseases of our
Bodies and Minds upon himself, that he may take them away from us. Taking
together with our Flesh our Guilt, Shame, Weaknesses, Demerits, Enemies and
Enmities, Death, the Divine Wrath into the Unity of the Divine Person: He makes
an end of the Transgression with its trains of evils, consuming all, swallowing
up all in the most beautiful and blissful flame of those Divine Purities,
Powers, Righteousness, Rest, Glories, Pleasantnesses, Immortality, which
receive them into themselves in the Unity of this blessed and eternal Person.

The holy Ghost clearly and fully expresses this Mediatory Work of our
Redemption by Christ in this ground and superstructure, Heb. 1. 3. Who being
the brightness, or effulgency, out-shining, of the Glory of God, the express
Image of his Person, or Substance, bearing up all things by the word of his
Power, having purged away our Sins by himself. Jesus in his essential Image is
the Glory of God, as the Woman is said to be the glory of the Man. In his
Mediatory Form he is the Brightness, Effulgency, or out-shining of this Glory.
The shadowy Image, in which Christ is the immediate Head of the first Creation,
is properly, according to the Greek word, the Character of his Divine Nature
and Person: For a Character is properly the engraving or impression of a Figure
upon some foreign matter; as a Figure cut upon a Seal, or from a Seal
imprinted upon Wax, or Letters stamped in Ink upon Paper: Such a Character is
the Image of God in the Creature. The word in this Text bearing signifies
properly a twofold sense, bringing forth, and bearing up, as (...) Seed its
Plant: So Jesus Christ is in the whole Creation, and in every Creature all
along bearing all things by the Word, or flux of his Power; that is, by his
seminal Virtue flowing forth, and springing up in all. Upon this ground, in
this universal Person, Jesus Christ taking our flesh upon him (in our lost
estate) into the Unity of his Person does by himself, that is, by the Divinity
of his Person, purge away all our Sins, and in them all our Evils.

Thus in the Incarnation, in the Word made Flesh, the Sun of Righteousness
begins to turn toward us; The Dayspring from on high visits us in the midst
of the shades of Night and Death. Righteousness begins to look down from
Heaven, and to spring up out of the Earth, as this blessed Person in his Divine
Union at once shines forth from above, and springs up in our flesh here
below.

He dwelt among us. The words in Greek are (...), he tabernacled in the midst
of us. See here the Life of Christ in Flesh. His Flesh was the Tabernacle in
which he journeyed through the Wilderness of this World, the Antetype to the
Tabernacle, in which God sojourned with the Children of Israel, resting in the
midst of them, marching before them through the Desert into the Land of
Promise. This word (...) is constantly used for that Tabernacle, and
particularly often, Heb. 9. Jesus Christ says to the Jews, Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will build it up. The Spirit adds there expressly,
That he spoke of his Body, in St. John. The Humane Nature of Christ in the
Flesh was a moveable Tabernacle to be taken down, and so figured by the
Tabernacle in the Wilderness. The Humanity of Christ in the Resurrection, in
the Spirit was the true Temple immovable, immutable, eternal in the Heavens,
answering to Solomon's Temple on Mount Sion, or Mount Moriah.

In the Tabernacle under the Law there was a threefold Perfection: 1. All
things there were exact Figures of the Pattern upon the Mount. 2. These Figures
were taken immediately from the Pattern it self, formed, wrought, and ordered
by the same Spirit in Bezaleel, Aholiab, Moses, Aron, the Priests and the
Levites. 3. The Pattern it self in its Glory dwelt in the Tabernacle.

The Scriptures laid together, seem to demonstrate Jesus Christ to be this
Pattern upon the Mount. The Law is said to have the shadow of good things to
come, (...), not the very Image of the thing, Heb. 1. 1. This very Image can be
no other, than the first, the principal, the substantial Image, the Pattern it
self upon the Mount. This word is applied to Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 15. He is
said to be (...), the Image of the invisible God. And that the very Image, the
Original Image is understood, appears by that which is added, The firstborn of
every Creature.

The Jewish Rabbis teach us, That the Tabernacle was a model of the whole
Creation; of the Divine World, as it is the Head of the Creation, and at the
Head of the Creation appears in a created Figure, of the Angelical, and of the
visible World. These were represented by the Holy of Holies, the holy place,
and the outward Court. Thus far they were right, but in this they fell short,
that they looked not to the beginning and end of these. The Messiah in in his
own Mediatory Glory, and in his Fathers Glory; as he was the Pattern of these
upon the Mount, and as these stood originally in him.

But according to this Type in the Tabernacle in his Flesh, and in his Life on
Earth, he fulfilled all Righteousness, the Righteousness of the Creature, the
Law and the Letter, the Righteousness of God and of the Gospel. Jesus Christ
says of himself, What I see my Father do, that do I: The words that I speak
are not mine, but my Fathers, he does the Works. The Humane Nature of Christ in
Flesh, his Motions, his Rest, all his Words and his Works answered to the
Pattern upon the Mount, his own heavenly Image in the Glory of God, and were
formed from that Pattern by the same Spirit forming his Humane Nature,
subsisting in it, and acting it. The Father, says he, has sent me, and I live
by the Father. The mission of the Father, and his living by the Father, were
his springing forth from the Father, according to the eternal Image of things
in the Father, by the Spirit of the Father in his Birth, Life and Death.

Thus he fulfilleth all Righteousness according to the Law, as it was at first
engraven on the heart of man, as it was afterward renewed on Tables of Stone
in the Moral Ceremonial, and Judiciary parts of it.

The Pattern it self also, the heavenly and Divine Image, with the Original
Righteousness and Glory, dwelt in this Flesh of Christ, in all his Motions and
Rests, filling the figures with the substance. Thus it is said of him, The Word
was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, full of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1. 14. It is
said again, verse. 17. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ. Grace is eternal Love, the naked Face of God, as it shines and
smiles with all pleasantness in it, opposed to the Law, as it is a Ministry of
Wrath, and a Vail upon the Divine Nature. Truth is the very Image, the Pattern,
the everlasting Righteousness, the Original, and eternal Glory of God opposed
to the shadows, the fading Righteousness, the vanishing Glory of the Law. Thus
this Tabernacle of Flesh in the Unity of Christ's Person was full of Grace and
Truth. The everlasting Love, and everlasting Righteousness, with their
Sweetnesses, Strengths and Glories, which never fade nor pass away, at once
formed, filled, and rested upon their own perfect and spotless figures in the
flesh of Christ. So he fulfilled the first part of his Mediation, and our
Redemption, while as an universal Person, comprehending all Mankind and the
whole Creation in himself. He presents himself in his Birth, in his Life unto
God in the place of all, and all in himself, as a perfect Figure of the Divine
Righteousness and Glory, as in an exact Harmony, so in an inseparable,
immediate Union with its Pattern.

2. The second Part of Christ's Mediatory Work in our Redemption, comprehends
the Sufferings and Death of the Lord Jesus.

The Sufferings of Christ are to be considered in the manner and the merit of
them.

The manner of the Sufferings of Christ's are set forth in diverse Scriptures,
Isa. 53. 6. God laid the Iniquity of us all upon him. And verse. 10. He made his
Soul an offering for Sin. St. Paul seems to relate to these Prophesies, when he
says, 2 Cor. 5. ult. Him, who knew no sin, has God made sin for us. It is
frequent in the Hebrew Language and Idiom, to express Sin, and metanomically
the Sacrifice for sin, the panishment of sin by the same word, Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has purchased us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.
A cursed Person is a Person charged with all guilt and filth, and universal
abomination and detestation to God, to Angels and Men. A Person devoted to
Divine Vengeance and Wrath; excluded from all things holy and good, exposed to
the opposition and enmity of all things holy and good; set apart to be cut off,
and quite taken away in the shamefulest, dreadfulest, and direfulest manner.

Thus God personally in our flesh suffered. Our Jesus takes away our Sins, the
Sins of the whole World, Joh. 1. by taking them upon himself. He stands in the
place and person of all Sinners. He bears the Sins of the whole World upon
himself: Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the World, Joh. 1.
The Greek word comprehends both senses, to take up, and to take away. He is
set, as the abominable, execrable, detestable thing in the Eyes of God, and of
all the Creatures. He is devoted by the most solemn, most sacred Curses, to
bear the weight of all Guilt, to satisfy the Divine Justice, to sustain the
Divine Wrath to the utmost. As the Sin-Offering was all consumed by fire, and
was burnt without the Camp; so went Jesus out of the City, separated from the
Society of all, in Heaven, and on Earth, bearing his shame, and to endure the
pain. The Curse with all evils in their greatest extent and extremity, shame,
pain, the pain of loss and of sense then fell most sensibly upon him, when he
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

A Wound is said to be a solution or separation of the Continuity, or parts
united by one common Life. The Sun was eclipsed at the Death of Christ beyond
the course of Nature: for it was eclipsed totally, not by the interposition of
a dark Body between that and the Earth; but by the failing of the Light it self
in the very body of the Sun. Was ever any Wound so bitter, so full of pain and
anguish as this? Was ever any Eclipse so prodigious, so dreadful and direful?
God in his own Person, in the most sweet, most vital, the supreme Unity of his
Divine Person is separated and divided from himself by the force and fury of an
unexpressible Wrath. The Person of God in his own Spirit, in its Divine
Strengths, Solaces and Glories, by a fury sharper and fiercer than any Sword or
Flame, is divided from himself in his own Flesh. The all-chearing, and
all-quickning Light of the eternal Sun fails in the Person of God, as he is
in Flesh, being turned into Sackcloth and Blood.

Jesus now truly suffers (...), the Torments not only of an Eve-eternity, but
of Eternity, for his Sufferings are extended and heightened not only according
to the capacity of a particular individual man in flesh, of an immortal Soul,
or an Angel great in Power; but according to the proportion of the
Super-Angelical Head of the whole Creation, eminently and transcendently
comprehending all Creatures in himself. And not only so, but his Sufferings in
this nature are suited to the Divine and eternal Person subsisting and
supporting the Nature, and to the Divine and eternal Person offended, coming
down upon him in the full weight of his Wrath, in the full Opposition, the full
Contrariety, the full Enmity of all the Attributes of God, of his entire
Godhead, to his proper, most contrary, irreconcilable Enemy, the evil of Sin.
This is the manner of Christ's Sufferings. Thus God personally suffered in
Flesh.

The merit of these Sufferings consists in this, that this Flesh which
suffers, and the Sufferings of this Flesh stood in the Unity of the Divine
Person. Our Jesus was God and Man in one Person, that being Man he might
suffer, and this Man being God might merit by suffering. By this hypostatical
or personal Union, by this mutual and indivisible Unity of the same Person in
both Natures, the Righteousness, the Beauty, the Sweetness, the Glory, all the
united Excellencies and Blessedness of the Godhead stood entirely in every
Wound, in every Sigh, in every Blush of shame, in every pang of pain, in every
part, in every degree of sufferings through the whole flesh of Christ. All
these reciprocally were filled and encompassed with the full Glory, with the
united Excellencies of the Divine Nature. Thus were they a Divine Price indeed
paid down for us in the Blood and Life of our dear Savior.

Now the same Divine Person, the God of all Loves and Lovelinesses, the God of
all Peace, Righteousness, Joy and Immortality in the Tempests and Flames of
Divine Justice and Wrath from above: In the tempests and flames of all guilt,
sufferings, and shame from below meets with himself on both sides in all
these. So the tempests and flames of Justice and Wrath from above in a moment
vanish into a golden Calm and Sunshine of Divine Loveliness and Love: In the
same moment the tempests and flames of guilt, shame, and sufferings below, are
transformed into the Divine unspotted Beauty of an everlasting Righteousness,
into the triumphs of an eternal Life, Love, and Joy. In a word, the whole
Contrariety thus come to its utmost point returns into, and is swallowed up in
the most pure, the most perfect Sweetness and Harmony of that Divine Unity from
which it went forth. So is our Jesus become Hylasterion, the Propitiation, the
Atonement. Thus the Blood of God in the Person of Christ washes Crimson and
Scarlet sins, double died, in the Blood of God himself unto the whiteness of
the wool of the Lamb of God, and of the Snow coming down new unstained from
Heaven.

As Jesus Christ was a Divine Person, so was he an universal Person in his
Sufferings. As Christ is God, he is the universal Being, in which all things
have their Being; which is most intimately and universally in each thing, as
the Being of every Being. He is the Mediator, by which all things in every kind
or degree of Being descend and ascend. He is the Head, the Root, the pure and
primitive Spirit of the whole Creation, as the Spirit contains in it self the
outward Form and Image. He goes forth into all forms and states of things from
above the highest Heavens to the nethermost parts of the Earth filling all. He
espouseth into the Unity of his Divine Person the Humane Nature, the Harmony
and Model of the whole Creation unconfined by any particular personality: He
takes upon him the Humane Nature in its lowest state, in fading, frail and
dying flesh. The Father has given him to the World, and for the World, Joh. 3.
He has ^iven himself for us, Gal. 2. ult. Thus he suffers as an universal
Person, and becomes a ransom for all: So St. Paul lays down the ground of
this. Ransom, and this Ransom, 1 Timothy 2. There is one God the Father of all:
there is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all.

The Death of Jesus Christ is the finishing of his Sufferings, and of his abode
in Flesh. This is as the Midnight, that Point in which the Sun of the Godhead
in the Heaven of Christ's Person, is gone to the utmost distance from him, to
the utmost degree of Contrariety to him, and now is returning toward him again
in the beautiful and blessed Unity of the Divine Love. There is a twofold
mystery in the Death of Christ:

1. An universal Dissolution. 2. An universal Resolution.
1. The Death of Christ is an universal Dissolution. He spoiled Principalities
and Powers, making a show of them openly, and triumphing over them on his
Cross, Col. 2. This true Sampson dying, takes hold of the Pillars of the
World, by a Divine force in his Death pulls them down, and the whole Creation,
to fall together with himself into his Grave. Some teach us, That the Sun is
the Center, the Cornerstone, the immediate Foundation of this visible World,
and that if this should fall out from Heaven, or should lose its Light and
Course in Heaven, all Motions, and so all Forms of things here would cease and
be no more. Jesus Christ of a truth is the true Sun, the shining Pillar, which
holds the Foundation of all things visible and invisible; the Root of all
created Light, and so of the whole World. He dying, all things die in him, all
things die together with him. If any man be in Christ, says St. Paul, he is a
new Creation, old things are passed away, 2 Cor. 5. It is a known story recited
by Plutarch, That of a great Cry, with dreadful shrieks and groans to Thamus a
Pilot, as he passed by a desolate Island, in the Reign of Tiberius, under whom
Christ was put to death, Great Pan is dead, this great All is dead. The Heathen
figured the whole Creation in the Person of their God Pan, the Angelical,
Celestial, and Elementary parts of it.

2. The Death of Christ is an universal Resolution or Return of all things, as
they stand in Christ into their first and Divine Principles. The Light, the
Life, the Forms, the Essences of all things return into their Ideal Forms,
their incorruptible Originals and Patterns, their pure eternal Springs in the
Mediatory Form, and Divine Nature of Christ. The shadowyness returns into that
blessed shade, that fell immediately from the Person of Christ in Glory, that
Primitive and Divine Darkness which was before the first Day, the Womb of the
first Light, and of the whole Creation, which composed those Nights of Beauty,
Peace and Pleasure, the Nights of the six Days, the Night of the seventh Day,
and all the Nights of Paradise. Thus was Jesus with the good Thief, and all
things with him, in him in Paradise at his Death. The Jewish Rabbis
distinguish Paradise from Heaven thus; Heaven is a state of Divine Glory and
Pleasure above in the open Light of ^e Godhead. Paradise is a state of Divine,
incorruptible Glory and Pleasure below, beneath the shades of the Earth. This
is that pure, primitive, Divine Darkness, of which I speak, which was the
shade, out of which the pure Earth with all the unstained Forms of things at
first arose, and into which they now return again in Christ. This is the Divine
sleep of all things in the Death of Christ, their retirement into their Divine
Patterns, their sweet and entire rest in them, their contemplation and fruition
of all the immortal Joys and Glories of their Patterns, and of themselves in
those Joys and Glories, as a Divine dream in this sleep, within this sweet,
this amiable, this more than Angelical shade which over-spreads them. Here they
desirously and delightfully wait for the Day of the Resurrection from the Face
of God, which they see by degrees dawning and rising upon them, when the sweet
Peace of this lovely shade shall break up into the more full and glorious
sweetness of the supreme Light, and that eternal Day. St. Paul expresses all
this to us, when he teaches us, That Christ has gathered up all things into
one in himself, Col. 2. The Greek word properly signifies there the Resolution,
or Return of things back into their first Principle, their Original Spring and
Pattern.

3. The third and last part of the Mediation of Christ in our Redemption, as it
was accomplished in his own Person, is his Resurrection and Ascension. These
two agree, are the same in nature and kind; differing only in degree. The
Resurrection of Christ is the breaking up of that primitive shade, which
overspread him, into a clear Light of Glory. Now he springs up, and
flourishes throughout his whole Person, and all things together with him in
his Person, in the Beauty and Immortality of his Mediatory Form. He is now
become an entire Spirit in his Humane Nature, both Soul and Body. This two
Scriptures make clear to us. Jesus Christ says to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. 6. That
that which is begotten of the Spirit is Spirit. The word there is a Substantive
(...), a spiritual substance, or substantial Spirit. Now it is manifest in the
Scriptures, that the Resurrection of Christ in the Body was an immediate
Generation by the eternal Spirit: So Divines interpret, and apply those words,
Heb. 1. 5. cited from the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee: Suitable to this is that Scripture, Romans 1. 4. Declared the Son
of God with power, according to the holy spirit by the Resurrection from the
dead. Two things are manifest from this Scripture:

1. That Jesus Christ was raised from the Dead by the immediate Power and
Operation of the holy Spirit.

2. That this Resurrection was a Divine Generation by the Spirit, through which
he was brought forth into the proper Form of the Son of God. That which we read
declared (...), signifies properly defined, or determinately formed. This
receives further Light from St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Being put to death truly
in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit: We read it by the Spirit, but in Gr^
the Flesh and Spirit do so exactly answer one another in the construction and
manner of expression, that one would think nothing to be plainer, than the
intention of the Holy Ghost to signify, that the Flesh and the Spirit had both
the same relation to the Person of Christ in those different states of his
dying and rising again, that by this change the Spirit came in the place of the
Flesh, and that the Flesh was changed into a Spirit, as by a natural
Generation, that that was Water, or Air, is made Fire. The words are these,
(...). In the same sense, in which he died in Flesh, or to the Flesh: So he
rose again in the Spirit, or to Spirit. That same Body, which died a fleshly,
compounded, mortal substance, rose again a simple, pure, immortal Spirit. As
the Humanity of Christ rose again a Spirit, so it rose in an immediate
inseparable Union with the eternal Spirit upon the same Root into the same Life
and Image. St. Paul instructs us in this mystery, 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first
Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam a quickening Spirit, verse. 45. The
subject of St. Paul's Discourse there, and in many verses before, is the
Resurrection of the Body. He said immediately before, It is sown a natural
Body, (...), a Body proper for a Soul; It is raised a spiritual Body, a Body
proper for a Spirit, verse. 44. He illustrates this afterward, The first man is
of the Earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from Heaven, verse. 47. Then he
distinguishes them by the names of the earthly, and the heavenly man, or the
Super-Coelestial, verse. 48. He likewise distinguishes their two Images, the
Image of the earthly, and the Image of the heavenly, or super-coelestial, verse.
49. Then he concludes with a a positive and emphatical Declaration, But this I
say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, verse.
50.

From these Scriptures laid together, these particulars seem evidently to arise.

1. Jesus Christ by the Resurrection in his whole Humane Nature, both Soul and
Body is a supernatural, super-coelestial Spirit, far above the nature of Souls
or Angels in the first Creation.

2. The humanity of Christ has now its Root in Heaven, in that Heaven out of
which it comes forth, and appears as Lord of all: the Heaven of the Fathers
Bosom; the Heaven of the eternal Spirit, and of the Godhead, where it has the
Root of its Personality, and its Life hidden with God from the natural eye of
every Creature.

3. The whole Manhood of Christ is clothed with an heavenly, or
super-coelestial Image, an Image suitable and proper to that Heaven out which
he springs.

4. The Manhood of Christ is so immediately, entirely, mutually united to the
eternal Spirit, the Godhead it self, that Christ, as he is man, is said to be a
quickening spirit. The Humane Nature, and the Divine in the Lord Jesus are so
far now become one Spirit, as in a mystical Marriage, where at the height of
their Unity they keep the distinction as high and clear.

5. ^us Christ in his Humane Nature, in his Body, as well as his Soul is thus
become a Spirit in opposition to the earthly and fleshly substance of the
natural Body of the first man, which is declared incapable of entering into the
Kingdom of God.

6. This spiritual and super-coelestial state above the natural Body, and above
the natural Soul of the first man in his primitive state, and so above the
Creation in its visible or invisible part, when it was most pure, is properly
the Kingdom of God, to which that of St. Paul agrees, when he places the
Kingdom of God in the eternal Spirit.

Thus the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus is his Return with his Humane Nature,
with his shadowy Image, with the whole Creation in himself, into the
Immortality and Glory of his Mediatory Form, to be there, as he was at first.
This is the Object of his Hope, the subject of his Prayer. Now, O Father,
glorify me with thy self, with that Glory which I had with thee before the
World was, Joh. 17. 5. What time, that now relates unto, you may understand by
the foregoing verse, I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the Work
which thou gave me to do. Jesus Christ speaks this by a Prolepsis, or
Anticipation, having his Eye upon the finishing his Work upon the Face of the
Earth by dying, and finishing his Work in the Heart, or nethermost parts of the
Earth by lying the appointed time in the Grave. Jesus Christ points out to us
three eminent Circumstances in his Resurrection.

1. The first is a Glory with his Father, an Union and Fellowship with the
Godhead, and with the Person of the Father in his own proper and Divine
personal Glory. He expresses this twice over, as the chiefest sweetness of his
Hopes, and the principal Glory in the Glory. Glorify me with thy self, with
the Glory which I had with thee.

2. This Glory transcends that of the whole Creation in its greatest
Perfection, as it also antecedes it, as it also is a Glory which was before the
World was.

3. Here are three states distinctly represented to us:

1. Jesus Christ in Glory, before he came into this World, before this World
was.

2. Jesus Christ coming forth from that Glory into this World, and being
without that Glory all that interval of his Life here.

3. The return of Christ at his Death and Resurrection into the same Glory.

These three states must necessarily respect Jesus Christ in the same form
under the same relation, to accommodate this sense, and make that proper. The
Person of Christ in his shadowy Image, in which he was the Head of the whole
Creation, and comprehended this all in himself, as he took flesh of the Virgin
Mary, and set himself in the place of all in their fallen estate; So He was
without the Glory. Before all this in his Mediatory Form, he stood together
with God, and his Father in his shadowy Image, in Flesh and Blood, with all the
changes accompanying him after a spiritual manner, filled and clothed with a
super-coelestial and eternal Glory.

Two Scriptures laid together give more light and strength to this place and
this sense. Jesus Christ having spoken to the Jews of eating his Flesh, and
drinking his Blood, Joh. 6. 56. Of his being the Bread coming down out of
Heaven, verse. 58. Understanding the Jews to murmur, and be offended at the
hardness of this saying, verse. 60, 61. makes this Reply to their murmurs; What
if ye shall see the Son of man ascending thither, where he was at first, or
before. It is the Spirit quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing: The words
which I speak they are Spirit and Life. The other Scripture is that, Romans 1. 4.
Christ was raised from the dead by the Glory of God.

From these two Scriptures compared, the Truth of this mystery shines forth in
these parts:

1. The flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, in the proper sense of Christ's words,
are Spirit and Life.

2. They were Spirit and Life in the Glory of God, before the coming down of
Christ upon the Earth.

3. From that state they came forth into their shadowy appearance here in this
shadowy Image.

4. They returned again together with this shadowy Image into that first state,
where casting off the Vail, or rather converting the Vail into the same Nature
and Form, they were again all Spirit and Life, by the Glory of God in the
Resurrection springing up in them, coming down upon them, and taking them into
it self.

Lastly, The flesh and blood of Christ, even when they are come forth from this
spiritual and immortal Glory, while they are in this shadowy state upon the
Earth, abide unchangeably in this Glory, and are there still all Spirit, all
Life, without any Vail or Cloud: Thus are they the food of a Saint.

The Lord Jesus expresses this sense; No one has ascended into Heaven, but he
who comes down out of Heaven, the Son of Man, who is in Heaven.

Two things are remarkable here:

1. The being in Heaven is expressed by the Participle of the present Tense, a
present and constant Act.

2. The Title of the Son of Man is particulary added to that clause of the
being in Heaven constantly without interruption, while he comes down out of
Heaven, while he ascends into Heaven, in the interval, or space of his being on
Earth between both these. Jesus Christ, as he is the Son of Man, comes down at
first out of that Heaven into which at last he returns and re-ascends. In the
same Heaven also has he his present and constant abode, while he is on Earth.

As the Heaven of Christ's Mediatory Glory, and of the Fathers Glory, which are
far above all created Heavens, the Heavens of this Creation, come down together
with him upon the Earth, obscured beneath the Vail of Flesh, and in this Flesh
act all the parts of his living and dying here: So do these Heavens also at
once comprehend this Earth in the Person of Christ, his flesh, their obscurity
before it; All the parts of his Life and Death in the flesh, as parts of Glory
in these Heavens; As Spirit and Life, as spiritual and immortal Glories in the
Fountain of Life and Glory, the eternal Spirit.

St. Austin in his Discourses of the Trinity, interprets the mission, or
sending Christ by the Father, to be his coming forth out of the invisible Glory
of the Father into a visible state and form. The invisible Glory being
immutable, undivided and unconfined, comprehends constantly in it self after
its own manner, that visible Form which it sends forth from it self.

Object. How do we say, that the Manhood of Christ was a Spirit in its
Resurrection, when he says in one place to his Disciples, A Spirit has not
flesh and bone, as ye see me to have. In another place he showed his hands and
his side to the Apostles, Joh. 20. 20. Again, he calls to Thomas, Bring thy
finger hither, and see mine hands, and bring thine hand, and put it into my
side; and be not unbelieving, but believing. In a visible form he ascended
before the eyes of the Apostles, and a Cloud took him up out of their sight,
Act. 1. 9. To this I give three Answers.

Answ. 1. Jesus Christ intended not that these outward appearances of a natural
Form to their outward and natural senses, should be in themselves alone any
demonstration of his Resurrection and Glory. Did not he know, that all their
senses were equally capable of being deluded by a Fantom, or an Apparition of
the Devil? If Satan can change himself into an Angel of Light, to the deluding
of our most noble and Divine Faculty, our Understanding; can he not as easily
by the same skill and power change himself into any known or agreeable Object,
to abuse any of our senses? might not he either by false Species or Images
impressed upon the outward Organs of sense, the natural Spirit, the
Imagination, or by thickning and forming a Body of Air, counterfeit the
softness, the warmth, the solidity of Christ's Flesh, and his Wounds to the
touch, and to the hands of St. Thomas, as well as to his sight, and to his
eyes? Histories of those affairs, which write them with greatest Authority, and
best Reputation, tell us of dissolute Persons, who have seemed to themselves in
the warm embraces of a delightful Person on a soft and rich bed, who yet in the
end have found themselves with a filthy sow in the mire.

Answ. 2. We read in Daniel, that the Bodies of the Saints in the Resurrection
shine as the Sun in the Firmament. When Jesus Christ was transfigured, his Face
did shine as the Sun in its strength. If then the Body of our Lord Jesus, risen
from the dead, did remain flesh still, yet certainly it was rarefied, and
heightened to such a degree of Spirituality and Glory, that it could bear no
resemblance to the natural Body, the Flesh of Christ in its Humiliation upon
the Cross, stained and broken with Wounds, with Blood, with Agonies, with the
forms of Death invading it. Can we think a glorified Body could bear any
proportion to our natural senses, when our own reason, according to the Rules
of Philosophy teaches us, That a sensible Object, if it excel, destroys the
sense? Our experience makes this plain to us in the Sun, which shining clearly
forth, is incapable of being looked upon by us, chastizing us with a blindness,
even to inferior Objects, if we dare to cast our eyes upon him; yet is he in
his brightest Glory, but a shadowy Figure of the glorified Body of Christ, and
of his Saints: For, when Christ shall appear in his glorified Body, and the
Saints in their glorified Bodies shall appear, and shine in their full splendour
with him; the Sun shall have no glory before this excelling Glory, but be
turned into Sackcloth, as the Stars lose their light, when the Sun rises
upon them.

Can we think then, our eyes, our natural senses, or those of the Apostles,
capable of discerning or taking in the Glory of Christ's spiritual Body in its
proper and true Form, when he was risen from the dead?

Answ. 3. The holy Spirit says expressly of these appearances of Christ to the
natural senses of the Apostles, immediately upon that History of St. Thomus.
Many truly therefore, and other signs Jesus wrought before his Disciples, Joh.
20. 30. We read also concerning these appearances of Christ to the Apostles,
that Jesus Christ presented himself to them alive by many signs or wonders for
the space of forty days appearing to them, and seen by them. These then were
Signs or Miracles wrought by Christ, which had no force in the outward Form,
any farther than the eternal Spirit with a Divine Power and Glory wrought in
them, and shined through them. Such Signs and Wonders were the Images of things
presented of old to the eyes or imaginations of the Prophets, which were of no
use any farther than the eternal Word, the Glory of God opened it self to the
Spirits of the Prophets through them, at once discovering them in it self, and
it self in them. So now the Lord Jesus by these Signs to the outward senses at
once opened, fortified, heightened, enlarged the Understanding, and the
spiritual senses of the Apostles, and presented himself to them with his whole
Manhood, Soul and Body, risen into the Glory of his Mediatory Form, and of his
Divine Nature. Here he set before them all those fleshly Forms of his
Humiliation, of his Incarnation, Life and Death, through which he had passed in
their proper Forms of their several seasons, not as shadowy Images to shadowy
senses, but as the essential, eternal Truth, the Spirit and Life of them, as
Mysteries and Glories unvailed, and sealing themselves upon the spiritual
senses of those, whose eyes were thus anointed to behold them. This was the
sight which Christ presented to Thomas, when he said to him with words, which
carried a new Creation along with them, be not unbeliving, but believing. This
was the sight which Thomas saw, when he cried, My Lord and my God.

The Ascension of our Lord Jesus is his passage out of his Mediatory Form and
Glory, carrying that also up together with himself into the Glory of the
Father. Jesus Christ distinguishes between his own Glory and the Glory of his
Father, Luke 9. 26. When the Son of Man comes in his own Glory, and the Glory
of his Father, and the Glory of his holy Angels. The Glory of the holy Angels
is that of this Creation, which is subjected to them, in which they are
according to the Language of the Scripture, Principalities, Powers, and
Thrones. His own Glory, the proper Glory of Christ, which he calls his own
Glory, is that of his Mediatory Form. The Glory of his Father transcendeth
that, shining forth in the supreme Unity, and purest simplicity of the Godhead.

This threefold Glory, Jesus Christ united in his own Person. Through this
threefold Glory he ascended, taking up all with him into the highest Glory. He
comes again in the Spirit of Glory, and of God, as the Root of this threefold
Glory, putting forth himself gradually in it, through the Saints, till by
springing and forming himself in them, he bring them also to be where he is, to
see the Glory of his Godhead, to see all Glories, and themselves also like him
in that Glory.

Thus Jesus Christ ascends, and sits down at the right hand of the Father,
above all Principality, and Power, and Dominion, and above every Name that is
named; not only in this World, but in that which is to come. This World is the
World of Angels, and of their Glories. The Names of Principalities, Powers,
Dominions, Thrones, are the Names of Angels, and Names named in this, their
World. The World to come is the Mediatory World, the Kingdom of the Mediator,
where Christ alone Reigns over all, and in all, where Christ has his own
proper Glory above the Glory of the Angels, beneath the Glory of the Father;
where Christ alone is named in every Name, by Names above every Name, which is
named in this World of Angels. This distinction between these two Worlds
seems to appear plain in the comparison of this Scripture, with that Heb. 2.
5. For he has not put that World to come, of which we speak, in subjection to
Angels. Then this is confirmed by a citation of the Psalmist, verse. 7. Having
made him a little lower than the Angels, thou have crowned him with Glory and
Honor, and set him over the Works of thine hands. Thou have put all things,
even the Angels themselves, with their World, and their Glory under his feet.

In like manner the Ascension of our Lord Jesus is represented to us in great
Majesty and Glory, with a great pomp and train of Glories, Ephesians. 4. 10. He that
descends, is the same who also ascends far above all Heavens. Behold our Jesus
ascending through all the Heavens of Angels, all the H^hvens of his own
Mediatory Form and Kingdom, leaving them all behind him. Behold himat the right
hand of the Father, in the Bosom of the Father, in the purity and simplicity of
the Godhead, entered into the Holy of Holies, ascended to an height above every
name of Heavens, or Glories, or any thing named in any the highest Heavens, by
any Glories, by any the highest and sweetest Names. Behold him, carrying along
with him up to this height in his own Person, and by the Power of his Person
and Spirit drawing up after him the long pomp and train of all these Heavens,
and their several Glories. Here now Jesus sits down in his eternal Rest upon
the Throne of Eternity, having nothing higher to which he may ascend.

The Resurrection of Christ is the beginning of his Ascension, his Ascension is
the finishing of his Resurrection. Now Jesus Christ is perfectly ascended
thither where he was at first. The Godhead of Christ in his Mediatory Form
shines forth immediately, nakedly, but gradually; in answerable degrees the
Humane Nature of Christ is Light in the Light of the Godhead, a clear, pure
Light in the naked Bosom of that Light, but an increasing Light. Now in the
Ascension of Christ, the Glory of the Father shines out, not only immediately
and nakedly, but entirely, fully. The Union, the Communion, the Conformity of
the Humane Nature with the Divine is complete, as in kind, so also in degree.

God is now all in all in the Person of Christ, and in both Natures. God is
totus, and totaliter in toto Christo, and in qualibet part Christi. God is
entirely full, and fully in the whole Person of Christ, in the whole Manhood of
Christ, and in every part. God is all with his whole Godhead, all in every
kind, in every degree, in every way and manner, in all Christ, in all the
humanity of Christ.

The Humane Nature of Christ is now by a mutual, entire Union, Similitude, and
Society married to its Idea, its heavenly Pattern, as it stood in the Mediatory
Form of Christ, being an uncreated, and a created Spirit of Light, Glory, and
Immortality in one Spirit. Now this created Spirit of Light, Glory, and
Immortality it self, and the Humane Nature of Christ together with it, in it,
lies in the mutual embraces of its first Idea and Pattern, in the simplicity
of the Godhead, in the high and holy place of Eternity, in its highest and
purest simplicity, in its Idea and Pattern, its ever-flourishing Father and
Husband. In this Bosom is the Marriage consummate: In this Light the Humane
Nature sees the Godhead eye to eye, is become like it, embraces it, being
embraced by it, as it is in its full Glories fully pouring forth themselves
into its Bosom, after which, and beyond which there is no Glory. This is the
sense of St. Paul, when he says, Col. 2. 9. That in Christ dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; that is, substantially, entirely, distinctly.

FINIS.

