FREE GRACE Exalted, and thence Deduced. EVANGELICAL RULES FOR EVANGELICAL
SUFFERINGS. In two Discourses made 29. March, and 10. May, 1670. From Romans 5.21.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1670.

TO THE READER.
RUth reaped a bountiful blessing with her humble gleaning in the field of her
near kinsman Boaz, to become the Mother of her Lord and Savior; the same
benediction is perpetually to be found in the field of the Gospel, whereof the
former field is the figure: a poor creature having had the opportunity of a
turn or two in that field, and finding much heavenly consolation there, picked
up with his Pen a few scatterings of what was lately presented before the God
of the whole harvest, in two Discourses, of the Free Grace of, and Suffering
for, the Gospel; and being willing they should extend to a standing benefit of
a few more than the Auditors, out of love to the truth and souls has
transcribed them for the Press, and if out of them any poor soul shall press
the wine of the kingdom to comfort and establish him, by the assistance of the
spirit of Grace, let him bless the Master of the Vineyard, who refreshes every
weary soul that comes to him. I confess the world is well replenished with
treatises of both subjects, Free Grace, and Sufferings, all I wish is, they
were better studied and practiced, this is only the casting two Mites into the
Treasury, which it is hoped some will reap the benefit of, nay these in
themselves contain the whole Treasury if sanctified to an humble soul.

There is only this note to be made, whereas there is a necessary caution laid
down against sourness of spirit, wrath, desire of revenge, or the like, to be
allowed by any in their sufferings; that yet this does not tend to invalidate
the true and faithful sayings of God, that he will in his time appointed pour
out his fierce wrath and indignation against all implacable enemies, as Babylon
and her Confederates, in order to the setting up the kingdom of the Lord Jesus
universally in the earth in truth and righteousness; here is the faith and
patience of the Saints, and hence it is they cry, Come Lord Jesus come quickly.

Free Grace Exalted, and thence Deduced. In a Discourse March 29. 1670.
Romans 5.21. As Sin, -- So might Grace reign through righteousness to Eternal
life by Jesus Christ our Lord.


ST. Paul in this Epistle does establish on heavenly grounds, and heavenly
pillars of divine truths, and divine arguments* The doctrine of free Grace as a
rock, as a rock of Eternity, on which the rock himself Jesus Christ, as he is
the Mediator of the Covenant, is founded, against which all the gates of hell
shall not be able to prevail; he establishes it against all assaults by which
the powers of darkness do invade it; he sets it before us as the^ (...) out of
which all the most precious and pleasant mysteries of the Gospel do spring, and
as the head, which is chief of them all, on which they all depend, from which
they all have the life, strength, beauty and sweetness: In these two last
verses of this Chapter, you have the treasure of the whole Epistle and whole
Gospel, comprised with a divine skill in a little compass; he gives a distinct
view of the whole; In these two verses is a comparison between the Law and the
Gospel; or the Covenant of Works and Covenant of Grace; the mystery of the Law,
and Covenant of works, with its design, end, and effect, represented; the Law
entered that the offense might abound, Sin reigns to death; that is the design of
the Law; It never entered into the heart of God, that righteousness or life
should be by the Law, or the Covenant of works; no, the design of the Law is,
that Sin might find a way into the world and be heightened, that the offense
might abound, and that Sin may bring in death upon all; but is this in the eye
of God simply thus to determine his Councels? no, but the Gospel follows, and
is the sweet Riddle, Out of the Eater came Meat, and out of the Strong came
Sweetness; the Law is as a foil for a Diamond, it is the design of God, that
the Covenant of Grace that everlasting love, might come down from Heaven with a
greater pomp and glory, with a greater train of sweetness and joy, bringing
everlasting righteousness, and everlasting life along with it; so you see the
20th. verse, The law entered that the offense might abound, but where sin
abounded, grace does much more abound: a great heap of fuel is laid to this
end, that the fire taking hold of it, might consume it, and spread it self, and
rise to Heaven with a glorious flame, that as sin has reigned unto death, even
so might Grace reign to Eternal life through righteousness by Jesus Christ our
Lord. My design is to speak to the last part of this verse, So might Grace etc.
where you have all the treasures of the Gospel richly pointed at in the compass
of two lines; First, you have here a King, Grace, this King is on the Throne,
grace reigns; it reigns over sin and death; 2ly, you have the Scepter of this
King righteousness, grace reigns through righteousness, he reigns to
righteousness, or by righteousness, righteousness is the Scepter of the
kingdom of grace; 3ly, you have the effect or end of this reign, how blessed
is it to be Subjects to this King? how good and blessed is this Kings reign to
all his Subjects, for it is to eternal life, a life of grace and of glory, a
life that is begun here in earth and flesh by grace, that is perfected in the
spirit and in heaven by glory; then 4ly, here is the great Minister of this
great King, by Jesus Christ our Lord, grace reigns by Jesus Christ* as great
Kings; First, they make their Ministers of State* they first raise them, then
use them, and reign by them, as Pharaoh by Joseph, so Jesus Christ is both the
gift of this grace, and the Minister of this grace, free grace raised Jesus
Christ up to be a Mediator in the Covenant of grace, to be a Minister in this
kingdom of grace, and then reigns by him to eternal life; Jesus Christ is the
Minister of grace by both righteousnesses, the righteousness of justification,
which is the righteousness of God in Jesus Christ, resting as a Crown on the
head of a Soul to justify him, and he is the righteousness of Sanctification,
the righteousness of God by Jesus Christ as a root of holiness in the heart of
a Saint, springing up into all holiness and spirituality there; how full is
this blessedness? how full is the Covenant of grace? so many words as be here,
so many heavens open themselves in fullness of grace and glory; Grace,
Righteousness, Eternal life, Jesus Christ our Lord, every one comprehends all.

Divines distinguish between two sorts of grace, one is grace-making-grace, the
other is grace-made-grace* the one is Eternal love in the heart of the Father
to the Soul, the other is a Spiritual loveliness in the heart of a Believer,
which is this love from the heart of the Father, first shining into the Soul,
and so kindling it self to a holy love there, which love at once carries the
Soul out of it self to the bosom of God, and changes the Soul to the likeness
of God, and fills it with the grace and joy and glory of God.

The grace mentioned here in the Text, is the first of these, that which
Divines rightly call free grace, for you see it is a grace that is antecedent
to, and transcendent over eternal life, and Jesus Christ himself in his
mediatory office, for it is a grace that reigns by all these, as the Scepter,
Minister, and effect of his reign.

The Doctrine which I intend to prosecute from these words is this; the free
grace of God is the Supreme and Sovereign good in covenant of grace, and in the
Gospel, it is that from which all the good things of the Gospel flow, on which
they all depend, and by which they are all dispensed; we see it lies plain in
the Text, it is the great King that reigns, the glorified person of our Lord
Jesus Christ is but the Throne of this grace where it sits, from which it
reigns; righteousness is the golden Scepter of this grace, and eternal life the
fruit of this grace; this free grace reigns to eternal life, this grace must of
necessity be Soveraignly, supreamly, absolutely, every way infinitely free and
full when it is before eternal life, it being the beautiful cause that produces
this blessed effect eternal life, which comprehends the life of grace and of
glory in the whole compass of it, Zach. 4.7. the Lord speak thus, Who art thou,
O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a a Plain, and he shall
bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying grace, grace unto it.
Zerubbabel is the figure of Jesus Christ, the scatterer of Babel, that spirit
of heavenly beauty and order that takes away all confusion, which says, O
death I will be thy death; so he calls himself Zerubbabel, the confusion of all
confusion (...) brings out the head stone, he brings out himself the head stone
of the spiritual building with shouting, and what does he teach them to cry to
it in the shouting, Jesus, Jesus? no no, they cry to Jesus himself as he brings
out himself the head stone, grace, grace, free grace, love from eternity,
supreme love, sovereign love, the most beautiful womb out of which Jesus Christ
together with all his heavenly treasure and sweetness springs, cry grace, grace
to it. My beloved, you know that the material Temple was but a figure of the
spiritual and living Temple, which is the Temple of the Lord Jesus, and of
every Saint; O that your spiritual senses were awaked, what melody should we
hear at this building of grace, of the spiritual Temple, in every soul, as
begun in laying the head stone the foundation, as carried on in rearing the
walls, as finished in laying on the roof of glory, we should hear the heavenly
company the blessed Angels and Spirits shouting with ravishing harmony, crying
to it, grace, grace, free love, supreme sovereign love, eternal love, it is
this, it is this, which lays it self as the foundation and head stone in the
person of Christ, this carries on the building in the walls and flores, and
lays it self the top stone in glory: O my beloved that have this building
though imperfect in you, you that lie in the rubbish, that have any sense of
the beauty of this building, of the glorious company that inhabit it, there is
no such way to have it begun, carried on, and finished, as to cry continually
to it, grace, grace, as with a shout of ravishing affections from a sense of
love, love infinitely free, transcending all your expectations, with a shout of
admiration cry continually with the language of all within you, of all your
parts, powers, senses, grace, grace; O the infinite freedom of grace, O the
sovereignty and supremacy of grace, of eternal love reigning through
righteousness to eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, reigning over sin and
death, and even out of them from the blackest darkness, raising the more
beautifully the Temple of divine light, and divine love.

I design to speak somewhat largely of Free Grace.

In the Porch of the Temple were two great Pillars, Boaz, and Jachin, one
signifying in strength, the other, he shall establish, or he shall prepare: O
my beloved, blessed are they whose heart, whose hope, whose grace, whose glory
does go up as a heavenly Temple, resting on these two Pillars which meet both
in one, free grace; here is the strength of the Godhead his love, God is love;
here is the preparation and establishment, the preparation from eternity, free
grace from eternity, and the establishment, is through all changes and storms
of times to eternity.

There be three things in which in general I would open and confirm the nature
of free grace. First, The grace of God, free grace is the highest love.
Secondly, It Is the highest loveliness; and Thirdly, It is the highest joy.

First, The grace of God is the highest love; grace in the Hebrew tongue Kene
from Kana, signifies most properly a love condescending, stooping from the
greatest height with the greatest complacency, bowing it self down, so making
it self one with the lowest object in its lowest estate, and that to this end,
that it may raise this object, and carry it to its own height, to be one with
its self in its own beauty and triumphant blessedness; the force of the word
according to some enforces thus much, this is expressed by another word, Psalm
63.3. Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise
thee: it is Keses, here is the grace of God expressed as the highest love, better
than life; there be three excellent things, light, life, and love, life is an
excellency of a higher kind than light is, life is light in a transcendent
perfection, therefore called light of life; and so is love above life, it is a
higher kind of excellency than life, it is the perfection of life; as life is
better than single light, because it is light in a perfection in which it
transcends it self, so is love better than life, because it is life in a
perfection in which it transcends it self; the highest love is the love of God
free grace, what purity, power, pleasantness, and glory, is there in light?
what strength, virtue, sweetness, and joy, is there in life? all these be
comprehended in the love of God, all these be comprehended in free grace with
an eminency surmounting themselves. The effect is in the cause after a more
excellent manner; love is the Fountain of life, and so the Crown of life, every
thing that is desirable in light and life, is more desirable in love, as the
cause exceeds the effect: thus the loving kindness of God is better than life.

This love signifies a natural love that flows freely and sweetly from its own
nature; O how high a love is that of free grace? O how free is this grace and
love in all its sweetness, and how sweet in all its freedom, flowing from the
divine nature, from the Godhead? the best of honey is live honey that drops
from the Comb without straining; the purest myrhe is that which comes from the
tree of its self; this is love at its greatest height, this is the pure honey
the grace of God, free grace that flows of its own accord, without any thing
moving, from the nature and heart of God himself. As a Fountain is a treasury
of water which continually sends out living streams, as the Sun is a body of
light which from the beginning of the world to the end sends out millions of
beams every moment, yet it remains still full and undeminish'd, such is free
grace, or God the Fountain of free grace; our God is a treasury of love, a
composure of love and sweetness that freely from himself every moment, from
eternity to eternity, sends out millions of millions of streams and of beams of
glorious love, yet still remains a Fountain, a Sun of richest love
undeminish'd; how pleasant, and pure, and powerful, is free grace? how sweet is
it to rest in the bosom and lie in the arms of free grace? it is to lie in the
bosom and arms of God, as in an unlimited treasury of the highest love and
sweetness, where love is springing with millions of springs and communications
of its self in all forms of grace, comfort, strength, joy, and glory
everlastingly, without any cessation or diminution. I would not be long,
neither would I miss my application, therefore shall leave the other two
arguments to set out free grace, in that it is the highest loveliness, and
highest joy, as well as the highest love, therefore shall spend the rest of the
time in the use.

My first Use is of Admonition; take heed of being strangers, and being enemies
to the grace of God, to free grace* as a bird wandering from his nest, so is a
man from his place; the Jews say place there is the name of God, it is free
grace that is the rest of every Spirit, of every Soul, here it is born, here
it is hatched, fledged, cherished, and fed, here the heavenly Mother, the
eternal spirit spreads his wings; it is free grace is the place of every soul,
every thing is at rest in its place, and strengthened in its proper place or
element; here is thy place O man, here alone is thy rest, here you spring up to
spiritual strength and virtue, O then take heed of being strangers and enemies
to it; he that is a stranger to it, is as a man wandering from his place, a bird
wandering from its nest, where shall it be cherished and fed? he that disturbs
his Family, is like one that beats his own flesh, says Solomon; be not enemies
to grace, this is thy place and nest, if you disorder your own place, and
fillest it with enmity, you be as he that consumes his own life and being.

There be three sorts of persons strangers and enemies to free grace, these two
fall into one, for free grace has no enemy to it, but he that is ignorant of
it, and (...) stranger^ to it, for those that know thy name will trust in thee,
those that have tasted the sweetness of free grace, what a heavenly Vine this
is that cheers both the heart of God and man, these will bow down to it, and
cry to all their hopes and expectations, grace, grace. The three sorts of
persons that are strangers and enemies to free grace, are first, the Profane
Heathen, 2ly, the Pious Jew, and 3ly, the Vain Christian; O you that here me
when I speak of the Heathen and Jew, think not that I talk of Jerusalem or the
Indies; O that these three strangers were not in the midst of us: the first
stranger is the Profane Heathen, Jesus Christ said to Pilate, John 18.37. For
this cause came I into the world, to bear witness to the truth; he that is of
the truth hears my voice: Pilate said, What is truth, and then went out: this
is a Pilate spirit, a Heathen spirit, one that is fit for interest sake to
crucify Christ: when Christ spoke of so great a glory as the end both of his
life and death, he asks, What is truth, and turns his back on Christ; but what
is this truth that Christ has such an esteem of, That he came from Heaven to
Earth, and died to declare, see it in two or three Scriptures, it is that truth
of the Gospel which Saint Paul sets out, 2 Cor. 4.6. the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; this is that truth, a light of
glory shining in the face of Jesus Christ; what is this glory, see that in
another Scripture, Ephesians. 1.6. to the praise of the glory of his grace; here is
the glory, the grace of God, free grace is the glory of God; this is the truth,
this is the truth for which Christ lived and dyed, that the light of this
glory, the most glorious and sweet light of the free grace of God, might shine
from his face on the heart of his brethren. Again, what that truth is for which
Jesus Christ lived and dyed, see in those last words of his Prayer to his
Father, John 17. ult. I have declared to them thy name, and will declare it;
what is that name and that declaration? it is this free grace, that God is love,
known by his name of love, so it appears, that the love wherewith thou have
loved me, may be in them, and I in them; O unexpressible love!

How infinitely sweet and free is that love; consider three things in it,
first, that the love that the Father has to Jesus Christ, is that very love by
which he brings out Jesus Christ as the second person in the Trinity, the only
begotten of the Father from eternity to eternity; it is that love by which he
delights in him, and embraces him, and has all joy in him, as he lies
eternally in the bosom of the Father, the eternal generation of the Lord
Jesus, which is the same from eternity to eternity, with which he is the
delight, and joy, and glory of the Father; this is the love of the Father with
which he loves Jesus Christ, and is not this a free love?

Secondly, This love of the Father with which he loves Jesus Christ, is the
same love of the Father which is in the Saints as their root, as that eternal
root out of which the Saints spring, and out of which Jesus Christ springs in a
Saint, that eternal root out of which Jesus Christ, and a Saint, spring both
together as two Spirits married, and become one Spirit, how rich and free is
this love?

Thirdly, This love of the Father to a Saint is that to which the being of
Christ in a Saint is a consequent, how full is this love which is anteceedent
to the Union of Jesus Christ, and a Soul out of which all good springs to a
Soul, is not this free grace? that glory of God for which Jesus Christ lived
and dyed that this truth might shine in the face of all his Saints, this is
that love in which the joy of all holy Angels and men is placed; who art thou
now, when Jesus Christ lived and dyed to publish this joyful sound of free
grace, when the Ministers of Christ, when Saints Baptized into the Spirit of
Christ, continually shout and cry concerning all good within them, or round
about them, grace, grace, free grace, love from eternity, and to eternity? who
art thou, that as Pilate negligently cries, what is this grace, I understand it
not, and so go away turning thy back on this grace, on Jesus Christ, on the
glorious Ministry of this grace, on the everlasting Father the Fountain of this
grace? this is the Profane Heathen.

The second stranger and enemy to free grace, is the pious Jew, when Jesus
Christ by his doctrine discovered his glory, and the people believed on him,
the most religious Jews cried out, we know that God spoke to Moses, but whence
this man came we know not. Oh how many such Jewish devout spirits be among
Christians? when Jesus Christ in the Ministry of his Gospel shines out with the
beams of free grace, breaking out in their simplicity, purity, and unmixed
freedom, see it not, and know it not; when Jesus Christ in his glorified face
scatters those beams of grace into the bosom of many men, they cry out, this
we know, that Moses, that the latter of the Scripture every where calls upon us
to be doing, to abound in good works, to work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling; but what this doctrine of free grace is, we know not, nor whence it
comes, although there be no right doing or abounding in good works, or working
out Salvation, but by the operation of this free grace, for it is God that
works in us both to will and to do; how ignorant are many of the Religious
Jews among us of the glory of this King, of the power of his reign, who reigns
by a Scepter of righteousness to eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. Oh let
no more thine own reason, the free will or power of the creature, or all works
arising from these in opposition to the free grace of God, (...) contend with
it for the pre-eminence or copartnership, to take the Scepter of righteousness
out of his hand; no, free grace has a most glorious Minister by which he will
reign to bring out eternal life through righteousness, and that is Jesus
Christ: in the place of free will, right reason so called, and all created
excellencies, he sets up Jesus Christ; free grace reigns through righteousness
to eternal life by Jesus Christ.

The third enemy and stranger to the grace of God, is the Vain Christian, and
this is of two kinds; first, he that plays the wanton with the grace of God,
Oh that there were not too much of this; when God rained to the Jews the bread
of Angels in the wilderness, they loathed it, and said, What is this manna, how
insipid is this, we find no strength in it; Oh that this were not the temper of
many. How is that relish of free grace, that savor and esteem of free grace,
that eager feeding of the soul on free grace, as the delicacy of Heaven and
Eternity which was among the Saints of old, now almost quite lost? how do we
play the wanton with this grace of God that reigns so freely? we find no
relish in it to satisfy our understanding, or to feed and feast our will and
affections; tak heed I beseech you of thus playing the wanton with free grace,
whosoever he be that subordinates the free grace of God to any thing besides
its self, or bounds it in any thing besides it self, he that gives it
confinement to or dependence on any thing of the creature, or subjects the free
grace of God to man's reason, or which is the other wantoness, turns this grace
of God into a liberty to sin, and makes this high free love a pretense or cloak
to licentiousness, he is a stranger and enemy to the grace of God, as it is of
God, he that sees not God to be all in all, sees nothing at all of God rightly,
so he that sets not up the grace of God in the infiniteness, unlimitedness,
independency of its own freedom and sweetness, transcendent over, antecedent
to all good in the creature, he makes the grace of God nothing; grace is no
grace, unless it be all grace, abate any thing of the freedom of divine grace,
and it is no more grace at all. I conclude this Use with the last of the
Revelations 18. For I testify to every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the Plagues that are written in this book, and if any man shall take
away from the words of this book, God shall take away his part out of the book
of life. See the danger of adding to, or taking from the word of God; now to
bring this to my purpose, you may see that this word of God is no other than
the word of his grace, no word comes from God to his people, but the word of
his grace, it has its beginning, strength, and end in this grace, as appears
20 Acts 32. Now Brethren I commend you to God, and the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance amongst all them that are
sanctified* he takes from and adds to the word of God, that takes from and adds
to the grace of God. O my beloved, let us all then, as the glory of God is dear
to us, as the peace of our souls and bodies is dear to us, lets take heed of
taking from, or adding to the grace of God, if we take from the grace of God
any thing of its own freedom, of its antecedence to all good in all creatures,
God certainly will take from us proportionably of the purity, of the peace, of
the power, of his spirit in our spirits, of the comfort and prosperity of our
lives, of consolation and joy in death, of our blessedness and glory after
death. If we add to the grace of God, any power in the creature, any free will
in the creature, any excellency in the creature, God certainly will so withdraw
from us, that by it we shall find we add to our corruptions, we add to our
care, fear, grief, doubt, despair and anguish, while we live and add to the
blackness of darkness in death, and add to everlasting torments after death, if
this free grace it self do not interpose and prevent it by its own freedom.

My next Use is to persuade all, Heathens, Jews, and Christians, to seek after
this grace of God, to be acquainted with it, and that their acquaintance may
increase, seek acquaintance with the free grace of God with all your heart; let
all the desires of your heart be wrapped up in the search of free grace, Psalm
27.8. My heart says, seek my face, thy face will I seek; free grace, eternal
love, this is the naked face of God, Oh seek, let your heart with all within
you, say to you continually by day and by night, seek the face of God, the
grace of God, and let your heart answer again in the truth of your practice,
thy grace O God we will seek; all good things of time and eternity are wrapped up
in the grace of God, wisdom is a tree of life to those that take hold of it,
it is the Gospel is the Tree of life, it is grace is the Gospel, the glad tidings
from Heaven; take hold of this grace of God by faith, it is a tree of life, God
is the root of this tree in thy spirit, when you take hold of the grace of God,
you shall have the Father the Fountain of this grace, the Son the Channel full
of this grace, the holy Spirit as the living Streams, living Water, and Flood
of this grace, pouring out it self into thee, you shall have the new nature,
the spiritual man, the budds of this tree springing out of this root, and every
spiritual grace as the branches of it, and all joy and glory of the spirit as
the fruit of free grace, on which your soul shall feed as on the fruit of his
own tree; O then follow free grace, wait for it, seek acquaintance with it,
with all your understanding, might and power.

My next Use is, to warn all that profess the name of God to take heed of
living under the law, of abiding in a legal spirit; you shall see how I come to
this admonition from this doctrine, if you consider that Text which loudly
alarums us to have from Sinai to Sion, 6 Romans 14. For Sin shall not have
dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under grace. O behold and
tremble to see that the law and grace are inconsistent in their reign, if you
be under the law, you cannot be under grace; if you be under grace, you are no
more under the law; if you be under the law, sin domineers over you, grace is
no King to you; O then be fearful to build Tabernacles on Mount Sinai in clouds
and earthquakes under the administration of the law; but you will say, how
shall we know if we be under the law or no? I shall at this time give you one
character to know it by; art thou still in thy natural estate of unregeneracy
of unbelief, then you are under the law, and not under grace, the Lord Jesus
tells, John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God;
and again, Except a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: art then acquainted but with a natural birth, art thou
a stranger to the new birth, the second birth, that from above where grace is a
King, whose Kingdom is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; art
not thou born of water and of the spirit, of that spirit the spirit of grace,
of that water which is above the Firmament, the grace of this spirit which
flows for ever, then you cannot see or enter into the Kingdom of grace; there
is a Cherub with a flaming sword, the Ministry of the law, that keeps the
entrance that you cannot taste the sweetness, joy and glory of this grace; the
law has dominion over thee, and sin, death, the devil, and eternal wrath, have
dominion over thee according to thy present state; Oh that you would lament
this with tears of blood, that your hearts would break with longings, till
grace according to its freedom translate from this Kingdom of the law to its
own Kingdom and Dominion, a Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth. Alas, while under
the law in vain do you strive to break the chains of corruption and lust, guilt
and fear; sin reigns powerfully, and will reign to death, to a first death, a
dark and melancholy state, to the second death, a long and endless night
without any glimps of light or the least refreshment, where you lie in torments
unexpressible beyond that of the highest fear, in unquenchable burnings, where
evil spirits and devils in this Kingdom of the law and wrath pour continually
oil to the fire, and cry out, where be the pleasures of sin, the riches of the
world, where is your pomp, happiness and joy, now in all the things that were
seen, and be now vanished, and be as fuel to heighten your flame; O come to the
Lord Jesus and be councelled by him: we read when an Army of the Philistines
lay between David, and Bethlehem, he cried out, Oh that one would give me drink
of the water of the Well of Bethlehem which is by the gate, and three mighty
men brake through the Host and brought water to David, but he poured it out
unto the Lord and said, far be it from me, is not this the blood of the men
that went in jeopardy of their lives? Hear all you that are under the law, the
bosom of the Father is the true Bethlehem, the house of bread, Jesus Christ
the bread of God is there, in the gate of this Bethlehem is a fountain of
grace, O long day and night cry and say, in the ear of the Lord Jesus, who will
give to drink of that Fountain in the gate of Bethlehem, in the fountain of
grace, then I shall not be parched with the burning heat of lust, of guilt, of
grief, of pain, then shall I thirst no more after the poisons of this world,
the least drop of that water would be an eternal solace to my soul; Oh hear and
see thou that thus longest and faintest to drink, but cryest, alas there be
Armies between thee and this fountain, Armies of corruptions, of guilt, of sin
and wrath, Armies of devils, Oh who now shall give me to drink of this
fountain? Be not cast down, look up, behold, and see, and rejoice to see Jesus
Christ the mighty Worthy of God has broke through all these Armies, and in
despite of all, he brings of the living water of grace, from the fountain of
grace for thee to drink, nay he brings thee to the fountain in the bosom of
the Father; Oh now in this moment, thou that have hitherto been in thy natural
estate under the dominion of the law, hear his voice that by the Ministry
brings thee to the fountain of grace, that calls thee to come freely without
money and without price, to drink deep of this fountain; this shall spring up
to all righteousness, holiness and joy in thee; this shall spring up as streams
to make thee flourish like the garden of God; Oh that the Lord Jesus would be
present with thee now to a new birth, to give thee a new heart, a believing
heart, do not as hitherto pour out the precious water of this grace from this
fountain on the ground by contempt of it; but say now, Shall I spill the water
of this grace, which is the blood of my Jesus, the life of my Jesus, that not
only hazarded, but poured out his blood to bring me to this fountain; Oh drink
then, the spirit of grace give thee a new nature, a new heart to drink deep, to
drink abundantly by day and by night of this free grace which reigns through
righteousness by Jesus Christ our Lord.

EVANGELICAL RULES CONCERNING SUFFERING. In a Discourse, May 10. 1670.
Romans 5.21. the latter part. So might Grace reign through Righteousness unto
Eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.


I Have raised this Doctrine from these words, That the Grace of God is the
Supreme good in the Gospel, in the Covenant of Grace, there is no good above
it, there is no good before it, all the good of the Gospel comes from it, all
good depends on it, and is dispensed by it. I have showed that this Grace is
sovereignly infinitely free, sweet, and irresistible: I demonstrated this by
three Arguments.

First, That the grace of God is the highest love; Secondly, The grace of God
is the highest loveliness and beauty; Thirdly, It is the highest joy. This is
the grace of God, the love of the Father, the loveliness of the Son, God in all
the three Persons at once shining out in each of them in the light of divine
love, heavenly beauty, and incomprehensible joy, and breaking out from God in
the spirit of a Saint as a spiritual flame of divine love, heavenly beauty, and
infinite joy, inlightning inlivening the soul of a Saint, teaching it and
transforming it to one spiritual flame of the same love, beauty, and joy, with
it self.

My last Use was an Exhortation to glorify the grace of God, and thereby the
God of grace. First, in our lives, by living to this grace; Secondly, by
suffering for this grace, by this grace. I spoke of the first, and shall by the
assistance of God spend this time on this last part, to glorify the grace of
God in your sufferings. Here I began by the grace of God to deliver those
things to you, which I my self have sometimes received from Jesus Christ, when
I have seen his face and tasted his love by a spirit of faith, and so do I hope
and desire in the simplicity of my heart to lead you by the same anointing of
the spirit of this grace of God shining in the face of Christ with this
heavenly love, beauty, and joy, as I hope I my self am led and taught to live
upon them.

There be five Rules I would lay before you in the pursuit of this Exhortation.

Rules.
First, See that you suffer from the grace of God calling you to suffer.
Secondly, Suffer only for the grace of God. Thirdly, Suffer with grace in your
spirits. Fourthly, Suffer with grace in your outward behavior. Fifthly, Let
grace alone, this grace of God, be all your solace in all your sufferings.
Heb. 5.4. the Holy Ghost tells us, No man takes this honor to himself, as a
Priest to God, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was; when you suffer as
Saints, then you will by Jesus Christ become like him, and be both the Priest
and the Sacrifice; but take heed you take not this honor to your selves to be
Priests and Sacrifices to God, except he call you to it, as he did Aaron: St.
Paul lays this as the ground of all that spiritual light that flowed from him,
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.1. Paul called to an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, through the will of God; then have you a sweetness and strength
in your sufferings, when you can say of your selves, such an one is called to
be a Sufferer; when the grace of God calls you to be a Sufferer, then the title
of a Sufferer and the triumph will be great. Paul when he stood before the
Roman Governor, makes this the ground of his confidence and consolation, O
King Agrippa I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision; what a spring of
fresh life will this be to say, I have not been disobedient to the heavenly
vision, I have not been disobedient to the heavenly call, the grace of God
shining without me in his providence of grace, and shining before me in his
word of grace, and shining within me from the spirit of that grace on my
spirit? O ye the Flock of Jesus Christ, O ye little Flock, keep your eye on
your Shepherd the Lord Jesus, especially when he leads you into the Wilderness,
and into the Storm, see him going before you, and hear his voice calling to
suffer, and know his voice; then shall you go in and out and find pasture; then
in the valley of death you shall meet with green pastures; then in the time of
great tempests when the Sea roars, you shall feed by the still waterbrooks and
rivers; then in the hot noon of Persecution your Shepherd shall lay you in a
shady grove, under his own shadow, in the tender grass, in his own bosom, and
there and then your Conscience, together with the spirit of grace, the holy
Angels, all blessed Spirits, shall be as so many Birds singing about you, and
you shall appear as a continual Spring; God shall spring up in the beauty of
his appearance, in the manifestation of his love, while you are obedient to the
heavenly vision, and follow the heavenly call of his grace in his Providence,
his Word, and Spirit. This is the first Rule, See that you suffer only from
grace calling you to it.



Paul says, Do I persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I
yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Oh suffer
not to approve your selves to men; the Scripture says, Judge. 9.13. That Wine
cheareth the heart of God and man. A learned Interpreter applies this to Christ
and his Saints, Christ the Vine, and Saints the Branches, the blood of Christ
in his Saints poured out in sufferings, makes glad the heart of God and man, Oh
pour not out this blood to make glad the heart of man alone; how foolish be we
to seek to please men with a false fleshly spirit? Oh let this Wine be poured
out to this end, to make glad the heart of God, and all that partake of the
same divine joy with him. A great King when he met with a great Philosopher
said, Oh what a Theater have I lost, by thy not seeing my actions: It was more
to him to be applauded by this one man before all the world, than all the
benefit of his victories besides. Beware of this, to make any man, any sort of
men, the Theater of your Sufferings, to be applauded by men, let God alone be
the Theater of your Sufferings, it is a light thing with me, says the Apostle,
to be Judged in man's day; let this be the beginning and end of all your
suffering, to be applauded by God, approved of God, and accepted by him.

Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth; this relates to the
Passover, 7th. verse, For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: there is
to be a conformity between the sufferings of Christ and a Saint; do you come to
suffer with Christ? let it be like Christ, let it be a Passover, let it be a
Sacrifice of a Lamb, lay thy self down as a Lamb, gentle, innocent, and meek,
and let this be a feast, and cast out the old leaven, all sour, sullen, cross,
perverse spirits; keep this feast with the unleavened bread, the sincerity,
truth, simplicity of an innocent, gentle, meek spirit.

Suffer not for any earthly interest, worldly power, or Paul tells us, 2 Cor.
3.17, 18. that that which kept him from fainting in affliction, we look not at
the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen, for the things
that are seen are temporal; now while the outward man perishes, the inward man
is renewed day by day; if we suffer with our eyes on visible powers and
interests, we shall faint in our suffering, when instead of having our
expectations of great rewards answered, we shall find our outward man, and the
interests thereof decay, at what a loss shall we be. Saint Paul joins these two
together, minding earthly things, and being enemies to the Cross of Christ,
Phil. 3.18, 19. be not deceived, it will be found an unhappy delusion; while we
think we are in conformity to the Cross of Christ, for us to keep our eye,
mind, and heart, fixed on earthly things, we shall be found in truth enemies to
the Cross of Christ.

My fourth caution is this in my second Rule of suffering Hagar the bondwoman
which is of Mount Sinai, this spirit shall not inherit the promise or the
kingdom of God; that is reserved for the spirit of the freewoman, for Isaak
the seed of love, of divine mirth and joy: when Nadab and Abihis offered
strange fire before the Lord, the strange fire returns upon them and consumes
them; God calls his own works of wrath, a strange work; it is a strange fire to
God who is love, If you come to suffer with the strange fire of a wrathful
spirit, this fire will burn upon you till this wrathful spirit has consumed
you. Moses himself, the meekest man on earth, yet being a Minister of the law
and of wrath, for one wrathful expression, hear now ye Rebels, he was not
suffered to enter into the good land of Canaan. David, a man after Gods heart,
though he had fought the battles of the Lord, for his wrath in murdering Vriah,
was not permitted to build the house of God the Temple. When Christ was to
suffer, he bids Peter put up his sword, for he that uses the sword, shall
perish by the sword. If we suffer for a Ministry of wrath, with a spirit of
wrath, we shall find the wrathful sword turn it self against us; it is the
spirit of grace alone, it is the spirit of love, of faith and joy, which brings
to the good land of rest, which builds up the heavenly Temple.

Now I come to my Rule it self, which is, Suffer alone for the grace of God. I
shall divide this Rule into four parts.


I will publish the name of God, sings Moses in Deuteronomy. 32.3. you to whom that
name has proclaimed it self in the Gospel, publish that God is light in whom
is no darkness, a light of pure glory, that God is love it self, free,
absolute, unmixed, that he is God Emmanuel, this light, this love, with us, for
us, in us, in our stead, springing up in us. Oh pour out this name of God
wherever you come, as an ointment that may fill all spirits round about you
with a sweet smell, to draw all souls by the sweet smell of Christ's loveliness
in thee, to Jesus Christ, and make them in love with him; and now see what
Saint Paul says, Phil. 2.17. Yea, and if I be offered on the sacrifice and
service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with you all; for the same cause also
do ye joy and rejoice with me. Does the most high God in thy spirit shine out
with the light of his blessed beauty and love? does he by thy spirit shed
abroad his dearest love to many souls? does he by thee woo souls and bring
them into the bosom of his most heavenly love, where they also become Children
of light and love, shining in the same beauty, springing in the same sweetness?
If thou be offered up in any degree of suffering, and made a sacrifice for this
service of the faith of any, for thus espousing Jesus Christ, and the souls of
Saints one to another in this golden band of incorruptible beauty and love, Oh
rejoice, and call all holy Angels, and blessed Spirits, to rejoice with thee,
and be thereby helpers forward of your joy. Thus suffer for the Ministry of
grace.

Secondly, Suffer for thine attendance on the Ministry of Oh cursed, says that
good and noble Italian Marquess, be he that thinks all the treasures in the
world to be worth one moments communion with the Lord Jesus Christ. David a
great King says, One day in the house of the Lord to behold his glory, is
better than a thousand elsewhere. Does God by any Ministry through the outward
word of his grace bring forth himself to thee as a heavenly Bridegroom coming
out of his Chamber richly adorned as the Sun in a Summer morning fresh and
sweet with beauty of his grace, to take thee out of thy state of sin and
sorrow, out of the tumults of the flesh, to his Bridal Chamber, to his
Marriage Chariot, to Ride with him as his Queen? can thou now think there are
any joys, any treasures to be compared with this State? have you thus in the
Ministry of his grace seen the Lord Jesus, and received him in his love into
your souls? and is not one hour spent thus, better than thousands in all the
glory of the world? is not one grain of this glory better, of more worth, than
all this world at present, with respect to the present sweetness? what will it
then be as it grows up in full ripe Fruits to Eternity? Thus suffer for
attending to the Ministry of grace.

Thirdly, Suffer for your obedience only to the grace of a Stable, because
there they met with the King of glory. Behold a more beautiful guide than a
Star, I will guide thee by my eye, the face of God to his people, is the day
spring from on high; Follow this day spring, this eye, this face of God,
whethersoever it leads thee, though to a Manger, though to a Prison, though to
the Cross and to the Grave, to Poverty and Desolation: Oh follow it, for
wherever it leads you, you shall find your Jesus there, the Prince of glory,
turning the Stable, the Prison, to a Palace of glory, and turning the Cross to
a flourishing Tree of life, budding as Aarons Rod.

Heb. 11.13. They confessed that they were strangers and Pilgrims on the earth:
then 14th. They that say such things, declare they sought a Country, a
Kingdom, but what Kingdom, 15. verse. not that from whence they came; and 16.
but now they desire a better Country, that is an heavenly; therefore God is
not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City: they
seek a Country, it is their heavenly native Country; the word is Patrida,
(...), suffer as Pilgrims here, not to be Princes, care not for it; have you
been cast out of your Possessions, Estates, and Glories here, and desire not to
return whatever opportunities present themselves? let not this be in your eye
in suffering, profess here you have no abiding place, no enduring substance,
profess your selves Pilgrims, give your selves to suffer as such, let your eye
be upon your native Country, on the heavenly Jerusalem; now you please God to
the heart, and God delights to be called your God, when together with him, you
will be sojourners here, and seek no kingdom but that in which he Reigns; now
God will prepare, now God has prepared for you a City, nay a Kingdom. The
second Scripture is 2 Cor. 4.18. with the 5th. and 1st. what carried Paul
through suffering, says he, We look not at the things that are seen, but
things not seen, which are Eternal; and now we know, that if our earthly house
of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God Eternal in the
Heavens, and this we groan for, to be clothed with our house which is from
Heaven, not to be uncloathed, but clothed, that mortality may be swallowed up
of life* here is a Kingdom for which alone all the Saints are to suffer; not of
this world, nor in this world; not of the flesh, or in the flesh; but of the
spirit, and in the spirit; but for an invisible kingdom, which the eye of no
natural understanding can reach, a kingdom seated and established in God, a
kingdom eternal in the Heavens, where the invisible light and glory swallows
up all that is visible, temporal, and mortal into it self: for this kingdom of
grace endure sufferings, so you will be like Christ, for it is said he endured
for the joy set before him; what was that joy set before him? see that John
17.5. And now, O Father, glorify me with thy self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was: see here the joy and kingdom which was in the
eye of Christ, that kingdom of God above which is righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, which is not in this world, which was before the world
was; a kingdom in Eternity, God himself that kingdom, the invisible, eternal
glory of the Godhead, which was, when the world was not, and shall be, when
the world is no more, which while the world continues is the same, but not in
the world, nor in appearance to sense or reason, but in the invisibility of the
eternal spirit, in a glory far surmounting sense or reason; this kingdom was
in Christ's eye when he suffered, now the joy of this kingdom made him despise
the shame; Oh be ye like Christ, and suffer for this kingdom to reign with God
in his invisible and eternal glory. So much for this second Rule, To suffer
only for the grace of God.

Thirdly, Let us suffer with the grace of God in our spirits; Samaritans that
would not suffer him to go through their City, Jesus Christ says unto them, Ye
know not what spirits you are of; these words are capable of a twofold sense:
first, you know not not O my Lambs what is your proper spirit, and how that you
ask is your proper spirit, this is unproper to my spirit, and do you desire to
know what spirit this is? the Holy Ghost tells in the Epistle of Saint James,
Jam. 3.14. If you have any bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not,
and lie not against the truth; this is a bitter Zeal in the Original, call not
this Zeal, Religion, and Grace, and the Spirit of the Gospel, you lie against
the truth if you do so; this wisdom is not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, and devilish: O see what spirit we are of, if we call for fire from
Heaven to consume those that reject us and resist us, to destroy the soul or
life of any man; this is a bitter Zeal, and brings in 16 verse. Confusion, and
every evil work.

A second sense is, you know not what spirit you are of, that is, you do not
understand what the spirit of grace, of the Gospel, in you is, and what the
spirit of a Saint under the Gospel is; For the Son of Man came not to destroy
souls, but to save them: would you know the proper spirit of a Saint? see that
in the 17th. verse. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and the fruits of
righteousness are sown in peace, without partiality; the word is, without
wrangling: See the spirit which is your spirit, the spirit of Saintship, it is a
Dove, as the eyes of the Spouse, a spirit composed of the purity of a spiritual
and heavenly loveliness, and in the simplicity of this loveliness, it flows out
in love to all, without regard to this party, or the other party, without
quarrelling, and so in its life, it sows the fruit of righteousness, in peace,
in the purity, love, peacebleness, and gentleness of this spirit, and so makes
peace, and springs up into peace. Oh that our Lord Jesus were ever in our eye
and heart as a pattern; when he was Crucified, he died to be a Sacrifice of
Love to those that Crucified him; when his blood was poured out with the
greatest malice, he shed it to wash away their sins that spilt it, to make his
blood a heavenly wine in the kingdom of his Father for those very sinners to
drink of, and receive a new life, to have fellowship with him in his life; his
last-breath was spent in a Dove-like breathing, and giving a kiss of love to
those souls that Crucified him, in these words, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do: what a kiss of kindness was this to those souls that
were with the greatest rage Crucifying him. Oh suffer ye in like manner.

It Is said, the blood of the Saints, is the seed of the Church; when you
suffer, let your loss and suffering be with this spirit, to sow a precious seed
of grace and love, of peace and righteousness, to spring up in the souls of
those by whom you suffer, by your heavenly love and meekness in suffering. If
you dye suffering on account of the grace of God, let the breathings of your
soul to the last, be an offering of prayers in the behalf of those that cause
your sufferings, that God may pardon them, and delight in them, to do them
good, and bring them to the same rest of God with you.

My fourth Rule is, Let grace be in your outward behavior Cor. 4.12. Being
reviled, we bless.

A fifth Rule is this, Let the Grace of God be your only solace in all your
sufferings; I shall only gloss a little on two Scriptures, and so conclude; the
first is, in Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, distress, or persecution, famine, or nakedness, peril or sword?
nay, in all these things we are more then conquerours, through him that loved
us; for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor any creature, shall be
able to separate from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The grace of God that we have been speaking of, and the love of God here in
the Text, are all one, how sweet and full of consolation is this grace in
suffering? the love and grace of God which shines out and lives in the
glorified person of Jesus Christ, is the same that he communicates to his
Saints and lives in them. And now whatever suffering comes to a Saint, no part
of it shall ever come between you O Saint, and this bosom of love, nothing
shall separate from this love: A cloud of suffering may surround you, and be
black without to those that look on it, but this cloud within shall (like the
Tabernacle with Badgers skins without, all glorious within) shall be full of
divine love to you; this cloud shall not come between you and this love of God,
the grace of God shall be between you and every cloud; They say of the Romans
of old, that they had a sort of linen that would not be burnt in the fire, and
after they had burned the dead as was their custom, they took up the bones and
wrapped them in that linen, and therein burnt them to ashes to keep the ashes
unmixt from the common ashes. Let what suffering will come, let what fire will
be kindled upon you, you are wrapped in the bosom of the Lord Jesus; and
whatever operation the fire may have upon you, it (...) do you no hurt, for you
are safe wrapped up in that love which the fire cannot hurt. The houses of great
persons have naked, bare, dead, damp walls in them, when the owners family is
from thence; but when they come to their houses they furnish them with rich
hangings, which are beautiful to the eye, and keep the rooms warm, and serve
for recreation to entertain the indwellers with some pleasant stories which are
described in them. O my beloved, every state of suffering into which a Saint
comes, is a distinct room of the Palace of the great King of Glory and his
Bridegroom, and though that condition be like bare walls, damp, melancholy, and
naked, yet when you come into it, having this grace of God accompanying you in
every state; now it is furnished richly for you with love, as for an heir of
glory, with the grace of God, which is the light of Divine love, beauty and joy
all in one; God in Christ shining in the simplicity of all his love, does as
with hangings of glory furnish thy room; now the deformity of the walls is
covered with divine beauty, now the damp of the walls is taken away with the
warmth of divine love, now the melancholy is taken away, and you are
entertained with pleasant stories of this love and its glory, all in this
furniture, in this love of God which comes between thee and sufferings, and
present themselves to thee according to all wisdom and prudence. My last
Scripture is, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye are reproacht for the name of Christ, happy
are yo^ for the spirit of God and of glory rests on you. Let me give you a few
considerations from this word of grace; First, when you suffer as a Saint God
is with you, he presents himself and appears to thee in grace and love. So it
was with Jacob, he was by Esau's ill will cast out of his Fathers house, sent
away poor and alone; with my staff I went over says he; he wanders in a large
field, and meets with a dark night and a hard bed, having a cold stone for his
sorrowful head to sleep upon; but behold there he met with that presence of
God, that spirit of God and of glory, in such eminency, as he never saw before,
that he cries out, This is none other but the house of God, this is the gate of
Hea^^^. Let us not fear what will befall us while we be obedient to the
heavenly vision in the face of Christ; we may be cast out of our Fathers house
by our churlish Brethren, from our own houses, estates, and joys of this life
to wants and nakedness. But behold their God will appear to us, that we shall
say, O blessed experience, I am cast out of my own house, but here I am in the
house of my God, where I shall dwell for evermore.

2ly. God will be with thee in his spirit, not a spirit of grace only, but a
spirit of glory, God will be with thee in the spirit unvailed, and give thee
the sweetest view of his naked face, he will in this spirit of grace and glory
pour out himself in the highest delights to thy bosom, and take thee to his
bosom, to the fountain of love and sweetness, making himself with thee one
spirit of Joy, beauty, sweetness, love and light, all your graces shall be
turned into glories; now as Gold by the fire is heightened to a luster, the
spirit shall be in every grace, comfort, and truth, a spirit of glory. God
shall say to you, come out from the possessions and joys of this world, to the
naked open field; there I will bring thee to my garden, and there I will sing
of my loves, come out of the Tabernacles of clay, come with me my love to my
banqueting house, there I will give thee my loves, there I will spread my
banner of love more gloriously then ever you saw it, and you shall be more sick
of love for me, and I will more abundantly satisfy thy love.

Thirdly, God will now be with thee to rest on thee to continue with thee, not
as in your prosperity like a waifairing man, to give a visit for a night and
away; no, he will say thou have left and lost comfort of relations, and
friends, and ready to lose thy life, now I will not leave thee alone, I will be
house and land, gardens and orchard, sweet relations, all joys of life; i will be
the pillar of fire and pillar of cloud at once to thee by day and by night; i will
be a firm security to thee, a fire shining round about thee with flames of
purest glory, most ravishing sweetness, divinest love; I Will be a sweet cloud
overshadowing thee, distilling on thee peace and rest; I will keep thee in
perpetual safety by my over shadowing thee; I will never leave thee alone while
you sleep; I Will watch over thee when you awake; I will talk with thee; I will
entertain thee; I will speak of my Kingdom and glory, and in all thy walks I
will guide thee; I will tell thee of the union between thee and me, which is an
unsearchable mystery to the natural man; I will celebrate before thee my
everlasting love, my light, life, and love, shall be the way in which you shall
walk, in which you shall go from one delight to another, till you come to
eternal joys in my self.

Lastly, when you suffer for the grace of God, it appears from this Scripture,
the God of all grace will rest in thee, that is, will lay himself down in thy
bosom, and give thee full satisfaction, highest complacency and joy that you
are capable of: when Christ was baptized, Heaven was opened upon him, and God
came down in the form of a Dove, and said, This is my well beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased. Oh who would not with Jesus Christ enter into a Baptism of
the deepest affliction, the greatest suffering, to have God as the Heaven of
Heavens opening himself about thee, and come in a Dove-like form in purest
love, speaking such words as these, this is my beloved Child, in whom my soul
is well pleased? now is my joy full in thee, and thy joy shall be full in me,
and I will glorify thee with my self; these sufferings themselves shall be a
Crown of glory.

Thus my beloved, make the grace of God the only solace to you in sufferings,
and set these Rules before you in suffering, from the grace of God, for the
grace of God, as a Ministry of love, and in attendance on it, obedience to it,
to walk in God as he is love, and have nothing but this love dwell in you;
suffer with a spirit of grace and love, springing up into all grace, suffer
with a gracious behavior, where nothing but love to all, springs up a divine
love like the love of our Savior, making you in suffering a sacrifice of a
Lamb for all in love; and then let this grace of God, this grace which is the
highest love, beauty and joy, which is God himself in highest love and joy,
coming to you, and taking you to himself; let this be your solace in suffering,
and so the God of grace and peace shall keep you whether you live or dye, he
shall sow the Fruits of Righteosness in peace, which shall spring up in peace
to your selves, and all round about you. And thus much for this Exhortation.

FINIS.

