THE REFORMATION JUSTIFIED: IN A SERMON Preached at GUILD HALL CHAPEL September.
21. 1673.

Before the Lord Major AND ALDERMEN, etc.

By EDW. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed, by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at
the White Heart in Westminster Hall, and at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1674.

Hanson Major.

Cur. special. tent. in Festo S. Michaelis Archang. 1673. Annoque Regis Caroli
secundi Angliae, etc. XXV.

IT is Ordered by this Court, that Dr. Stillingfleet be earnestly desired to
Print his SERMON lately Preached at the GUILD HALL CHAPEL before the LORD
MAJOR and ALDERMEN of this CITY.

Wagstaffe.

ACTS XXIV. 14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they
call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which
are written in the Law and the Prophets.
IN the beginning of this Chapter we find St. Paul brought to his Trial before
Felix the Roman Governor, wherein (if we only except the unfitness of the
Judge) all other things concurred, which could make such an action
considerable, viz. the greatness of the cause, the quality of the persons, and
the skill which was showed in the management of it. The cause was not common
and ordinary, such as were wont to be tried before the Governors of Provinces,
but of an unusual and public nature; not a question of words and names, as
Gallio Act. 18. 15.
thought it, but of a matter of the highest importance to the world: which
being managed by St. Paul, with that zeal and industry, which was agreeable to
it, gave occasion to his malicious Countrymen to accuse him before the Roman
Governor, as one guilty of Faction and Sedition. Under this color, they hoped
easily to gain the Governors good will to their design; being a person that
more regarded the quiet of his Province, than all the concernments of Truth and
Religion. But that this design might be carried on with the greater pomp and
show of Justice and Piety, they do not commit the care of it to the rage of the
people, or some furious Zealots; but the High Priest and some members of the
Sanhedrin Ver. 1.
go down on purpose from Jerusalem to Caesarea, and carry with them one of
their most eloquent Advocates called Tertullus to manage the accusation against
Paul. Who was no sooner called forth, but the Orator begins to show his art, by
a flattering insinuation, which is most apt to prevail with men of mean and
corrupt minds; Seeing that by thee, says he, we enjoy great quietness, and
Ver. 2, 3.
that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy providence; we accept
it always and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness: Having
thus prepared his Judge, he presently falls upon the matter, and charges St.
Paul with being a pestilent and seditious Ver. 5, 6.
person, a disturber of his Nation in all parts, a prophaner of the Temple; but
the main point of all, and in which the rest were comprehended, was, that he
was a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes. (So the Christians were then
called among the Jews, from our Savior's abode in the Town of Nazareth.) But
although the Writer of this History gives us only the short heads of his
accusation; yet we may easily suppose by St. Paul's answer, that he insisted
more largely on this, than on any of the rest: representing to Felix, That when
the Jewish Church had been at first established by God himself under Laws of
his own making, when he had so settled the several orders and degrees of men
among them, that the Priests lips were to Mal. 2. 7.
preserve knowledge, and the Law to be sought at their mouths; when under this
Government, their Religion had been preserved for many hundreds of years, and
after many revolutions they enjoyed one common and public Worship among them,
though there were several distinct Orders of Religious men (such as the
Pharisees and Essens) yet all agreed in the same Divine Worship; but now at
last to their great regret and horror appears one Jesus of Nazareth, a person
of obscure parentage and mean education, who pretended to discover many
corruptions in the doctrine and practices of our best men; and without any
Authority from the High Priest or Sanhedrin he gathered Disciples, and drew
multitudes of people after him; till at last the wisdom of our Governors
thought it fit to take him off, and make him an example for Reformers;
notwithstanding this, his bold and forward Disciples after his death carried on
the same design, pretending that the time of Reformation was come; and
accordingly have formed Heb. 9. 10.
themselves into a Sect, vigorous and active, of high pretenses, and dangerous
designs, which if it continues and increases can end in nothing short of the
ruin of our ancient Jewish Catholic Church; which has had so constant and
visible a Succession in all Ages; that has had so many Martyrs and Confessors
in it; so many Devout and Religious Persons as the Pharisees are; so excellent
an Order and Government, so much unity and peace before this new Sect of
Nazarenes arose in opposition to that Authority with which God had invested the
High Priest and Rulers of the People. And among all the promoters of this new
Sect, there is none more factious and busy than this Paul whom we here accuse;
and whom some of our Nation found in the Temple profaning of it, and there we
would presently out of mere zeal to our Religion have taken and destroyed; but
he was violently rescued out of our hands, and sent hither to be tried; and
these things, which I have spoken, is the sense of all those who are come down
as witnesses; for so we read, v. 9. And the Jews also assented and said, that
these things were so. St. Paul being thus accused, and having leave given him
to answer for himself, was so far from being daunted by the greatness Ver. 10.
of his enemies, or the vehemence of their accusation, that he tells the
Governor, that he did with all cheerfulness undertake his defense: and there
being two parts of his accusation, 1. His tumultuous and profane carriage in
the Temple; this he utterly denies, v. 11, 12, 13. and plainly tells them, they
can never prove it against him. 2. But as to the other and main part of the
Charge, his being a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes; although he would
not, out of his great modesty, take upon himself to be one of the Heads or
Chiefs among them, yet as to the owning of that way, notwithstanding all the
imputations they had cast upon it, he does it with the greatest freedom and
courage in the presence of his Judge and Accusers; and not only so, but defends
himself therein, that he had done nothing contrary to the Laws of God, or the
most ancient Religion of his Country: all which particulars are contained in
the words of the Text; But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets.

Wherein we have these three things considerable.

1. The Imputation which Christianity suffered under in its first appearance:
After the way, which they call heresy.

2. The Way taken by St. Paul to remove this false Imputation; viz. by appeal
to Scripture and Antiquity; So worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all
things that are written in the Law and the Prophets.

3. The Courage of St. Paul in so freely owning his Religion in the presence of
his greatest enemies, and when they were in hopes to destroy him for it: This I
confess unto thee, that after the way, etc.

1. I begin with the false Imputation which Christianity suffered under at its
first appearance; After the way which is called heresy; the same Word which is
translated Sect, v. 5. and although the Word be indifferent in it self, yet
where it is taken for a combination of men together against an established
Religion and lawful Authority (as it was by the Jews when they charged the
Christians under this name) then it implies in it a twofold accusation: 1. Of
Novelty and Singularity. 2. Of Faction and Sedition.

1 Of Novelty. A Sect of Heresy in this sense implies in it, men's setting up
with a new Doctrine which was not heard of before; and making that
theFoundation of a new Society separate and distinct from the established
Church, and consequently they must charge the Church they are divided from with
errors and corruptions, or they make themselves guilty of Schism, i. e.
unnecessary separation. Now upon these two grounds the Jews laid the imputation
of a New Sect upon the Nazarenes or Christians, 1. Because they could not show
a visible succession in all Ages: 2. Because they could not prove the Jewish
Church to be guilty of such errors and corruptions as to need a Reformation.

1. They could not show a Succession in all Ages of such persons who agreed in
all things with them. For where (say they) were the men to be found in former
Ages, that taxed the Jewish Church with such errors and corruptions as Jesus of
Nazareth did? that bid men beware of the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees,
i. e. of the most learned and holy men. Had not God always a Visible Church
among them? they could produce the names of their High Priests in every Age,
and show them all the marks of a Visible Church: Psalm. 76. 1. Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 2
Kings 21. 7. 2 Chronicles. 7. 16.
For in Judah was God known, and his Name was great in Israel. Has not God
said, that in his House at Jerusalem he would put his Name for ever; and his
eyes and his heart should be there perpetually? How is it then possible but
there must be a constant and visible Succession in all Ages? since God would
always have a people to dwell among; and that might be known to be his people
by the outward marks and signs of a true Church. But if the Christians
pretenses held good, God must for several Ages have wanted a Church amongst
them. For none of those things which they charged the Jews with, were newly
crept in among them, but had been delivered down to them by the Tradition of
their Forefathers, in an uninterrupted manner, as they thought, from the very
time of Moses. This was their Rule whereby they guided themselves in their
actions of Religion, and in the sense of obscure places of the Law and the
Prophets; and in that time after the cessation of Prophecy, when the Christians
supposed these corruptions to have come in among them, they could draw down a
constant Succession from the men of the great Synagogue, of persons eminent for
Learning and Piety that never charged them with any such corruptions as Jesus
of Nazareth and his Disciples did. Would God ever suffer such dangerous errors,
hypocrisy, and superstitions to prevail in his own Church, and raise up no
Persons to discover these things, till these new Teachers and Reformers arose?
Were not Hillel and Shammai that so accurately discussed all the niceties of
the Law, able to find out such gross and open corruptions, if any such had been
among us? Might not we say, that not only the Teachers, but God himself had
slept all V. Bell. de not. Eccles. l. 4. c. 5.. praeterea.
that time, if he raised up no one Person to discover the coming in of such
errors and corruptions? Where had God then any true Church in the world, if not
among his people of the Jews? And would he suffer that to be overspread with
such a Leprosy, and send none of his Priests to discover it? And even by the
confession of the Christians themselves, they were once the beloved and chosen
people of God, how or when was it that they ceased to be so? Do not themselves
acknowledge, that they receive the Law and the Prophets from our hands? And
that to us were committed the Romans 3. 2.
Oracles of God, and that to us pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenants, and 9. 4, 5.
the giving of the Law, and the service of God and the promises, and that ours
are the Fathers? How is it then possible after all these privileges, to
suppose this Church to fall into such a degeneracy, as at last to be cast off
by God, and a new Church to arise out of the ashes of it? Thus we may
reasonably suppose the Jews to have argued for themselves; and on the other
side, they trampled upon and despised this new Sect of the Nazarenes,

That had nothing of the Pomp and Splendor of their Church: they had only a
company of mean and illiterate persons at first to join with them; the
Disciples of their Master were a sort of poor Fishermen and inconsiderable
persons, men of no Authority, or reputation for extraordinary Sanctity or
Learning: even their Master himself was one of no great severity of life, that
did not retire from the world, and lead an abstracted life, but conversed with
Publicans and Sinners, and put not his Disciples upon Fasting and long Prayers;
whereas the Pharisees were men of great austerity and mortification, much
exercised in devotion, making frequent and long prayers, at certain hours; and
in whatever place those hours took them. Now how is it possible to believe,
that such devout persons as these are mistaken, and the Sect of the Nazarenes
only in the right? But besides all this, Where was their Church before Jesus of
Nazareth? We offer to produce a personal succession on our side, that joined in
constant communion with us at the Temple at Jerusalem; let the Christians show
any number of men before themselves, that joined with them in believing what
they do, and rejecting the abuses which they tax among us: if they cannot do
this, let them then suffer under the just imputation of Novelty.

2. But supposing they do not think it necessary to assign a number of men
distinct from our Society, but say it is enough that though they joined with
them in the worship of God, yet they did not in their corruptions: yet to
vindicate themselves, they must show how it was possible for such corruptions
to come in, and no more notice be taken of them: Such things could not be
introduced without some notable alteration; and in such a one, the author, the
time, the place, the manner may be assigned: We can tell, say they, all these
circumstances in the Idolatries of Jeroboam, Ahab, and Manasseh; if so great
alterations have happened in the state of our Church, that there is a necessity
of reforming it; name us the persons, the time, the place, the manner how all
these corruptions came in. When came men first to forsake the letter of the
Scripture, and adhere to Tradition? Who first brought in the Pharisaical
Superstitions? What was his name, where was his abode, who first opposed and
condemned him? Were all men asleep then to suffer such alterations, and to say
nothing at all against them? What, could one Generation conspire to deceive the
next? and if not, how could such changes happen in matters of Religion, and no
one take care to discover it and prevent the infecting of posterity by it? Had
no persons any regard to God and the purity of Religion then? If they had,
would they suffer strange fire to come upon Gods Altar, and take no notice at
all of it? Why did not Jesus of Nazareth, when he so frequently and vehemently
declaimed against the Pharisaical hypocrisy and superstitions, and false
Doctrines, show to the people, when, and where, and how these things came into
the Church of God? He only condemns them, and speaks sharply against them, but
he says not one word to satisfy the Scientifical men among them, how it was
possible for corruptions to come in, and prevail to such a degree, and yet no
circumstances of time or place be assignable of it.

Thus the Jews still believed themselves to be the only true, ancient, visible
Catholic and infallible Church of God, and despised the poor Christians, as a
novel and upstart Sect of Nazarens; which is the first imputation the
Christians suffered under.

2. They suffered under the imputation of Faction and Sedition; which is the
second thing employed in the name of Sect or Heresy here mentioned; and that
they charged upon them two ways. 1. For not submitting to the Churches
Authority. 2. For disturbing the peace and quiet of the People.

1. For not submitting to the Churches Authority: not, that the Disciples of
our Lord did out of humor, or fancy, or only to make a party, break with the
Jews in matters merely of order and indifferency: no, on the contrary we find
them extremely cautious of giving any offense in such matters, which temper
they learnt of their Lord and Master, who complied with many things, that
others might not take advantage by his omission of them, to slight and contemn
them; thus when others were baptized Mat. 3. 15.
of John, he would be so too; not, that he had any need of washing away of sin:
but he would not make use of a particular privilege to bring any
discountenance upon a general duty. Thus we see, he went up at the solemn
Feasts to Jerusalem as others did; and not only was present in the Temple, but
vindicated by a Miracle the order and decency of it, by driving out the buyers
and sellers from the outward parts of it, although they had a fair pretense of
being ready at hand to serve the necessities of such as Mat. 21. 12.
were to sacrifice to God in the Temple; nay, St. Mark tells us, that he would
not suffer any vessel to be carried through the Temple: and this he did Mar.
11. 16.
not upon any reason peculiar to the Levitical Law, but because it was a House
of Prayer. And this example his Apostles followed, who after they had the Holy
Ghost poured upon them, yet they attended the Temple at the hours of prayer.
Acts 3. 1.
But most remarkable to this purpose, is the instance of St. Paul at that very
time when he was seized upon, and like to be destroyed by the fury of the Jews.
For, understanding at Jerusalem from St. James, that there were many thousands
of believing Jews that were still zealous of Acts 21. 20, 21.
the Law, and were informed that St. Paul among the Gentiles slighted
circumcision and the Levitical Customs; he to give them all reasonable
satisfaction that he intended to make no unnecessary breach among them about
indifferent matters, submits himself to a legal purification in the Temple for
seven days together; before Ver. 7.
the end of which, the Jews made a tumult and seized upon him, and so he was
brought to answer the accusations against him in this Chapter. Thus careful St.
Paul was to give no ground for suspicion that he delighted in disorders and
separations; this example he did leave to all prudent Christians, rather to
submit to things which they have no great value for (as no doubt at this time
St. Paul had very little for the Levitical Customs) than to hazard the breaking
the peace of the Church for such matters. But notwithstanding all this care of
the first Christians, they could not avoid the imputation of Faction; because
they would not entirely submit their judgments to the Authority of the Jewish
Church. For this was the great pretense they stood upon, that they were the
Governors of the Church by Gods own institution, that they were to explain and
interpret the Law and the Prophets; and this was expressed in the beginning of
their Law, That in all cases of difficulty they were to go up to the place
which the Lord their God should choose; and to go to the Priests, and the
Levites, and to the Judge, and they shall show thee the Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12.
sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to the sentence which they
of that place (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee, and thou shall
observe to do according to all that they inform thee; and the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not bearken to the Priest, (that stands to minister
there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall dye, and
thou shall put away the evil from Israel. Upon this place, they might certainly
much better establish the infallibility of their own Church, than others draw
an argument for Infallibility in the Christian Church from it. However,
absolute obedience would serve their turn, to charge the Christians with
Faction, in not submitting to their Authority. For, was not this a matter of
difficulty, whether the Messiah were to be a temporal Prince or not? concerning
what time, and place, and person the Prophecies were to be understood? Who were
the competent Judges in this case, but those whom God had established by his
Law? If the Scribes and Pharisees were charged with false glosses, and
corrupting the Law by their Traditions, the Christians were not to take upon
themselves to judge of them; but to appeal to the High Priest and the
Sanhedrin, who were the only lawful Judges in these matters: Their duty was
submission and patience; but by no means ought they upon their own Authority to
begin a new Church, and to broach new Doctrines directly contrary to the
judgment of the High Priest and Sanhedrin; yea, after they had pronounced
Sentence against Jesus of Nazareth, and condemned him to death; and
excommunicated his followers, and punished as many as they could get into their
power; what could it (in their opinion) be but the Spirit of Faction and
disobedience thus to oppose the Authority of their Church, in believing
contrary to its decrees, and reforming without any power derived from it? We
see in our Saviors time how severely they checked any of the people who spoke
favorably of Christ and his Doctrine; As though the poor ignorant people were
fit to judge of these matters! to understand Prophecies, and to know the true
Messiah, when he should appear! And therefore when some of their Officers that
had been sent to apprehend him, came back with admiration of him, and said,
Never man spoke like this man, they take them up short and tell them, They must
believe as the Church believes; what, they take upon them to judge of such
matters! No, they must submit to their Governors: Have any of the Rulers, or
Pharisees believed on him? but this people which know Joh. 7. 46, 47, 48, 49.
not the Law are cursed. i e. When they set up their own judgment in
opposition to the Authority of the Church. And after our Saviors death at a
solemn Council at Jerusalem, when Peter and John were summoned before them;
the first Question they asked was, By what power, or by what name have ye done
this? They never enquired, Acts 4. 7.
whether the Miracle were wrought or no, or whether their Doctrine were true;
all their Question was about their Mission, whether it were ordinary or
extraordinary; or what authority they could pretend to, that were not sent by
themselves; but let the things be never so true, which they said, if they could
find any flaw in their Mission according to their own Rules and Laws, this they
thought sufficient ground to forbid them to preach any more, and to charge them
with Faction if they disobeyed.

2. They charged the Christians with Faction in being so active and busy to
promote Christianity to the great disturbance of the Jews in all parts. This
Tertullus accused St. Paul of, that he was a mover of sedition among all the
Jews throughout the Ver. 5.
world; and accordingly the Jews at Thessalonica take the Christians by force
and carry them to the Rulers of the City, crying, Those that have turned the
world upside down are come hither also. This Acts 17. 6.
they knew was the most effectual course to render them odious to all
Governors, who are apt to suspect all new things as dangerous, and think no
truth can compensate the hazard of alterations. Thus it was especially among
the Roman Governors, who had learnt from the counsel given to Augustus, to be
particularly jealous of all innovations in Religion; and had much rather the
people should continue quiet under an old error, than have the peace disturbed
for the greatest Truth. This was really the greatest difficulty in the way of
Christianity, it came no where, but people were possessed before hand with
quite other apprehensions of Religion, than the Christians brought among them.
The Jewish and Pagan Religions were in possession in all places, and the people
were at ease in the practice of them. What then must the Christians do? Must
they let them alone and not endeavor to convince them of the truth of their
own Doctrine? If so, they are unfaithful to their trust, betrayers of truth,
and false to the Souls of men: if they go about to persuade men out of their
Religion, they know, such is the fondness most men have for their own opinions,
especially in Religion, that where they might hope to convince one, they might
be sure to enrage many; especially of those whose interest lay in upholding the
old Religion. How little does Reason signify with most men, where Interest is
against it! Truth and falsehood are odd kind of Metaphysical things to them,
which they do not care to trouble their heads with; but what makes for or
against their Interest, is thought easy and substantial. All other matters are
as Gallio said, questions of names and words, which they care not for; but no
men will sooner offer to demonstrate a thing to be false, than they who know it
to be against their interest to believe it to be true. This was the case of
these great men of the Jews that came down to accuse Paul; they easily saw
whither this new Religion tended, and if it prevailed among their people,
farewell then to all the Pomp and Splendor of the High Priesthood at
Jerusalem; farewell then to the Glory of the Temple and City whither all the
Tribes came up to worship thrice a year; farewell then to all the riches, and
ease, and pleasure which they enjoyed: And what was the greatest Truth and best
Religion in the world to them, in comparison with these? These were sufficient
reasons to them to accuse Truth it self of deceiving men, and the most
peaceable Doctrine of laying the Foundation of Faction and Sedition. Thus we
have considerd the false imputations which were cast upon Christianity at
first, employed in these words, After the way which is called heresy.

2. I now come to the way taken by St. Paul to remove these false imputations,
which he does,

1. By an appeal to Scripture, as the ground and rule of his faith, Believing
all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets.

2. By an appeal to the best and purest Antiquity, as to the object of Worship;
So worship I the God of my Fathers, not bringing in any new Religion, but
restoring it to its primitive purity.

1. By an appeal to Scripture as the ground and rule of his faith. The Jews
pleaded Possession, Tradition, Authority of the present Church: against all
these St. Paul fixes upon a certain and unmovable Foundation, the Law and the
Prophets. He does not here insist upon any particular revelation made to
himself, but offers the whole matter in dispute to be tried by a common Rule
that was allowed on both sides. And his meaning is, if they could prove that he
either asserted, or did any thing contrary to the Law and the Prophets, then
they had some reason to accuse him of innovation, or beginning of a new Sect;
but if the foundation of his doctrine and practice lay in what themselves
acknowledged to be from God, then they had no cause to charge him with
introducing a new Sect among them.

But the great Question here is, What ground St. Paul had to decline the
Authority of the present Church? Since God himself had appointed the Priests to
be the interpreters of the Law; and therefore in doubtful cases resort was to
be made to them; and not the judgment left to particular persons about the
sense of Scripture; and yet in this case it is apparent St. Paul declined all
Authority of the present Church; for at that very time the Highpriests and
Elders came down to accuse him, and he takes not the least notice of their
judgment in this matter. I shall therefore now show that St. Paul had very
great reason so to do, and to appeal only to Scripture.

1. Because the Authority of the present Church was more liable to error and
mistake, than the Rule of Scripture was.

2. Because it was liable to more partiality, than that was.

1. Because it was more liable to error and mistake, than the Rule of Scripture
was. It was agreed on both sides, that the Law was from God, and that the
Prophets spoke by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; all that was now left was
only to find out the true meaning of them, and to compare Prophecies with
events. As in the case of the Messiah, if the circumstances foretold by the
Prophets had their exact accomplishment in Christ, as might appear to those who
carefully compared them; If he were born at Bethlehem, of the Tribe of Judah,
when the Scepter was departed from it, and during the second Temple, and all
other circumstances agreeing; then though the ordinary judgment concerning
true Prophets belonged to the Sanhedrin, yet it was far more reasonable to
believe that they were mistaken, than that all the Prophecies should be
accomplished in a person that was not the true Messiah. For those Prophecies
were not intended only for the Priests and Rulers, but for directions to the
People, that they might be able to judge of the accomplishment of them:
otherwise when the Authority of the Jewish Church condemned our Savior, the
People could have no reason to believe him to be the Messiah; if they were
bound in the sense of Scripture to submit their judgment wholly to the
Churches Authority. It is plain then, that the sense of Scripture may be so
evident to private capacities, that they are not to submit in it to the present
Authority of a Church. For notwithstanding all the promises made to the Jewish
Church, and the command of submitting to the sentence of their Priests and
Rulers, in a matter of the highest concernment, viz. concerning the true
Messiah, men were bound to believe directly contrary to the present Authority
in the Church. For the people were bound to believe Christ to be the true
Messiah; although the High Priest and Elders had condemned him for a deceiver
and malefactor. But besides this particular case, there may be several others
wherein men may lawfully reject the Authority of the present Church; and those
are, when that Authority shall go about to overthrow those things which must be
supposed antecedent to the belief of any such Authority: as, 1. The common
sense of mankind. 2. The force of a divine Law. 3. The liberty of judgment
concerning truth and falsehood. All these must necessarily be supposed before
any Authority of a Church; but if any Church goes about to overthrow these, it
thereby forfeits its own Authority over men.

1. If it requires things contrary to common sense; as in that instance wherein
some of the Jewish Rabbis required submission to their Authority, viz. in
believing the right hand to be the left, or the left to be the right, if they
determined so; or supposing the Jews to have required the people to deny that
they ever saw any Miracle wrought by Christ; or in the Miracle of the Loaves,
that what they saw and handled, and tasted, to be bread was true bread; or to
say, that the same individual body might be in a thousand places at once, or
that things whose nature it is to be in another, can subsist without their
proper subject; what Church soever requires such things as these from its
members to be believed, gives them just reason to reject its Authority.

2. If it requires things contrary to the force and reason of a divine Law: as
the Jews themselves would have acknowledged, if any Authority among them had
gone about either to have left out the second Commandment, or made it lawful to
give Religious worship to Images, under any distinctions whatsoever: or if the
Priests had taken away from the people their share in the sacrifices, under
pretense of the unsanctified teeth, or the long beards of the Laity, which were
not fit to touch what had been offered in sacrifice to God. But we need not put
cases among them, for our Savior therefore bids men have a care of the leaven
of the Scribes and Pharisees, because by Mat. 15. 6. 16. 6.
their traditions they made the Commandment of God of none effect: as in their
Corban, if they made a vow to God they thought themselves excused from
relieving their Parents; and in this way our Savior generally deals with them,
showing that though they pretended to keep the letter of the Law; yet by their
corrupt additions and false glosses they overthrew the scope and design of it:
which he thought sufficient reason to reject their Authority; and therefore
when he bids his Disciples, observe and do what soever the Scribes and
Pharisees bid them; it must be supposed to be Mat. 23. 3.
only while they keep to the letter and reason of the Law; for if he had
intended an absolute obedience, he would never elsewhere bid his Disciples
beware of their Doctrine. Mat. 16. 12.


3. If it takes away all liberty of judgment concerning truth and falsehood in
Religion. For this is a natural right which every man has to judge for
himself: and they that take this away, may as well command all men to put out
their eyes, that they may better follow their Guides. But the other is so much
worse, because it is an assault upon our understandings, it is a robbing us of
the greatest talent God has committed to our management, it is a rape upon our
best faculties, and prostituting them to the lusts of Spiritual Tyrants; it is
not captivating our understandings to the obedience of faith, but enslaving
them to the proud and domineering usurpations of men; wherein they would do by
us as the Philistines did by Sampson; they would put out our eyes, that we might
grind in their prison, and make them sport. I would not be mistaken, it is the
liberty of judgment I plead for, and not of practice; that may be justly
restrained by the Laws of the Church, where the other is allowed; because the
obligations to peace and unity are different from those to faith and inward
assent. And that no absolute submission of judgment could be required by the
Law of Moses, notwithstanding the command of outward obedience in the cases
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, etc. is most evident from hence, because that Law
makes provision for a sin-offering in case Lev. 4. 13.
the whole Congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid
from the eyes of the Assembly, or Supreme Council, and they have done something
against the commandment of the Lord: which had been a Law made to no purpose,
if it had been impossible for their chief Authority to have erred or been
mistaken in their judgment. From hence we see St. Paul had great reason to
appeal from the High Priest and Elders to the Law and the Prophets, because
they were subject to error and mistake, but these are not.

2. Because the Law and the Prophets are less liable to partiality, than a
living Judge, or the Authority of the present Church. I have oft-times wondered
to hear men speak so advantageously of a living Judge, before an Infallible
Rule, in order to the end of Controversies. If all they mean be only that an
end be put to them no matter how, I confess a living Judge in that case has
much the advantage, but so would any other way that persons would agree upon,
as the judgment of the next person we met with, or Lottery, or any such thing;
but if we would have things fairly examined and heard, and a judgment given
according to the merits of the cause, the case will be found very different
here from what it is in civil causes. For here the Judge must be a party
concerned, when his own Authority and interest is questioned; and liable to all
those passions which men are subject to in their own cases. Which will be
notoriously evident in the case before us, between the High Priest and Elders
on one side, and St. Paul on the other: They pleaded, that if any difficulty
arose about the sense of the Law, it belonged to them to judge of it; St. Paul
declines their judgment, and appeals only to the Law and the Prophets: had it
been reasonable in this case for Felix to have referred the judgment to them
who were the parties so deeply concerned? A living Judge may have a great
advantage over a bare Rule to put an end to controversies; but then we must
suppose impartiality in him, freedom from prejudice, an excellent judgment,
diligence and patience in hearing all the evidence, and at last delivering
sentence according to the sense of the Law; if any of these be wanting, the
controversy may soon be ended, but on the wrong side. I suppose none of those
who would have controversies in Religion ended by a living Judge, will for
shame say, they would have them ended right or wrong; but if they would have
Truth determined, they must give us assurance, that these Judges shall lay
aside all partiality to their own interests, all prejudice against their
Adversaries, shall diligently search, and examine, and weigh the evidence on
both sides, and then shall determine according to the true sense of the Law.
How likely this is will appear by the living Judges in our Saviors time; Was
there ever greater partiality seen than was in them, or more obstinate
prejudice, or more wilful errors, or a more malicious sentence than came from
them in the cause of our Lord and Savior? They would not believe his Miracles,
though told them by those that saw them; when they saw them, they would not
believe they came from God, but attributed them to the Devil; they would not so
much as enquire the true place of his Nativity, but ran on still with that
wilful mistake, that he was born in Galilee; and by this they thought to
confound Nicodemus presently, Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no
Prophet. If they had searched John 7. 52.
and looked themselves, they would have found, that Christ was born in
Bethlehem, and not in Galilee. But where men are strongly prejudiced, any thing
serves for evidence and demonstration; whereas all the arguments on the other
side shall be despised and contemned. How captious were they on all occasions
toward our Savior, lying in wait to entrap him with questions, to pervert his
words, and draw blasphemy out of the most innocent expressions? And when none
of all these things could do, they use all the ways of fraud, malice and
injustice to destroy the Savior of the world as a Malefactor and Blasphemer.
Was not here now a mighty advantage, which the Authority of the present Church
among the Jews of that time had, above the guidance of the Law and the
Prophets? And the knowledge St. Paul had of the same temper being in them still
might justly make him decline their judgment, and appeal only to the Law and
the Prophets, for the ground and Rule of his faith.

2. For the object of his worship, he appeals to the best Antiquity, I worship
the God of my Fathers. i. e. I bring no new Religion among you, but the very
same in substance with that which all the Jews have owned; so some render (...)
Deo Patrio, the God whom all my Brethren acknowledge, but he rather understands
it of the same God that was worshipped by Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, quem
majores nostri coluerunt; so St. Peter in his preaching to the people
concerning the resurrection of Christ, to avoid the imputation of Novelty,
says, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Acts 3. 13.
Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus; and again to the
Sanhedrin he says, the God of 5. 30.
our Fathers raised up Jesus; and St. Paul, the God of our Fathers has chosen
thee; in the use of which expressions 22. 14.
they purposely declare that they had no thoughts of bringing in any new
Religion among them, contrary to what God had of old declared to the
Patriarchs. The main things in which the Jews objected innovation to them, did
either concern the bringing in some new doctrine, or the reformation of
corruptions among them.

1. For their doctrine; that either concerned the Messiah, or a future state.
For the doctrine of the Messiah it was as ancient as the records of any
revelation from God were. It was the great promise made to the Patriarchs long
before the Law of Moses; and even Moses himself speaks of him, as St. Steven
proves to them; and David, and Isaiah, Acts 7. 37.
and Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and Daniel, and Micah, and Malachi, as the Apostles
at large prove in their writings. Why should this then be accounted any new
doctrine which they all believed and received? If the Question be only whether
Christ were that Messiah or no; for that, they desire nothing more than the
testimony of the Law and the Prophets, and the Miracles wrought by him; but
they had no reason to quarrel with them upon their belief, for such an
alteration of the state of things which themselves believed must be when the
Messiah came; for in him not only the Nation of the Jews, but all the Nations
of the earth were to be blessed; which was inconsistent with supposing the
Ceremonial Law to continue in its force and obligation; being particularly
suited to one people lying within such a compass as they might three times a
year attend upon the service in the Temple at Jerusalem. If their quarrel was,
concerning a future state, as though that were a new doctrine, St. Paul adds in
the next Verse, that themselves also allow, that there shall be aresurrection
of the dead both of the just and the unjust. And in his defense before Agrippa
he says, And now I stand and am judged Acts 26. 6, 7.
for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers, unto which promise
our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to come. So that the
Apostle produces Antiquity, Universality and Consent in these Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Religion; only a late busy and Politic Faction of
the Sadducees opposed this doctrine; but why should their opposition signify
any thing against so full a stream running down from the first and purest
Antiquity? Thus much for the positive part of their faith and doctrine.

2. For the negative pare, or the reformation of abuses and corruptions among
them; this was S. Paul's plea; Let them show where the God of our Fathers
imposed any of those heavy burdens which the Scribes and Pharisees place so
much of their Religion in. What ground is there in the Law and the Prophets,
for the Pharisaical Superstitions, and Vows, and severities to themselves in
fetching blood and knocking their heads against the walls, and different garbs
and dresses to appear more holy unto men, with many other customs of theirs,
the observation of which was made so great a part of the Religion of their
devoutest men? And it is a strange thing they should think it impossible such
things should come in among them, without great notice being taken of it; for
although sudden and violent changes may have all the circumstances known, yet
it is not to be expected in more in sensible and gradual alterations. A man may
tell when a violent Fever seized upon him and inflamed his blood, but he
cannot do so by a Hectic or a Consumption; must he therefore believe himself
well, because he cannot tell the punctual time when he fell sick. We may casily
describe the circumstances of a Landflood which overflows the banks, and bears
all before it, but we cannot do so by the coming in of the Tide, which steals
in secretly and insensibly, and no man can assign the place where the salt and
fresh water first mix together. Superstition is a Hectic Fever to Religion,
it by degrees consumes the vitals of it, but comes on insensibly, and is not
easily discovered till it be hard to be cured. At first, it may be some devout
but indiscreet men made way for it, who love to find out some Modes of devotion
different from the rest of the world, which are greedily embraced by such who
admire and follow them; this example taking, another begins and sets up for a
more refined way than the former; and so the design spreads, till at last true
piety and goodness be swallowed up by superstitious fopperies. Which is the
most probable account of all the Pharisaical corruptions; some of whose
observations might be begun at first with a good mind, and by the devout
persons of that time; but afterward, every one that had a sowrer look and a
worse nature than ordinary, thought it not enough to follow the example of
others, but like a great Physician he must have his Nostrum's, something of his
own finding out, a new garb, or ceremony, or posture of devotion, whereby he
may be taken notice of, and admired for his sanctity. Thus that fardle of
superstitious rites was gathered up among the Scribes and Pharisees in our
Saviors time, whom he most severely upon all occasions rebukes for their
hypocrisy, in placing so much of their Religion in them. And thus much for the
way taken by St. Paul to vindicate Christianity from the imputations of being a
new Sect or Heresy, by an appeal to Scripture and the best Antiquity.

3. There remains only, the freedom and courage expressed by him in owning his
Religion, notwithstanding these false imputations. But this I confess unto
thee, that after the way which is called heresy, etc. He abhorred that mean
and base-spirited principle, which makes it lawful for men to deny their
Religion when it brings them into danger; he studied no secret arts of
compliance with his Adversaries to securehimself; he did not decline appearing,
though to the hazard of his life, in so just a cause. He valued his Religion
beyond his own safety, and regarded not all the calumnies and reproaches of his
enemies, as long as he made this his constant exercise, to keep a conscience
Ver. 16.
void of offense, both toward God and toward men. And this he elsewhere says
afforded him more inward comfort and satisfaction, than all the crafts and
policy in the world could give him. For our rejoicing 2 Cor. 1. 12.
is this, says he, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world. There is nothing inspires men with so much
courage, as integrity and uprightness of mind does; and such persons who have
the comfort of that, have not only better hopes as to another world, but
oft-times escape better as to this, than others do; for even their enemies
cannot but esteem them: whereas the fawning, sneaking and flattering hypocrite
that will do or be any thing for his own advantage, is despised by those he
courts, hated by good men, and at last tormented by his own conscience, for
being false to God and Religion. But we may see here in St. Paul a great
instance of true Christian magnanimity; he was sensible how great both the
malice and quality of his enemies were; he knew he was to answer before a
Judge, that regarded nothing either of Justice or Religion; yet he neither
flatters his Judge, nor betrays any distrust of him: he does not bespatter his
enemies, nor discover any fear of them; but with a modest freedom and manly
courage owns the main part of their accusation, and effectually vindicates his
own innocence and his Religion together. For even Felix himself, although a man
otherwise very capable of being wrought upon by some ways of address, of which
we read, Ver. 26. yet the High Priest and the Elders with their eloquent
Tertullus were forced to return as they came, and leave St. Paul under the name
of a Prisoner, but enjoying the conveniences of liberty, ver. 23.

I have now gone thorough all the parts of the Text, with a respect to St. Paul
and the Authority of the Jewish Church, which was engaged against him; it may
now be justly expected that I make Application of what I have said to our own
State and Condition. Thanks be to God, we are not brought to such a trial as
St. Paul was, we enjoy the liberty of speaking for our selves and our Religion,
and not only speaking for it, but professing and owning it. And, may we ever do
so! But we have busy and restless Adversaries abroad, the factors of the High
Priest and Elders at Rome, who have as much spite and malice against us, as
ever those of Jerusalem had against St. Paul; and they have their Tertullus's
too, men of art and insinuation, and who manage their cause against us just as
he did against St. Paul, they charge us with bringing in new Sects under the
pretense of Reformation; or with rejecting the Authority of the present Church
which we were bound to obey, and thereby laying the Foundation of Faction and
Schism. These are heavy charges, but they are no other than those the High
Priest and the Elders made against St. Paul; and thanks be to God, his Defense
and Vindication is ours too, for we appeal to Scripture and the best and purest
Antiquity; and desire to be judged according to these. These three things
therefore I shall speak to, before I conclude.

1. That the same reasons which they produce against the Reformation would have
held against the spreading of Christianity at first.

2. That the same Defense which St. Paul made for Christianity will justify
the Reformation.

3. That we have all reason to follow the courage of St. Paul in owning and
defending our Religion, not with standing the imputations which are cast upon
it.

1. That the same reasons which they produce against the Reformation would have
held against Christianity at first. What have all the clamours of our
Adversaries for above a hundred years come to, but the very same which I have
already mentioned as the Jews Objections against Christianity, viz. Novelty,
and Faction? Where was your Church before the Reformation? produce your
succession in all Ages of persons who agreed in all things with you. Where were
those distinct bodies of men who found fault with those corruptions that you
pretend to reform? Our Church has had a constant and glorious succession of
Bishops, and Martyrs, and Consessors, and Religious Orders of Men, Virgins, and
Widows. But supposing such a distinct succession were not necessary, yet show
how it was possible for so many errors and corruptions to come into the Church,
and no one take notice of them and discover them. Where was the watchful eye
of Providence over the Church all this while? What, all the Pastors asleep at
once! or all conspiring together to deceive their posterity! Besides, how can
the Protestants ever answer their rejecting the Authority of the present Church
which they lived under? and to whom God had promised his infallible Spirit? how
can they clear themselves from faction and disturbing the peace of the
Christian world, which lived in so great unity and peace before? This is the
sum of their Objections against the Reformation, which are the very same we
have mentioned before, as produced by the Jews against Christianity. If the
arguments are good now, they were so then; if they were good then, for all that
I can see the High Priest and Elders were in the right, and St. Paul in the
wrong; if they were not good then, but are now, some remarkable disparity must
be showed between their case and ours; and that must lie in showing these three
things.

1. That the Christian Church has greater infallibility promised than the
Jewish had.

2. That the first Christians had greater reason to reject the Authority of
that Church, than the Reformers had, as to the Church of Rome.

3 That the Causes of corruptions in the Jewish Church, could not hold in the
Christian. But if none of these can be made good, then the case will appear to
be the very same.

1. It cannot be proved that the Christian Church has greater infallibility
promised than the Jewish had. Of which we have this plain evidence, that one of
the strongest arguments produced for the infallibility of the Christian Church
is taken from the Promises made to the Jewish. How often has Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9,
10. been made Use of to prove infallibility in the Christian Church? If they
had any better arguments in the New Testament, would they ever run so far back
to a Command that most evidently relates to the Jewish constitution? Where has
ever God promised that he would dwell in St. Peter's at Rome, as he did, that he
would dwell in his Temple at Jerusalem? What boastings and triumphs would
there have been, if any such words had been in the Gospel concerning Rome, as
there were of old concerning Jerusalem; viz. that God had 2 Chronicles. 7. 16.
sanctified it, that his Name might be there for ever; and his eyes and his
heart should be there perpetually? What pitiful proofs in comparison of this,
are all those brought out of the New Testament for the Authority and
Infallibility of the Roman Church? What are all the promises of the Spirit made
to the Apostles, and remarkably accomplished in them, to this plain promise of
Gods particular presence in that place for ever? Suppose St. Peter had
privileges above the rest of the Apostles; how comes the entail to be made to
all his successors, and only at Rome and no where else? Where are the Deeds
kept, that contain this gift? Why are they not produced during all this
contest? And yet we see in the Jewish Church where such a promise was made to a
particular place, no such thing as Infallibility was employed in it.

2. It cannot be showed, that the first Christians had greater reason to reject
the Authority of the Jewish Church, than our Reformers had to reject that of
the Church of Rome. I know here it will be presently said, That the Apostles
saw the Miracles of Christ, and wrought many themselves, and received an
immediate Commission from Jesus Christ in whom the Churches Infallibility was
then seated. All which I grant to be true in it self, but cannot be pleaded by
them who contend for absolute obedience to the present Churches Authority as
infallible. My reason is, because upon this principle they could not believe
Christ to be the true Messiah; for his being the true Messiah depended upon two
things, viz. the fulfilling of Prophecies, and the truth of his Miracles; now
according to their principles, no man could be certain of either of these
without the Authority of the Church; for the fulfilling of Prophecies depended
upon the sense of many obscure places of Scripture, about which they say there
is a necessity of an infallible Judge; and for Miracles, they tell us, that
there is no certain way of judging true and false, but by the Authority of the
Church. Now if these things be so, what ground could the first Christians have
to believe Christ to be the true Messiah, when in both these, they must oppose
the Authority of the present Church?

3. They can never prove, that the same causes of corruptions do not hold as to
the Christian, which did as to the Jewish Church. For the Christian Church in
those Ages which we charge with introducing the corruptions, was degenerated
into greater Ignorance, Barbarism, Luxury and Superstition, than the Jewish
Church in the time of its darkness from the cessation of Prophecy till the
coming of Christ. Our Adversaries themselves confess, that for a long time,
there was nothing either of Learning or Humanity among them; nothing but ease,
and luxury, and ambition, and all manner of Wickedness among the Chief Rulers
among them; nay, even at Rome there was a succession of fifty of their High
Priests, so remarkable for their wickedness, that Annas and Caiaphas (setting
only aside their condemning Christ) were Saints in comparison of them. And is
it now any wonder that such errors and corruptions should come into that
Church, as those we charge them with? Nay, rather the greatest Wonder seems to
be, that any thing of Christianity should be preserved among them. But besides
the sottishness of those times, we have many other causes to assign of the
corruptions introduced among them; as, a Compliance with Gentilism in many of
their Customs and Superstitions; Affectation of new Modes of Devotion, among
indiscreet Zealots; Ambition and constant endeavor to advance the Authority
and Interests of the Priesthood above all Secular Power; and when for a long
time these had been gathering the rude materials together, then the Moorish
Philosophy happening to creep in among them, the Monks began to busy
themselves therein, and by the help of that, a little better to digest that
Mass and heap of corruptions, and to spend the wit they had to defend and
improve them.

2. But against all these, we stand upon the same defense that St. Paul did: we
appeal to Scripture, and the best and purest Antiquity. We pretend to bring in
no new Doctrines, and therefore no Miracles can be required of us; which the
Apostles wrought to confirm Christ's being the true Messiah who was to alter
that State which God himself had once appointed: All that we plead for, is that
the Religion established by Christ may serve our turn, and that which is
recorded by the Apostles and Evangelists; to these we make our constant appeal,
and have the same reason to decline the Authority of the Roman Church, that St.
Paul had as to the High Priest and Elders, when he appealed to the Law and the
Prophets: Nay, we have somewhat more reason; because God had once appointed the
High Priests and Rulers of the People among them, but the Supremacy of the
Roman Church was a mere Usurpation begun by Ambition, advanced by Forgery, and
defended by Cruelty. But we do not only believe all that is written in the Law
and the Prophets, but we worship the God of our Fathers; of the Fathers of the
first and purest Ages of the Christian Church; we are not only content to make
use of their Authority in these matters, but we make our appeal to them; and
have begged our Adversaries ever since the Reformation, to prove the points in
difference between us, by the testimony of the first six hundred years; but
from that time to this, they are as far from proving any one point, as ever
they were.

3. What then follows from all this, but that we should imitate St. Paul's
courage in owning and defending our Religion, notwithstanding all the false
imputations which are cast upon it. What a shame would it be for us, meanly and
basely to betray that Cause, for which our Ancestors sacrificed their lives? Is
the Romish Religion any thing better than it was then? What error in Doctrine,
or corruption in Practice have they ever reformed? Nay, have they not rather
established and confirmed them more? Are they any thing kinder to us than they
have been? No. Notwithstanding all their late pleadings for Evangelical Peace
and Charity, they can at the same time tell us, That the Statutes Advocat of
Conscience-Liberty, p. 236. 247.
against Heretics are still in force against us, as condemned Heretics; and
we are not so dull, not to apprehend the meaning of that; viz. that were it in
their power they could lawfully burn us to morrow. And is not this the height
of Evangelical Love and Sweetness? Who can but admire the perswasiveness of
such arguments to Gospel-meekness, and melt at the tenderness and bowels of an
Inquisition? Let us not deceive our selves; it is not the mean compliance of
any in going half way toward them, will serve their turn: there is no chewing
their Pills, all must be swallowed together, or as good in their opinion to
have none at all. For not only plain Heretics, but the favorers and suspected
of Heresy are solemnly excommunicated every year in the famous Bull of Coena
Domini; and Lindwood Lindwood Provinc. l. 5. tit. de haeret. p. 162. 2.
their English Canonist, tells us whom they account suspected of Heresy, viz.
All that show common civility to Heretics, or give Alms to them, or that once
hear their Sermons. This last indeed has been mitigated by a considerable
party among them; for notwithstanding the opposition of the Jesuits in this
matter, and seven Briev's obtained by their means from several Popes forbidding
all Roman Catholics to come to our Churches; yet the Secular Priests have
contended for it as a thing lawful for them not only to come to our Prayers,
and hear our Sermons, but to partake of Vertum. Romans p. 104, 105.
our Sacraments too. Which they may allow, while they hope to carry on their
interest better that way; but if once, (which God forbid) the Tide should turn
with them, then the old Laws of their Church must prevail, and nothing will be
thought so wholesome as an Inquisition. Which it is strange, their Advocates for
Liberty of Conscience, should call only, Laws in Catholic Countries Advoc. for
Lib. p. 24.
against Heretics, and not Laws of the Church, when there are extant above a
hundred Bulls and Briev's of Popes establishing, confirming, and enlarging the
Inquisition. Since then no V. Append. ad Nicol. Eyneric. Director. Inquisit.
Ven. 1607.
favor is to be expected from their Church (for whatever they pretend, all the
severity comes from thence, all the favor and mitigation from the clemency and
Wisdom of Princes) let us endeavor to strengthen our selves, by a hearty zeal
for our Religion, and using the best means to confirm and uphold it. And since
the Children of this world are in their Generation wiser than the Children of
light; there are some things practiced among them which may deserve our
imitation: and those are,

1. A mighty Industry and Zeal in promoting their Cause; they have learned of
their Predecessors to compass Sea and Land to gain one Proselyte. They
insinuate themselves into all companies, stick at no pains, accommodate
themselves to all humors, and are provided one way or other to gratify
persons of all inclinations; for they have retirement for the melancholy,
business for the active, idleness for the lazy, honor for the ambitious,
splendor for the vain, severities for the sour and hardy, and a good dose of
pleasures for the soft and voluptuous. It is not their Way, but their Zeal and
Industry I propound to our imitation; I know not how it comes to pass; but so
it often happens, that they who are most secure of truth on their side, are
most apt to be remiss and careless; and to comfort themselves with some good
old sayings, as God will provide, and Truth will prevail, though they lie
still, and do nothing toward it; but certainly such negligence is inexcusable,
where the matter is of so great importance, the Adversaries so many, and an
account must be given shortly in another world, of what men have done or
suffered for their Religion in this.

2. Submission and Obedience to their Spiritual Governors; the greatest
strength of that prevailing Faction lies in the close union and cohesion of all
the parts together, by a settled subordination of one to another; which though
not always effectual, yet the contrivance is so laid, as if there were as much
Truth and Reason as Policy in it, cannot be denied to be fit for upholding the
interest of a Church. But we plead not for their blind and absolute obedience;
but sure the Apostles had some meaning when they bid the Christians obey them
that had the rule over them, and submit themselves, for they watched for their
souls; and Heb. 13. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
esteem them very highly in love for their Works sake: not, be ready on all
occasions to reproach and contemn them, and be glad of any idle stories
wherewith to bespatter them. If men would once understand and practice the
duties of humility, modesty, and submission to the Government which God has
set over us, we might have greater hopes to secure the interest of our Church
and Religion, than without it we can ever have. For spiritual pride,
conceitedness in Religion, and a Spirit of contradiction to Superiors are to
be reckoned among some of the worst Symptoms of a declining Church.

3. Lessening of differences among themselves; for although with all their care
they cannot prevent them, yet they still endeavor to extenuate them, as much
as possible, and boast of their Unity among strangers to their Churches
affairs. The great wisdom of the Court of Rome lies in this, that as long as
persons are true to them in the main points wherein the difference lies, they
can let them alone in smaller differences among themselves; and not provoke
either of the dissenting parties, unless they are sure to suppress them, lest
they give them occasion to withdraw from their communion. They can allow
different Rites and Ceremonies in the several Orders of Religion among them,
and grant exemptions and privileges in particular cases; as long as they make
them serviceable to their common interest by upholding and strengthening them.
Would to God we could at last learn this Wisdom from our enemies, not to widen
our own differences by inveterate heats, bitterness and animosities among our
selves; but to find out ways whereby even the dissenters in smaller things may
be made useful for the maintaining the common interest of our Church and
Religion. And it is a vain thing in any to go about to separate these; or ever
to hope that the Protestant Religion can be preserved among us without
upholding the Church of England. For if once that Bullwark be demolished, our
Adversaries will despise all the lesser Sconces and Pallisado's; they will be
but like Romulus his Walls, which they will easily leap over at their pleasure.
I pray God then (and I hope you will all join with me in it) that he would
vouchsafe to our Governors the Spirit of Wisdom and Peace, to find out the
most proper means for the establishment of our Church and Religion; and I pray
God give us all a Spirit of knowledge to understand the things which belong to
our peace, and of Love and Unity to endeavor after them.

FINIS.

