THE Bishop of Worcester's ANSWER TO Mr. Locke's Letter, Concerning Some
PASSAGES Relating to his ESSAY OF Humane Understanding, Mentioned in the late
Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity. With a POSTSCRIPT in answer to some
Reflections made on that Treatise in a late Socinian Pamphlet.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

THE Bishop of Worcester's Answer TO Mr. Locke's Letter, etc.
SIR,
I Have seriously considered the Letter you were pleased to send me, and I find
it made up of two Parts; A Complaint of me, and a Vindication of your self: To
both which I shall return as clear and distinct on Answer, and in as few words,
as the matter will permit.

1. As to the Complaint of me, it runs quite through the Book, and even your
Postscript is full of it.

The substance of it is, that in answering Objections against the Trinity, in
point of Reason, I produce several Passages out of your Essay of Humane
Understanding, as if they were intended by you to that Purpose; but you declare
to the World, p. 150. that it was written by you without any Thought of the
Controversy between the Trinitarians and Unitarians; and p. 224. That your
Notions about Ideas have no Connection with any Objections that are made by
others against the Doctrine of the Trinity, or against Mysteries. And therefore
you complain of it, as an Injury done to you, in imputing that to you, which
you have not done, p. 95. or at least in leaving it so doubtful, that the
Reader cannot distinguish who is meant, p. 96. and this you call my peculiar
way of Writing in this part of my Treatise.

Now to give you and others satisfaction as to this matter, I shall first give
an account of the Occasion of it, and then show what Care I took to prevent
Misunderstanding about it.

The Occasion was this, Being to answer the Objections in Point of Reason,
(which had not been answered before) the first I mentioned, was, That it was
above Reason, and therefore not to be believed; in answer to this, I proposed
two Things to be considered; 1. What we understand by Reason. 2. What Ground in
Reason there is to reject any Doctrine above it, when it is proposed as a
matter of Faith.

As to the former I observed that the Unitarians in their late Pamphlets talked
very much of clear and distinct Ideas and Perceptions, and that the Mysteries
of Faith were repugnant to them, but never went about to state the Nature and
Bounds of Reason in such a manner as those ought to have done who make it the
Rule and Standard of what they are to believe. But I added, that a late Author
in a Book, called Christianity not Mysterious, had taken upon him to clear this
Matter, whom for that cause I was bound to consider; the design of his
Discourse related wholly to Matters of Faith, and not to Philosophical
Speculations; so that there can be no Dispute about his Application of those he
calls Principles of Reason and Certainty.

When the Mind makes use of intermediate Ideas to discover the Agreement or
Disagreement of the Ideas received into them, this Method of Knowledge, he
says, is properly called Reason or Demonstration.

The Mind, as he goes on, receives Ideas two ways: 1. By Intromission of the
Senses. 2. By considering its own Operations.


And these simple and distinct Ideas, are the sole Matter and Foundation of all
our Reasoning.

And so all our Certainty is resolved into two things, either immediate
Perception, which is self-Evidence, or the use of intermediate Ideas, which
discovers the Certainty of any thing dubious; which is what he calls Reason.

Now this I said did suppose,

That we must have clear and distinct Ideas of whatever we pretend to any
Certainty of in our minds (by Reason) and that the only way to attain this
Certainty is by comparing these Ideas together; which excludes all Certainty of
Faith or Reason, where we cannot have such clear and distinct Ideas.

From hence I proceeded to show, that we could not have such clear and distinct
Ideas, as were necessary in the present Debate, either by Sensation or
Reflection, and consequently we could not attain to any Certainty about it; for
which, I instanced in the Nature of Substance and Person, and the Distinction
between them.

And by virtue of these Principles I said, That I did not wonder, that the
Gentlemen of this new way of Reasoning had almost discarded Substance out of
the Reasonable Part of the World. Which Expression you tell me you do not
understand. But if you had pleased to have looked back on the Words just
before, a Person of your Sagacity could not have missed the Meaning I intended.
Which are, Now this is the case of Substance; it is not intromitted by the
Senses, nor depends upon the Operations of the Mind, and cannot be within the
compass of our Reason.

But you say, P. 6.
That if I mean that you deny or doubt that there is in the World any such
thing as Substance, I shall acquit you of it, if I look into some Passages in
your Book which you refer to. But this is not the point before us, whether you
do own Substance or not? but whether by virtue of these Principles, you can
come to any Certainty of Reason about it? And I say, the very places you
produce do prove the contrary; which I shall therefore set down in your own
Words, both as to Corporeal and Spiritual Substances.

P. 7.
When we talk or think of any particular sort of Corporeal Substance, as Horse,
Stone, etc. though the Idea we have of either of them be but the Complication or
Collection of those several simple Ideas of sensible Qualities which we use to
find united in the thing called Horse or Stone, yet because we cannot conceive
how they should subsist alone, or one in another, we suppose them existing in
and supported by some common subject, which Support we denote by the name
Substance, though it be certain we have no clear or distinct Idea of that thing
we suppose a Support. The same happens concerning Operations of the Mind, viz.
Thinking, Reasoning, etc. which we considering not to subsist of themselves,
nor apprehending how they can belong to Body or be produced by it, we are apt
to think these the Actions of some other Substance, which we call Spirit,
whereby yet it is evident, that having no other Notion or Idea of Matter, but
something wherein those many sensible Qualities, which affect our Senses do
subsist, by supposing a Substance wherein Thinking, Knowing, Doubting, and a
Power of Moving, etc. do subsist, P. 8.
we have as clear a Notion of the Nature or Substance of Spirit as we have of
Body, the one being supposed to be (without knowing what it is) the Substratum
to those simple Ideas we have from without, and the other supposed (with a like
Ignorance of what it is) to be the Substratum to those Operations which we
experiment in our selves. You mention other places to the same purpose, but
these are sufficient for mine. These and the like fashions of speaking, P. 9.
you say intimate, that the Substance is supposed always something, etc. I
grant that you say over and over, that Substance is supposed; but that is not
what I looked for, but something in the way of Certainty by Reason. Yes, you
say, we cannot conceive how these sensible Qualities should subsist alone, and
therefore we suppose a Substance to support them. It is but supposing still,
because we cannot conceive it otherwise. But what Certainty follows barely from
our not being able to Conceive? Are there not multitudes of Things which we are
not able to conceive, and yet it would not be allowed us to suppose what we
think fit on that account? I could hardly conceive that Mr. L. would have
brought such Evidence as this against himself; but I must suppose some unknown
Substratum in this Case.

But you go on, That as long as there is any simple Idea, or sensible Quality
left, according to my way of Arguing, Substance cannot be discarded, because
all simple Ideas, all sensible Qualities carry with them a supposition of a
Substratum to exist in and of a Substance wherein they inhere. What is the
meaning of carrying with them a supposition of a Substratum and a Substance?
Have these simple Ideas the Notion of a Substance in them? No, but they carry
it with them. How so? Do sensible Qualities carry a Corporeal Substance along
with them? Then a Corporeal Substance must be intromitted by the Senses
together with them. No; but they carry the Supposition with them. And truly
that is burden enough for them. But which way do they carry it? It seems it is
only because we cannot conceive it otherwise. What is this Conceiving? It may
be said that it is an Act of the Mind, not built on simple Ideas, but lies in
comparing the Ideas of Accident and Substance together, and from thence finding
that an Accident must carry Substance along with it? But this will not clear
it; for the Ideas of Accidents are simple Ideas, and carry nothing along with
them; but the Impression made by sensible Objects: and the Idea of Substance
comes in by way of Supposition with the other, so that it is not the comparing
two Ideas together, but the supposing one Idea from another, and that a very
obscure and confused one too, as is confessed, viz. That it is something which
supports Accidents, and was found out for that substantial End. As appears from
these remarkable words of yours.

They who first ran into the Notion of Accidents, Book 2. Chapter 13. Sect. 19.
as a sort of real Beings that needed something to inhere in, were forced to
find out the word Substance to support them. Had the poor Indian Philosopher,
but thought of this word Substance, he needed not to have been at the trouble
to find an Elephant to support it, and a Tortoise to support his Elephant. The
word Substance would have done it effectually. And it might have been taken for
as good an Answer from an Indian Philosopher, that Substance without knowing
what it is, is that which supports the Earth, as we take it for a sufficient
Answer, and good Doctrine from our European Philosophers, that Substance
without knowing what it is, is that which supports Accidents. What can be
ridiculing the Notion of Substance, and the European Philosophers for asserting
it, P. 14.
if this be not? I forbear now your Repetition of it; because I see it does not
please you. Chapter 23. Sect. 2.
But truly it was not to upbraid you with the bare Repetition as a fault in
Writing (many of which I am too much sensible of my self, to blame it in
others) but only to show that it was not a sudden Fancy, but a deliberate, and
(as you thought) a lucky Similitude.

P. 11.
But you say, You would be glad to hear a clearer and more distinct Idea of
Substance, but you can find no better in your own Thoughts, or in the Books of
Logicians. Are not these Logicians a sort of European Philosophers, who were
despised so much before, for this very Notion of Substance? Even Burgersdicius
and Sanderson (whom you quote) were so, as well as many others of the dull
Tribe of Logicians.

But I do not find fault with the Definition of Substance brought by Logicians;
for they do not say, that it was found out only to support Accidents, but they
say, it first implies a Subsistence by it self; and then that it supports
Accidents: But you say, The former implies no more than that Substance is a
Thing or Being; or in short, something they know not what. Is there no
difference between the bare Being of a Thing, and its Subsistence by it self? I
had thought Accidents or Modes of Matter which make sensible Impressions on us,
were Things or Beings; or else there could be no effect of them, but you will
not say they subsist of themselves, and are in no other thing as the proper
subject of them, and you confess at last, that Substance does imply that it is
not supported it self as a Mode or Accident. So that our European Philosophers
happen to be in the right at last.

Well! P. 12*
but I would think it hard to be thought to discard every thing which I do not
comprehend; for I own Mysteries. Why then should I charge others for discarding
Substance, because they have but a confused Idea of it. This is the force of
the Charge which I bring into as few words, as may be, but without the least
Intention to abate the strength of it.

To which I answer, That I do not charge them with discarding the Notion of
Substance, because they have but an imperfect Idea of it; but because upon
those Principles there can be no certain Idea at all of it, whereas I assert it
to be one of the most natural and certain Ideas in our Minds, because it is a
Repugnance to our first conception of Things that Modes or Accidents should
subsist by themselves; and therefore I said the Rational Idea of Substance is
one of the first Ideas in our Minds; and however imperfect and obscure our
Notion be, yet we are as certain that Substances are and must be, as that there
are any Beings in the World. Herein you tell me you agree with me, P. 22.
and therefore you hope this is no Objection against the Trinity. I never
thought it was, but to lay all Foundation of Certainty as to matters of Faith
upon clear and distinct Ideas, which was the Opinion I opposed, does certainly
overthrow all Mysteries of Faith, and excludes the Notion of Substance out of
Rational Discourse, which at length you apprehend to have been my meaning.

P. 35.
But, say you, if any assert, that we can have no Ideas but from Sensation or
Reflection, you declare, that this is not your Opinion. I am very glad of it:
And I will do you all the Right I can in this matter. But we must take your
Meaning from your own words. And there are three Particulars you express it in.

(1.) That your Meaning was, P. 25.
to signify all those Complex Ideas of Modes, Relations, and specific
Substances, which the Mind forms out of simple Ideas. So that these Ideas are
allowed by you although they come not by Sensation or Reflection. But is not
the Notion of particular Substances a Complex Idea, because it is a
Complication of simple Ideas, as will presently appear from your own words; but
all simple Ideas come in by Sensation and Reflection. But you may say the
Combination of them to make one Idea, is an Act of the Mind, and so this Idea
is not from Sensation or Reflection. It seems then, the Mind has a Power to
form one Complex Idea out of many simple ones, and this makes a true Idea of a
particular Substance not coming in by Sensation or Reflection. But I am still
to seek, how this comes to make an Idea of Substance; I understand it very well
to be a Complex Idea of so many Accidents put together; but I cannot
understand, how a Complex Idea of Accidents should make an Idea of Substance.
And till you do this you are as far as ever from a true Idea of Substance,
notwithstanding your Complex Ideas.

(2.) You never said that the general Idea of Substance comes in by Sensation
or Reflection. P. 38.
And if there be any Expressions that seem to assert it to be by a Complication
of simple Ideas, (and not by Abstracting and Enlarging them) because we
accustom our selves to suppose a Substratum; P. 28, 29.
it ought to be looked on as a slip of the Pen, or a Negligence of Expression.
In which Cases, I think no Man ought to be severe. But was there not too much
occasion given for others to think, that the Idea of particular Substance was
only a Complication of simple Ideas; and because all simple Ideas do come in,
you say, only by Sensation and Reflection, therefore all the Ideas of
particular Substance (which is but a Complication of them) must either come in
those ways, or else we can have no true Idea of particular Substance at all?

So that there are Two things, wherein you are very far from giving
Satisfaction.

P. 32.
1. That although you say, That the Idea of Substance in general is made by
Abstraction; yet you add, That all the Ideas we have of particular distinct
Substances are nothing but several Combinations of simple Ideas. From whence it
is plain, that according to your repeated Assertions, we can have no Idea of
particular and distinct Substances, but what is made up of a Complication of
simple Ideas: and although there may be some abstracted Notion or general Idea
of Substance, which is only an act of the Mind, yet there is no real Idea of
any particular Substance, but what is a Complication of simple Ideas. And that
a Man has no other Idea of any Substance, Book 2. chapter 23. Sect. 6.
let it be Gold or Horse, Iron, Man, Vitriol, Bread, but what he has barely of
those sensible Qualities, which he supposes to inhere with a supposition of
such a Substratum, as gives as it were a support to those Qualities or simple
Ideas, which he has observed to exist united together. These are your own
words; and what can the meaning of them be, but that we neither have nor can
have any Idea of a particular Substance, but only with respect to the simple
Ideas which make it up; and these being sensible Qualities, there is no such
thing as an Idea of Substance, but only a supposition of a Substratum to
support Accidents.

2. That although the Idea of Substance P. 32.
be made doubtful by attributing it only to our accustoming our selves to
suppose some Substratum; yet the Being of Substance is not. How is this
possible? Is not the Being doubtful if the Idea be; and all our Certainty come
in by Ideas? No, P. 33.
say you, the Being would not be shaken, if we had no Idea of Substance at all.
What! not as to our Knowledge? But you say, there are many things in Nature of
which we have no Ideas. And can we have any Certainty of Reason as to those
things? For about that our debate is, viz. What Certainty we can have as to
Substance, if we can have no Idea of it? So that the Being of Substance on
these Principles is far from being safe and secure as to us, when we have so
lame an account of the Idea of it.

But you have yet a farther distinction to bring off the Idea of Substance; for
you say,

P* 40.
(3.) That the Idea of Substance is a Relative Idea. For the mind can frame to
it self Ideas of Relation, and perceiving that Accidents cannot subsist of
themselves, but have a necessary Connection with Inherence or being supported,
which being a Relative Idea, it frames the Correlative of a Support, which is
Substance. And now I think we have all that is said in Defense of the Idea of
Substance; viz. That there is a Complex, Abstracted and Relative Idea of it;
which is derived from the simple Ideas got by Sensation or Reflection. But this
Relative Abstracted Idea is confessed to be an obscure, indistinct, vague Idea
of Thing or Something; and is all that is left to be the positive Idea, which
has the Relation of a Support or Substratum to Modes or Accidents: And that
what Idea we have of particular and distinct Substances is nothing but a
Complication of simple Ideas with the supposition of a Substratum or Support.

These being the Concessions and Distinctions you make in this Matter, I must
now return to the Occasion of this Debate, which was, whether the ground of our
Certainty, as to the Nature of Substance can be resolved into the simple Ideas
we receive in by Sensation or Reflection. The question is not, Whether you
doubt or deny any such Being as Substance in the World? nor whether the Notion
you have of it be clear and distinct? for you confess it is not; but the point
in debate is, What Certainty we can have of the Nature of Substance from the
simple Ideas we have by Sensation or Reflection? And here the question is not,
Whether the mind cannot form Complex and Abstracted general Ideas from those
simple Ideas? But whether those simple Ideas are the Foundation of our
Knowledge and Certainty as to the Nature of Substance?

P. 18, 23, 24, 36, 37.
For you affirm over and over (if I may have leave to say so) That the simple
Ideas we have by Sensation and Reflection are the Foundation of all our
Knowledge. P. 8.
And yet that the Ideas we have of particular distinct Substances are nothing
but several Combinations of simple Ideas of Accidents.

Which being supposed, I think it no hard matter to make it appear that we
cannot come to any Certainty as to the Nature of Substance in this way of
Ideas. For,

1. The simple Ideas afford no ground of Certainty any farther than as to
themselves. Outward Objects make an impression on our Senses; and all the
Certainty we have by them is that our Senses are so and so affected by them;
but what that is in those Objects which produces those Effects in us, these
simple Ideas do not acquaint us. For the old or new Doctrine of Qualities may
be true, notwithstanding any Effect of these simple Ideas upon us; for the same
effects would be whether there be real Qualities in the Objects, or only a
power to make such Impressions on us, which we fancy to be Qualities without
us. And so for our inward Perceptions; we certainly know, that we have a Power
of Thinking, Doubting, Considering, etc. these simple Ideas we are very certain
of; but whether these Perceptions come from a Material or Immaterial Substance,
you say, cannot be certainly known by these simple Ideas: for you think Matter
may be so refined and modified as to produce them. Now it is a very strange
thing to me, that Men of Understanding should make these simple Ideas the
Foundation of all our Knowledge and Certainty; and yet, that we should be able
to attain to no Certainty at all by them, from whence they proceed. For if
these Ideas were intended for the means of our attaining to any Certainty, this
would be the first thing we should know by them. It is not distinguishing
Primary and Secondary Qualities will help us out here. For these sensible
Qualities of Bodies, which arise from the first, viz. Bulk, Figure, Texture and
Motion of Parts, do not carry any evidence along with them that they are not
Resemblances of something in the Objects as well as the Primary. It is very
easy to affirm, That there is in Truth nothing in the Objects themselves, but
only Powers to produce various Sensations in us: but I intend not to dispute
whether it be so or not; all that I observe, is, that there have been
Philosophers, both European and others, of another opinion; and that these
simple Ideas, which are said to be the only Foundation of our Knowledge, do not
help us one jot in the Discovery. For it is confessed by your self, Essay, B.
2. chapter 8. Sect. 25.
That Sensation discovers nothing of Bulk, Figure or Motion of Parts in the
Production of sensible Qualities, nor can Reason show how Bodies by their Bulk,
Figure and Motion should produce in the Mind the Ideas of Blew, Yellow, etc.
How then are these simple Ideas the Foundation of our Knowledge and Certainty,
when by them we can discover nothing of the true causes of those Impressions
which are made upon us? And you own, Chapter 9. Sect. 8, 9, 10.
That the Ideas of Sensation are often corrected by Judgment, and that so
insensibly, that we are apt to mistake one for the other; so that these simple
Ideas are but a very slippery and uncertain Foundation for our Knowledge,
unless Reason and Judgment be watchful to prevent the Errors we are liable to
in the Ideas of Sensation But if no more be meant by the simple Ideas that come
in by Sensation or Reflection, and their being the Foundation of our Knowledge,
but that our Notions of Things come in either from our Senses or the Exercise
of our Minds: As there is nothing extraordinary in the Discovery, so I am far
enough from opposing that, wherein I think all Mankind are agreed. But when new
Terms are made use of by ill men to promote Skepticism and Infidelity, and to
overthrow the Mysteries of our Faith, we have then Reason to enquire into them,
and to examine the Foundation and Tendency of them. And this was the true and
only Reason of my looking into this way of Certainty by Ideas, because I found
it applied to such Purposes.

(2.) The Idea of particular Substances being only the Complication of many
simple Ideas, can give no greater Foundation of Knowledge or Certainty than
those simple Ideas of which it consists.

Which is so clear of it self, that I shall not go about to prove it. But that
you make the Ideas of particular Substances to be no other, P. 7, 8, 10, 30.
is plain from the several places before mentioned, produced by your self in
this Book. So that as to the Notion of particular Substances, we can find no
Foundation of Knowledge or Certainty at all from the Ideas. It cannot be
denied, that you join the supposition of a Substratum with this Complication of
simple Ideas; but we must take notice that you place the Idea of particular and
distinct Substances in that Complication, and only reserve the supposition of
the Substratum, as a general confused unknown thing, which makes no part of the
Idea, but is only kept at a dead lift to support Accidents. Your words are,
When we talk or think of any particular sort of Corporeal Substance, P. 6.
as Horse, Stone, etc. though the Idea we have of either of them be but the
Complication or Collection of those several simple Ideas of sensible Qualities,
we use to find united in the thing called Horse or Stone: then follows, Yet we
suppose them existing in some common Subject, etc. So that the Idea was
complete before the supposition. P. 8.
And again, Whatever be the secret Nature of Substance in general, all the
Ideas we have of particular Substances are nothing but several Combinations of
simple Ideas. Can any thing be plainer? Yet there follows, Co-existing in such,
though unknown cause of their Union, as makes the whole subsist of it self.
Here we have still an unknown Support, but made no part of the Idea it self. In
another place, the Idea of Substance is said to be a Complication of many Ideas
together, B 2. chapter 23. Sect. 1.
because not imagining how these simple Ideas can subsist by themselves, we
accustom our selves to suppose some Substratum which we call Substance. And
this is said to be the Notion of pure Substance in general, Sect. 2, 3, 4.
and not of any particular Substance, which consists in a Complication only of
simple Ideas.

(3.) The Relative Idea of Substance arising from the necessary Support of
Accidents is a mere effect of Reason and Judgment, and no effect of any simple
Ideas. For it arises from nothing suggested by the Ideas of Sensation or
Reflection, but it comes only from the Mind it self. Because, as I said before,
it is a Repugnancy to our first Conception of Things, that Modes or Accidents
should subsist by themselves. But which of the simple Ideas is this built upon?
You tell me, You say the same thing, and quote these Words of yours; And I say,
P. 22.
Because we cannot conceive how simple Ideas of sensible Qualities should
subsist alone, or one in another, we suppose them existing in and supported by
some common Subject. But you have not told me, how this is founded on the
simple Ideas, which was your main point; You boast, you say, of my Agreement
with you herein: I wish we might as well agree in all other things under
Debate; but why did you not inform me, how you came to this, by your simple
Ideas; and what steps and progress you made in the Complication of your simple
Ideas before you came to it. For truly, I should have found some difficulty in
it, since you make the Idea of a particular Substance a Complication of many
simple Ideas: for if it be so, how could a Complication of simple Ideas, which
cannot subsist by themselves, make the Idea of a Substance which does subsist
by it self? This looks a little untowardly in the way of Knowledge and
Certainty. But there is no help for it, a Substratum must be supposed to
support these unlucky Accidents. Let it be so then. How came we to know that
these Accidents were such feeble things? What simple Ideas informed you of it?
If none, then it is to be hoped there is some other way to attain Knowledge and
Certainty in this matter. No; you tell me, there is no need of any other way,
but this of Ideas. How so? Your words are these, P. 40.
The general indetermined Idea of Something, is by the Abstraction of the mind
derived also from the simple Ideas of Sensation and Reflection. But alas! We
are not upon the general indetermined Idea of something; but upon the
particular Idea of distinct Substances, which is granted not to be by
Abstraction, but by a Complication of simple Ideas. So that this is quite off
from the matter. But as to your general abstracted Idea, I have something
farther to say.

(4.) A general Abstracted Idea of Substance is no real Substance, nor a true
Idea of one, if particular Substances be nothing but a Complication of simple
Ideas. For you say, P. 40.
That the Mind by Abstraction from the positive simple Ideas got by Sensation
or Reflection comes to the general Relative Idea of Substance. If then the
general Idea be raised from the simple Ideas, and those simple Ideas make that
of particular and distinct Substances only by Complication, then the general
Idea of Substance can be nothing but an Abstracted Complication of these simple
Ideas, or else it is not by Abstraction from the simple Ideas. But I do not
deny that there is a general Nature of Substance, which is as real as a general
Idea can be, and it is that, which makes any particular Substance be what it is
in its own Nature without respect to Individual Modes and Properties. And
although this general Substance does not exist of it self, yet it does really
exist in the several Individuals that belong to its kind; and the several kinds
of particular Substances are really distinguished from each other, not merely
by simple Ideas of sensible Qualities, but by their inward Frame and
Constitution: as the Substance of a Man is from that of a Horse or a Tree. For
it is ridiculous to imagine, that these really differ from each other only as
Individuals of the same sort under the general Abstracted Idea of Substance.
And if there be Substances of several kinds really different from each other,
an account must be given, not only of the general Notion of a Substratum for
Accidents, but of the specific Nature of different Substances, and wherein the
difference of the unknown Support lies, as to the Modes and Accidents of their
kinds, which I despair of ever seeing done by the simple Ideas of Sensation and
Reflection. And your self confess, That we have no Idea of Abstract Substance;
B. 2. Chapter 24. Sect. 16.
and that by the Complex Idea of sensible Qualities, we are as far from the
Idea of the Substance of Body, as if we knew nothing at all.

And now I freely leave the Reader to judge whether this be a tolerable Account
of the Idea of Substance by Sensation or Reflection, and whether I deserve so
much to be complained of, for exposing the unreasonableness of laying the
Foundation of all our Certainty and Knowledge upon simple Ideas which we
receive by Sensation or Reflection.

But before I proceed further, it will be proper here to take notice how you
justify your Idea of Substance from the Etymology of the Word; P. 43.
which, say you, is standing under or upholding. I told you very little weight
is to be laid on a bare Grammatical Etymology, when the Word is otherwise used
by the best Authors for the Essence of a thing; and I named Cicero and
Quinctilian; and the Greek Word imports the same. But still you say, it is
derived a substando; and you tell us your opinion, That if we knew the Original
of Words, P. 44.
we should be much helped to the Ideas they were first applied to and made to
stand for. If you mean the true Ideas of them, I must beg leave to differ in my
opinion, and my Reason is this, because Words were used before men came to form
Philosophical Notions or Ideas of Things; and therefore they were forced to
make use of Words applied in another Sense; or else to coin Words on purpose to
express their own (as Cicero often does, as Qualities, Evidence, Comprehension,
etc.) So that if substare were used in another Sense before, it does not
follow, that it ought to be so, when we enquire into the true Ideas of Things.
But one of the best Critics of the Latin Tongue in our Age, has told us, that
substantia is so called, Voss. Etymol. in V. Sto.
quia per se substat. And substare is used by Terence, not for standing under,
but for being steadfast, Metuo ut substet hospes. But as to your general
Observation; I think there are very few Words used in the Philosophical
Language of the Romans, but what were taken off from the original Sense they
were applied to; as Persona was first taken for a Man in Masquerade, Genus for
a Pedigree, Species for a Sight, from Specio, to see, Virtus for manly Courage,
and distinguished from Probity. Sit virtus etiam non Probitate minor. Ovid. de
Pont. l. 3. And so Anima was first taken for the Breath in the Body, as well as
Spiritus. Thence Varro says, Their Ancestors, although they eat Leeks and
Onions, yet were been animati, had no ill Breath; and thence Animam agere and
efflare, says Cicero; and from Anima, he says, came Animus, by which they
understood the Mind; Hinc Animus ad intelligentiam tributus, says Varro* and
many others of a like Nature. But I shall only add one more, and that is the
Name of Idea, so very often used by your self and others of late. I wish we had
been told the original use of it, and how it was first applied, that we might
better judge of the true meaning of it now when so much Weight is laid upon it.
Thucyd. l. 6. p. 392. Ed. Ox. and l. 3. p. 184
I find in Thucydides, who was an accurate Writer, and understood the true
Sense of Words, that an Idea is used by him for an Appearance and Show without
Reality, as when he says, That the Athenians in dealing with the Sicilians,
made use of the same Idea which they had done before. Where it can signify
nothing but what he calls before a Pretense. But when the Philosophers came to
use this Word, they applied it to another Sense; Plato made use of it to
signify the true Exemplars or Models of Things, according to which the several
sorts of them were framed and distinguished. This Notion he had, as many
others, from the Pythagoreans, but what they Mystically called Numbers he
called Ideas. But Idea in its original Sense from the Etymology of it, is
derived from Seeing, and so the natural Sense of it is something Visible; from
thence it came to signify the Impression made in us from our Senses; and
thence it was carried to the general Notion of a thing, and from thence by
Metaphysical and abstracted Speculations to the Original Exemplars of
particular Essences, which were Simple and Uniform and not liable to those
Changes which visible Objects are subject to. So Cicero tells us, Acad. l. 1.8.
Plato formed his Notion of Idea, which he would by no means allow to any
Representation made by our Senses, which are dull, heavy, uncertain and
imperfect either by the Minuteness, or Distance, or Mutability of the Objects;
thence the Philosophers of his School denied any true grounds of Certainty to
be laid in the Ideas we have by our Senses, which can only afford ground for
Probability (not as to the bare Objects) but as to the Notions we take from
them. But all Knowledge and Certainty was placed in the acts of the Mind
(Scientiam nusquam esse censebant nisi in animi notionibus atque rationibus) i.
e. in examining and comparing, not the bare Ideas, but the Definitions of
things; and from these, judging of the Truth and Certainty of them. And if our
Ideas of things be so few, so superficial, and so imperfect as you confess them
to be; if we are so much to seek, as to the Connection of Ideas, and the finding
out proper intermediate Ideas, I am afraid this way of Certainty by Ideas will
come to very little at last. And so this Agreement and Disagreement of Ideas
will have the Fate of the Stoics Criterion of Truth, which only multiplied
Disputes, but ended none. Never any men talked more of Certainty than they; and
they boasted of their Discoveries of the true grounds of it: and the question
then was not about a Criterion of the bare Existence of things; (about which
they allowed the Judgment of the Senses to be sufficient, and the Ideas from
them to be true;) Nor was it about a Criterion for the Actions of Life, for
which they thought Probability or Opinion sufficient; but it was about finding
out such a mark of truth in the Ideas of our Minds as could not agree to a
Falsehood, i. e. such an Impression or Signature, as Cicero expresses it, Cicer.
in Lucul. c. 6.
as appeared in that which was, which could not be found in that which was not.
And this was called Visum, or a true Idea; his words are, Quale igitur visum?
quod ex eo quod esset, sicut esset, impressum est, signatum, and effectum. C.
24.
The Greeks called it a Comprehensive Idea, which they compared to Light, which
discovers it self as well as other Things. But when they came to be pinched
with particular difficulties about the Natures of Things, they were never able
to make out that infallible mark of Truth in their Idea; and yet this was a
more likely way to have found it, than to place the grounds of Certainty in the
comparing the Agreement and Disagreement of Ideas, unless it could be made out
that we have a full stock of Ideas, and are able to discern and make out the
Connection of them with one another. For if we fail in either of these, the
talking of Ideas and comparing those which we have will do us little service in
finding out of Truth.

But I confess, the design in general is so good, that it is pity that it should
lie open to so many Objections; and much more, that it should be abused to very
bad purposes. But my joining your words with another's Application, is that
which has given you so much Offense as to make you think it necessary to
publish this Letter for your Vindication.

2. I come therefore now to show the Care I took to prevent being
mis-understood; which will best appear by my own Words. I must do that right to
the Ingenious Author of the Essay of Humane Understanding, (from whence these
Notions are borrowed to serve other purposes than he intended them,) that he
makes the case of Spiritual and Corporeal Substances to be alike. It was too
plain, that the bold Writer against the Mysteries of our Faith took his Notions
and Expressions from thence, and what could be said more for your Vindication,
than that he turned them to other purposes than the Author intended them? And
the true Reason why the Plural Number was so often used by me, was because he
built upon those which he imagined had been your grounds, and my business was
to show that those Expressions of yours, which seemed most to countenance his
method of Proceeding could not give any reasonable Satisfaction. But you say,
P. 57.
You do not place Certainty only in clear and distinct Ideas; but in the clear
and visible Connection of any of our Ideas. And Certainty of Knowledge, you
tell us, is to perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in
any Proposition. Whether this be a true account of the Certainty of Knowledge
or not, will be presently considered. But it is very possible he might mistake
or misapply your Notions; but there is too much reason to believe, he thought
them the same, and we have no reason to be sorry, that he has given you this
occasion for the explaining your Meaning, and for the Vindication of your self
in the matters you apprehend I had charged you with: And if your Answer does
not come fully up in all things to what I could wish, yet I am glad to find
that in general you own the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, and the
Scriptures to be the Foundation and Rule of it. For thus you conclude your
Book, in the last Paragraph of the Postscript. The Holy Scripture is to me, P.
226.
and always will be the constant Guide of my Assent, and I shall always hearken
to it, as containing infallible Truth relating to things of the highest
Concernment. And I wish I could say there were no Mysteries in it; I
acknowledge there are to me, and I fear always will be. But where I want the
Evidence of things, there yet is ground enough for me to believe, because God
has said it: And I shall presently condemn and quit any Opinion of mine, as
soon as I am shown that it is contrary to any Revelation in the Holy Scripture.

Which Words seem to express so much of a Christian Spirit and Temper, that I
cannot believe you intended to give any advantage to the Enemies of the
Christian Faith; but whether there has not been too just occasion for them to
apply them in that manner is a thing very fit for you to consider. For in an
age wherein the Mysteries of Faith are so much exposed by the Promoters of
Skepticism and Infidelity, it is a thing of dangerous consequence to start such
new methods of Certainty as are apt to leave men's minds more doubtful than
before; as will soon appear from your own Concessions. For if the ground of
Certainty be resolved into the Agreement and Disagreement of the Ideas as
expressed in any Proposition; is it not natural enough from hence to infer,
that from whencesoever this Proposition comes, I must judge of it by the
Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas contained in it? You make a Distinction
between the Certainty of Truth and the Certainty of Knowledge. The former you
say, Book 4. Chapter 6. Sect. 3.
Is when Words are so put together in Propositions as exactly to express the
Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas they stand for: and the latter, When we
perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in any
Proposition. But our question about Certainty must relate to what we perceive,
and the means we have to judge of the Truth and Falsehood of Things as they are
expressed to us; which you tell us, Is by the Agreement or Disagreement of the
Ideas in the Proposition. And in another place, Wherever we perceive the
Agreement or Disagreement of any of our Ideas, Chapter 4. Sect. 18.
there is certain Knowledge; and whenever we are sure those Ideas agree with
the Reality of Things, there is certain real Knowledge: and then conclude, I
think I have shown wherein it is that Certainty, real Certainty, consists,
which, whatever it was to others, was, I confess, to me heretofore, one of
those Desiderata which I found great want of. So that here is plainly a new
Method of Certainty owned, and that placed in the Agreement and Disagreement of
Ideas. But the Author already mentioned, professes to go upon the same grounds,
and therefore it was necessary for me to examine them.

He says, Christianity not Mist. p. 10.
That the simple and distinct Ideas we receive by Sensation and Reflection are
the sole Matter and Foundation of all our Reasoning; and that our Knowledge is
in Effect nothing else but the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of
our Ideas. P. 12.
And that where our Perception is not immediate, our Certainty comes from the
clear and visible Connection of Ideas. P. 13.
For he says, That if the Connection of all the intermediate Ideas be not
indubitable, we can have no Certainty. Wherein now do his grounds of Certainty
differ from yours?

But he applies them to other Purposes. I grant he does so, and that was it
which I had said for your Vindication. But the question now is, whether your
general expression had not given him too much occasion for it?

It is true, that Ch 3. he distinguishes the means of Information from the
ground of Persuasion; and he reckons all Authority Divine as well as Human
among the means of Information: and the ground of Persuasion he makes to be
nothing but Evidence; and this Evidence, he says, lies in our Ideas, Chapter 4. in
the Agreement or Disagreement of them, p. 19. and he places Certainty in our
clear Perceptions of this Agreement or Disagreement, which you call clear and
visible Connection of Ideas. And wherein then lies the difference as to the
grounds of Certainty?

But his design is to overthrow the Mysteries of Faith.

This is too true. But upon what grounds? Is it not upon this Principle, that
our Certainty depends upon the clear Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas in any Proposition. Now let the Proposition come to us
either by Human or Divine Authority: If our Certainty depends upon this, we can
be no more certain, than we have clear Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of the Ideas contained in it; and so he thought he had reason to
reject all Mysteries of Faith, which are contained in Propositions, upon your
grounds of Certainty.

But you say, you own the infallible Truth of the Scriptures, and that where
you want the Evidence of Things there is ground enough for you to believe,
because God has said it. I do verily believe you, because I have a far greater
Opinion of your Sincerity and Integrity than I see reason for, as to the other
Person who pretends mightily to own the Authority of Scripture at the same time
when he undermines it. For his Words are, The Authority of God or Divine
Revelation is the Manifestation of Truth by Truth it self, to whom it is
impossible to lie, p. 16. But when he comes to state the point, how far we are
to believe upon Divine Revelation, he has these Words, Sect. 2. chapter 1. n. 10.
The natural Result of what has been said is, That to believe the Divinity of
Scripture, or the Sense of any Passage thereof without rational Proofs, and an
evident Consistency is a blameable Credulity, and a temerarian Opinion
ordinarily grounded upon an ignorant and wilful Disposition. And in the next
Chapter he says, That Revelation is not a necessitating Motive, but a mean of
Information. Not the bare Authority of him that speaks, but the clear
Conception I form of what he says is the ground of my Persuasion. And again,
Whoever reveals any thing, his words must be intelligible, and the matter
possible. This rule holds good, let God or Man be the Revealer. As for
unintelligible Relations, we can no more believe them from the Revelation of
God, than from that of Man. Sect. 2. chapter 2. n. 16. p. 42.

But what are all these things to you, who own, That where you want the
Evidence of things, the Authority of Revelation is ground enough for you to
believe. I do not impute them to you, but I must say, that he alleges no
ground for his sayings but your ground of Certainty: For in the same Page he
says, That the conceived Ideas of things are the only subjects of Believing,
Denying, Approving, and every other act of the understanding. All the
difference we see is, that he applies that to Propositions in Scripture, which
you affirmed of Propositions in general, viz. that our Certainty depends upon
the clear Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas contained in
them. But I shall do you all the Right I can, as to this matter, by showing
what Reason I had to say, that your Notions were turned to other purposes than
you intended them, and that I shall make appear from several passages in the
same Book.

1. You own the great Defects of Humane Knowledge, B. 4. chapter 3. Sect. 23.
notwithstanding the simple Ideas we have by Sensation or Reflection. And from
these things, 1. The Paucity and Imperfection of our Ideas in general; because
our Sensation and Reflection goes so little a way in respect of the vast extent
of the Universe; and the infinite Power and Wisdom of the Creator of it: So
that what we see in the intellectual and sensible World, holds no proportion to
what we see not: and whatever we can reach with our Eyes or our Thoughts of
either of them, is but a point, almost nothing in comparison of the rest. 2.
The want of Ideas which we are capable of, because although we have Ideas in
general of Bulk, Sect. 24, etc.
Figure and Motion; yet we are to seek as to the particulars of them in the
greatest part of the Bodies of the Universe; although we daily see their
Effects. And that because of the Distance and Remoteness of some, and the
Minuteness of others, and therefore we cannot come to a scientifical Knowledge
in Natural Things, much less to that of Spiritual Beings, of which we have only
some few and superficial Ideas. Sect 28.
3. Want of a discoverable Connection between those Ideas we have. Because the
Mechanical Affections of Bodies have no Affinity at all with the Ideas they
produce in us; there being no conceivable Connection between any Impulse of any
sort of Body, and any Perception of any Color or Smell which we find in our
Minds. And so the Operations of our Minds upon our Bodies are unconceiveable by
us; And the Coherence and Continuity of Parts of Matter; and the original Rules
and Communication of Motion, are such as we can discover no natural Connection
with any Ideas we have. 4. Want of finding out such intermediate Ideas, Sect.
30.
which may show us the Agreement or Disagreement they have one with another.
And this for want of due Application of Mind in acquiring, examining and due
comparing those Ideas; and by ill use of Words, which have so much perplexed
and confounded Men's understanding.


2. You own the many Failings in our Reason. Book 4. Chapter 17. Sect. 1.
By which you understand two Faculties in our Minds, viz. Sagacity and
Illation; the one finding out, and the other ordering the intermediate Ideas;
so as to discover the Connection between them. But Reason, you say, fails, Sect.
9.
where our Ideas fail us, and because of the Obscurity, Sect. 10.
Confusion or Imperfection of our Ideas, Sect. 11.
both as to Matter and our own Minds, and the Divine Operations; and for want
of intermediate Ideas; Sect. 12.
and by proceeding upon false Principles and dubious Expressions.

3. As to Propositions you own these things; 1. Those are according to Reason,
B. 4. chapter 17. 1. Sect. 23.
whose Truth we can discover, by examining and tracing those Ideas we have by
Sensation or Reflection; and by natural Deduction find to be true or probable.
2. Those are above Reason, whose Truth or Probability we cannot by Reason
derive from those Principles. 3. Those are contrary to Reason, which are
inconsistent with, or irreconcilable to our clear and distinct Ideas. 4. As to
Faith and Divine Revelation you own, B. 4. chapter 18. Sect. 2.
1. That Faith is the Assent to any proposition, not thus made out by deductions
of Reason, but upon the Credit of the Proposer, as coming immediately from God
which we call Revelation. 2. That things above Reason and not contrary to it,
are properly Matters of Faith, and to be assented to on the Authority of Divine
Revelation.



Thus far I have endeavored with all possible Brevity and Clearness to lay
down your Sense about this matter. By which it is sufficiently proved that I
had reason to say, that your Notions were carried beyond your Intention.

P. 59.
But you still seem concerned that I quote your Words, although I declare, that
they were used to other purposes than you intended them. I do confess to you,
that the Reason of it was, that I found your Notions as to Certainty by Ideas
was the main Foundation which the Author of Christianity not Mysterious went
upon; and that he had nothing which looked like Reason, if that Principle were
removed; which made me so much endeavor to show that it would not hold. And so
I suppose the Reason of my mentioning your words so often is no longer a Riddle
to you. P. 62.


I now proceed to other particulars of your Vindication.

Among other Arguments against this Principle of Certainty, I instanced in the
Being of Spiritual Substances within our selves, from the Operations of our
Minds, which we do perceive by Reflection, as Thinking, Doubting, Considering,
etc. This Argument I yielded to be very good; but that which I urged from
thence was, that it could not be from those simple Ideas of the Operations of
the Mind; because you had affirmed that it is impossible for us by the
Contemplation of our Ideas to be certain without Revelation that a material
Substance cannot think. This is a point, in my apprehension, of great
consequence, and therefore I must more strictly examine what you say in answer
to it.

P. 65.
Which is, That thinking is inconsistent with the Idea of Self Subsistence, and
therefore has a necessary Connection with a Support or Subject of Inhesion, i.
e. If there be Thinking there must be something that Thinks.

But the question is, Whether that something be a Material or Immaterial
Substance? But this Thinking Substance is in your Sense a Spirit. The question
I put is, Whether Matter can think or not? If not, then the Substance which
thinks must be Immaterial; if it can think, then there can be no evidence from
the Idea of Thinking to prove the Substance which thinks to be Immaterial.

This I take to be plain Reasoning; which you must allow, because it is about
the Agreement or Disagreement of two simple Ideas, viz. Matter and Thinking.

P. 66.
But you say, That the general Idea of Substance being the same everywhere, the
Modification of Thinking, or the Power of Thinking joined to it makes it a
Spirit, without considering what other Modification it has, as whether it has
the Modification of Solidity or not. As on the other side, Substance, which
has the Modification of Solidity, is Matter, whether it has the Modification
of Thinking or not. And therefore if I mean by a Spiritual an Immaterial
Substance, you grant that you have not proved nor upon your Principles can it
be demonstratively proved, that there is an Immaterial Substance in us that
thinks.

I have thus set down your own Words, that you may not complain I have done you
Injury. Id. p. 74.82.
But when you put in demonstratively proved, I suppose you mean in the way of
Certainty by Ideas; for concerning that our dispute is. And therefore when you
add, That you expect that I should conclude it demonstrable from Principles of
Philosophy; you must give me leave to say, this is going off from the business
before us; which is about your Principles of Certainty from Ideas; for it was
only to that purpose, that I brought this argument to prove, that we cannot
from our Ideas be certain of one of the points of greatest importance, viz.
that there is a Spiritual Substance within us; and yet the operations of our
Mind are made one of the Sources of those simple Ideas, which are made by you
the Foundation of Knowledge and Certainty. So that the point before us is,
whether this Assertion of yours, That the Power of Thinking may belong to
modified Matter, does not overthrow your Certainty by Ideas?

No, say you, that which you are certain of by the Idea is only, That there is
in us a Spiritual Substance, and that, you say, implies no more than a Thinking
Substance, i. e. that by Thinking you can prove you have a Power of Thinking,
which I believe may be demonstratively proved.

But I pray Sir, consider how this question arose, it was from your
distinguishing Spiritual and Corporeal Substances from each other; and saying
that we have as clear a Notion of a Spirit as we have of a Body. Against this I
urged, that if it be possible for Matter to think, which you assert, then from
the Idea of Thinking, we cannot prove the Certainty of a Spiritual Substance
within us, where it is plain, that a Spiritual Substance is opposed to the
Power of Matter. It is not, whether Matter so modified can think, but whether
Matter can think; and let it be modified how it will, Matter is Matter still.
But the Power of Thinking makes it a Spirit, say you. But does it cease to be
Matter or not? If not, then it is Matter still endued with a Power of Thinking;
and so our Idea can be no other, than of a Material Thinking Substance. But you
say further, That the Power of Thinking makes it a Spirit, without considering
what other Modifications it has, whether it has the Modification of Solidity
or not. That is, Although it be really a Material Substance, yet the
Modification of Thinking makes it a Spiritual Substance; for we are to go no
farther than that Modification of Thinking, and from thence we are to conclude
it to be a Spiritual Substance. But we are now enquiring not into the bare
Modification of Thinking; but whether from thence we can prove an Immaterial
Substance within us, or which is all one, a Spiritual Substance as opposed to
Corporeal, which is your own Distinction. And that I may not be thought to do
you injury, I shall produce your own Words.

By the simple Ideas we have taken from our own minds -- we are able to frame
the complex Idea of a Spirit. B. 2. Chapter 23. Sect. 15.
And thus by putting together the Ideas of Thinking, Perceiving, Liberty and
Power of moving themselves, we have as clear a Perception and Notion of
Immaterial Substances, as well as material. So that here we have two things
clear.

1. That a Spirit and Immaterial Substance are the same. 2. That from the
Operations of our Minds, we have a clear Idea of an Immaterial Substance within
us.
Sect. 17.
Again you say, That the primary Ideas we have of Body as contradistinguished to
Spirit, are the Cohesion of solid and consequently separable parts, and a Power
of communicating Motion by Impulse. These you think are the Original Ideas
proper and peculiar to Body. Here Body is contradistinguished to Spirit; and as
it is so, the Cohesion of solid and separable Parts is made one of the original
Ideas proper and peculiar to Body as distinguished from a Spiritual Substance:
How then, I pray, can a Spiritual Substance consist of solid and separable
Parts? For whatever is solid, you grant to be consequently separable. This
seems to me to confound the Ideas of Body and Spirit, which you had taken so
much care to distinguish; and so must destroy all Certainty of a Spiritual
Substance from your Ideas. For although the bare simple Idea of Thinking may be
said to be distinct from that of a solid Body; yet it is impossible from that
Idea so explained to prove a Spiritual Substance, as distinct from Body. Which
was the thing I intended to prove.

But you go on to compare the Complex Idea of Spirit and Body in these Words;
Sect. 22.
Let us compare then our Complex Idea of Spirit, without our Complex Idea of
Body. Our Idea of Bod^ is an extended solid Substance, capable of communicating
Motion by Impulse; and our Idea of our Souls is of a Substance that thinks and
has a Power of exciting Motion in Body by Will and Thought. These you think are
our Complex Ideas of Soul and Body as contradistinguished. Here you do not
speak of the bare Ideas of Thinking and Solidity; but of the different
Substances, and one is said to be a solid Substance and the other a Substance
that thinks.

I shall add one passage more to the same purpose.

The Idea we have of Spirit compared with that we have of Body, Sect. 30.
stands thus. The Substance of Spirit is unknown to us, and so is the Substance
of Body equally unknown to us. Here we have again the Substance of Spirit and
the Substance of Body distinguished from each other; and not the bare
Modifications. So that I need no body to answer you but your self. But least
such expressions should be thought a mere slip of the Pen; you are pleased
again to assert the Notion of an Immaterial knowing Substance to imply no more
of a Contradiction than an extended divisible Body. Sect. 31.


And yet after all this you confess, That you have not proved an Immaterial
Substance, P. 67.
and that it cannot be proved upon your Principles.

What is the meaning of this? I cannot think you intended to lessen the
Authority of your Book in so considerable a part of it: And I should much
rather have thought the latter Passage a slip of your Pen, but that in your
Letter you go about to defend it. Therefore I must attend your Motions in it.

P. 68.
You say, That all the great ends of Religion and Morality are secured barely by
the Immortality of the Soul without a necessary supposition that the Soul is
Immaterial.

I am of opinion, that the great ends of Religion and Morality are best secured
by the Proofs of the Immortality of the Soul from its Nature and Properties;
and which I think prove it Immaterial. I do not question whether God can give
Immortality to a Material Substance; but I say it takes off very much from the
evidence of Immortality, if it depend wholly upon God's giving that, which of
its own Nature it is not capable of. For if the Soul be a material Substance it
is really nothing but Life; or Matter put into Motion with such Organs and
Parts as are necessary to hold them together; and when Death comes, then this
Material Substance so modified is lost. God may by his Power grant a new Life;
but will any man say, God can preserve the Life of a Man when he is dead? This
is a plain Absurdity, and I think no such thing tends to preserve Religion or
Morality.

Mr. Hobbes speaks very consonantly to his own Principles (although not to
those of Religion and Morality. Leviath. chapter 34.
) For he says, That the universe being the Aggregate of all Bodies, there is
no real part of it that is not also a Body. And so he says, That Substance and
Body signify the same thing, and therefore Substance Incorporeal are Words
which destroy one another. But what then is a Spirit? That, he says, in the
proper signification of it in common Speech, is either a subtle, fluid,
invisible Body, or a Ghost, or other Idol or Phantasm of the Imagination. But
is there not an Immortal Soul in Man? The Promise of Immortality, says he, is
made to the Man and not to the Soul* and Immortal Life does not begin in Man
till the Resurrection. From whence it is plain, he looked on the Soul as
nothing but the Life; Leviath. chapter 38.
and so he says, That Soul and Life in Scripture do usually signify the same
thing. And in the Vindication of his Leviathan, Vindicat. of Leviath. p. 90, 91.
he says, That his Doctrine is, that the Soul is not a separated Substance,
but that the Man at his Resurrection shall be revived. And he answers that
place, Fear not them which kill the Body, but cannot kill the Soul; thus* Man
cannot kill a Soul, for the Man killed shall revive again. I think he might as
well have said, That Man cannot kill the Body; for that shall be revived at the
Resurrection.

But what is all this to you? I hope nothing at all. But it shows, that those
who have gone about to overthrow the Immortality of the Soul by Nature, have
not been thought to secure the great ends of Religion and Morality.

And although we think the separate State of the Soul after Death is
sufficiently revealed in Scripture, yet it creates a great difficulty in
understanding it, if the Soul be nothing but Life, or a Material Substance,
which must be dissolved when Life is ended. For if the Soul be a Material
Substance it must be made up as others are, of the Cohesion of solid and
separate Parts, how minute and invisible soever they be. And what is it which
should keep them together, when Life is gone? So that it is no easy matter to
give an account, how the Soul should be capable of Immortality, unless it be an
Immaterial Substance; and then we know the Solution of the Texture of Bodies
cannot reach the Soul being of a different Nature.

And this is no more than what the wisest and most intelligent Philosophers
have asserted, merely from the consideration of the Nature and Properties of
the Soul: as you very well know; and I need not for your sake, run into such a
Digression, (or as you call it step out of my way) any farther, then you give
occasion for it in what follows. For you tell me, P. 69
You have great Authorities to justify your using a Spiritual Substance
without excluding Materiality from it. And for this you refer me to two great
men indeed among the Romans, Cicero and Virgil. I was surprised at what you say
out of Cicero, having been no stranger to his Writings about these matters, and
I have consulted the place you refer to; where you say that he opposes Corpus
to Ignis and Anima, i. e. Breath; and that the Foundation of his distinction of
the Soul from the Body is, because it is so subtle as to be out of Sight. It is
a very easy matter to multiply Citations out of Cicero, where Spiritus and
Anima are both taken for Breath; but any one who will but read the very
beginning of his Tusculan Questions, may understand his meaning. For in the
Entrance of that Dispute he takes Animus for the Soul, and neither Anima nor
Spiritus: and he tells us, there were two opinions about it at Death. Some held
a Discessus Animi a Corpore, a departure of the Soul from the Body, others
said, that the Soul never departed, but was extinguished with Life: and the
several opinions he sets down at large, Chapter 9, 10. and then Chapter 11. he sums up
the different opinions; and says he, If it be the Heart, or Blood, or Brain;
because it is a Body, it will be extinguished with it: If it be Anima, the
Vital Breath, it will be dissipated, if it be Fire, it will be extinguished. It
is true, he distinguishes here the Vital Breath from the Body; and no one
questions such a distinction of the Animal and Vital Spirits from the grosser
parts of the Body; but all this proceeds upon the Supposition of those who held
nothing to survive after Death; but then he goes on to those who held the
Souls, when they are gone out of their Bodies, to go to Heaven as their proper
Habitation. And here he plainly supposes the Soul not to be a finer sort of
Body, but of a different Nature from the Body which it leaves. Nam Corpus
quidem, says he, quasi vas est and receptaculum Animi, C. 22. and elsewhere he
calls the Body the Prison of the Soul, C. 30. and says, That every wise Man is
glad to be dismissed out of the Bonds and Darkness of it: and his business in
the Body is secernere Animum a Corpore, to draw off the Soul from the Body;
which the Philosophers called Commentatio mortis, i. e. a Continual Exercise of
Dying; therefore, says he, Disjungamus nos a Corporibus, id est, consuescamus
mori. Is it possible now to think so great a Man looked on the Soul but as a
Modification of the Body, which must be at an end with Life? Instead of it,
there are several things very remarkable in this very Book concerning the
Immortality of Souls by Nature;

1. He extremely despises those who made the Soul a mere Mode of Matter which
was extinguished with Life; and he says, they were Plebeii Philosophi, Chapter 23.
a mean sort of Philosophers, and in another place minuti Philosophi, De Senect.
c. 23. who held there was no Sense after Death. But he represents Cato there,
as weary of the Noise and Filth of this World, and longing to go to far better
Company. O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud Divinum Animorum Concilium Coetumque
proficiscar, atque ex hac turba and colluvione discedam! Did these men look on
the Souls of Men, as mere Modifications of Matter?

2. He urges the general Consent of Nations for the Permanency of Souls after
Death. c. 16. and he affirms Nature it self de Immortalitate Animorum tacit
judicare, c. 14. And I do not think the general Consent of Mankind in this
Matter, so uncertain, or so slight an argument, as some have made it; even
since the late Discoveries: as I think it were no hard Matter to prove; but I
shall not here go out of my way to do it.

3. The most ancient Philosophers of Greece held the same opinion as he shows
from Pherecydes, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, etc. c. 16, 17, etc. and they
went upon far better Reasons than the other, as he proves at large, c. 21, 22,
23.

4. That the Bodies and Souls of Men have a different Frame and Original. Our
Bodies, he says, c. 19. are made of Terrestrial Principles; but the Souls, he
says, are of a divine Original; and if we could give an account how they were
made, we should likewise how they were dissolved, c. 14. as we may of the Parts
and Contexture of Bodies; but says he, Animorum nulla in terris origo inveniri
potest, nihil est enim in animis mixtum atque concretum, aut quod ex terra
natum atque fictum esse videatur, c. 27. So that here he plainly makes a
Difference between our Bodily Substance, and that of our Souls, which have no
bodily Texture and Composition; because there is no material Substance, which
can reach to the wonderful Faculties and Operations of the Soul; and therefore
he concludes in these words, Singularis est igitur quaedam natura atque vis
animi sejuncta ab his usitatis notisque naturis. What can express the Soul to
be of a different Substance from the Body, if these words do it not? And
presently adds, That the Mind is of a divine and Spiritual Nature and above
Material Composition as God himself is.

I hope this may give you satisfaction as to Cicero, how far he was from making
the Soul a Material Substance. And the only place you produce out of him, c.
22. proves nothing but that the Soul is Invisible, as you may see by looking
upon it again.

As to Virgil, you quote that Expression, Dum Spiritus hos regit artus; where
it is taken for the Vital Spirit; which sense I know no body questions; and so
Tully expresses life, quae Corpore and Spiritu continetur, and opposes it to a
Life of Immortal Fame, which he there speaks of, Pro Marcello, c. 9. but the
only matter in debate is, Whether they excluded any other Notion of Spirit,
which was not done, as I have made it appear concerning Cicero, and so I shall
of Virgil too.

For soon after, Aeneid 4.385. he has these Words, Et cum frigida mors Animae
seduxerit Artus,
Omnibus Vmbra locis adero, dabis improbe poenas.


Which shows that Virgil did believe the Soul to be more than a mere Vital
Spirit, and that it subsisted and acted in a separate State: And it is observed
by Servius, that Virgil uses Spiritus, Men's and Animus for the same. In Aeneid
6.726. Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus.
Men's agitat molem --


And he proves, that Virgil asserted the Immortality of Souls, and answers the
arguments against it; and as far as he could understand, he says, that our
Bodies are from the Elements and our Souls from God; and the Poets intention
was, Vt Animos immortales diceret. So that neither Cicero nor Virgil do you any
kindness in this matter, being both Assertors of the Souls Immortality by
Nature. P. 71.
If these will not do you bring me to Scripture, and say, that Solomon himself
speaks after the same manner about Man and Beast, as the one dies, so dies
the other, yea, they have all one Spirit, Eccles. 3.19. I will not dispute
about the proper Sense of the Hebrew Word, but I must about Solomon's Sense.
For although he makes Life and Death common to Man and Beast; yet he says, v.
21. The Spirit of a Man goes upward, and the Spirit of a Beast goes down to
the Earth. But you say, If the Notion of a Spirit excludes Materiality then the
Spirit of a Beast must be Immaterial, as well as that of a Man. I answer, that
although the bare Word does not prove it, yet the design of Solomon's Discourse
does, and so the going upward of the Spirit of a Man must be understood in a
very different Sense, from the going downward of the Spirit of a Beast. For he
says concerning Man, That the Spirit shall return to God that gave it, c.
12.7. To what purpose? To be dissipated in the common Air? or to be lost in the
vast Confusion of Matter? no, but he concludes his Book thus; v. 14. For God
shall bring every Work into Judgment with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil. If these be Solomon's Words, as no doubt they
were, and he were a Man of Sense, and laid his sayings together, as no doubt he
did; these last Words must interpret the foregoing, and his other sayings be
made Consonant to this. Yes, you may say, This relates to the general Judgment,
and not to the Soul's Subsistence after Death. But Solomon speaks of the Spirit
of a Man going upward at Death, and returning to God that gave it: What Sense
is there in this, if it be a Material Substance which vanishes and is dissolved
then? And if the Soul be not of it self a free, thinking Substance, I do not
see what Foundation there is in Nature for a Day of Judgment. For where there
is nothing but Matter, there is no Freedom of acting; where there is no
Liberty, there is no Choice; where there is no Choice, there is no room for
Rewards and Punishments, and consequently no Day of Judgment. But Solomon
positively concludes, there will be a Judgment to come as to good and evil
Actions in another World, and therefore he must be understood in those
Expressions, to mean a Free and Thinking, and consequently an Immaterial Spirit
in us.

P. 72.
But you urge farther, That our Savior himself opposes Spirit to Flesh and
Bones, Luke 24.39. i. e. to such a gross Compages as could be seen and felt.
The question then was, whether it were the real Body of Christ or only an
Appearance of it; and how could this be resolved better than our Savior does?
Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as you see me have.
But he calls this a Spirit. What follows? Therefore a Spirit is only an
Appearance? I do not think that is your meaning. And no body questions but the
name of Spirits is sometimes given to Apparitions. But this is far from our
case, which is, whether that real Spiritual Substance we find in our selves be
Material or not? Does a Spiritual Substance imply Matter in its Idea or not?
You cannot say it does: Then it may be Immaterial: But how come we to know
things but by their distinct Ideas? Is the Idea of Matter and Spirit distinct
or not? If not, to what purpose do we talk of Knowledge by Ideas when we cannot
so much as know Body and Spirit from each other by them?

Is it then any Absurdity to call a Spiritual Substance Immaterial? P. 73.
No, you say, You would not be thought to affirm, that Spirit never does
signify a purely Immaterial Substance; for in that Sense the Scripture
attributes the Notion of Spirit to God, and you have proved from your
Principles, that there is a Spiritual Immaterial Substance. And this you think
proves an Immaterial Substance in your way of Ideas. But of that afterward. We
are yet upon the proving an Immaterial Substance in our selves from the Ideas
we have by Sensation and Reflection. Now, I say, still this is impossible if
the Spiritual Substance in us may be material. And at last you grant, That what
I say is true, P. 74.
that it cannot upon these Principles be demonstrated. Then, say I, Your
grounds of Certainty from Ideas are plainly given up. P. 75.
But you say, it may be proved probable to the highest Degree. But that is not
the point; for it is not Probability, but Certainty, that we are promised in
this way of Ideas; and that the Foundation of our Knowledge and real Certainty
lies in them; and is it dwindled into a Probability at last? The only reason I
had to engage in this matter was a bold Assertion, that the Ideas we have by
Sensation or Reflection are the sole Matter and Foundation of all our
Reasoning: and that our Certainty lies in perceiving the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas as expressed in any Proposition; which last are your own
Words. How can we then be certain where we have no Ideas from Sensation or
Reflection to proceed by? As in the present case. I have a Mind to be resolved
whether the Soul in Man be an Immaterial Substance or not; and we are to judge
of the Truth of it by our Ideas. I ask then, What Idea you have of the Soul by
Reflection? You answer, That it is a Thinking Substance. But does this prove it
Immaterial? You answer, That you cannot be certain, but that it is very
probable. Is not this giving up the Cause of Certainty? But you say, P. 81.
You never offered it as a way of Certainty where we cannot reach Certainty.
But did you not offer to put us into the way of Certainty? What is that, but to
attain Certainty in such things, where we could not otherwise do it? And what a
strange way is this, if it fails us in some of the first Foundations of the
real Knowledge of our selves? But you say, If I dislike your way, you desire me
to show you a better way of Certainty as to these points.

I am sensible that you design herein, P. 81.
to draw me out of my way to do you a kindness; but I will so far gratify you
at this time; and to oblige you the more, I will make use of no other
Principles or Ideas, than such as I meet with in your Book; and from thence I
do not despair of proving, that we may be certain that a material Substance
cannot think.

And the method I shall proceed in, shall be to prove it, by such ways and
steps as you have directed me to, although you might not think to find them so
laid together.

1. From your general Principles as to Knowledge and Certainty. You say, That
all our Knowledge consists in the view the Mind has of its own Ideas; Book 4.
Chapter 2. Sect. 1.
which is the utmost Light and greatest Certainty, we with our Faculties and in
our way of Knowledge are capable of. Here you resolve our Knowledge and
Certainty into the view of the Ideas in our Minds; therefore by those Ideas we
may come to know the Certainty of things; not in the Frame and inward Essence
of them, as you often tell us; but by the Powers and Properties which belong to
them. Whatever, say you, be the secret and abstract Nature of Substance in
general, Book 2. chapter 23. Sect. 6.14.
all the Ideas we have of particular distinct Substances, are nothing but
several Combinations of simple Ideas And you take pains to prove, Sect. 7.
That Powers make a great part of our complex Ideas of Substances: and their
secondary Qualities are those which in most of them serve principally to
distinguish Substances one from another; Sect. 8.
which secondary Qualities, as has been shown are nothing but bare Powers. So
that our Knowledge cannot reach the inward Substance of things; and all our
Certainty of Knowledge as to them, and their Distinction from each other, must
depend on those Powers and Properties which are known to us.

One would think sometimes, that you would allow Mankind no more Knowledge than
suits with the Conveniences of Life; Sect. 12.
but this would overthrow the great design of your Book, which is to put us
into a way of real Certainty by the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas; Book 4.
Chapter 4. Sect. 18.
and where ever we perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of any of our Ideas,
there is certain Knowledge. So that here you own we may come to a Certainty of
Knowledge (which is beyond mere Probability) and that by perceiving the
Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas.

2. If we can find the Disagreement of any two Ideas upon your own Principles,
we must do those of Body and Spirit. For the Idea of Matter in general, you
say, B. 3. chapter 10. Sect. 15.
That in Truth it contains nothing but the Idea of a solid Substance, which is
everywhere the same, everywhere uniform. And that Body stands for a solid
extended figured Substance. So that Solidity, Extension and Figure are the
inseparable Properties of Bodies. And in another place you have these Words, B
2. chapter 23. Sect. 17.
The primary Ideas we have peculiar to Bodies as contradistinguished to Spirit,
are the Cohesion of solid and consequently separable Parts, and a Power of
communicating Motion by Impulse. These you think are the original Ideas proper
and peculiar to Body, for Figure is but the consequence of finite Extension.
Here we have the Idea of Body laid down by your self as contradistinguished to
Spirit. Therefore by your own confession we may perceive the Disagreement of
these two Ideas of Body and Spirit, and consequently may certainly know their
Distinction from each other by their inseparable Properties. But if it be
possible for Matter to think, then these Ideas must be confounded: Yet you
distinguish the Ideas of a Material and Immaterial Substance in these Words, B.
2. chapter 23. Sect. 15.
Putting together the Ideas of Thinking and Willing, and the Power of Motion or
Rest added to Substance, we have the Idea of a Spirit, and putting together the
Ideas of solid coherent Parts, a Power of being moved, joined with Substance,
we have the Idea of Matter. The one is as clear and distinct an Idea as the
other; the Idea of Thinking and Moving a Body being as clear and distinct
Ideas, as the Ideas of Extension, Solidity and being moved. Can any thing now
be plainer than the Disagreement of these two Ideas, by the several Properties
which belong to them? But if after all this Matter may Think, what becomes of
these clear and distinct Ideas? And yet you have th^se Words, Thus by putting
together the Ideas of Thinking. Perceiving, Liberty and Power of moving
themselves and other things, we have as clear a Perception and Notion of
Immaterial Substances as we have of Material. Here it is plain, that you make
Thinking and Perceiving to be part of the Complex Idea of an Immaterial
Substance. How is this possible, if a Material Substance be capable of Thinking
as well as an Immaterial? either therefore you must renounce your own Doctrine
of Certainty by Ideas, or you must conclude, that Matter cannot think.

3. But I urge this yet further from your Notion of Liberty and Necessity. B. 2
chapter 21. Sect. 8.
Liberty, you say, is the Idea of a Power in any Agent to do or forbear any
Action, according to the Determination or Thought of the Mind, whereby either
of them is preferred to the other. So that Liberty cannot be, where there is no
Thought, no Volition, no Wish. Sect. 13.
And again, Agents that have no Thought, no Volition at all are necessary
Agents. But you make a Power of Thinking and Liberty to be parts of the Complex
Idea of an Immaterial Substance, in the Words before cited. But what Liberty
can you conceive in mere Matter? For you grant, That Bodies can operate upon
one another only by Impulse and Motion; B. 2. chapter 8. Sect. 11.
that the Primary Qualities of Bodies which are inseparable from it, Sect 10.
are Extension, Solidity, Figure and Mobility from any Body. Now how can the
Idea of Liberty agree with these simple Ideas of Body? To be moved only by
Impulse from another Body; and from the free Determination of our own Thoughts;
are two Ideas as disagreeing with each other, as we can well imagine. But if
Matter may Think, it may have Liberty too, because you join these together; but
if it be incapable of Liberty which goes along with Thinking, how can you
imagine it should be capable of Thinking?

I argue, from your Notion of Personal Indentity, which you place in self
Consciousness. B. 2. chapter 27. Sect 9.
For you tell us, That a Person is a thinking intelligent Being that has Reason
and Reflection; and can consider it self, as it self, the same thinking thing
in different times and places; which it does only by that Consciousness, which
is inseparable from thinking, and seems to you essential to it. From whence it
follows, that if there can be no Self-consciousness in Matter, then it cannot
think, because it wants that which you say is Essential to it. It being
impossible, for any one to perceive, but he must perceive, that he does
perceive. But what is there like Self-consciousness in Matter? Or how is it
possible to apprehend that mere Body should perceive that it does perceive? For
Bodies, you say, operate only by Impulse and Motion; i. e. one Body upon
another. But how can a Body operate upon it self without Motion? Those you call
the Secondary Qualities of Bodies, are only you say, the effect of the Powers
in some Bodies upon others endued with Sense and Perception. So that the
effects of these Powers in Bodies, or of the Primary Qualities of Bulk, Site,
Figure, Motion, etc. is not upon themselves but upon other Bodies, either by
changing those Primary Qualities in them by different Site, Figure, Motion,
etc. or producing those Effects in us, or which we call Sensible Qualities. But
either of these ways there is no possibility for Matter to operate upon it self
in a way of Self-consciousness. If then every intelligent thinking Being have
this so inseparably belonging to it, that you say, It is impossible, for any
one to perceive, without perceiving that he does perceive; and it be impossible
from the Idea of Matter to make out that a mere Body can perceive that it does
perceive, I think it is more than probable in the way of Ideas that Matter
cannot think.

5. I argue, from the power of Abstracting which you make proper to a thinking
Substance. B. 2. chapter 11. Sect. 9.
This is done, say you, by considering Ideas in the Mind as separate from the
Circumstances of Time and Place. And this power of abstracting, you add, Sect.
10.
puts a perfect distinction between Man and Brutes; and is an Excellency which
the Faculties of Brutes do by no means attain to.

Letter, p. 27.
You tell me, That you did not say the chief Excellency of Mankind lies chiefly,
or any ways, in this that Brutes cannot abstract; for Brutes not being able to
do any thing, cannot be any Excellency of Mankind. But I hope it is the
Excellency of Mankind, that they are able to do what the Brutes cannot: And you
say, This puts a perfect distinction between Man and Brutes; and I had thought
in comparing Man and Brutes that which put a perfect Distinction was the chief
Excellency with respect to them. But let that be as it will; the thing I insist
upon is, the power of Abstracting following that of Thinking so closely that
you utterly deny it to Brutes; but if it may be in the power of Matter to
think, how comes it to be so impossible for such Organized Bodies as the Brutes
have to enlarge their Ideas by Abstraction? Pomponatius thinks to avoid the
Argument from Abstraction to prove the Souls Imateriality, De Immort. Animae.
c. 9.
by saying, That in the most abstract Speculation the Mind rests upon
Particulars; Universal in singulari speculatur. But this does not reach the
force of the Argument; which is not, whether the Mind has not an Eye to
Particulars, when it forms Universal Notions; but whether the power of forming
such Abstract Ideas from Particulars do not argue a Power which mere Matter can
never attain to: And all that Philosopher has said, does not amount to the
least Proof of it.

6. Lastly, I argue from the Reason you give, why God must be an Immaterial
Substance. Let. p. 139.
For these are the words in your Letter. And the Idea of an Eternal, actual,
knowing Being is perceived to have a Connection with the Idea of Immateriality,
by the Intervention of the Idea of Matter, and of its actual Division,
Divisibility and Want of Perception, etc. Here the want of Perception is owned
to be so essential to Matter, that God is therefore concluded to be Immaterial;
and this is drawn from the Idea and Essential Properties of Matter, and if it
be so Essential to it, that from thence you concluded God must be an Immaterial
Substance, I think the same Reason will hold, as to any thinking Substance.
Because the Argument is not drawn from any thing peculiar to the Divine
Perfections, but from the general Idea of Matter.

P. 73.
But after all, you tell me, That God being Omnipotent, may give to a System of
very subtle matter, Sense and Motion. Your words before were, a Power to
perceive or think; and about that, all our debate runs; P. 66.
and here again you say, That the Power of Thinking joined to Matter, makes it
a Spiritual Substance. But as to your Argument from God s Omnipotency, I
answer, That this comes to the same Debate we had with the Papists about the
Possibility of Transubstantiation. For, they never imagined, that a Body could
be present after the manner of a Spirit in an ordinary way, but that by God's
Omnipotent Power it might be made so: but our Answer to them was, That God does
not change the Essential Properties of things while the things themselves
remain in their own Nature: And that it was as repugnant for a Body to be after
the manner of a Spirit, as for a Body and Spirit to be the same. The same we
say in this Case. We do not set bounds to God's Omnipotency: For he may if he
please, change a Body into an Immaterial Substance; but we say, that while he
continues the Essential Properties of Things, it is as impossible for Matter to
think, as for a Body by Transubstantiation to be present after the manner of a
Spirit; and we are as certain of one as we are of the other. These things I
thought necessary on this occasion to be cleared, because I look on a mistake
herein to be of dangerous Consequence as to the great Ends of Religion and
Morality: which, you think, may be secured although the Soul be allowed to be a
Material Substance; but I am of a very different Opinion: For if God does not
change the Essential Properties of things, their Nature remaining: then either
it is impossible for a Material Substance to think, or it must be asserted,
that a Power of thinking is within the Essential Properties of Matter; and so
thinking will be such a Mode of Matter, as Spinoza has made it: and I am
certain you do not think, he has promoted the great Ends of Religion and
Morality.

I shall now proceed to consider the Arguments for proving a Supreme Immaterial
Substance, which you freely allow to be so. And my Design, as I said, was to
show, that the certainty of it is not placed upon any clear and distinct Ideas,
but upon the force of Reason distinct from it.

P. 87.
To this you answer, That Knowledge and Certainty in your Opinion, lies in the
Preception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, such as they are, and not
always in having perfectly clear and distinct Ideas. But those who offer at
clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty than you do; and speak
more agreeably to your original grounds of Certainty. P. 88.
For your Relative Idea, which you here run to again is no certainty at all
from the Idea, but from the plain Evidence of Reason, that Accidents cannot
support themselves.

I pass over all which I think I have sufficiently answered already; as when
you spend so many Pages about my using the Plural Number when your words are
only mentioned, etc. But I shall pass over nothing which may seem to an
indifferent Reader to require any farther Consideration.

P. 101.
Whether you took this way of Ideas from the Modern Philosopher mentioned by
you, is not at all material; but I intended no Reflection upon you in it (for
that you mean by my commending you as a Scholar of so great a Master) I never
meant to take from you the Honor of your own Inventions; P. 103.
and I do believe you when you say, That you wrote from your own Thoughts, and
the Ideas you had there. But many things may seem New to one that converses
only with his own Thoughts, which really are not so; as he may find when he
looks into the Thoughts of other Men which appear in their Books. And
therefore, although I have a just Esteem for the Invention of such who can spin
Volumes barely out of their own Thoughts; yet I am apt to think they would
oblige the World more, if after they have thought so much themselves, they
would examine what thoughts others have had before them concerning the same
things, that so, those may not be thought their own Inventions, which are
common to themselves and others. If a man should try all the Magnetical
Experiments himself, and publish them as his own Thoughts, he might take
himself to be the Inventor of them; but he that examines and compares them with
what Gilbert and others have done before him, will not diminish the Praise of
his Diligence, but may wish he had compared his Thoughts with other Men's, by
which the World would receive greater Advantage, although he lost the Honor of
being an Original.

P. 106.
The Matter of Certainty, you say, one cannot employ too many Thoughts about,
viz. as to the finding the true Grounds of it, or wherein it is placed. This I
was led to consider, by our Unitarians placing it in clear and distinct Ideas;
and therefore rejecting the Mysteries of Faith, because they could not have
clear and distinct Ideas of them. And one wrote purposely to show that we were
not to believe any Mysteries in the Gospel, because all our Certainty depended
upon the Preception of the Agreement or Disagreement of those simple Ideas
which we have by Sensation or Reflection. Now if these Principles of Certainty
hold good as to all Propositions we can have no Certainty of Faith, where we
cannot perceive the Connection of the Ideas contained in them. I own that you
say, That Faith is an Assent to any Proposition not made out by any Deductions
of Reason, but upon the Credit of the Proposer. But this does not clear the
matter; for, is Faith an Unreasonable Act? Is it not an Assent to a
Proposition? Then, if all certainty in Acts of Reason be derived from the
perceiving the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas contained in it, either
there can be no Certainty of the Reasonable Act of Faith, or the Grounds of
Certainty must be laid some other way. But you say, Where you want Evidence of
things there is yet Ground enough for you to believe because God has said it.
Which does not yet remove the Difficulty, from the true Ground of Certainty;
for say they, Revelation is but a means of Information; and God discovers by
that such Propositions, which we could not have found out without Revelation;
but wherever Propositions are offered to our Understandings, we must judge of
them by our Perception of the Agreement and Disagreement of the Ideas contained
in them. And Faith does not overthrow Nature: If therefore the Nature of
Certainty lies herein we cannot be certain without it.

Is it not enough for you to disown the Consequence, but to show that it does
not follow from your Principles of Certainty: But of this I have spoken
already, and I love not Repetitions. I only take notice, that you Assert and
hold to the same. P. 107.
I stick to my own plain way of Certainty by Ideas. And so do those who reject
the Mysteries of Faith, because not agreeable to their Ideas, and think they
proceed upon your Grounds.

But you say, That according to my Rules you know not where to place Certainty;
Ib.
for in the Account I give of Des Carts, I have these words concerning him.
The first thing he found any Certainty in, was his own Existence, which he
founded upon the Perception of the Acts of his Mind. From hence he proceeded to
enquire how he came by this Certainty, and he resolved it into this, that he
had a clear and distinct Preception of it. And from hence he formed his general
Rule, that what he had a clear and distinct Perception of was true. Which in
Reason ought to go on farther, than where there is the like Degree of Evidence;
for the Certainty was not grounded on the clearness of the Perception, but on
the plainness of the Evidence. Which is of that nature that the very doubting
of it proves it, since it is impossible that any thing should doubt or question
its own being that had it not. So that here it is not the clearness of the
Idea, but an immediate Act of Perception, which is the true ground of
Certainty. And this cannot extend to things without our selves, of which we can
have no other Perception, than what is caused by the Impression of outward
Objects. But whether we are to judge according to those Impressions does not
depend on the Ideas themselves, but upon the Exercise of our Judgment and
Reason about them, which put the difference between true and false, and
adequate and inadequate Ideas, so that our Certainty is not from the Ideas
themselves, but from the Evidence of Reason, that those Ideas are true and
just, and consequently, that we may build our Certainty upon them.

These I acknowledge to be my words; and yet I see no Reason why I may not
stick to them. P. 107.
But you say, That I have placed the Grounds of Certainty of our own Existence,
sometimes in the plainness of Evidence, in opposition to the clearness of
Perception; sometimes in the immediate act of Perception in opposition to the
clearness of the Idea; and the certainty of other things without us in the
Evidence of Reason, that these Ideas are true and just in opposition to the
Ideas themselves; so that such is your Dullness you cannot by these Rules tell,
where to place Certainty.

But all these Mists will easily be scattered, if you set your self a little to
consider the Design of my Discourse; which was not, to lay down Rules of
Certainty, but to show that the Grounds of Certainty from clear and distinct
Ideas were not well laid at first by Des Carts himself. Because he deduced his
Rule as to Certainty of other things, from the Evidence he had as to his own
Existence, which he had both from immediate Perception and uncontrollable
Evidence, when even the Doubting of it necessarily proved it. But the main
Question was, whether this would reach to other things without us: Yes said he,
the Rule will hold, wherever there are clear and distinct Ideas. But I say
the Certainty does not depend upon the Idea but upon inward Perception and the
Evidence founded upon it; and we have not the same as to External Objects: For
we have no inward Perception of them, nor any Evidence that results from our
own Beings; therefore the Rule of Certainty is carried beyond the true Ground
of it. I do not oppose in the former Case the plainness of the Evidence to the
clearness of the Perception; but I suppose them both as to our own Existence. I
say indeed after, that it is not the clearness of the Idea, but an immediate
act of Perception which is the true Ground of Certainty as to our own
Existence; but there I take Idea as Des Carts did, for the clear and distinct
Perception of our Minds, which might reach to other Objects as well as our
selves; and such an Idea I deny is the Ground of Certainty as to our own
Beings, which is founded on an immediate Act of Perception. And when they prove
this as to such outward Objects, which we have the Ideas of, they may then
carry the Rule so far; but I say the Case is vastly different, as to a clear
Perception we have from our own Acts, and that which we have as the Impressions
from outward Objects; in the former Case we have such an Evidence, as it is
impossible to doubt of, but the very doubting must prove it: Is it the same as
to the Ideas of External Objects? And as to these I do not deny, but we may
come to a Certainty: but I say, it is not from the Ideas, which may be true or
false, adequate or inadequate, and whether we may be certain of them or not,
depends upon the Exercise of our Reason and Judgment about them. So that I
found the Certainty of Ideas upon Reason, and not Reason upon the Certainty of
Ideas.

And so I come more closely to consider the Argument from the Idea as to the
Proof of a Supreme Immaterial Substance.

If our Certainty did arise from clear and distinct Ideas then it must hold,
where we have a clear and distinct Idea, as it is confessed we have concerning
God. But this Argument from the Idea will not be allowed in this Case; it is
denied by others plainly; but I do not say, that it is denied by you, but that
it is made a doubtful thing. Which comes to the same, in the point of
Certainty: and so the force of my Argument does by no means fail. P. 110


P. 113.
But you say, That you intended by your words not to deny that the Idea of a
most perfect Being does prove a God, but to blame those who take it for the
only proof, and endeavor to invalidate all others. For the Belief of a God
being the Foundation of all Religion and genuine Morality you thought no
Arguments that are made use of to work the Persuasion of a God into men's Minds
should be invalidated, which you grant is of very ill Consequence. P. 114.


Here you must give me leave to ask you, what you think of the universal
Consent of Mankind, as to the Being of God? Has not this been made use of, as
an Argument not only by Christians, but by the wisest and greatest Men among
the Heathens? And what then would you think of one who should go about to
invalidate this Argument? And that by proving, that it has been discovered in
these latter Ages by Navigation, that there are whole Nations at the Bay of
Soldania, in Brasil, in the Caribbe Islands, and Paraquaria, among whom there
was found no Notion of a God, And even the Author of the Essay of Human
Understanding has done this. B. 1. Chapter 4 Sect 8.


This cannot be thought a mere slip of the Pen. For men do not quote Authors so
punctually then. But if it would not be thought stepping too much out of my
way, I think I could prove that these Instances are very ill chosen, because
either they were taken from such as were not sufficiently acquainted with the
People and Language of the Country; or that their Testimony is contradicted by
those who have been longer among them and understood them better; or lastly
that the account given of them makes them not fit to be a standard for the
Sense of Mankind, being a People so strangely bereft of common Sense, that they
can hardly be reckoned among Mankind, as appears by the best accounts both of
the Cafres of Soldania, and the Caiguae of Paraquaria.

But this would be too much a Digression in this place. I return therefore to
the argument for proving the Existence of God; and you may plead for your self
that your design was only to prove, That there is no Innate Idea of a God. But
does not this however take off from the force of an Argument some have used to
persuade Men that there is a God? I meddle not with Innate Ideas; but have not
some Persons of Note, in these Matters, used the Argument from the Mark and
Character of God imprinted on the Minds of Men to prove his Being? And have you
not set your self to disprove it? Chapter 4. Sect. 12.


But I leave this, and come to the argument from the Idea of God, concerning
which you say, P. 119.
That though the Complex Idea for which the Word God (whether containing in it
the Idea of necessary Existence or no, for the case is the same) will not prove
the real Existence of a Being answering that Idea, any more than any other Idea
in any ones mind will prove the real Existence of any real Being answering that
Idea, yet you conceive it does not hence follow, but that there may be other
Ideas by which the Being of God may be proved.

And afterward you offer to show that your Proof of a Deity is all grounded on
Ideas, P. 123. P. 125. P. 121.
i. e. from the Ideas of our selves, as we are thinking Beings. But you
confess, that you think, that the argument from the Idea will not hold, but
however you will not give up the argument from Ideas. Against which I urged
your own argument, That from the Consideration of what we find in our selves
and in our Constitutions, our Reason leads us to the Knowledge of this certain
and evident Truth, that there is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing
Being. All which, I said, I did readily yield; but we see plainly, the
Certainty is not placed in the Idea, but in good and sound Reason from the
Consideration of our selves and our Constitutions. To which you reply, P. 120
That you never thought the Consideration of our selves and our Constitutions
excluded the Consideration of the Idea of Being or of Thinking, two of the
Ideas that make a part of the Complex Idea a Man has of himself. But is the
Reason you speak of, which leads us from thence to the Knowledge of an eternal,
most powerful, and most knowing Being, con^ained in the Complex Idea of a Man
or not? A Complex Idea is made up of simple Ideas, all simple Ideas come in by
Sensation or Reflection; and upon comparing these simple Ideas our Certainty
you say is sounded. What simple Ideas then are there in Man, upon which you
ground the Certainty of this Proposition, That there is a God? I grant you,
that there is a Certainty grounded upon our Beings and the Frame of our
Natures; but this I still say, is a Certainty of Reason and not of Ideas

P. 128.
You say, You do not well understand what I mean by being not placed in the
Idea; for you see no such Opposition, but that Ideas and sound Reason may stand
together* i. e. in Reason rightly managing those Ideas so as to produce
Evidence by them. But what need all this great noise about Ideas and Certainty,
true and real Certainty by Ideas: if after all, it comes only to this, that our
Ideas only represent to us such things, from whence we bring arguments to prove
the Truth of things? But the World has been strangely amuzed with Ideas of
late, and we have been told, that strange things might be done by the help of
Ideas, and yet these Ideas at last come to be only common Notions of things,
which we must make use of in our Reasoning. P. 127.
You say, in that Chapter about the Existence of God, you thought it most
proper to express your self in the most usual and familiar way, by common Words
and Expressions. I would you had done so quite through your Book; for then you
had never given that Occasion to the Enemies of our Faith to take up your new
way of Ideas, as an effectual Battery (as they imagined) against the Mysteries
of the Christian Faith. But you might have enjoyed the satisfaction of your
Ideas long enough, before I had taken notice of them, unless I had found them
employed in doing Mischief.

But at last you tell me, P. 132.
That whether I will call it placing the Certainty in the Idea, or placing the
Certainty in Reason; or if I will say, it is not the Idea that gives us the
Argument, but the Argument, it is indifferent to you. And if you mean no more
by your Certainty from Ideas, but a Certainty from Reason, I am not such an
unreasonable Man to disagree with you.

The next Argument for the Existence of God stands thus, as I have summed it up.

We find in our selves Perception and Knowledge. So that there is some Knowing,
Intelligent Being in the World. And there must have been a Knowing Being from
Eternity, or an Unknowing; for something must have been from Eternity: but if
an Unknowing, then it is impossible there ever should have been any Knowledge,
it being as impossible for a thing without Knowledge to produce it, as that a
Triangle should make three Angles bigger than two right ones.

To which I added, that allowing the Argument to be good, yet it is not taken
from the Idea, but from Principles of true Reason, as that no Man can doubt his
own Perception; that every thing (we see) must have a Cause; that this Cause
must either have Knowledge or not; if it have, the point is gained; if it has
not, nothing can produce nothing, and consequently a not knowing Being cannot
produce a Knowing.

In your Answer to this, I must first take notice of your Exception to that
Expression, Allowing the Argument to be Good; P. 145.
which you say, seems to imply that I thought the Argument not to be Good,
which was very far from my meaning. For I had said before, That you brought
very good Arguments to prove the Existence of a God in that Chapter: and
afterward, That I was far from weakening the force of your Arguments. And so I
hope that Exception is removed.

You except not, P. 136.
you say, against my Arguments or Principles of Reason: but you think still, P.
137.
this is an Argument taken from Ideas: if you will think so, I cannot help it.
But you endeavor to show, That the very Principles you allow are founded upon
Ideas: As that a man cannot doubt of his own Perception; This, you say, is by
perceiving the necessary Agreement of the two Ideas of Perception and
Self-Consciousness. But I rather think, it is from that Self-Evidence which
attends the immediate Perception of our own Acts, which is so great, Cum enim
duo sint genera rerum quae sciuntur, unum earum quae per sensus corporis
percipit animus, alterum earum quae per scipsum* multa illi Philosophi
garrierunt contra corporis sensus; animi autem quasdam firmissimas per seipsum
perceptiones rerum verarum, quale est illud, Scio me vivere, nequaquam in
dubium vocare potuerunt. De Trin. l. 15. c. 12.
that as S. Augustine observes, the Academicks had nothing to say against that
kind of Certainty, but only against that which arose from things conveyed by
our Senses to our Mind.

The next Principle that every thing must have a Cause, must be understood of
the Matter treated of, i. e. the things we see and perceive in the World. You
say, It is a true Principle that every thing that has a Beginning must have a
Cause, because by contemplating our Ideas we find that the Idea of Beginning is
connected with the Idea of some Operation; and that with the Idea of something
operating which we call a Cause, and so the Beginning to be, is perceived to
agree with the Idea of a Cause, as is expressed in the Proposition. Is not here
a great ado to make a thing plain by Ideas, which was plainer without them? For
is not any Man who understands the meaning of plain Words satisfied that
nothing can produce it self? or, That what is not cannot make it self to be?
And so the evidence does not depend on the Agreement of the Ideas of Beginning,
and Operation, and Cause; but upon the Repugnancy of the contrary Supposition.
As in that Principle, That it is impossible for a thing to be and not to be at
the same time: If you say, that this depends upon the Disagreement of the Ideas
of Not-Being and Being, it will be to little purpose for me to say any more
about it.

But there is one thing which deserves to be considered; P. 139.
which is the Connection between the Idea of an Eternal, Actual, Knowing Being
with the Idea of Immateriality. This was the thing I looked for. And by what
means now does this Connection between these two Ideas appear? By the help of an
Intermediate Idea. What is that? Even the Idea of Matter. How so? The Idea of
Matter you tell us, implies its Actual Division, Divisibility, and want of
Perception, etc. which are the Arguments you use in this Proof. Are they so
indeed? And will not the same Ideas prove our Souls to be Immaterial? If want
of Perception be in the very Idea of Matter, how can Matter be made capable of
Perceiving? But I find you do not always attend to the Agreement or
Disagreement of your own Ideas. But of this before.

I proceed to the last Argument I produced to show, that your Proofs of the
Existence of God does not depend upon Ideas. And the Substance of it I thus put
together. If we suppose nothing to be first, Matter can never begin to be; is
bare Matter without Motion be Eternal, Motion can never begin to be; if Matter
and Motion be supposed Eternal, Thought can never begin to be. For if Matter
could produce Thought, then Thought must be in the Power of Matter; and if it
be in Matter as such, it must be the inseparable Property of all Matter, which
is contrary to the Sense and Experience of Mankind. If only some Parts of
Matter have a Power of Thinking, how comes so great a difference in the
Properties of the same Matter? What Disposition of Matter is required to
Thinking? And from whence comes it? Of which no account can be given in Reason.
This I took to be the Force of your Argument, which I said, I was far from
designing to weaken: Only I observed that the Certainty of it is not placed
upon clear and distinct Ideas, but upon Reason distinct from it; which was the
Thing I intended to prove.

But you say, P. 142
You do not see but the same proof may be placed upon clear and distinct Ideas,
and upon Reason too. I hope this matter is made a little clearer to you; having
so fully showed to you before, that in the way of Ideas you can come to no
Certainty about any Substance, but by Reason as it is distinct from the Ideas;
i. e. as to Material Substances that your Certainty is resolved into this
Principle of Reason, that Accidents cannot subsist without a Substratum.

As to Spiritual Substance in us, that depends on two things, 1. That Thinking
is only a Mode, and must suppose a Substance. 2. That Matter cannot think, and
therefore it must be an Immaterial Substance; which I have proved from your own
Principles.


As to a Supreme Immaterial Substance, the evidence depends upon this Reason,
that Matter and Motion cannot produce Thought; and therefore an Eternal
Thinking Being must be Immaterial. And that Matter and Motion cannot produce
Thought, is proved by this Reason, that either it must be an inseparable
Property of Matter; or some account in Reason must be given why some part of
Matter should think and not others. And does not all this proceed upon Reason
as distinct from Ideas?

And when I said, That the Certainty of it, i. e. the Argument is not placed on
clear and distinct Ideas, but upon the force of Reason distinct from it, I
meant the Certainty from ideas, although it were not so clearly expressed as it
might have been; but here I observe you call for the Plural Number, which you
are so offended with in other Parts of your Letter.

The next thing I undertook to show was, that we can have no clear and distinct
Idea of Nature and Person from Sensation or Reflection. Here you spend many
Pages to show that this does not concern you. Let it be so. But it concerns the
Matter I was upon; which was to show that we must have Ideas of these things
which we cannot come to by Sensation or Reflection.

My words are, I grant that by Sensation or Reflection we come to know the
Powers and Properties of Things. But our Reason is satisfied, that there must
be something beyond these, because it is impossible that they should subsist by
themselves. So that the Nature of things properly belongs to our Reason, and
not to mere Ideas. Still you are at it, P. 157.
That you can find no Opposition between Ideas and Reason: but Ideas are the
Objects of the Understanding, and Understanding is one of the Faculties
employed about them. No doubt of it. But you might easily see that by Reason, I
understood, Principles of Reason, allowed by Mankind. Which I think are very
different from Ideas. But I perceive Reason in this Sense is a thing you have
no Idea of, or one as obscure as that of Substance. But if you set aside these
common Principles of Reason, your Ideas will signify very little; and will
like Accidents want a Substratum to support them.

But your Notion of Nature and Person deserves to be more thoroughly considered.
Therefore to proceed more clearly in a debate of this Consequence with respect
to the Doctrine of the Trinity (whatever you pretend to the contrary) I shall
first set down your Notions of Nature and Person from your own Words, and then
enter upon the Examination of them.

P. 165.
As to Nature, you tell me in short it is this, That it is a Collection of
several Ideas combined into one Complex Abstract Idea. Which when they are
found united in any Individual Existing, though joined in that Existence with
several other Ideas, that Individual is truly said to have the Nature of a Man,
or the Nature of Man to be in him: for as much as all these simple Ideas are
found united in him, which answer the Complex Abstract Idea to which the
specific name Man is given by any one; which Abstract Specific Idea keeps the
same, when he applies the Specific Name standing for it, to distinct
Individuals, i. e. no body changes his Idea of a Man, when he says, Peter is a
Man, from that Idea which he makes the Name Man to stand for, when he makes
John a Man.

P. 216.
As to Person in the way of Ideas, you tell us, That the Word Person in it self
signifies nothing, and so no Idea belonging to it, nothing can be said to be
the true Idea of it; but when any Language appropriates it to any Idea, then
that is the true Idea of a Person and so of Nature. These are therefore the
signs of two Ideas they are put to stand for; P. 217.
and by enumeration all the simple Ideas that are contained in the Complex Idea
that each of them is made to stand for; we shall immediately see the whole
difference that is between them.

After which, you conclude, That you must content your self with this condemned
way of Ideas, and despair of ever attaining any Knowledge by any other than
that, or farther than that will lead you to it.

But this must not hinder me from enquiring a little more strictly into these
Notions of Nature and Person, for if these hold, I do not see how it is
possible to defend the Doctrine of the Trinity. For if these terms really
signify nothing in themselves, but are only Abstract and Complex Ideas, which
the common use of Language has appropriated to be the signs of two Ideas; then
it is plain, that they are only Notions of the Mind, as all Abstracted and
Complex Ideas are; and so one Nature and three Persons can be no more.

We must therefore examine what your Notion is, of Abstracted and Complex
Ideas, and how it can be applied to Nature and Person: and whether they are
only signs of such Ideas as People have agreed to signify by them.

To explain this, I must give an account, as well as I can, from your self, how
these Abstracted and Complex Ideas come to be formed in our Minds, and what is
implied in them. ^ 2. chapter 1. Sect. 5.
The Understanding, you say, seems to you not to have the least glimmering of
any Ideas which it has not by Sensation or Reflection. These and their several
Modes and the Compositions made out of them, we shall find contain our whole
stock of Ideas; and that we have nothing in our Minds which did not come in one
of these two ways. Chapter 2. Sect. 1. Sect. 2.
From hence you consider the several sorts of Ideas, some Simple and some
Complex. The simple Ideas are the Materials of all our Knowledge; and when the
Understanding is once stored with these simple Ideas, it has the Power to
repeat, compare and unite them, even to an almost infinite variety, and so can
make at pleasure new Complex Ideas: But no understanding can make one new
simple Idea, not taken in by the ways before mentioned, nor can it destroy
those that are there. After you have given an account of the simple Ideas both
ways, you come to the Faculty of Discerning in our Minds, and there you reckon
up, Chapter 11.
Distinguishing Ideas, Comparing, Compounding and Abstracting.

The Reason of Abstraction, Sect. 9
you say, is to have one general Name for many Particulars, or else Names would
be endless. Which Abstraction is performed by separating the Ideas of
particular Objects from the Circumstances of real Existence, as Time, Place,
etc. Complex Ideas are those simple Ideas which the Mind unites as one Idea.
Chapter 12. Sect. 1.
But still it is confined to those simple Ideas which it received by Sensation
or Reflection, which are the ultimate Materials of all its Compositions.

Of these you reckon, Modes, Sect. 3.
Substances and Relations.

The Ideas of Substances are such Combinations of simple Ideas, Sect. 6
as are taken to represent particular things subsisting by themselves. And
these are of two sorts, one of single Substances as they exist separately, as
of a Man, etc. the other of several of these put together as an Army of Men.

In your Chapter of Complex Ideas of Substances* Ch ^^. Sect. 3.
you affirm the Ideas of particular Substances to be made by a Combination of
simple Ideas: and again, that it is by such Combination of simple Ideas as
co-exist in some unknown cause of their Union. Sect. 6, 14


Sect. 33.
That the Complex Ideas we have of God and separate Spirits are made up of the
simple Ideas we have by Reflection; by enlarging the Ideas we find in our
selves.

B 3. chapter 3. Sect. 2.
In your 3d Book you consider general Terms. And the Reason of them, you say is
because it is beyond the power of Human Capacity to frame and retain distinct
Ideas of all Particulars. And these are made by way of Abstraction from
Circumstances of Time and Place. After which you tell us, Sect. 6.
That General Natures are nothing but Abstract Ideas; and the whole Mystery of
Genera and Species, Sect. 9.
which make such a noise in the Schools, is nothing else but Abstract Ideas
with Names annexed to them. From whence, Sect. 11.
you say, it is plain, that General and Universal, belong not to the real
Existence of Things, but are the Inventions and Creatures of the Understanding;
made by it for its own use and concern only Signs whether Words or Ideas. Sect.
12.
And the Abstract Idea and the Essence of the Species or Genus of the same
thing: Sect. 14.
and every distinct, abstract Idea is a distinct Essence.

But then you distinguish the Real and Nominal Essence. Sect. 15.
The former is the Real, Internal Constitution of particular things; and the
Nominal is the Abstract Idea. But there is so near a Connection between them
that the Name cannot be attributed to any particular Being, Sect. 16.
but what has this Essence, whereby it answers that Abstract Idea, whereof that
Name is the Sign.

These things you repeat and enlarge upon in several other places, but this I
think is the substance of what you say upon this matter: For I would not
willingly mistake or mis-represent your Meaning.

The Question now between us comes to this, Whether the common Nature or
Essence of Things lies only in an Abstract Idea, or a General Name, and the
Real Essence consists only in particular Beings from which that Name is
abstracted?

The Question is not, Whether in forming the Notion of Common Nature, the Mind
does not abstract from the Circumstances of particular Beings? But it is
whether there be not an Antecedent Foundation in the Nature of things upon
which we form this Abstract Idea? For it there be, then it cannot be called an
universal Name only: or a mere sign of an Idea, which we have formed from
putting many simple Ideas together, which Name belongs to all of such a sort,
as have those simple Ideas united together. I know not how it comes to pass,
that a Man spinning Books out of his own Thoughts should hit so luckily upon
the Thoughts of another Man: I do not mean now, about clear and distinct Ideas,
but about this Point of universal Names. Leviath. chapter 4.
For Mr. Hobbs in his Chapter of Speech, tell us, That Names were to serve for
Marks or Notes of Remembrance, and therefore were called Signs. Of these Names,
some are proper and singular to one thing, as Peter, John, this Man, this Tree;
some are common to many things, as Man, Horse, Tree, in respect of all which it
is called an Universal, there being nothing in the World Universal but Names;
for the things named, are every one of them individual and singular.

One universal Name is imposed on many things, for their similitude in some
Quality or other Accident; and whereas a proper Name brings to mind one thing
only Vniversals recall any one of those many.

And of Vniversals some are of more, or less Extent, the larger comprehending
the less large, and some of equal extent, etc.

This is enough to let you see that these Notions are not so peculiar but that
another Person, from his own Thoughts too, had said much the same things.

But whoever said or thought them first, we must examine how reasonable these
Thoughts are.

I know no Body that thinks now-adays, that Vniversals exist any where by
themselves; but I do think, that there is a difference to be made between that
and making them mere Names, or signs of Ideas.

I. And the Reasons I go upon are these. In the first place, we are agreed,
that there is a supreme immaterial most perfect Being; whose Essential
Attributes do not depend upon our Arbitrary Ideas; nor any Names or Signs of
Honor we give him, nor upon the mere Enlarging the Ideas of our own
Perfections; or such as we account to be so in our selves: for we attribute
those to God which we are not capable of, as Eternity or Necessary Existence,
Immutability, etc. Herein, we take up no Complex Ideas from several
Individuals; but we form a true Idea of a Divine Essence, from such Attributes
as are Essential to an infinitely perfect Being, which being Infinite is
thereby, Incomprehensible by us. And so you own, that the great God of whom and
from whom are all things is incomprehensibly Infinite. B. 2. chapter 17. Sect. 1.
And that God is infinitely beyond the reach of our narrow Capacities.

II. In the next place, we look on this Supreme Being, as the wise Creator of
all things, who has ordered the several Sorts and Ranks of Beings in the World
according to his own Eternal Wisdom; and has given them all such Properties as
himself thought fit, whereby they are really and essentially distinguished from
one another; as appears by Mankind, and Brutes, and Plants. And no man that
ever imploys his own Thoughts can think, that these are distinguished from each
other, only by an Act of our Minds.

III. Among these it is evident, that there are some things, wherein they
agree; and some wherein they differ. They all agree in being real, created
Beings, and having a sort of Life belonging to them. But they differ, that some
have Sense, which others have not; and some have Reason and Understanding which
others want. And all this, is so plain and evident, that one might question,
whether those had Understanding or not, who could think the difference of these
from each others was not in their Natures, but only depended on the several
Names that we call them by.

IV. Among the Individuals of the same kind, there is an Agreement in the same
Essential Properties; as all Men in being Rational Creatures; and there is a
Real Difference from each other in the several Accidents that belong to them;
as to Time, Place, Qualities, Relations, etc. And no Man in his Senses can call
this in question. For his most plain and simple Ideas will inform him of it.

V. The Question now is, Whether that wherein they do all agree, be a mere
Universal Name and Abstract Idea or not.

It is certain, that what God created is no mere Name or Idea: It is certain,
that God created not only Individuals but the several Kinds, with the
Differences, which they have from each other; it is certain, that these
Differences do not lie in mere Names or Ideas: How comes it then not to be
certain that there is a Real Common Essence or Nature in the Individuals of the
same kind?

But it comes not to us in the way of Ideas. If it be so, the way of Ideas and
Reason are two different ways; and I shall never forsake one for the other,
unless I could see better Reason for it; and even then I should not; but adhere
to Reason still.

But how does it appear by Reason, that Nature is any thing else but a
Collection of several Ideas combined into one Complex Abstract Idea.

That will be done by considering, 1. What these Ideas are, which are so
collected into a Complex Idea; which is called Nature. 2. What that Essence is
which is implied in this Idea; whether it be a Real or only a Nominal Essence.


1. What these Ideas are, of which this Complex Idea of Nature consists; and
they are said to be, the simple Ideas of particular Substances united together,
without the Circumstances of Time and Place. But those simple Ideas may be
considered two ways.

1. With respect to the Qualities of things, and these Ideas are said to be
true and adequate; but they go no farther than the Qualities; which reaches
only to that Sense of Nature, as it is taken for Properties. 2. With respect to
the Subject of them, which is the Nature or Substance that supports them, and
of this you confess we have only imperfect and inadequate Ideas.
As they are true and adequate; and so they are not the true Representations of
Things without us, but of the Effects of such Powers in them as produce
Impressions in us; which are those you call Secondary Qualities. P. 169
And in that Sense I take your words. And of these I said, that we can
understand nothing really by them but the Effects they have upon us; i. e. the
Powers and not the Ideas. The Ideas are the Impressions on our Minds; and by
these we can understand nothing but the Effects which the Powers in outward
Objects have upon us, and consequently not the Nature of them. This I take to
be plain Sense.

To this you Answer Two things; P. 170.
1. That we certainly know to distinguish things by Ideas, supposing them
nothing but Effects produced in us by these Powers, as if they were
Representations. P. 171.
2. That we have certainly as much pleasure and delight by those Ideas, one way
as the other.


Granting all this to be true, what is it to the Complex Idea of Nature, which
arises from these simple Ideas? Nature is a Collection of several Ideas
combined into one Complex Abstract Idea. But the simple Ideas acquaint us not
with the Nature of the Objects, but only with the Powers which are in them; by
the help of Bulk, Size, Figure and Motion; which you call the Primary
Qualities. B. 2. chapter 8. Sect. 10, 15, 17, 23.
Now these, you say, are really in the things themselves; whether the Senses
perceive them or not; and the Ideas of these are the true Resemblances of what
exists in the Objects; i. e. that by the Impressions we find in our selves, we
are certain that there are Bodies of a determinate Bulk, Size, Figure and
Motion. And this is all, we can by these simple Ideas come to, as the Nature of
Corporeal Substances. But suppose one should ask how we can understand, the
Nature of these Operations of the Primary Qualities in producing the Secondary;
we are soon answered, Sect. 25.
that there is no conceivable Connection between them and that Reason cannot
show how Bodies by their Bulk, Figure and Motion should produce in the Mind,
the Ideas of Blue, Yellow, etc. And so we are extremely helped by these simple
Ideas in understanding the Nature of any particular Substance. For the sensible
Qualities in us are only the Effects of certain Powers in the Objects, caused
by their Bulk, Size, Figure and Motion; but if we ask how they are produced, we
are plainly told, that our Reason by these simple Ideas can reach to no
knowledge of it. And so we are left in as much Ignorance, as ever as to the
Manner how Things without us produce Ideas in us.

But say you, P. 174.
By these simple Ideas, we can as certainly distinguish the Beings wherein
those Powers are, and receive as certain Advantages from them, as if those
simple Ideas were Resemblances.

As to Advantages from them, that is quite out of our Enquiry; which is
concerning the Idea of Nature? as it is a Complexion of simple Ideas; and all
that it amounts to is, that by these simple Ideas, we understand the Distinct
Powers in several Bodies to produce Impressions in our Minds; and by the
secondary Qualities we find in our selves, we are certain of the primary
Qualities in Bodies, from their different Bulk, Size, Figure and Motion. But
still we have nothing but an Idea of Qualities, which goes no farther than the
Essential Properties; but the Idea of Nature goes farther and implies that
Being wherein those Qualities are; and that I said, which is the subject of
Powers and Properties is the Nature or Substance of it; which in this respect
is the same. Have we any Adequate Idea of this?

To this you say:

P. 176.
2. That all Ideas of Substances, which are referred to Real Essences are in
that respect Inadequate. This is what your self own to be your Sense; and is as
much as I desire. For, I pray consider what a fine Abstract Complex Idea you
have given us of Nature. Our Adequate Ideas go no farther than Qualities, and
if we enquire into the Real Essence, or Substance that supports them, we are
told that they are Inadequate; and consequently we can have no true Notion or
Idea at all of it.

But you say farther, P. 178.
that you do not affirm, That Abstract Ideas are only general Names. For you
assert a Real Essence in things; the internal unknown Constitution is the Real
Essence; and the Abstract Idea is the Nominal Essence.

The former you tell me, P. 181.
you do readily own; viz. That Essence which is in particular Substances; but
the Question before us is, Whether that which is in more Individuals than one,
be a Real or only a Nominal Essence.

2. And this is that, which we are next to Examine. To clear this, I put the
Instance of the Sun, where an Essence was said by you to be in one Individual;
and yet more Suns might agree in it. In this one Sun there is a Real Essence,
and not a mere Nominal and Abstracted Essence: upon which I asked, If there
were more Suns, would not each of them, have the Real Essence of the Sun? For
what is it makes the second Sun, to be a true Sun, but having the same Real
Essence with the first? If it were but a Nominal Essence, then the Second would
have nothing but the Name.

Here I must examine your Answer, as far as I can understand it: For here
indeed you may complain of the want of clear and distinct Ideas; but I will do
what I can to explain that which I conceive to be your Sense.

P. 190.
You say, This does not at all concern the Real, but the Nominal Essence.

How is this possible? Is there not the Real Essence of the Sun in that
Individual, we call the Sun? But I put the Case, that there were a
Multiplication of Individuals; and there were more Suns: would not each of
these have the Real Essence of the Sun? If it were only a Nominal Essence, the
rest would have only the Name.

P. 191.
But you say, you did not mean the real Essence of the Sun was in that
Individual. How could you mean otherwise, when you acknowledge the Real Essence
to be in particular Substances? And is not the Sun a particular Substance? But
the Idea of it being a Complex and Abstracted Idea, could not be the Real
Essence. I answer, That the Essence of the Sun being communicated to another is
a Real Essence; or else, the Second is but the Name and nothing else.

You tell me, That you say expressly, that our distinguishing Substances into
Species by Names, is not at all founded on their Real Essences. And I think it
is clear to any one that understands things, and not mere Ideas; that another
true Sun must have the Real Essence of a Sun.

You ask, What I mean by a true Sun. I answer, That which has the Essence of a
Sun; and that the Name cannot be truly applied to that which has it not. Yes,
say you, it may to any thing, which has united in it that Combination of
sensible Qualities, by which any thing else that is called Sun is distinguished
from other Substances, i. e. by the Nominal Essence. So that now the Abstract
Complex Idea is owned to be nothing but a Combination of Qualities in one Idea.

But I must still ask, what becomes of this Combination of Qualities in the
second Sun, if there be not a Real Essence to support them? You grant it when
the second Sun comes to exist. And if it does not exist, how can it be the
Second Sun?

Should it be true, P. 193.
say you, that the Real Essence of the Sun were in any of the fixed Stars, yet
it could not be called by us the Sun, whilst it answers not our Complex Idea,
or Nominal Essence of a Sun. If the Real Essence of a Sun be in a fixed Star,
it is really a Sun, whether you call it so or not; as a Laplander is as really
a Man whatever you call him, if he has the Essence of a Man. And it is strange
to me to find any Man dispute such evident things.

And so I come to the Instance of the Individuals among Men. I said, that there
must be a Real Essence in every Individual of the same kind. Peter, James and
John are all true and real Men; not by attributing a general Name to them; but
because the true and real Essence of a Man is in every one of them.

P. 195.
But you say, I first suppose them to be Men: no otherwise than as they are
Individuals of the same kind.

Your Weweena, Cuchepy and Cousheda I have nothing to say to, they may be
Drills for any thing I know; but Peter, James and John are Men of our own
Country, and we know them to be several Individuals of the Race of Mankind: And
what is it makes them Men, but that the true and real Essence of a Man is in
every one of them? Yes, say you, P. 197.
if making be taken for the Efficient Cause. Whoever dreamt of a Specific
Essence being the Efficient Cause? But I said, that it was the true and real
Essence of a Man, which made every Individual a true and real Man; of which I
said we are as certain, as that we are Men. P. 198.
That, say you, is only by our Senses finding those Properties, which answer
the Abstract, Complex Idea, which is in our Minds of the Specific Idea to
which we have annexed the Specific Name Man. I leave to you the Honor of this
Scholastic Language, which is always most proper when there is nothing under
it. I love to speak plain Sense if I can, and so as to be understood by every
one that is acquainted with these Matters: but these Specific Names and
Abstract and Complex Ideas, I think tend to confound Men's Apprehensions; who
can never think otherwise, but that every Man is said to be a true real Man;
not for any Specific Name, but because his Properties show him to be endued
with the true real Essence of a Man. I said, that the general Idea is not made
from the simple Ideas, but by mere Act of the Mind abstracting from
Circumstances, but from Reason and Consideration of things.

You Reply, P. 199.
That you thought Reason and Consideration had been mere Acts of the Mind, when
any thing was done by them. I hope the Ideas you have of the Acts of your own
Mind, are clearer than those you have of other Men's. For it is plain, I opposed
your General and Abstract Idea by a mere Act of the Mind, to a Rational
Inference from the Nature and Properties of things. For I added; for, when I
see so many Individuals, that have the same Powers and Properties, we thence
infer, there must be something common to all, which makes them of one kind;
and if the difference of Kinds be real, that which makes them of one kind and
not of another, must not be a Nominal but a Real Essence. Is there now no
difference between these Two Acts of the Mind, viz. Abstraction and
Ratiocination.

P. 201.
And you grant, that the Inference is true. But you say, it does not follow,
that the general or specific Idea is not made by the mere Act of the Mind.
Where do I deny that Abstraction is made by an Act of the Mind? But that is not
the Question; but whether the Notion of Essence in Individuals of the same
kind, be a mere Act of the Mind by Abstraction, or have a real Foundation in
the Nature of Things? i. e. whether it be a Real or a Nominal Essence.

But you say, P. 20^.
There may be Objections to the Name of Nominal Essence. My Objection is not to
the Name, but to the Thing you understand by it, viz. that there is nothing
beyond Individuals but Names, which utterly overthrows the Difference of Nature
and Person. For if there be nothing really, but an individuated Essence, then
it must follow, that there can be no difference of Hypostases in the same
Nature: For Nature individuated must take in the Hypostasis; and Nature being
taken as common is affirmed by you to be nothing but an Abstract and Complex
Idea, and a mere Nominal Essence.

You say, P. 203.
That we cannot know the differences of things by their real Essences. And what
then? Do I ever deny, that the difference of kinds is to be understood from the
different Properties? But we are not upon our Knowledge of the difference of
Species, but upon the Real and Nominal Essence.

And I showed that the real Essence does not depend upon Complex Ideas; because
if men mistake never so much in the Combination of Ideas, yet the same Essence
remains; as I instanced in the Essence of a Man, a Horse and a Tree.

P. 210.
True, you say, Our Thoughts or Ideas cannot alter the real Constitutions of
things that exist; but the Change of Ideas can and does alter the signification
of their Names, and thereby alter the kinds, which by these Names we rank and
sort them into.

But this does by no means reach the point, which is not concerning our sorting
of Things, which is by Names, but God's sorting them, when he made them of
different kinds. For so I said, that the Essences remain always the same,
because they do not depend on the Ideas of Men, but on the Will of the Creator,
who has made several sorts of Beings.

P. 212.
All the Answer you give is this, That the real Constitution or Essence of
particular things existing, do not depend on the Ideas of Men, but on the Will
of the Creator, but their being ranked into sorts, under such and such Names,
does depend and wholly depend upon the Ideas of Men.

But my Argument did not proceed upon particular things existing, but upon the
several kinds of God's making, and is it possible for you to think that the
kinds are not of his making, but that Men only by their Ideas make the several
sorts? If so, I have very little hopes to remove you from your Ideas; but I am
bound to do what in me lies to hinder such Notions from overthrowing the
Mysteries of our Faith.

And it is a great satisfaction to me to find, that these Notions of Ideas, as
far as they tend that way, have so very little Foundation in Reason, or rather
are so manifestly repugnant to them.

Before I conclude my self, I must take notice of your Conclusion, viz. That
you must content your self with this condemned way of Ideas, and despair of
ever attaining any knowledge by any other than that, or farther than that will
lead me to it. Which is in effect to say, that you see no way to avoid
Skepticism but this: but my great Prejudice against it is, that it leads to
Skepticism, or at least, that I could find no way to attain to Certainty in it
upon your own grounds.

For (1.) you say, Book 4. Chapter 1. Sect. 1.
That Knowledge to you seems to be nothing, but the Perception of the Connection
and Agreement or Disagreement, and Repugnancy of any of our Ideas. In this
alone it consists. Whence it unavoidably follows, that where we can have no
Ideas, we can have no Knowledge.

But you go about to prove, That there are many more Beings in the World, Chapter
3. Sect. 23.
of which we have no Ideas, than those of which we have any; and that one holds
no Proportion to the other. So that we are excluded from any Possibility of
attaining to knowledge, as to the far greatest part of the Universe for want of
Ideas; and yet you say, That he that will consider the infinite Power, Wisdom
and Goodness of the Creator of all things, will find Reason to think it was not
all laid out upon so inconsiderable, mean and impotent a Creature, as he will
find man to be, who in all Probability is one of the lowest of all intellectual
Beings. And not long after, Sect. 27.
you say, That the Intellectual World is a greater Certainly and more
beautiful World, than the Material.

But whence comes this Certainty, where there can be no Ideas? Is a general
Reason sufficient without particular Ideas? Then why not in other cases as well?

2. Suppose we have no Ideas of the Intellectual World, yet surely we may have
as to the visible World: No, you say, Sect. 24
That although we have Ideas of Bulk, Figure and Motion in general; yet not
knowing what is the particular Bulk, Figure, and Motion of the greatest part of
the Bodies of the Universe, we are ignorant of the several Powers, Efficacies
and Ways of Operation, whereby the Effects we daily see are produced. These are
hid from us in some things by being too remote, in others by being two minute.

So that you confess, Sect. 26.
We can attain to no Science, Sect. 27.
either as to Bodies or Spirits. And what a narrow compass must our Knowledge
then be confined to? You confess, Sect. 25.
We have no Ideas of the Mechanical Assertions of the minute Particles of
Bodies; and this hinders our certain Knowledge of universal Truths concerning
natural Bodies; and our Reason carries us herein very little beyond particular
matter of Fact. Certainty and Demonstration we must not in these things pretend
to. So that all Certainty is given up in the way of Knowledge, both as to the
visible and invisible World, or at least, the greatest part of them.

3. But still it is to be hoped, that where we have Ideas, we may come to a
Certainty in discerning the Connection between them. Sect. 28.
No, you say, Another Cause of our Ignorance is, the want of a discoverable
Connection between those Ideas we have. What! are we at a loss here too, and yet
all our Certainty depend no the perceiving the Agreement and Disagreement of
Ideas? Yes, you confess, That the Mechanical Affections of Bodies having no
Affinity at all with the Ideas they produce in us, we can have no distinct
Knowledge of such Operations beyond Experience. And the Operations of our Minds
on our Bodies is as unconceivable.

4. But by the help of Intermediate Ideas, may we not come to find out the
certain Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, so there be due Application of the
Mind to it? B. 4. chapter 2. Sect. 2.
Yes, say you, This may be done, and this is that we call Reasoning, and those
intervening Ideas are called Proofs: and where the Agreement or Disagreement is
clearly and plainly perceived, it is called Demonstration. But how if this way
of Demonstration be made impossible? What benefit can we have of it in the way
of Certainty: Each step, Sect. 7.
you tell us, That Reason makes in demonstrative Knowledge must have intuitive
Evidence; for else, you say, that Intermediate Idea would need a Proof. And for
want of this, Men often embrace Falsehoods for Demonstrations. But if there be
no way of coming to Demonstration but this, I doubt we must be content without
it.

5. You give no reasonable Satisfaction in the way of Ideas, as to the plainest
Evidence of Sense concerning the Existence of external Objects. For there is no
Intuition of the Mind, nor Demonstration in this Case; and all the evidence in
your way must be from the Ideas in our Minds, which are supposed to arise from
external Objects; but the question is, how from these Ideas within our selves,
we can prove the certain Existence of Objects without our selves. Because men
may have such Ideas in their Minds by the power of Imagination, when there are
no Objects to produce them? You say, Chapter 2. Sect. 14*
A man is invincibly conscious to himself of a different Perception, in seeing
the Sun in the Day, and remembering it in the Night, and tasting of Wormwood and
smelling of a Rose, and thinking of it afterward. But this does not clear the
main difficulty, which is, how from the Idea of the Taste of Wormwood or Smell
of a Rose I can prove the actual Being of such things without me, since you
grant, that there is no conceivable Connection in Reason, between the Powers in
the Objects and the Ideas in us: and if there be not, how can we be certain in
the way of Ideas? I do not speak, as to Pain or Pleasure, but as to the
Evidence from the Ideas in our selves. For the most that you say is, That a Man
may perceive a very manifest difference between dreaming of being in a Fire,
and being actually in it, because of the Pleasure or Pain that follows the
Application of certain Objects; which Certainty is as great as our Happiness or
Misery, beyond which we have no Concernment to know or to be. But the present
difficulty is not merely about the difference between sleeping and waking; and
I grant you, that a Man's being sensible of Fire touching him, will effectually
convince him that he is not in a Dream: but the point before us is, when we are
sensible we are awake, what it is in the way of Ideas, which can satisfy us of
the real Existence of external Objects. For you confess, ^^^^ Sect. 1.
That the having the Idea of any thing in our Mind, no more proves the
Existence of that thing, than the Picture of that Man evidences his being in
the World, or the Visions of a Dream make a true History. How then can we come
to any Certainty in the way of Ideas? The Account you give is this, Sect. 2.
that the actual receiving Ideas from without, makes us know that something
does exist at that time without us, which causes that Idea within us. Which is
in other terms to remove the Certainty from the Idea to the mere Act of
Sensation: but all our Dispute has been not about the Certainty either of
Sense or Reason; (which I freely yield to) but about a particular way of
Certainty by the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas; and of this I show that
you give no satisfactory Account, as to the Existence of the plainest Objects
of Sense. For you say, The Certainty lies in perceiving the Connection between
Ideas; and here you grant, That Reason cannot perceive the Connection between
the Objects and the Ideas, how then should we possibly attain any Certainty in
the way of Ideas? So that your self gives up the way of Certainty by Ideas.

I might easily pursue this matter farther; but I think this is sufficient to
let you see, you have no such cause to be so well contented with this condemned
way of Ideas, as you are pleased to call it.

And now to conclude, I am very far from being an Enemy to any free Enquiries
into the Nature and Reasons of Things, and would be glad to find any real
Discoveries that way. And I can easily bear the putting of Philosophical
Notions into a modern and fashionable Dress.

Let Men express their Minds by Ideas if they please; and take Pleasure in
sorting and comparing and connecting of them; I am not forward to condemn them;
for every Age must have its new Modes, and it is very well if Truth and Reason
be received in any Garb. I was therefore far enough from condemning your way of
Ideas, till I found it made the only ground of Certainty, and made use of to
overthrow the Mysteries of our Faith, as I told you in the beginning. This was
it which made me look more narrowly into it at first, and now to give you this
Trouble of an Answer to your Letter.

I hope that in the managing this Debate, I have not either transgressed the
Rules of Civility, or mistaken your Meaning, both which I have endeavored to
avoid. And I return you thanks for the Civilities you have expressed to me
through your Letter; and I do assure you, that it is out of no Dis-respect, or
the least ill will to you, that I have again considered this Matter, but
because I am farther convinced, that as you have stated your Notion of Ideas,
it may be of dangerous consequence as to that Article of Christian Faith, which
I endeavored to defend.

I am no Lover of Controversies, however I have been often engaged in them; but
I have that satisfaction in my mind, that my design was to promote that, which
upon my best Enquiries, I thought to be Truth; and by such means as were most
suitable to the pursuit of it, without any Bitterness against those I opposed.
But of all Truth, I am convinced, that it is fittest for me to employ the
Remainder of my Days in what concerns the Vindication of our Holy Religion
contained in the Scriptures, which gives us the only sure Grounds to hope for a
Blessed Immortality. And in the Defense and Practice of that, I hope, by the
Grace of God both to live and die.

I am, Sir, Your Real Friend, and Humble Servant, Edw. Wigorn.
Worcester, March 27. 1697.
Postscript.
I Had no Thoughts of adding a Postscript to my Answer, as you had done to your
Letter; but before the Sheets were wrought off, there was sent to me a new
Socinian Pamphlet, wherein there are Reflections (and little more) on my late
Treatise in Vindication of the Trinity. The reason I had to join my short
Animadversions on that to these Papers, was the advantages he takes from the
abstracted Notion of Nature against the Doctrine of the Trinity, which was the
thing I told you, I apprehended to be of dangerous Consequence in it.

But before I come to that, I cannot but take notice of their very different
way of Writing from yours, which is Grave and Civil, but theirs is trifling,
and too scurrilous in matters of Religion, for which I had so justly rebuked
them before, but it seems to very little purpose: which makes me apt to think,
their greatest Hopes still are in such Readers, who love to see Matters of
Religion ridiculed; and the Persons who are concerned to defend them exposed to
Scorn and Contempt. This was that I told them, which gave such a Relish to
their late Pamphlets, as though nothing would go down with such vitiated
Palats, that had not a Mixture of this Assa soetida with it. But because in the
Conclusion of his Pamphlet, he charges me as well as others, with using them
unjustly as well as roughly. I shall give a Taste of this man's decent manner of
Writing. The first thing he insists upon against me, is, That I openly profess
my Method, that I will prove First, then Secondly, then Thirdly, then Fourthly
and Fifthly. And what harm is there in using the plainest Method in a nice and
intricate Subject? Should I go about to justify this, by the Rules of the
ancient and best Masters of Writing in Arguments of such a Nature? That would
be showing too much regard to such pitiful Cavilling. But methinks these men
should not object this Method against us, of First, Secondly and Thirdly, who
had before charged us with brutal and inexcusable Ignorance in Counting or
Numbering. But he goes on. And now beloved first of the first. Have I any words
like these? No matter for that. But this serves well enough for the Farce; when
the design is to ridicule the Form and Way of modern Sermons; which he knew was
an acceptable Subject to his Men of Wit, as he calls them. If they be really
so, they cannot but despise such Fooling in serious matters. And our Modern
Sermons are such, both as to the Structure and Reason of them, as will bear the
Censures of Men of Judgment, (as well it may be, as of any Age) but his Men of
Wit, who love Religion in no dress, will always have something or other in
Sermons to find fault with. And our Author was hard put to it to bring in this
smart Reflection on Modern Sermons to please his Friends, which was very remote
from a Debate about the Trinity.

The next thing is, (for I must not say Secondly) That my Way of Writing is too
obscure; and that he could not take my Meaning under two or three Readings.
Which to please his Men of Wit, he facetiously expresses after this manner; And
when I have strained my Iaws and hazarded my Teeth to break the Shell, most
commonly it proves nothing but a Shell, that I am tempted to renounce Nuts for
ever. And I think he will do wisely in it. I am certain, I was so far from
affecting Obscurity, that I endeavored to put the darkest points into as good
a Light, as I could; and I am afraid he sometimes shut his Eyes, that he might
complain of the darkness of the Room.

I dare not go so far as Thirdly; and therefore come to consider the main parts
of his Pretense to answer my Book.

As to the Contents of my Book, he says. I show, that neither Antiquity, nor
Reason, nor Scripture is at all for them, they are all against them. Wherein he
is very much in the right. And I shall now examine what he has said, to take
off any part of the Charge.

He begins with Antiquity, and very fairly takes it for granted, That for 4000
Years, The Doctrine of the Unitarians was the true Doctrine: but he observes,
That I make the Doctrine of the Trinity to have been a part of the Cabala or
Oral Tradition among the Jews; upon which he cries out, Where is Conscience, or
is Religion nothing but a Name? Why, what is the matter? How comes Conscience
and Religion to be so deeply concerned, whether the Jews had any Anticipation
of the Trinity among them? But he says, I do not believe the Jewish Cabala, no
more than the Alchoran, and yet I produce the Authority of it: and he adds,
That it was a Fiction of the Pharisees; and that it is a Prevarication in me to
mention it as the unwritten Word of God. I am afraid his Cracking of Nuts has
put him into some Disorder, and made him cry out, without any other Cause but
the Pain of his Teeth. Where did I ever give the least Cause to suspect my
owning the Jewish Cabala, as the unwritten Word of God? All that I said was
this. The Socinians had said, That Christ was called the Word, because he was
the Bringer or Messenger of God's Word. To which I answered, That the Jews were
to understand it in the Sense it was known among them: which was for a Divine
Subsistence, as I proved from the Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Testimonies of
Philo the Alexandrian Jew, who lived so near our Savior's time. Here is not a
Word of the Pharisaical Cabala, which every one knows to have been about
Traditional Customs, which they laid as much weight upon, as upon the Law of
God, if not more. But the Chaldee Paraphrast was in very great Esteem, as
giving the true Sense of the Scripture, and for that only I produced it. And
what answer does he give to the Testimonies out of it? He says, They relate
either to the Law, or to the Command of God to Moses, or to the Power of God.
But I showed that Rittangel, who managed the Debate on this Argument with a
learned Unitarian, proved to his plain Conviction, that these places could be
understood of nothing but a Divine Subsistence. But he mightily triumphs, that
the most pertinent Place is false printed; for it is set down, Genesis 20.21. and
he tells us, There are but 18 Verses in that Chapter; but a Man of common
Ingenuity would suspect an Error in the Press in such a case; and if he had
pleased to have looked on Genesis 28.21. he might have have found 22 Verses, and
the Words in the 21. Therefore, says he, so much for Chaldee and Cabala,
despised by all learned Men, Jews as well as Christians; and never used but
when the People are to be gulled with noisy Nothings. One would hardly think it
possible such mean stuff as this should pass for an answer, among any that
pretend to Sense or Knowledge. For how can he deny the sense of the Chaldee
Paraphrast, when Philo the Alexandrian Jew concurs in that Interpretation, as
is evident by multitudes of places in him? Did I not expressly mention his
Testimony as concurring with the other? Why not a word said to it? Did I not
add the Consent of Eusebius concerning the Jews owning the Divinity of the
Messiah, till they fell off from it in opposition to the Christians? And are
these but noisy Nothings to gull People with? Let what will become of the
Dispute between the Pharisaical Jews and the Karaites; those who know any thing
of these Matters, do know that I went upon other grounds; viz. whether the
Israelites did receive from God an Oral Law, which they are bound to observe as
much as the written Law, and to interpret the written Law, and the force of its
obligation by it. And this I never mentioned or intended to plead for it. And
as to the 13 ways of Cabalistical Interpretations, I look on them as groundless
and frivolous things; but the thing I aimed at, was only this, There are
certainly places of the Old Testament, which speak of the Messiah as the Son of
God; Thou art my Son, etc. and call him Lord, The Lord said unto my Lord. The
question is, what the Sense of these places was, and how they are to be applied
to Christ? Now if it appear, that the most ancient Jews did understand them in
such a manner, as to apply them to a Second Subsistence in the Divinity, we
have great reason to follow that Sense, which is so agreeable to the New
Testament; and about this we have no manner of Reason to despise the Sense of
the ancient Jews, and especially of the Chaldee Paraphrast, who asserts a
second and a third Subsistence in the Divinity. And this he could not but find
without any danger to his Iaws, was the only thing I intended.

The next thing in point of Antiquity which he contests, is about the
Nazarenes: That Name, I said, was at first common to all Christians, as is
plain from Act. 24.5. afterward it was applied to the Jewish Christians at
Pella and Decapolis; and to such as admitted no Gentiles to their Communion,
but kept to the Ceremonies of the Law; and of these I said they might be all
Ebionites; but I utterly denied it of such as were Members of the Catholic
Christian Church, as it was made up of Jews and Gentiles. This Distinction he
calls a pure figment, but answers not one of the Reasons I brought for it;
although I proved from uncontrollable Evidence, that they made two different
Bodies, had different Rules of Faith; and that the Church of Jerusalem did hold
the Divinity and Pre-existence of our Savior. And is all this Cabala too, and
only to be used when People are to be gulled with noisy Nothings? i. e. with
empty Pleroma's, and silent Thunderclaps. The Alogians were theirs, for any
thing I know in all respects; and I will give them Theodotion, and Paulus
Samosatenus, and Photinus. But I think not much to their comfort; the two
latter were most certainly condemned by the Christian Church; and whether the
former were a mere Jewish Proselyte, or an Ebionite is not worth contending
about; since S. Ierom makes him to translate the places about our Savior like
a Jew, and Aquila like a Christian; which shows how mean an opinion he had of
his Sincerity.

I proved the condemning Paulus Samosatenus while they were under the power of
Zenobia, to be a plain evidence of the sense of the Christian Church against
his Doctrine; at a time when no interest could be supposed to sway them. To
this he gives a twofold Answer, (1.) That be sure it is false, that they were
then under the power of Zenobia. But how can we be sure it is false, when I
brought proof it was true, and he answers nothing at all to it? But it seems,
all is Cabala and noisy Nothings that stand in his way. (2.) He says, They
were all Heretics. A very short Answer. But how is this proved? For a little
proof looks well sometimes, and a man must not always say, be sure it is so.
Well, here is a plain proof; they differed from the Council of Nice about
Homoousios. But I had before given a full Answer to that, p. 42. to which he
gives not the least reply, viz. that they took it in two different Senses.

As to Lucian, I leave it to the Readers Judgment, if he compares what I have
said, and what he answers together, and whether he thinks it probable that the
Arians should forge a Creed under his Name at Antioch; if he continued in the
Doctrine of Paulus Samosatenus, which was contrary to it.

This is all, he says, that seems considerable in point of Antiquity; and
whether he has said any thing really considerable about it, let the Reader
judge.

Come we now to the point of Scripture, which is the main point in the case.
For I had declared, p. 112. that our Faith as to the Trinity, is built upon
that; and that there are many places of Scripture, of which no tolerable Sense
can be given without it. And therefore I examined the Sense the Unitarians gave
of the most remarkable Places, and showed the Weakness and Inconsistency of it,
and then in an entire Chapter proved our Doctrine from the Form of Baptism
delivered by our Savior, as it was always understood in the Christian Church.
This I think was a very plain and easy Method of proving our Doctrine.

And what now says our Unitarian to all this? Truly, I have met with few
Answers like it. In short, he says, That for his part, he is enough persuaded
without further arguing the Matter, that I have spent my Breath against a Rock.
This is just the Popish way of answering by Infallibility and super hanc
Petram. But in neither case can I see the least ground for such mighty
Confidence. Alas for them! they say, That if we write against their
Interpretations of Scripture, they are not at leisure to wipe off every small
Soil that may happen to be scattered in their Books. Not at Leisure! Whence
have come all those Swarms of pestilent Books which have come abroad of late
Years among us, to spread their infectious Doctrine over the Nation? And now
are they not at Leisure to defend them? And at the same time have Leisure
enough to run into other Matters, about which there may be more Color for
Cavilling. So that this cannot be the true Reason, and I leave the Reader to
judge what it is.

The last thing is the point of Reason; and here he finds Leisure enough to
expatiate. But I shall keep to that point, upon which he supposes the whole
Controversy to turn, which is, whether the difference between Nature and
Person, which we observe in Mankind, do so far hold with respect to the Divine
Nature, that it is a Contradiction to say, there are three Persons and not
three Gods?

And there are several things I proposed, in order to the clearing of this
Matter, which I shall endeavor to lay down as distinctly as I can; and I shall
not be Hectored or Banter'd out of that which I account the most proper Method,
although it happen to be too obscure for our Men of Wit to understand without
Hazard of their Iaws.

The Principles or Suppositions I lay down are these; I. Nature is One and
Indivisible in it self, wherever it is. II. The more perfect any Nature is,
the more perfect must its Unity be. III. Whatever is affirmed of a most perfect
Being, must be understood in a way agreeable to its Perfection. IV. It is
repugnant to the Perfection of the divine Nature, to be multiplied into such
Individuals as are among Men; because it argues such a dependence and
separation, as is inconsistent with the most perfect Unity. V. To suppose three
distinct Persons in one and the same Indivisible Divine Nature, is not
repugnant to the Divine Perfections; if they be founded on such relative
Properties, which cannot be confounded with each other, and be in themselves
agreeable to the Divine Nature. VI. Whether there be three such distinct
Persons or not, is not to be drawn from our own Imaginations, or Similitudes in
created Beings, but only from the Word of God, from whom alone the Knowledge of
it can be communicated to Mankind.


Let us now see how he proves, that since there is no Contradiction for three
Persons to be in one common human Nature, it must be a Contradiction to assert
three Persons in the same divine Nature. He offers at no less than
demonstrative Reason, p. 58. c. 2. but I have always had the most cause to fear
the Men that pretend to Infallibility, and Demonstration. I pass over his
Mysterious Boxes, as Trifles fit only to entertain his Men of Wit, and come
immediately to his demonstrative Reason, is it be to be met with. It comes at
last to no more than this, that Human Nature, and Angelical Nature, and Camel
Nature have no Existence but only in our Conception; and are only Notions of
our Minds; but the Persons in the same rational Being are not mere Metaphysical
Persons or Relative Properties, but they are such as necessarily suppose
distinct Substances as well as distinct Properties. But in the Trinity, the
Nature is a really existing Nature, it is a Spiritual Substance, and endued with
a great number of Divine Attributes, not an abstracted or mere notional
imaginary Nature; and the Divine Persons are not distinct Substances or real
Beings, but Properties only in a real Being and in an infinite Substance. This
is the force of the Demonstration. But now if I can make it appear, that every
Nature is not only One and Indivisible in it self, but endued with Essential
Attributes and Properties belonging to it as such, then it will be evident,
that Nature is not a mere Abstracted Notion of our Minds, but something which
really exists somewhere; and then the Foundation of this demonstrative Reason
is taken away. And I appeal to any Persons that consider things, whether the
Human, Angelical, and Camel Nature (as he calls it) do not really differ from
each other, and have such Essential Properties belonging to them as cannot
agree to any other Nature? For else it must be a mere Notion and Fiction of the
Mind, to make any real difference between them. But if Human Nature and Camel
Nature do essentially differ from each other, then every Nature has its
Essential Unity and Properties which cannot belong to any other, and that
without any act of our Minds. And if every Nature is really and essentially
different from another, it must have an Existence somewhere independent on our
Notions and Conceptions.

It may be said, That no such Nature does really exist by it self, but only in
the several Individuals. But that is not the present Question, where or how it
exists, but whether it depend only on our Imaginations or the acts of our
Minds; and if it does so, then there can be no real and essential Difference in
the Natures of Men and Beast, which I think none who have the Understanding of
a Man can imagine.

But really existing Natures, he says, are in such Persons, as necessarily
suppose distinct Substances, as well as distinct Properties; and if they
existed only in a common Nature, as the Humanity, and had not also distinct
Substances, they would never make distinct Persons.

I do allow, that in created and dependent Beings, there must be distinct
Substances to make distinct Persons; but he ought to have given an account what
that is which makes distinct Persons' necessarily to suppose distinct
Substances. For the Nature is One and Indivisible in them all; or else every
Individual must make a new Species, which is an Absurdity I suppose he will not
be fond of. If there be then one and the same Nature in the Individuals, whence
comes the difference of Substances to be so necessarily supposed? If it be from
Diversity, Dissimilitude, Dependence and separate Existence, as I asserted,
then these Reasons can hold only in created Beings; and where they cannot hold,
as in the Divine Nature, why may there not be a distinction of Persons founded
on relative Properties, without any distinction of Substances, which is
repugnant to the perfect Unity of the Godhead? What demonstrative Reason, nay,
what probable Argument has he offered against this?

He takes notice p. 60. of what I had said about the distinction of Personality
and Person; and that Personality is originally only a particular Mode of
Subsistence; and a Person besides the relative Property takes in the divine
Nature together with it. And what Demonstration have we against this? So far
from it, that he falls to Tristing again to keep his Men of Wit in good Humor.
So much for Madam Personality, now for Sir Person. Is this a decent way of
Writing about these Matters; to begin with the Talk of demonstrative Reason,
and to end with Burlesquing, and turning them into Ridicule? If this be an
agreeable Entertainment for his Men of Wit, it shows that they deserve that
Character, as well as he does that of a Demonstrator.

But this sportfull Gentleman has found something else to play with, viz. that
my Notion of three Subsistences without three Substances is really nothing but
Sabellianism. But I had already said so much for the clearing of this, both in
the Preface and the Book it self, that I need not to add one Word about it,
unless he had suggested some new demonstrative Reason to prove it. Which he is
far enough from. All that he says, is, That they must be called Fools as well
as Sabellius, if they asserted Relative Properties, or any Properties that were
in no Essence. But the Author of the Discourse of Real and Nominal
Trinitarians, (to whom he is no Stranger) had said That the Sabellians held
that the Father, Son and Spirit are but only three Names of God given to him in
Scripture by occasion of so many several Dispensations toward the Creature,
and so he is but one subsisting Person and three Relative Persons. If this be
true, here are Relative Properties indeed relating to a Divine Essence: but
how? not as to any Internal Relations of Father, Son and Holy Ghost; but as to
External Dispensations, which are another kind of Relative Properties.

This is all that I can find in this last Effort, that relates to my self: As
to what concerns others, they are very able to defend themselves, and
particularly as to Dr. S. and Dr. Sh. I must still say I think them much his
Superiors as to Wit and Learning, (for of them I spoke without the least
Respect to my self, however he makes it a Complement to my self and them, I
know not for what Reason, unless it be that I speak of those against whom they
had written with Insolence and Scorn.) But I hope they will show themselves so
much his Superiors too in Wisdom and Discretion, as not to renew their
Quarrels upon his Provocations, for he does what in him lies to inflame them;
and he thought it, (and I do not blame him for it) the best service he could do
to his sinking Cause.

WORCESTER, April 26, 1697. E. W.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3.1. an Answer. P. 42. l. 4. for Temerarian r. temerarious P. 63. l. 22.
for diceret r. doceret. P. 82. l. 17. for Preception r. Perception.

Books published by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edw. L. Bishop of
Worcester, and sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a
Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference,
etc. from the pretended Answer of T. C. 2d. Edit. Fol. Origines Britannicae, or
the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a Preface concerning some
pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in Vindication of the Bishop of St.
Asaph. Fol. Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds. 4 to. Origines
Sacrae, or a Rational Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to the
Truth and Divine Authority of the Scripture and the matters therein contained.
4 to. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and
the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. 8 vo. An Answer to several late
Treatises occasioned by a Book, entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry
practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion
of it; Part I. 8 vo. A Second Discourse in Vindication of the Protestant
Grounds of Faith, against the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in
answer to the Guide in Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles,
and Reason, and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a
particular enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church. 8 vo. An Answer to
Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching his
Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet. 8 vo. A Defense of the Discourse concerning
the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in answer to a Book entitled,
Catholics no Idolaters. 8 vo. Several Conferences between a Roman Priest, a
Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England; being a full Answer
to the late Dialogues of T. G. 8 vo. A Discourse concerning Bonds of
Resignation of Benefices in Point of Law and Conscience, 8 vo. A Discourse
concerning the Illegality of the Ecclesiastical Commission, in Answer to the
Vindication and Defense of it: wherein the true notion of the Legal Supremacy
is cleared; and an Account is given of the Nature* Original and Mischief of the
dispensing Power. The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an Impartial Account
of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion
of the Church of England. 4 to. The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right
to vote in Parliament in Cases Capital stated and argued, from the Parliament
Rolls and the History of former times; with an enquiry into their Peerage, and
the Three Estates in Parliament. 8 vo. A Discourse concerning the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction; or the true Reasons of his Sufferings; with an Answer to
the Socinian Objections. To which is added, A Sermon concerning the Mysteries
of the Christian Faith, Preached April 7. 1691. With a Preface concerning the
true state of the Controversy about Christ's Satisfaction. 8 vo. Twelve
Sermons preached on several Occasions, by the Right Reverend Father in God,
Edward, Lord Bishop of Worcester. The first Volume. 8 vo. A Second Volume will
speedily be published. The Effigies of the Right Reverend Father in God,
Edward, Lord Bishop of Worcester, Engraven on a Copper-plate by Robert White.
Price 6 d.

