A REPLY TO Mr. J. S. his 3d. APPENDIX, Containing some Animadversions ON THE
BOOK ENTITLED, A RATIONAL ACCOUNT of the Grounds of PROTESTANT RELIGION.

By Ed. Stillingfleet B. D.

London, Printed by R. W. for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard near the little Northdoor. 1666.

An Appendix to the RULE of FAITH.
To his honored Friend Mr. John Tillotson.
SIR,
AS soon as I understood your intentions to answer. 1.
Mr. Sergeant, I could not but rejoice on his behalf, as well as on the truths
and your own. For I have that real kindness for him, that I heartily wish him
that reason and science he pretends to; which I could not but despair of his
attaining, unless he were undeceived in that monstrous opinion he has of
himself and his undertakings. And I knew no person more fit then you, to let
him understand the tr^uth and himself together. In which, your performances
have been so clear and satisfactory, that I hope Mr. Sergeant in stead of
another letter of directions to his Answerer, will write you one of thanks, for
the reason and kindness you have showed him throughout your Book. Unless it
fares with you, as it has done with some other Adversaries of theirs, that
their civility has been interpreted as an argument of their uncertainty, and
their own confidence cried up for a demonstration. In which sense only I shall
grant our Protestant Writer^ to build on uncertainties, and Mr. White and Mr.
Sergeant to be the great Demonstrators of this age. If their own reason had
been as severe as the censures at Rome against them, they had saved us the
labor of any answer, and would have found out their own Sophistry without a
confutation. But the least thing we can imagine by their excessive confidence,
is, that they are deceived themselves; and therefore i^ is a part of charity to
them as well a^ justice to the truth, to let the world ^e, that big words are
quite another ^ing from science, and a strong pre^mption from a regular
demonstra^on. As to which, no more need to ^ve been said, than what you have
al^ady done, if Mr. Sergeant had not ^ought it an accession to the glory of ^s
achievements, to lead two Pages ^f my book in triumph after him. I ^nfess I
was somewhat surprised to see person who would be noted for his ^lour in
assaulting Protestant Writers, ^eal so behind the main bulk and design ^f my
Book, and when he had gotten ^o single pages by themselves, fall upon them with
as much pomp and ^tentation, as if he had attacqu'd the ^hole. And this must be
noised abroad an Answer to me, by the same figure ^at his arguments are called
demon^rations, which is by an Hyperbole un^ for any, but such who never flag
be^w the sphere of Science in their own ^dgements, though they seem not to ^ome
near it in others. Yet since ^r. Sergeant is not only pleased to ^ncern himself
so far as to answer that ^rt of my Book relating to oral tradition, but in most
express terms t^ challenge me to reply to him, he man p. 236.
now see (as soon as I could get any liberty from greater employments) ho^ ready
I am to give him all reasonabl^ satisfaction. And in the first place return him
thanks for the weapon h^ has made choice of, viz. that of reason; there being
no other, I desire t^ make use of in managing this deba^ between us: and I hope
he will find much civility toward him througho^ this discourse, as he
exptesses towar^ me in the entrance to his; if that m^ be accounted any real
civility which intended merely out of design wi^ the greater advantage to
disparage t^ cause I have undertaken, and yet ^ no reason to repent of. If in
his curs^ view of two chapters of my Book he h^ (as he says) quite lost me, he
had no ca^ to be troubled for it, if he had fou^ p. 202.
far more excellent persons, such Dr. Hammond, and the Dissuader, a^ Dr. Pierce
instead of me. But to sure he intends not this in honor any of us, but by way
of a comm^ reproach to us all, as though we did talk out of nature or things,
but wo^ and imagination. I could heartily have wished Mr. S. would have cropped
so much of the victory due to another learning and industry, as to have showed
me one proposition in those discourses, which a rational understanding that
would be true to it self, could not settle or rely on; but if such insinuations
as these must pass for answers, I must needs say, I judge Mr. S. equally happy
in confuting our grounds, and in demonstrating his own; in both which, his
greatest strength lies in the self-evidence of his bare affirmations. But it
seems he is willing to resign the glory of this Victory to the judicious author
of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, or to some others for him; and when they have
once obtained it, I shall not envy them the honor of it. And I suppose those
persons, whoever they are, may be able by this time, to tell Mr. S. it is an
easier matter to talk of Victories than to get them. But if they do no more in
the whole, than Mr. S. has done for his share, they will triumph nowhere, but
where they conquer, viz. in their own fancies and imaginations. Therefore
leaving them to their silent conquests, and as yet, unheard of Victories, we
come to Mr. S. who so liberally proclaims his own in the point of oral
Tradition. Which (in a phrase scarce heard of in our language before) is the
Post, he tells us, he has taken upon him to explicate further and defend. What
the explicating a Post means, I as little understand, as I do the force of his
demonstrations; but this, and many other such uncouth forms of speech, up and
down in his Book, (which make his style so smooth and easy) are I suppose
intended for embellishments of our tongue, and as helps to sure-speaking, as
his whole Book is designed for sure-footing.

But letting him enjoy the pleasure. 2.
and felicity of his own, expressions, I come to consider the matter in debate
between us. And his first controversy with me, is, for opposing the
infallibility of oral tradition, to doctrinal infallibility p. 203.
in Pope and Councils. A controversy fitter to be debated among themselves,
than between him and me: for is any thing more notorious, than that
Infallibility is by the far greatest part of Romanists attributed to the
present Church in teaching and delivering matters of faith, not by virtue of
any oral tradition, but the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost: and that
this is made by them the only ground of divine faith? For which Mr. S. may if
he please, consult his judicious author of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, or any
other of their present Writers, except Mr. White and himself. He need not
therefore have been to seek for the meaning of this doctrinal infallibility as
opposed to traditionary, if he had not either been ignorant of the opinion of
their own Writers, or notoriously dissembled it. For this infallibility is not
attributed to the Rulers of the Church, merely as Doctors or Scholars, but as
the representative Church whose office it is to deliver all matters of faith by
way of an infallible testimony to every age, and thereby to afford a sufficient
foundation for divine faith. But Mr. S. attributes no such infallibility to the
representative Church, as teaching the rest, but derives their infallibility
from such grounds as are common to all parts of the essential Church. Wherein
he apparently opposes himself to the whole current of their own authors, when
resolve all faith into the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost, without
which they assert there could be no infallibility at all in tradition or any
thing else; and therefore these opinions are as opposite to each other as may
be. For such an infallibility is not attributed by them to the teachers of the
Church, merely on some signal occasions, as Mr. S. seems to suppose, when they
are to explain new matters of faith; but it is made by them to be as necessary
as believing it self, because thereby the only sure foundation of faith is
laid, and therefore it is very evident they make it proper to the Church in all
ages: Or else in some age of the Church men were destitute of sufficient
grounds of faith. For they by no means think it a sufficient foundation for
faith, that one age of the Church could not conspire to deceive another; for
this they will tell him at most is but a humane faith; but that Christ by his
promise has assured the Church that there shall never be wanting in it the
infallible assistance of his Holy Spirit, whereby they shall infallibly teach
and deliver all matters of faith. And if this be not their opinion, let them
speak to the contrary, which if they do, I am sure they must retract their most
elaborate discourses about the resolution of faith written by the greatest
Artists among them. Let Mr. S. then judge who it is that stumbles at the
Threshold: but of this difference among them more afterward. By this it
appears it was not on any mistake that I remained unsatisfied in the Question I
asked, Whether am I bound to believe what the present Church delivers to be
Infallible? to which Mr. S. answers, I understand him not. My reply shall be
only that of a great Lawyers in a like case, I cannot help that. I am sure my
words are intelligible enough; for I take infallible there as he takes it
himself, for infallibly true; although I deny not the word to be improperly
used in reference to things; and that for the reason given by him, because
fallibility and infallibility belong to the knowing power, or the persons that
P. 204.
have it, and not to the object. But we are often put to the use of that word
in a sense we acknowledge improper, merely in compliance with our Adversaries,
who otherwise are apt to charge us with having only uncertainties and
probabilities for our faith, if we do not use the term infallible as applied to
the truth of the thing. I am content therefore wherever, in what I have writ,
he meets that term so applied, that he take it only in his own sense, for that
which is certainly true; for I mean no more by it. And in this sense Mr. S.
answers affirmatively; and gives this account of it, not only because the
present Church cannot be deceived in what the Church of the former Age
believed, but because the Church in no age could conspire against her knowledge
to deceive that age immediately following in matter of fact evident in a manner
to the whole world. The Question then is, whether this be a sufficient account
for me to believe that to be certainly true, or to be the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, which the present Church delivers? and consequently whether
the resolution of faith be barely into oral tradition?

Thus we see the clear state of the 3.
Question between us. I come therefore to the vindication of those things which
I had objected against this way of resolving faith into oral tradition. Three
things I especially insisted on. 1. That it is inconsistent with the
pretensions of the present Roman Church. 2. That it has not been the way owned
in all ages of the Christian Church. 3. That it is repugnant to common sense
and experience, and that the Church of Rome has apparently altered from what
was the belief of former ages. If these three be made good, there will be no
cause to glory in this last invention to support the sinking fabric of that
Church. These three then I undertake to defend against what Mr. Sergeant has
objected against them.

1. That it is contrary to the pretensions of the present Roman Church. And if
it be so, there can be no reason for those who are of it, to rely upon it. For
if so be that Church pretends that the obligation to faith arises from a quite
different ground from this; how can they who believe that Church infallible,
venture their faith upon any other principle than what is publikly owned by
her? And whosoever thinks himself bound to believe by virtue of an infallible
assistance of the present Church, does thereby show that his obligation does
not depend upon what was delivered by the former ages of the Church. As those
who believed the Apostles were infallible in their doctrine, could not resolve
their faith into the infallibility of oral tradition, but into that immediate
assistance by which the Apostles spoke; and where there is a belief of a like
assistance, the foundation of faith cannot lie in the indefectibility of
tradition, but in that infallible Spirit which they suppose the Church to be
assisted by. For supposing this oral tradition should fail, and that men might
believe that it had actually failed, yet if the former supposition were true,
there was sufficient ground for faith remaining still. And what assurance can
any one have that the present Church delivers nothing for matter of faith but
what has been derived in every age from Christ and his Apostles, if such an
infallible spirit be supposed in the present Church which was in the Apostles
themselves? For on the same reason that those who heard the Apostles were not
bound to trouble themselves with the tradition of the former age; no more ought
they who believe the present Roman Church to have the same infallible
assistance. They need not then enquire whether this age knew the meaning of the
former, or whether one age could conspire to deceive another, or whether
notwithstanding both these, errors might not come into the Church; it is
sufficient for them that the definitions of the present Church are infallible
in all matters of faith. Therefore my demand was built on very good reason; How
can you assure me the present Church obliges me to believe nothing but only
what, and so far as it received from the former Church? And Mr. S's answer is
far from being satisfactory, That this appears by her manifect practice, never
refusing communion to any man, that could approve himself to believe all the
former Age did. For this may be resolved into a principle far different from
this, which is the belief of the infallibility of the present Church. For
supposing that, they are not bound to enquire themselves into the reasons why
the tradition could not fail in any age; it is sufficient for them to believe
the Church infallible; and if it be so, in proposing matters of faith, it must
be so in declaring what the belief of the former age was. But my demands go on,
What evidence can you bring to convince me both that the Church always
observed this rule, and could never be deceived in it? Which question is built
on these two Principles which the infallibility of oral tradition stands on. 1.
That the Church must always go upon this ground. 2. That if it did so, it is
impossible she should be deceived. Both which are so far from that
self-evidence which Mr. Sergeant still pretends to in this way, that the
Jesuits principles seem much more rational and consistent, than these do. For
granting them but that one Postulatum, that there must be an inherent
infallibility in the testimony of the present Church to afford sufficient
foundation for divine faith, all the rest of their doctrine follows naturally
from it. Whereas this new way of resolving faith is built on such suppositions,
which no man well in his wits will be ready to grant. For unless it be
self-evident that the Church did always proceed on this ground, it cannot be
self-evident that oral tradition is infallible; because the selfevidence of
this principle depends on this, that in all ages of the Church, the only rule
and measure of faith was, what was delivered by oral tradition from the age
foregoing. Now if it be possible that matters of faith might be conveyed in
ways quite different from this, what self-evidence can there be that the
Church must always proceed upon this? Mr. S. then, must demonstrate it
impossible for matters of faith to be conveyed to posterity in any other way
than oral tradition; and not only that the thing is impossible, but that the
Church in all ages judged it to be so; or else he can never make it at all
evident that the Church always made this her rule of faith. But if either
there may be a certain conveyance of the doctrine of faith another way, viz. by
writing, or that the Church might judge that way more certain, whether it were
so or not, either way it will appear far enough from self-evidence that she
always judged of doctrines of faith, merely by the tradition of the preceding
age. If another way be granted possible, there must be clear demonstration,
that the Church notwithstanding this, did never make use of it; for if it did
make use of another way of resolving faith in any age of the Church, then in
that age of the Church oral tradition was not looked on as the ground of faith;
and if so, notwithstanding what ever Mr. S. can demonstrate to the contrary,
that age might have believed otherwise that the immediately preceding did. For
let us but suppose tha^ all necessary doctrines of faith, were betimes recorded
in the Church in books universally received by the Christians of the first
ages; is it no^ possible that age which first embrace^ these books, might
deliver them to posterity as the rule of their faith and so down from one age
to another and does it not hence follow that the rule of says is quite
different from ^ mere oral tradition? Let Mr. S. the^ either show it impossible
that the doctrines of faith should be written; or that being written, they
should be universally received; or that being universally received in one age,
they should not be delivered to the next; ^r being delivered to the next, those
^ooks should not be looked on as con^aining the rule of faith in them; or
though they were so, yet that still oral ^adition was wholly relied on as the
^ule of faith; and then I shall freely grant ^^at Mr. S. has attempted
something ^^wards the proof of this new hypothe^. But as things now stand it is
so far ^om being self-evident that the Church ^ath always gone upon this
princi^e, that we find it looked on as a great ^ovelty among them in their own
church; and it would be a rare thing ^r a new invention to have been the ^nse
of the Church in all ages; which it has not been, the strength of it is ^ereby
taken away.

But let us suppose that the Church ^d proceed upon this principle, that. 4.
^thing was to be embraced, but what (...) derived by tradition from the
A^tles; how does it thence follow that nothing could be admitted into the
Church but what was really so derive^ from them? Do we not see in the world at
this day, that among tho^ who own this principle, contradicto^ propositions are
believed; and bo^ sides tell us it is on this account, b^ cause their doctrine
was delivered ^ the Apostles? does not the Greek Chur^ profess to believe on
the account tradition from the Apostles as well the Latin? If that tradition
failed the Greek Church which was preserv^ in the Latin, either Mr. S. must
i^stance on his own principles in the Age which conspired to deceive t^ next,
or he must acknowledge t^ while men own tradition they may deceived in what the
foregoing ^ taught them; and consequently the things may be admitted as doctri^
coming from the Apostles which W^ not so, and some which did may lost, and yet
the pretense of tradit^ remain still. What self-evidence t^ can there be in
this principle, w^ two parts of the Church may b^ own it, and yet believe
contradicti^ on the account of it? It is then wo^ our enquiring what
self-evidence this is which Mr. S. speaks so much of, which is neither more nor
less, but that men in all ages had eyes, ears, and other P. 205.
^enses, also common reason, and as much memory as to remember their own names
and frequently inculcated actions. Which ^s so very re^sonable a postulatum,
that suppose none who enjoy any of these will deny it. Let us therefore see how
^he proceeds upon it. If you disprove ^his, I doubt we have lost mankind, the
^bject we speak of; and till you disprove ^t, neither I, nor any man in his
wits can doubt that this rule depending on testify^ng, that is sense on
experience, can possibly ^ermit men to be deceivable. Big words in^eed: but
such as evidence that all men who are in their wits do not constantly (...)
them. For I pray Sir, what does Mr. S. think of the Greek Church? ^ad not those
in it eyes, ears and other ^^ses, as well as in the Latin? Do not they pretond
and appeal to what they ^eceived from their Forefathers as well ^s the Latins?
It seems then a decepti^ is possible in the case of testifying, (...) therefore
this does more than per^^^ men to be decievable; for here has been an actual
deception on one side or other. But we need not fear losing mankind in this;
for the possibility o^ error supposes mankind to continue still; and if we
take away that, we m^^ sooner lose it than by the contrary. But what repugnancy
can we imagine to humane nature, that me^ supposing doctrines of faith to come
down from Christ or his Apostles, should yet mistake in judging what those
doctrines are? Had not men eyes and ears, and common sense in Christ and the
Apostles times? and yet we see eve^ then the doctrine of Christ was mistaken;
and is it such a wonder it should be in succeeding ages? Did not the Nazarenes
mistake in point of circumcision, the Corinthians as to the resurrection, and
yet the mean time agree i^ this, that Christ's doctrine was the rule of faith,
or that they ought to believe nothing but what came from him? Di^ not the
disciples themselves err, eve^ while they were with Christ, and certainly had
eyes and ears, an^ (...) sense as other men have, concern^ ^^me great articles
of Christian faith, Christ's passion, resurrection, and the nat^. of his
Kingdom? If then such who had the greatest opportunities imaginable, and the
highest apprehensions of Christ, might so easily mistake in points of such
moment, what ground have we to believe that succeeding ages should not be
liable to such misapprehensions? And it was not merely the want of clear divine
revelation which was the cause of their mistakes; for these things were plain
enough to persons not possessed with prejudices; but those were so strong as to
make them apprehend things quite another way than they ought to do. So it was
then, and so it was in succeeding ages; for ^et Parents teach what they pleased
for matters of faith, yet prejudice and ^yableness to mistake in Children might
easily make them misapprehend either the nature or weight of the doctrines
delivered to them. So that setting aside a certain way of recording the matters
of faith in the Books of Scripture, and these preserved entire in every age, it
is an easy matter to conceive how in a short time Christian Religion would
have been corrupted as much as ever any was in the world. For when we consider
how much notwithstanding Scripture, the pride, passion, and interests of men
have endeavored to deface Christian Religion in the world, what would not
these have done if there had been no such certain rule to judge of it by? Mr.
S. imagin^ himself in repub. Platonis; but it appear^ he is still in faece
Romuli; he fancies there never were, nor could be any differences among
Christians; and that all Christians made it their whole business to teach their
posterity matters o^ faith, and that they minded nothing in the world but the
imprinting tha^ on their minds that they might have i^ ready for their
Children; and that al^ Parents had equal skill and sidelit^ in delivering
matters of Religion t^ their posterity. Whereas in truth w^ find in the early
ages of the Christian Church several differences about matters of faith, and
these differences continued to posterity, but all parties stil^ pleading that
their doctrine came from the Apostles; and it fell out unhappily for Mr. S.
that those were commonly most grossly deceived who pretended the most to oral
tradition from the Apostles; still we find the grand debate was What came from
the Apostles, and what not? whereas had tradition been so infallible a way of
conveying, how could this ever have come into debate among them? What, did not
they know what their Parents taught them? it seems they did not, or their
Parents were no more agreed than themselves; for their differences could never
be ended this way. Afterward came in for many ages such a succession of
ignorance and barbarism, that Christian Religion was little minded either by
Parents or Children as it ought to have been; instead of that, some fopperies
and superstitions were hugely in request, and the men who fomented these things
were cried up as great Saints and workers of Miracles. So that the miracles of
S. Francis and S. Dominick were as much if not more carefully conveyed from
Parents to Children in that age than those of Christ and his Apostles; and on
this account posterity must be equally bound to believe them, and have their
persons in equal veneration. If men at last were grown wiser, it was because
they did not believe Mr. S's. principles, that they ought to receive what was
delivered by their Parents; but they began to search and enquire into the
writings of former ages, and to examine the opinions and practices of the
present with those of the primitive Church, and by this means there came a
restoration of Learning and Religion together.

But though matters of fact be plain and evident in this case, yet M. S. will.
1. 5.
prove it impossible there should any errors come into the Christian Church;
and his main argument is this, because no age of the Church could conspire
against her knowledge to deceive that age immediately following in matter of
fact evident in a manner to the whole world. But before I come more
particularly to show the weakness of this argument, by manifesting how errors
might come into the Church without such a conspiracy as this is, I shall
propound some Queries to him. 1. What age of the Church he will instance in
wherein all persons who were not cast out of the Church, had the same
apprehensions concerning all points of faith? i. e. that none among them did
believe more things delivered by Christ or the Apostles than others did. I am
sure he can neither instance in the age of the Apostles themselves, nor in
those immediately succeeding them; unless Mr. S. the better to defend his
hypothesis will question all written records because they consist of dead
letters, and unsenc't characters, and wordish testimonies. Never considering
that while he utters this, he writes himself; unless he imagins there is more
of life, sense and certainty in his books, than in the Scriptures or any other
writing whatsoever. 2. Where there were different apprehensions in one age of
the Church, whether there must not be different traditions in the next? for as
he looks on all Parents as bound to teach their Children, so on Children as
bound to believe what their Parents teach them. On which supposition different
traditions in the succeeding age must needs follow different apprehensions in
the precedent. 3. Whether persons agreeing in the substance of doctrines may
not differ in their apprehensions of the necessity of them? As for instance,
all may agree in the article of Christ's descent into hell, but yet may differ
in the explication of it, and in the apprehension of the necessity of it in
order to salvation. So that we must not only in tradition about matters of
faith enquire what was delivered, but under what notion it was delivered;
whether as an allowable opinion, or a necessary point of faith; But if several
persons, nay multitudes in the Church may have different notions as to the
necessity of the same points, by what means shall we discern what was delivered
as an opinion in the Church, and what as an article of faith? But Mr. S.
throughout his discourse takes it for granted that there is the same necessity
of believing and delivering all things which concern the Christian doctrine;
and still supposes the same sacredness, concern, necessity, in delivering all
the points in controversy between the Romanists and Us, as there was in those
main articles of faith, which they and we are agreed in. Which is so
extravagant a supposition that it is hard to conceive it should ever enter into
the head of a person pretending to reason; but as extravagant as it is, it is
that without which his whole fabric falls to the ground. For suppose we should
grant him that the infinite errors which depend on the belief of the Christian
doctrine should be of so prevalent nature with the world, that it is impossible
to conceive any one age should neglect the knowing them, or conspire to deceive
the next age about them; yet what is all this to the matters in difference
between us? Will Mr. S. prove the same sacredness, necessity, concern, and
miraculously attestedness (as he phrases it) in the Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Supremacy, etc. as in the believing the death
and resurrection of the Son of God: if he does not prove this, he does nothing;
for his arguments may hold for doctrines judged universally necessary, but for
no other. Therefore Mr. S. has a new task which he thought not of; which is,
to manifest that these could not be looked on as opinions, but were embraced as
necessary articles of faith, For unless he proves them such, he can neither
prove any obligation in Parents to teach them their Children, nor in Children
to believe what their Parents taught, but only to hold them in the same degree
which they did themselves. When Mr. S. will undertake to prove that the whole
Church from the time of Christ did agree in the points in difference between
us, as necessary articles of faith, I may more easily believe that no age could
be ignorant of them, or offer to deceive the next about them. But when Mr. S.
reflects on his frequent concession that there are private opinions in the
Church, distinct from matters of faith, he must remember before he can bring
home his grounds to the case between their Church and ours, that he must prove
none of the things in debate, were ever entertained as private opinions, and
that it is impossible for that which was a private opinion in one age, to
become a matter of faith in the next.

But because this distinction of his. 6.
ruins his whole demonstration, I shall first propound it in his own terms,
and ^hen show how from thence it follows, that errors may come into the Church,
and be entertained as matters of faith. His words are, it being evident, that
we have but two ways of ordinary know^edge, p. 203.
by acts of our soul, or operations ^n our body; that is by reason and
expe^ience; the former of which belongs to ^peculators or Doctors, the second
to De^iverers of what was received, or Testi^iers. And this distinction he
frequent^y admits, not only in the present age of the Church, but in any; for
the same reason will hold in all. From ^ence I propose several Queries further
to Mr. S. 1. If every one in the Church ^ooked on himself as bound to believe
^ust as the precedent age did, whence came any to have particular opinions of
their own? For either the Church ^ad delivered her sense in that case or not;
if not, then tradition is no certain conveyer of the doctrine of Christ; ^f she
had, then those who vented private speculations were heretics in so doing;
because they opposed that doctrine which the Church received from Christ and
his Apostles. If Mr. S. replie^ that private speculations are in such case^
where there is no matter of faith at all he can never be able to help himself
by that distinction in the case of hi^ own Church; for I demand, whether i^ it
a matter of faith, that men ought to believe oral tradition infallible? i^ not,
how can men ground their faith upon it? If it be, then either some are mere
speculators in matters of faith; or all who believe on the account o^ the Popes
infallibility are heretics for so doing. 2. If there were speculators in
former ages as well as this, whether did those men believe their own
speculations or no? if not, then the Father^ were great Impostors who vented
those speculations in the Church which they did not believe themselves; And it
i^ plain Mr. S. speaks of such opinions which the asserters of, do firmly
believe to be true: and if they did, then they look on themselves as bound to
believe something which was not founded on the tradition of the Church; and
consequently did not own oral tradition, as the rule of faith. So that as many
speculators as we find in the Church, so many testifiers we have against the
in^libility of oral tradition. 3. Whether those persons who did themselves
believe those opinions to be true, did not think themselves obliged to tell
others they ought to believe them; and consequently to deliver these as matters
of faith to their children? Let Mr. S. show me any inconsequence in this; but
that it unavoidably follows upon his principles that they were bound to teach
their Children what themselves received as the doctrine of Christ, and that the
obligation is in all respects equal as if they had believed these things on the
account of oral tradition. 4 If Children be obliged to believe what their
Parents teach them for matters of faith, then upon Mr. S's. own concessions is
not posterity bound to believe something which originally came not from Christ
or his Apostles? For it appears in this case, that the first rise was from a
private opinion of some Doctors of the Church; but they believing these
opinions themselves, think themselves obliged to propagate them to others; and
by reason of their learning and authority, these opinions may by degrees gain a
general acceptance in the ruling part of the Chur^^; and all who believe them
true, t^^^^ they ought to teach them their ^^^^dren; and Children they are to
believe what their Parents teach them. Thus from Mr. S's. own principles,
things that never were delivered by Christ or his Apostles, may come to be
received as matters of faith in the present Church. Thus the intelligent Reader
needs no bodies help but Mr. S. to let him understand how Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, etc. though never delivered either by Christ or
his Apostles, may yet now be looked on as articles of says, and yet no age of
the Church conspire to deceive another. Either then Mr. S. must say, there
never were any private opinators or speculators in the Church as distinct from
testifiers, and then he unavoidably contradicts himself; or he must deny that
posterity is bound to believe what their forefathers delivered them as matters
of faith; which destroys the force of his whole demonstration. Perhaps he will
answer, that Children are not bound to believe what barely their Parents, or
another number of persons might deliver matters of faith, but what the whole
church of every age delivers. This, ^ough the only thing to be said in ^e case,
yet is most unreasonable; be^^use it runs men upon inextricable dif^culties in
the way of their resolving ^ith. For suppose any Children ^ught by their
Parents what they are ^ believe; Mr. S. must say, they are ^ot bound to believe
them presently, ^ut to enquire whether they agree ^ith the whole Church of that
Age ^rst, before they can be obliged to as^nt. Which being an impossible task
^ther for Children, or men of age ^ find out in the way of oral tradi^on; this
way of resolving faith, ^oth but offer a fairer pretense for ^fidelity. For we
see how impossi^le it is for Mr. S. to make it appear, that their Church is
agreed about the ^ule of faith; for by his own confession, ^he far greater
number as speculators ^ppose the way asserted by him: how ^uch more difficult
then must it needs ^e to find out what the sense of the whole essential Church
is in all matters which Parents may teach their Children for doctrines of
faith? So that if Chrildren are not bound to believe what their Parents teach
them, till they know they teach nothing but what the whole Church teaches, it
is the most compendious way to teach them they are not bound to believe at all.
But if this distinction be admitted, as Mr. S. makes much use of it, then it
appears how errors may come into the Church at sirst under the notion of
speculations, and by degrees to be delivered as points of faith, by which means
those things may be received in the Church, for such, which were never
delivered by Christ or his Apostles, and yet no age conspire to deceive the
next, which was the thing to be showed.

This is one way of showing how errors may come into the Church,. 7.
without one ages conspiring to deceive the next; but besides this, there are
several others I might insist upon; but I shall mention only two more* 1.
Misinterpreting the sense of Scripure. 2. Supposing it in the power o^ some
part of the Church to oblige the whole in matters of faith. For the first we
are to consider that no imaginable account can be given either of the writing
or universal reception of the books of the New Testament, if they were not
designed for the preservation of the doctrine of Christ. And ^lthough it should
be granted possible ^or the main and fundamental articles of Christian faith
(such as the Apostles Creed gives a summary account of) ^o have been preserved
by the help of ^radition; yet, unless we be extream^y ungrateful, we cannot but
acknowledge that God has infinitely ^etter provided for us, in not leaving ^he
grounds of our Religion to the ^eer breath of the people, or the care ^f
mothers instructing their Children, ^ut has given us the certain records ^fall
the doctrines and motives of faith ^reserved inviolably from the first ages ^f
the Church. And when the Church ^w with what care God had provided ^r the means
of faith, oral tradition ^as little minded; thence the memory ^f those other
things not recorded in ^cripture is wholly lost; all the care ^as employed in
searching, preserving and delivering these sacred books t^ posterity. To these
the primitiv^ Church still appeals; these they plea^ for against all
adversaries, defendin^ their authority, explaining their sense vindicating them
from all corruption^ Tradition they rely not on any fu^ther then as a Testimony
of the trut^ of these records, or to clear the sen^ of them from the perverse
interpr^ tation of those Heretics who preten^ ed another kind of tradition the
what was in Scripture. And when the^ were silenced, all the disputes the arose
in the Church concerning matte^ of faith, was about the sense of the books; as
is evident by the procee^ings in the case of Arius and Pelagi^ Wherein
Tradition was only used a means to clear the sense of the S^ptures, but not at
all as that which t^ faith of all was to be resolved into But when any thing
was pleaded fr^ tradition for which there was ground in Scripture, it was
reject with the same ease it was offered; a^ such persons were plainly told, t^
was not the Churches way; if they b^ plain Scripture with the concurr^ sense of
Antiquity, they might produce ^t and rely upon it. So that the whole ^se of
Tradition in the primitive Church (besides attesting the books) was, to show
the unreasonableness of ^mposing senses on Scripture, against the universal
sense of the Church from the Apostles times. But as long as men were men, it
was not avoidable, but they must fall into different apprehensions of the
meaning of the Scripture, according to their different judgments, prejudices,
learning and education. And since they had all this apprehension that the
Scripture contained all doctrines of faith, thence as men judged of the sense
of it, they differed in their apprehension, concerning matters of faith. And
thence errors and mistakes might easily come into the Church without one age
conspiring to deceive the next. Nay if it be possible for men to rely on
tradition without Scripture, this may easily be done; for by that means they
make a new rule of faith not known to the primitive Church, and consequently
that very assertion is an error in which the former age did not conspire to
deceive the next. And if these things be possible, M. S's. demonstration fails
him; for hereby a reasonable account is given how errors may come into a Church
without one age conspiring to deceive another. Again, let me enquire of Mr. S.
whether men may not believe it in the power of the ruling part of the Church to
oblige the whole to an assent to the definitions of it? To speak plainer, is it
not possible for men to believe the Pope and Council infallible in their
decrees? And I hope the Jesuits (as little as Mr. S. loves them, or they him)
may be a sufficient evidence of more than the bare possibility of this. If they
may believe this, does it not necessarily follow that they are bound to believe
whatever they declare to be matter of faith? supposing then that
Transubstantiation, Supremacy, Invocation of Saints, were but private opinions
before, but are now defined by Pope and Council, these men cannot but look on
themselves as much obliged to believe them, as if they had been delivered as
matters of faith, in every age since the Apostles times. Is it now repugnant to
common sense, that this opinion should be believed or entertained in the
Church? if not, why may not this opinion be generally received? if it be so,
does it not unavoidably follow that the faith of men must alter according to
the Churches definitions? And thus private opinions may be believed as articles
of faith, and corrupt practices be established as laudable pieces of devotion,
and yet no one age of the Church conspire to deceive another. Thus I hope Mr.
S. may see how far it is from being a selfevident principle, that no error can
come into the Church, unless one age conspire to deceive the next in a matter
of fact evident in a manner to the whole world. Which is so wild an
apprehension, that I believe the Jesuits cannot entertain themselves without
smiles to see their domestic adversaries expose themselves to contempt with so
much confidence.

Thus I come to the reason I gave. 8.
why there is no reason to believe that this is the present sense of the Roman
Church. My words are, For I see the Roman Church asserts, that things may be de
fide in one age, which were not in another; at least Popes and Councils
challenge this; and this is the common doctrine maintained there, and others
are looked on as no members of their Church, who assert the contrary; but as
persons at least meritoriously if not actually excommunicate. Where then shall
I satisfy my self what the sense of your Church is as to this particular? Must
I believe a very few persons whom the rest disown as heretical and soditious?
or ought I not rather to take the judgment of the greatest and most approved
persons of that Church? And these disown any such doctrine, but assert that the
Church may determine things de fide which were not before. In answer to this,
Mr. S. begs leave to distinguish the words de fide which may either mean p. 05.
Christian faith or points of faith taught by Christ; and then he grants it is
nonsense to say they can be in one age, and not in another. Or de fide may mean
obligatory to be believed. In this latter sense none I think (says he) denies
things may be de fide in one age and not in another; in the former sense none
holds it. Upon which very triumphantly he concludes, Whatrs now become of your
difficulty? I believe you are in some wonderment, and think I elude it rather
then answer it; I shall endeavor to unperplex you. I must confess it a fault
of humane nature to admire things which men understand not; on which account I
cannot free my self from some temptation to that he calls wonderment; but I am
presently cured of it when I endeavor to reduce his distinction to reason. For
instead of explaining his terms he should have showed how any thing can be
obligatory to be believed in any age of the Church, which was no point of faith
taught by Christ, which notwithstanding his endeavor to unperplex me, is a
thing as yet I apprehend not: Because I understand no obligation to faith to
arise from any thing but divine revelation: and I do not yet believe any thing
in Christian doctrine to be divinely revealed, but what was delivered by Christ
or his Apostles. And my wonderment must needs be the greater, because I suppose
this inconsistent with Mr. S's. principles. For oral tradition does necessarily
imply that all points of faith were first taught by Christ, and conveyed by
tradition to us; but if a thing may be de side in this latter sense which was
not before, what becomes of resolving faith wholly into oral tradition? For
faitb is resolved into that from whence the obligation to believe comes; but
here Mr. S. confesses that the obligation to believe does arise from something
quite different from oral tradition; and therefore faith must be resolved into
it. Besides, all the sense I can find in that distinction, is, that men are
bound to believe something in one age, which they were not in another; and if
so, I shall desire Mr. S. to unperplex me in this, how every age is bound to
believe just as the precedent did, and yet one age be bound to believe more
then the precedent. But however, I am much obliged to him for his endeavor to
unperplex me as he speaks: for really I look on no civilities to be greater
than those which are designed for clearing our understandings: so great an
adorer am I of true reason and an intelligible Religion. And therefore I
perfectly agree with him in his saying, that Christianity p. 206.
aims not to make us beasts, but more perfectly men: and the perfection of our
manhood consists in the use of our reasons. From whence he inferrs, that it is
reasonable, consequences should be drawn from principles of faith, which, he
says, are of two sorts; first such as need no more but common sense to deduce
them; the others are such as need the maxims of some science got by speculation
to infer them; and these are Theological conclusions: the former sort, he tells
us, the church is necessitated to make use of upon occasion, i. e. when any
heretic questions those, and eadem opera, the whole point of faith it self, of
which they were a part; as in the case of the Monothelites, about Christ's
baving two wills. But all this while, I am far enough from being unperplexed:
nay by this discourse I see every one who offers to unperplex another is not
very clear himself. For since he makes no Theological conclusions to be de
side, but only such consequences as common sense draws, I would willingly
understand how common sense receives a new obligation to faith. For to my
apprehension the deducing of consequences from principles by common sense, is
not an act of believing, but of knowledge consequent upon a principle of faith.
And the meaning is no more then this, that men when they say they believe
things, should not contradict themselves, as certainly they would do, if they
deny those consequences which common sense draws from them. As in the case of
the Monothelites, for men to assert that Christ had two natures, and yet not
two wills, when the will is nothing else but the inclination of the nature to
that good which belongs to it. So that there can be no distinct obligation to
believe such consequences as are drawn by common sense; but every one that
believes the principles from whence they are drawn, is thereby bound to believe
all the consequences which immediately follow from them. Indeed the Church,
when people will be so unreasonable to deny such things, may explain her sense
of the article of faith in those terms which may best prevent dispute; but this
is only to discriminate the persons who truly believe this article from such as
do not. Not that any new obligation to faith results from this act of the
Church: but the better to prevent cavils, she explains her sense of the article
it self in more explicit terms. Which as he says, is only to put the faith
out of danger of being P. 207.
equivocated. Which is quite another thing from causing a new obligation to
believe. As suppose the Church to prevent the growth of the Socinian doctrine,
should, require from men the declaring their belief of the eternal existence of
the Son of God; Would this be to bind men to believe some thing which they were
not bound to before? no, but only to express their assent to the Deity of
Christ in the simplest terms; because otherwise they might call him God by
office, and not by nature. Now how can any one conceive that any should be
first obliged to believe that Christ is God; and yet receive a new obligation
afterward to believe his eternal existence? Thus it is in all immediate
consequences drawn by common sense; in all which the primary obligation to
believe the thing it self, extends to the belief of it in the most clear and
least controverted terms, which are not intended to impose on men's faith, but
to promote the Churches peace. For neither i^ there a new object of faith; for
how can that be which common sense draws from what is believed already* neither
is there any infallible proponent, unless common sense has usurped the Popes
prerogative. But Mr. S. offers at a reason for this, which is that none can
have an obligation to believe what they have not an obligation to think of; and
in some age the Gen^rality of the faithful have no occasion, nor consequently
obligation to mind, reflect, or think on those propositions involved in the
main stock of faith. From whence, he says, it follows, that a thing may be de
fide or obligatory to be believed in one age, and not in another. But let Mr.
s. show how a man can be obliged to believe any thing as an article of faith,
who is not bound to thin^ of all the immediate consequences o^ it? Because
faith is an act of a reasonable nature, which ought to enquire into the reasons
and consequences of things which it does believe. Bu^ Mr. s. mistake lies here,
in not distinguishing the obligation to believe, from the obligation to an
explicit declaration of that assent. The former comes only from God, and no
new obligation can arise from any act of the Church; but the latter being a
thing tending to the Churches peace, may be required by it on some occasions;
i. e. when the doctrine is assaulted by heretics as in the time of the four
first General Councils: but still a man is not at all the more obliged to
assent, but to express his assent in order to the Churches satisfaction.

But Mr. S. supposes me to enquire,. 9. p. 208.
how the Church can have power to oblige the Generality to belief of such a
point. To which his answer is, she obliges them to believe the main point of
faith, by virtue of traditions being a self-evident rule, and these employed
points by virtue of their being self-evidently connected with those main and
perpetually used points, so that the vulgar can be rationally and connaturally
made capable of this their obligation. But we are not now enquiring what the
obligation to believe the main points of faith is, nor whether traditiou be a
self-evident rule; but how there should be a new obligation to believe
something self-evidently connected with the former points, is beyond my
capacity to understand. And they must be vulgar understandings indeed, that can
rationally and connaturally be made capable of such an obligation. For if it be
selfevidently connected with the main points, no one can believe the one,
without believing the other: for nothing is self-evident but what a man assents
to at the first apprehension of it; and if he does so, how comes there a new
obligation to believe it? Is it possible to believe that any thing consists of
parts, and not believe that the whole is greater than any of those parts* for
this is a thing self-evidently connected with the nature of the whole. But
these are self-evident riddles, a^ the former were unintelligible
demonstrations. And yet though these b^ rare Theories, the application of them
to the case of the Roman Church exceeds all the rest. Whence, says he, the
Government of our Church is still justified to be sweet, and according to right
nature, and yet forcible and efficacious Although I admire many things in Mr.
S's. Book, yet I cannot say I do any thing more than this passage, that because
men are obliged to believe no employed points, but such as are self-evidently
connected with the main ones, therefore the Government of the Roman Church is
sweet and according to right nature, etc. Alas then, how much have we been
mistaken all this while, that have charged her with imposing hard and
unsufferable conditions of communion with her! no, she is so gentle and sweet
that she requires nothing but the main points on the account of a self-evident
rule, and employed points by reason of self-evident connection with the former. I
see Mr. S. (if he will make good his word) is the only person who ^s ever like
to reconcile me with the Church of Rome: For I assure you, I ^ever desire any
better terms of communion with a Church, than to have no ^ain points of faith
required from me ^o assent to, but what are built on a self-evident rule, nor
any employed points ^ut such as are self-evidently connected with the former.
And no work can ^e more easy, than to convince me upon these grounds; for all
endeavors of proof are taken away by the things being said to be self-evident.
For the very offer of proof that they are so, self-evidently proves they are
not so: For what ever is proved by something beside it self, can never be said
without a contradiction to be self-evident. But not to tie up Mr. S. from his
excellent faculty of proving, if Mr. S. will prove to me that any of the points
in difference between us, as Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Supremacy of the
Roman Church, etc. have any self-evident connection with any main poin^ of faith
in the Apostles Creed, I solemnly promise him to retract all I have writ
against that Church; so far shall be from needing a new obligation to believe
them. But if these be so remot^ from self-evidence, that they are plainly
repugnant to sense and reason (witne^ that self-evident doctrine of
Transubstantiation) what then must we thin^ of Mr. S.? Surely the least is,
that sin^ his being a Roman Catholic, his min^ is strangely enlightened, so far
that tho^ things are self-evident to him, whi^ are contradictions to the rest
of t^ world. But withal Mr. S. acquaints us with another mystery; which is,
how these points descended by a kind of tradition, and yet confesses, they were
never thought of or reflected on, by the Generality, till the Church took
occasion to explain them. Such a silent tradition does very sutably follow the
former self-evident connection. For he that can believe Transubstantiation to be
self-evident, no wonder if he believes that to have been delivered by a
constant Tradition, which was never heard of from the Apostles times to these.

Now Mr. S. is pleased to return to me,. 10.
and draws up a fresh charge against me, which is, that I act like a
Politician, and would conquer them by first dividing them, and making odius
comparisons between two parties of Divines. But to show us how little they
differ, he distinguishes them, as faithful, and as private discoursers; in the
former not^on, he says, they all hold the same divinely constituted
Church Government, and the same self-evident rule of faith; but as private
discoursers he acknowledges they differ in the explication of their belief. I
meddle not here ^^th the Government of their Church, (which I have elsewhere
proved to be far enough from being divinely constituted) but with the rule of
faith; and the question is, whether the infallibility of or altradition, be
that self-evident rule which that Church proceeds on; Yes, says Mr. S. they
are all as faithful agreed in it, but as discoursers they differ about it.
Which in short is, that all in the Church of Rome, who are not of his opinion,
know not what they say; and that they oppose that which they do really believe.
Which in plain English is, that they are egregious dissemblers and
prevaricators in Religion; that they do intolerably flatter the Pope and
present Church with loud declamations for their infallibility, but they do
really believe no such thing, but resolve all into oral tradition. But is not
this an excellent agreement among them, when Mr. White and his party not only
disown the common doctrine of the infallibility of Pope and Councils, but
dispute against it as pernicious and destructive to Christian faith? on the
other side the far greater part of Romanists say, there can be no certainty of
faith, unless there be an infallible divine testimony in the present Church,
and this lodged in Pope and Councils; that those who endeavor to overthrow
this, are dangerous, seditious, heretical persons. Accordingly, their Books are
censured at Rome, their opinions disputed against, and their persons condemned.
And yet all this while, we must believe that these stick together like two
smooth Marbles as faithful, though they are knocked one against another as
discoursers; and that they perfectly agree in the same self-evident rule of
faith, when all their quarrels and contentions are about it: and those managed
with so great heat, that heresy is charged of one side, and Arch-heresie and
undermining Religion on the other. Does he think we never heard of Mr. Whites
Sonus Succinae, nor of that Chapter in it, where he says, that the doctrine of
Pope and Councils De fide and Th^ol. tract. 2, sect. 22. p. 158.
infallibility tends to overthrow the certainty of Christian faith; and that
the propagating such a doctrine is a greater crime then burning Temples,
ravishing the sacred Virgins on the Altars, trampling on the body of Christ, or
the sending the Turk or Antichrist into Christian Countries? Or does he think
we can believe that the Pope and Cardinals, the Jesuits and all the Papists of
foreign Countries do as faithful agree with Mr. White in this? It seems not so
by the proceedings in the Court of Rome against him, in which as appears by the
censure of the Inquisition against him, dated 17. November 1661. his doctrine
is condemned not only as false, seditious and scandalous, but as heretical and
erroneous in faith. And if it were not for this very doctrine he was there
censured, why does Mr. White set himself purposely to defend it in his Tabulae
suffragiales? If these then do agree as faithful, who cannot but envy the
excellent harmony of the Roman Church, in which men condemn each other for
heretics, and yet all believe the same things still? Well Sir, I am in hopes
upon the same grounds Mr. S. will yield us the same charity too, and tell us
that we agree with him as faithful, only we differ a little from him as
discoursers; for I assure you, there is as great reason: the only difference
is, we give them not such ill words as they do each other. For let Mr. S. show
us wherein we differ more from him about the Rule of Faith, than they do among
themselves: For Mr, White when he has said, that all kind of heresy does
arise from hence that men make the holy Scripture, or a private spirit, the
rule of faith; he presently Ibid.
adds, it is all one, if one make councils or Pope any other way than as
witnesses to be the authors of faith. For, says he, this is to subject the
whole Church to that slavery, to receive any error for an article of faith,
which they shall define, or propose modo illegitimo, i. e. any other way then
as witnesses of tradition. Either then we differ from Mr. S. only as
discoursers, or he and his Brethren differ from each other more then as such.
And so any one would think who reads the oppositions and arguments against each
other on this subject, particularly Mr. Whites Tabulae suffragiales. But let
Mr. White say what he will, Mr. S. tells me, I am not aware how little they
differ even as Divines. The more shame for them to have such furious P. 209.
heats and oppositions where there is so little difference. But as little as
they differ, Mr. White thinks it safer to talk of their unity in England, than
to try whether they be of his mind at Rome, by going thither to clear himself;
for he justly fears he should find them differ from him some other way the^ as
bare discoursers. Yet let us hea^ Mr. S's. reason; for, says he, thoug^ some
speculators attribute to the Church a power of defining things not held before,
yet few will say she has new revelations or new articles of faith. Bu^ we know
the temper of these men better then to rely on what they barel^ say. For they
say what they think (...) most for their purpose; and on^ of Mr. Whites
adversaries, (if himself may be credited) plainly told him, i^ the doctrine of
the Popes infallibility were Tabul. suffrag. p. 318.
not true, yet it ought to be defended because it was for the interest of the
Church of Rome: for which he is sufficientl^ rebuked by him. It is one thing
the^ what they say, and another what necessarily follows from the doctrine
which they assert. But for plain dealing commend me to the Canonists, who say
expressly, the Church (by which they mean the Pope) may make new articles of
faith: and this is the sense of the rest, though they are loath to speak out.
Else Mr. White was much too blame in spending so much time in proving the
contrary. But what man of common sense can imagine that these men can mean
otherwise, who assert such an infallibility in Pope and Councils, as to oblige
men under pain of eternal damnation to believe those things which they were not
obliged to, before such a definition? And what can this be else but to make new
articles of faith? For an article of faith supposes a necessary obligation to
believe it: now if some doctrine may become thus obligatory by virtue of the
Churches definition which was not so before, that becomes thereby an article of
faith which it was not before. But these subtle men have not yet learnt to
distinguish a new doctrine from a new article of faith: they do not indeed
pretend that their doctrine is new, because they deny any such thing as new
revelation in the Church; but yet they must needs say, if they understand
themselves, that old implicit doctrines, may become new a^ticles of faith by
virtue of the Churcher definition. So little are they relieved by that silly
distinction of explicit and implicit delivery of them, which Mr. S. for a great
novelty acquaints us with. For what is only implicitly delivered, (...) no
article of faith at all: for that can be no article of faith, which men are not
bound to believe; now there are none will say that men are bound to believe
under pain of damnation i^ they do not the things which are only implicitly
delivered; but this they say with great confidence of all things defined by the
Church. And let now any intelligent person judge; whether those who assert such
things, do not differ wide enough from those who resolve all into oral
tradition, and make the obligation to faith wholly dependent upon the constant
tradition of any doctrine from age to age ever since the Apostles times.

But Mr. S. is yet further displeased with me for saying, that Pope and
Councils. 11.
challenge a power to make things de fide in one age, which were not in
another. For 1. he says I speak it in common, and prove it not. 2. He adds,
That take them right, this is both perfectly innocent, and unavoidably
necessary to a Church. And is it not strange he should expect any particular
proofs of so innocent and necessary a thing to the being of a Church? But he
will tell me it is in his own sense of de fide, which I have already shown to
signify nothing to his purpose. Let him therefore speak out whether he does
believe any such thing as inherent infallibility in the definitions of Pope and
Councils? if not, I am sure at Rome they will never believe that Mr. S. agrees
with them as faithful; if he does, whether does not such an infallible
definition bind men by virtue of it to the belief of what is then defined? if
it does, then things may become as much de fide by it, as if they were
delivered by Christ or his Apostles. For thereby is supposed an equal
obligation to faith, because there is a proposition equally infallible. But
will he say, the Pope does not challenge this? Why then is the contrary
doctrine censured and condemned at Rome? Why is the other so eagerly contended
for, by the most zealous sons of that Church, and that not as a school-opinion,
but as the only certain foundation of faith? Mr. S. is yet pleased to inform me
further, that nothing will avail me but this, if a Pope and Council should
define a new thing, and declare they ground themselves on new lights, as did
their first reformers in England: but I shall find, he says, no such fopperies
in faith-definitions made by the Catholic Church. Is this the man who made
choice of reason for his weapon? could there be a greater calumny cast on our
Church, than to say her reformers grounded themselves on new lights: when our
great charge against the Church of Rome is for introducing Novelties, and
receding from pure and primitive antiquity. Whether the charge be true or no,
yet sure it follows they did not declare they ground themselves on new lights,
but expressly the contrary. Well, but Pope and Councils neither define new
things, nor ground themselves on them: but what means the man of reason? that
they make no new definitions: surely ot; for then what did they meet for? ^d
what mean their decrees? but he ^tends, that they deliver no new do^rine: but
how must that be tried? ^r has Mr. S. gained the opinion of ^fallibility both
from Pope and Coun^ls, that we must believe his bare lord? but we not only say
but prove that even their last Council has defi^ed many things, which never
were ^elivered by Christ or his Apostles. And it is to no purpose whether they
^y they ground themselves on new lights, ^r pretend to an infallible
assistance; ^or it comes all to the same at last. For ^f the assistance be
infallible, what mat^er is it whether the doctrine has been ^evealed or no?
for on this suppositi^n it is impossible that Pope and Council should miscarry.
Therefore if any Church be guilty of fopperies in faithdefinitions, it must be
that which you miscall the Catholic, but is more truly known by the name of
the Roman Church. There is yet one piece of Mr. S's. sagacity to be taken
notice of as to this particular, which is, that I am at an end of my argument,
because I p. 210.
say the opinion of the Pope and Councils infallibility is the common doctrine
maintained: in which I confound the Church with the schools, or some private
opinaters, and then carp at those men's tenets. And this is the force of all
that Paragraph. He tells me, I wa^ not wit to know that no sober Catholic^
holds humane deductions the rule of their faith, schoolmen definers of it, no^
the schools the Tribunal whence to propose it authoritatively and obligingly to
the generality of the faithful. Neither does Mr. S. want the wit to know that
our present enquiry is concerning the sense of their present Church about the
rule of faith. Since the^ Mr. S. must confess it necessary to faith to know
what the certain rule of it is; let me enquire further, whether any particular
person can know certainly what it is, unless he know^ what the Church owns for
her rule of faith; and whether that may be owned as the Churches judgment,
which is stiffly opposed by the most interessed persons in the Roman Church,
and the most zealous contenders for it.? Especially when the Pope who is said
to be Head of the Church, condemns the doctrine asserted, and that only by a
small number of such who are as much opposed by themselves, as by any of us. Is
it then possible to know the Churches judgment or not? if not, it is to no
purpose to search for a rule of faith: if it be, which way can we come to know
it, either by most voices or the sense of the Governors of the Church; either
of the ways, I dare put it to a fair trial whether oral tradition, or the
infallibility of Pope and Councils be the doctrine most owned in the Church of
Rome? But Mr. S. still tells us, these are only private opinators and schoolmen
who assert the contrary doctrine to his. But will not they much more say on the
other side, that this way of oral tradition is a novel fancy of some few
half-Catholicks in England, and tends to subvert the Roman Church. But is the
present Pope with Mr. S. a private opinator, or was the last a mere schoolman?
I am sure what ever Mr. S. thinks of him he thought not so of himself, when he
said, he was no Divine in the controversy of Jansenius. Does the Court of Rome
signify no more with Mr. S. then a company of scholastic Pedants, that know
not what the sense of the Church is, concerning the rule of faith? I meddle not
with the Schools but with the authority of the present Church, and him whom Mr.
S. owns for the head of it: and is it consistent with his headship to condemn
that doctrine which contains in it the only certain rule of faith? Mr. S. may
then see they were no such impertinent Topics which I insisted on, and as
stout as Mr. S. seems to be, I am apt to believe he would not look on the
censure of the Inquisition as an impertinent Topic.

But at last Mr. S. offers at something. 12.
whereby he would satisfy me of the sense of the Church, as to this
particular, and therefore asks, whether I never heard of such a thing as the
Council of Trent? I must ingenuously p. 211.
confess I have; and seen more a great deal of it, then I am satisfied with.
But what of that? there, he tells me, I may find a clear solution of my doubt
by the constant procedure of that most grave Synod in its definitions. That is
I hope to find that oral Tradition was acknowledged there as the only
self-evident rule of faith: if I do this. I confess my self satisfied in this
enquiry. But how much to the contrary is there very obvious in the proceedings
of it? For in the 4. Session the Decree is, That Scripture and tradition should
be embraced with equal piety and reverence; and the reason is, because the
doctrine of faith is contained, partly in Scripture, partly in tradition; but
what arts must Mr. S. use to infer from hence, that oral tradition in
contradistinction to Scripture was looked on as the only rule of faith? I
cannot but say that the ruling men of that Council were men wise enough in
their Generation; and they were too wise wholly to exclude Scripture; but
because they knew that of it self could not serve their purposes, they
therefore help it out with tradition, and make both together the complete rule
of faith. Where I pray in all the proceedings of that Council does Mr. S. find
them desine any thing on the account of oral tradition? instead of which we
find continual bandyings about the sense of Scripture and Fathers, which might
have been all spared if they had been so wise as to consider they could not but
know the sense of the present Church, nor that of the precedent, and so up to
the time of Christ. But they were either so ignorant as not to light on this
happy invention, or so wise and knowing as to despise it. It is true they would
not have their doctrines looked on as Novelties, therefore they speak much of
tradition and the ancient faith; but that was not by what their Parents taught
them, but what the Fathers of the Church delivered in their writings; for by
these they judged of traditions, and not the oral way. And therefore I see
little reason to believe, that this was either the sense of the Council of
Trent, or is the sense of any number of Roman Catholics, much less of the
whole Church none excepted as Mr. S. in his p. 212.
confident way expresses it. And if he will, as he says, disavow the
maintaining any point, or affecting any way which is not assented to by all, I
hope to see Mr. S. retract this opinion, and either fall in with the Court of
Rome, or return as reason leads him into the bosom of the Church of England.
But there seems to be somewhat more in what follows, viz. that though schoolmen
question the personal infallibility of the Pope, or of the Roman Clergy, nay of
a General Council, yet all affirm the infallibility of tradition, or the living
voice of the Church essential; and this, he faith, is held by all, held firmly,
and that it is absolutely infallible. To this therefore I answer; either Mr. S.
means that none do affirm that the universal tradition of the Church essential
can err; or that the Church of Rome being the Church essential cannot err in
her tradition: But which way soever he takes it, I shall easily show how far it
is from proving that he designs it for. For if he take it in the first sense,
viz. that all the faithful in all ages could not concur in an error, then he
may as well prove Protestants of his mind as Papists, for this is the
foundation on which we believe the particular books of Scripture. If this
therefore proves any thing, it proves more then he intends, viz. that while we
thus oppose each other, we do perfectly agree together; and truly so we do, as
much as they do among themselves. But if Mr. S's. meaning be, that all of their
Religion own the Roman Church to be the Church essential, and on that account,
that it cannot err (setting aside the absurdity of the opinion it self) I say
from hence it does not follow, that they make or^l tradition the rule of faith,
because it is most evident that the ground why they say their Church cannot
err, is not on Mr. S's. principles, but on the supposition of an infallible
assistance which preserves that Church from error. So that this fall^ far short
of proving that they are all agreed in this rule of faith; which is a thing so
far from probability, that he might by the same argument prove that Scripture
is owned by them all to be the rule of faith. For I hope it is held by all, and
held firmly that the living voice of God in Scripture as delivered to us is
infallible; and if so then there is as much ground for this as the other. But
if we enquire what it is men make a rule of faith, we must know not only that
they believe tradition infallible, but on what account they do. so. For if
tradition be believed infallible barely on the account of a promise of
infallibility to the present Church, then the resolution of says is not into
the tradition, but into that infallible assistance; and consequently the rule
of faith is not, what bare tradition delivers, but what that Church which
cannot err in judging tradition does propose to us. It is not therefore their
being agreed in General that tradition is infallible does make them agree in
the same rule of faith; but they must agree in the ground of that
infallibility, viz. that it depends on this, that no age could conspire to
deceive the next. But all persons who understand any thing of the Roman Church,
know very well that the general reason why tradition is believed infallible is,
because they first believe the Church to be infallible; whereas Mr. S. goes the
contrary way, and makes the infallibility of the Church, to depend on the
infallibility of Tradition. And therefore for all that I can see we must still
oppose private opinators in this controversy; the Church of Rome, not having
declared her self at all on Mr. S's behalf, but the contrary: and the
generality believing on the account of the present Churches infallibility. And
it is strange Mr. S. should find no difference between men's resolving faith
into common sense, and into the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost. If this
then be the first principle of controversy, as Mr. S. p. 213.
pretends, we see how unlikely they are to agree about other matters, who are
so much divided about the principle of resolving them. And if this be the
ground of faith, then most Romanists build on a wrong Foundation. But if the
infallibility of oral tradition, be the foundation on which that formidable
structure is erecting, which he speaks of; woe then to the Court of Rome, for
that is known to build on quite a different foundation. And if this, as he
says, rises apace, and has advanced many stories in a small time, it only lets
us know how fast their divisions grow, and that they are building so fast one
against another, that their Church will not stand between them. By this
discourse, Mr. S. pretends to answer all those If's which follow; which are
these, In case the Church may determine things de fide which were not before,
whether the present Church does then believe as the precedent did or no? if it
did, how comes any thing to be de fide which was not before? if it did not,
what assurance can I have that every age of the Church believes just as the
precedent did and no otherwise? When I see they profess the contrary. And if a
thing may be de fide in one age which was not in a foregoing, then a Church may
deliver that as a matter of faith at one time, which was never accounted so
before: by which means the present Church may oblige me to believe that as a
matter of faith, which never was so in Christ's or the Apostles times, and so
the infallibility on the account of tradition is destroyed. To all which Mr. S.
gives a very easy answer: viz. that they do not hold any disparate or
unimplyed points of faith; but such as are involved and employed in the main
point. This is more easily said then understood: For if these be employed in the
former, how can there come a new obligation to believe them? For to take his
own Instance, will any man in his senses say, that he that believes, homo est
animal rationale, does not believe homo est animal? and this he makes choice of
as an example how one point of faith may be involved in another so as to
receive a distinct obligation to believe it. I grant that homo est animal is
involved in the other, but he that shall say, that after he has assented to
that proposition, homo est animal rationale, he may be capable of a new
obligation to believe the former which is involved in this, it may be justly
questioned whether such a one as to himself can truly say, homo est animal
rationale or no. But after such rare subtilties, he does very well to tell me,
that I ought to consider what Logic tells us, that the conclusion is in the
premises, which reflection (in his courtlike expression) he says will much
unblunder p. 214.
my thoughts. But let the conclusion be as long as it will in the premises,
will any man in his wits say, that he that believes the truth of the premises
is not thereby bound to believe the conclusion? and the more the one is
involved in the other, the less is it possible to make the obligation to
believe them distinct. And it is hard for me to believe, that this is a way to
unblunder my thoughts, when I see what horrible confusion such expressions
argue in his own. Let the Church then clear her thoughts never so much, yet all
this cannot amount to a distinct obligation to believe those things which were
involved before, but to a more explicit declaring them for the Churches peace
and satisfaction. The only conclusion then involved in these premises is, that
if some things may be de fide in one age which were not in another, then the
present age may believe otherwise then the precedent did. And if this doctrine
be held in the Church of Rome, nothing can be more evident, then that Mr. S's.
first principle of controversy, is far from being the doctrine of the Roman
Church: which was the thing to be proved.

My second chief argument against. 13.
this way of oral tradition was, that it had not been owned in all ages of the
Christian Church; to manifest which, I enquired into the reason of the
obligation in any age of the Church to believe and practice just as the
precedent did. Mr. S. rejoices in that confession of mine, that the only thing
to be p. 216.
proved in this case is, that every age of the Church and all persons in it
looked on themselves as obliged not to vary in any thing from the doctrine and
practice of the precedent age. And I there offer the choice of three ways to
prove it, reason, testimony Or tradition; he tells me, he accepts the way of
reason; yet quarrels with me for pressing for a demonstrative medium to prove
it, when yet Mr. S. seldom speaks under ^he rate of demonstrations. But he
thereby notes the unconsonancy of my carriage; Wherein I wonder? that I should
desire them to perform their promise, viz. to give us demonstrations for the
grounds of faith? But he says withal, he will yield me the honor of
professing I have no demonstration but probability for the ground of mine, and
he make^ this serious protestation for himself, tha^ he should esteem himself
very dishonest, did he assert and press on others an^ argument for the ground
of his faith which he judged not evident, that is demonstrative. What is it
these men mean, when they cry up their own way for demonstrative, and say that
we build ^ur faith merely on probabilities? Do ^hey say that Religion is
capable of ^rict and rigorous demonstration? If (...), let them demonstrate the
Being of ^od and Immortality of the soul with as ^uch evidence, as that the
three angles ^f a triangle are equal to two right angles. and it is strange if
they think particu^r problems in religion are more capa^le of demonstration
then those Theorems ^n which they are built. But by all he enquiry I can make,
all the diffe^ence between us is, that Mr. S. will ^ave that called a
demonstration, which ^ scarce a probability, and we call tha^ ^fficient reason,
which any wise man ^ay safely rely on in matters of religi^n. In the mean time
how much do ^e suffer by our modesty, that because ^e speak not as big as Mr.
S. does, we ^ust be censured presently to have nothing but probabilities for
our faith? Are those bare probabilities which leave no ^uspicion of doubt
behind them? and ^uch we freely assert the grounds of ^ur religion to do; i. e.
I assert that we have the highest actual certainty of the truth of our Religion
which the mind of any reasonable man can desire, and if Mr. S's. demonstrations
can do any more then this, let him tell us what it is. For my part I know
nothing higher in the mind of man then a certain assent, and if I did not think
there was the greatest ground in Religion for that, I abhor dissimulation so
much that I should leave off persuading men to embrace it. And if any men have
made us shye of the word demonstration and infallibility, they are such men as
Mr. S. have done it, who talk of these things when their arguments fall beneath
some of the remotest probabilities we insist on. Nay if there be any force in
his demonstration as to matters of fact, it has been used by us long before
his book saw the light. But we love to give the true names to things, and not
to lose our credit with all intelligent persons, by playing Mountebanks in
Religion, crying (...) those things for infallible cures which an ordinary
capacity may discern the insufficiency of. But was it any thin^ but justice and
reason in me to expe^^ and call for a demonstration from them who talk of
nothing under it? And therefore I said, that it was impossible to demonstrate
this way of oral tradition, unless it were proved impossible for men not to
think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their predecessors did.
For where the contrary is not only possible, but easily supposable, ^s that men
may believe those things as new articles of faith which are defined by Pope and
Council, I wonder how Mr. S. will demonstrate that men must ^ook on themselves
as obliged to be^^eve just as their predecessors did? For I had thought
demonstrations had ^ever place in contingent propositions; but it seems Mr. S.
who tells me, Logic will unblunder my thoughts, in^ends to make a new one for
me. And ^ assure you so he had need, before I shall ever call his arguments
demon^trations: and although he thinks himself very honest in calling them so,
yet ^ should think him much wiser if he did not.

But before I come to the particular. 14.
debate of these things, I freely tell him, that I grant all he requests; ^
shall take along with me the nature of the matter in hand, the doctrines an^ p.
236.
practices spoken of, the manner of delivering them, the necessary
circumstance^ which give weight to both; yet for al^ these, I cannot look on
his way as demonstrative. And that both our meanings may be better understood,
it i^ very necessary the Reader should have a true account of the state of the
Question between us. And if he will believe me, I never intended to disput^
with him or any one else, whether me^ were bound to wear their clothes, or
buil^ houses, or manage estates just as their p. 217.
predecessors did, but whether eve^ age is obliged to believe and practi^ just
as the precedent did by virtue o^ mere oral tradition; for about that i^ all
the controversy between us. I d^ not deny but that a succeeding ag^ may look
on it self as bound to believe what the precedent did; bu^ whether that
obligation does ari^ purely from the delivery of that doctrine by the precedent
in the way o^ of tradition, is the thing in dispute between us. For in case the
ground ^ faith be wholly the written word conveyed from age to age, I deny not
but an obligation to believe descends with the doctrine to every succeeding
age. But that which Mr. S. is to prove is, that abstractly from Scripture every
age is absolutely bound to believe just as the precedent did, without any
enquiry whether that doctrine does agree with Scriptures or no, but that he is
therefore bound to believe all which is proposed to him, because it was the
doctrine of the immediately preceding age. And this is that which I deny, and
desire Mr. S. to prove For which he first gives us a large instance in
historical matters, and then comes to the matters of Christian says. His
Instance is, in Alexanders conquest of Asia, as to which he says, that the
memory of it is fresh and lively, though some thousand p. 218.
years since. And that the universal and strong persuasion of this matter of
fact was not caused by Books, as Curtius his History, but by humane tradition:
that the continuance of this persuasion was the notoriety of the fact to the
then livers which obliged them to relate it to their posterity, and that this
testifying by the forefathers was that which obliged posterity to believe
things as true, because there could be no imaginable motive why the whole world
should conspire to deceive them, or be deceivable in their sensations: on which
principle it passed to the next age, and so came down by way of tradition to
our days: and the obligation to believe in every age depended upon this that
the senses of the first could not be deceived; and having this security in
every age that no one would conspire to deceive the next; it follows that no
age could say a former age testified so, unless it did so; therefore, says he,
it follows demonstratively that it was testified; and so the descendents in
every age to the very end of the world have the same obligation to believe
their immediate forefathers saying it was testified by theirs, and so to the
very first who were witnesses of his actions. This is the substance of what he
more largely discourses in several Paragraphs; which when he has done, he
tells me, he expects what I will reply to this discourse. Not to frustrate
therefore his p. 223.
expectation, and in order to the Readers satisfaction, we are to consider that
in the present case there are two distinct questions to be resolved. 1. How a
matter of fact evident to the world comes to be conveyed to posterity? 2. By
what means a complete history of all passages relating to it may be conveyed?
As (...) the first, I grant that a fact so noto^us as Alexanders conquest of
Asia might have been preserved by humane tradition, and conveyed in a certain
way from one age to another. But if we enquire into that which is alone proper
to our Question, viz. by what means we may judge what is true and false as to
the particulars of that conquest, then I deny that bare tradition is to be
relied on in this case. For the certainty of conveyance of all particulars does
depend not upon the bare veracity, but the capacity and skill of communicating
from one age to another. For which one would think we need no clearer evidence
then the considerations of the different account of former times in the several
Nations of the world. For who can imagine, but the barbarous Nations were as
unwilling to deceive their posterity as any other? yet we see a vast difference
in the histories of former ages among them, and more civilized people. And I
wish Mr. S. would rather have instanced in some history which had been
preserved merely by tradition and not in such a one, which, if any other, has
been most carefully recorded and propagated to posterity. If Mr. S. would have
undertaken to have told us who they were that first peopled America, and srom
what place they came by the tradition of the present inhabitants, and what
famous actions had been done there in former ages, we might have thought indeed
that sole tradition had been a very safe way to convey matters of fact from one
age to another. But since all Mr. S's. arguments will hold as well for the
S^ythians and Americans and the most barbarous Nations, as the most civil and
polite; what reason can Mr. S. give why there is not among them as certain an
account of former ages, as among the Greeks and Romans? Were not their senses,
who saw those matters of fact, as incapable of being d^ceived as others? was
not every a^ among them as un^illing to deceive their posterity as elsewhere?
yet notwithstanding the force of Mr. Ss. demonstration, we see for want of
letters how grossly ignorant they are of what was done before them. And if this
principle were true, why have we not as true an account of the eldest ages of
the world, as of any other? Nay, why were letters invented, and writing ever
used, if tradition had been found so infallible? But it is one thing
superficially to discourse what is impossible should be otherwise, and another
to consider what really has been in the world. Does not the constant
^xperience of all times prove that where any history has not been timely
recorded, it has been soon corrupted by notorious ^alsities, or obscured by
fabulous reports? As we see among our selves what difference there is in point
of certainty between the several stories of K. Arthur and William the
Conqueror; what will Mr. S. say, that these who lived in K. Arthurs time could
not know what he did; or that they conspired to deceive their posterity? But if
tradition be so infallible, why have we not the ancient story of Britain as
exact as the modern? If Mr. S. will impute it to the peoples ignorance, want of
letters, frequ^nt conquests by other Nations, and succeeding barbarism, he may
easi^y find how many ways there are for matters of fact to be soon lost or
corrupted, when they have not been diligently preserved by authentic records;
and that without one age conspiring to deceive another. But notwithstanding Mr.
S's. confidence, I cannot think it possible for Mr. S. to believe that we
should have had as true an account of Alexander^ conquest of Asia, if Arrian,
Curtius, o^ Plutarch had never writ his story, a^ we have now. Yet this he must
asse^ by virtue of his principles. And he that can believe that, I wonder he
should scruple believing the Popes infallibility; for certainly no principle o^
the Jesuits is more wild and absurd then this is. Besides, I admire how it
came into Mr. S's. head to think, no error could come into history unless o^
age conspired to deceive another, when we find no age agreed in the present
matters of fact which are done in it, as to the grounds and particulars of
them. To give Mr. S. an instance home to his purpose, in the late Council of
Trent; we see already what different representations there are made of it in so
little a time as has already passed since the sitting of it. One, though he
had all the advantages imaginable of knowing all proceedings in it, living at
the same time, conversing with the persons present at it, having the memoires
and records of the Secretaries themselves, yet his story is since endeavored
to be blasted by a great person of the Roman Church as fictitious and partial.
We see then it is at least supposed that interest and prejudice may have a
great hand in abusing the world in matter of story, though one-age never agree
to deceive another. And in stead of being persuaded by Mr. S's. demonstrations,
I am still of the mind, that we have no sufsicient security of the truth of any
story, which was not written while those persons were in being who were able to
contradict the errors of it. However I deny not but some notorious matters of
fact, such as Alexanders bare conquest of Asia, might by the visible effects of
it be preserved both in Asia and Greece for a long time. But if we come to
enquire particularly whether this or that was done by him in his conquest,
which is alone pertinent to our purpose, we have no security at all from
tradition, but only from the most authentic records of that story. And by
this, I hope Mr. S. will have cause to thank me for unblundering his thoughts
(his own civil expression) and showing him how errors may come into a story
without one age conspiring to deceive the next; and what a vast difference
there is between preserving a bare matter of fact, and all the particulars
relating to it. And hereby he may easily see how far the obligation extends in
believing the report of former ages. For there can be no obligation to believe
any further then there is evidence of truth in the matter we are obliged to. If
then there be not only a possibility but a very great probability of mistakes
and errors in matters of fact, I pray what obligation does there lie upon men
absolutely to believe what is delivered by the preceding age? But to put an
issue to this controversy, let Mr. S. examine himself, and try if he can name
one story that was never written, which was ever certainly popagated from one
age to another by mere oral tradition; and if he cannot, he may thereby see how
little real force his argument has in the world. For all the force of
tradition lies in an unquestionable conveyance of those books, which contain in
them the true reports of the actions of the times they were written in. But can
Mr. S. think, that if the Roman history had never been written, it had been
possible for us to have known what was done under the Kings and Consuls as now
we do? yet if his principle holds, this necessarily follows; for those of that
age could not but know them, and no age since could conspire to deceive the
next. And from hence, the most useful consequence of all is that Mr. S. might
have writ a history from the beginning of the world to this day, with a full
relation of all particulars, if there had never been any book written in the
world before. And does not Mr. S. deserve immortal credit for so rare an
invention as this is, and all built on nothing short of demonstrations:

But Mr. S. very prudently foresees, what it is I must be forced to recurre
to,. 15.
p. 224.
viz. that being baffled with his former demonstration, I have no other shift
to betake my self to, but to say the case is different between histories and
points of faith. And therefore to bring his business home, he applies it at
large to the delivery of the Christian faith, which that he might do in more
ample sort, he very finely descants on the old Verse, Quis, quid, ubi, etc.
containing the circumstances of human actions, and from every one of them
derives arguments for the infallibility of oral tradition: which briefly and in
plain English may be summed up thus; Since the author of this doctrine was the
son of God, the doctrine it self so excellent, and delivered in so public a
manner, in the most convincing way by miracles and good living, and for so good
an end as to save men's souls, and that by writing it in men's hearts and
testified to others; and all this at a time when men might judge of the
miracles and motives for believing it; therefore since in all these respects it
was imcomparably beyond the story of Alexanders conquests, it follows that in a
manner infinitely greater must the obligation be to believe Christ's doctrine,
than Alexanders or William the Conquerours victories, or any history of the
like nature whatsoever. All which I freely grant, but cannot yet see how from
thence it follows that oral tradition is the only rule of faith, or the means
whereby we are to judge what is the doctrine of Christ, and what not. Those
arguments I confess prove that the Christians of the first age were highly
concerned to enquire into the truth of these things, and that they had the
greatest reason imaginable to believe them; and that it is not possible to
conceive that they should not endeavor to propagate so excellent a doctrine
and of so high concernment to the world. But the question is, whether
abstractly from the books written in the first age of the Christian Church,
there is so much infallibility in the oral tradition of every age, that nothing
could be embraced for Christ's doctrine which was not and consequently whether
every age were bound to believe absolutely what was delivered it by the
precedent for the doctrine of Christ? Mr. S. therefore puts himself to a
needless task of proving that every age was bound to believe the doctrine of
Christ, which I never questioned; but the dispute is, whether every age be
bound on the account of oral tradition to believe what is delivered by the
precedent for Christ's doctrine. But it is to be observed all along how
carefully Mr. S. avoids mentioning the written books of the New Testament;
because he knew all his game about oral tradition would be quite spoiled by a
true stating the matter of fact in the first ages of the Christian Church. I
hope he will not be angry with me, for asking him that question about the
Scripture, which he asks me about the Council of Trent; did he never hear of
such a thing as the Scripture? or is it so hard to find it? But if he has
heard of it, I entreat him to resolve me these Questions. 1. Whether he does
not believe that the books of the New Testament were written at such a time,
when the mat^ers of fact therein recorded, were ca^able of being thoroughly
examined? which he cannot deny upon his own ^rinciple; for tradition being then
in^allible as to the doctrine of Christ, the writers of these books cannot be
con^eived to deliver it amiss, unless they ^esolved to contradict the present
tradition of the Church, which if they had done, those books could never have
found any reception among Christians. If tradition then convey the doctrine of
Christ infallibly, these books must convey it infallibly, because they contain
in them the infallible tradition of the first age of the Christian Church: and
were written at that time when many persons living had been able to disprove
any thing contained therein repugnant to truth. And that these books were
written by those persons whose names they bear, I appeal to Mr. S's. own rule,
Tradition; for if that be infallible in any thing, it must be in this; and if
one age could conspire to deceive another in a matter of such concernment, what
security can be had, that it may not do so in all other things? 2. Whether he
believes that those whose intention was to write an account of the life,
actions and doctrine of Christ, did leave any thing out of their books which
did relate to them as of concernment for us to believe? For upon Mr. S's
principles, any one may easily know what the tradition of the Church is; and
especially such certainly who were either present themselves at the matters of
fact, or heard them from those who were; and what satisfaction can any one
desire greater then this? But the question is, whether this testimony were not
more safely deposited in the Church to be conveyed by word of mouth, then it
could be by being committed to writing by such who were eye and ear-witnesses
o^ the actions and doctrine of Christ? Upon which I advance some further
Queries. 3. If oral Tradition were the more certain way, why was anything
written at all? it may be Mr. S. will tell us, for moral instructions, and to
give precepts of good life; bu^ then why may not these be as infallib^ conv^yed
by tradition as doctrines of faith? And why then were any matters of fact and
points of faith inserted in the books of the New Testament? by which it
certainly appears that the intention of writing them was to preserve them to
posterity. Let Mr. S. tell me whether it was consistent with the wisdom of men,
much less with the wisdom of an Infinite Being to employ men to do that, which
might be far better done another way, and when it is done can give no
satisfaction to the minds of men? 4. Whether those things which are capable of
being understood when they are spoken, cease to be so when they are written?
For Mr. S. seems to understand those terms of a living voice, and dead letters
in a very strict and rigorous manner; as though the sense were only quick when
spoken, and became buried in dead letters. But Mr. S. seems with the sagacious
Indian to admire how it is possible for dead letters and unsenc'd characters to
express men's meanings as well as words. It cannot enter into Mr. S's.
apprehension how 24. letters by their various disposition can express matters
of faith? And yet to increa^ the wonder, he writes about matte^ of faith, while
he is proving that matters of faith cannot be conveyed b^ writing. So that Mr.
S's. own writing is the best demonstration against himself; and he confutes his
own Sophistr^ with his fingers, as Diogenes did Zeno^ by his motion. For does
Mr. S. hop^ to persuade men that tradition is ^ rule of faith by his book or
not? i^ not, to what purpose does he write ^ if he does, then it is to be hoped
so^ matters of faith may be intelligibly conveyed by writing; Especially if Mr.
S. does it; but by no means we are t^ believe that ever the Spirit of God ca^
do it. For whatever is written by me^ assisted by that, is according to him bu^
a heap of dead letters, and insignifican^ characters; when Mr. S. the mean
while is full of sense and de^onstration. Happy man that can thus outdo
in^nite wisdom, and write far beyond either Prophets or Apostles! But if he
will condescend so far as to allow that to inspired persons which he
confidently believes of himself, viz. that he can write a book full of sense,
and that any ordinary capacity may apprehend the design of it, our controversy
is at an end. For then matters of faith may be intelligibly and certainly
conveyed to posterity by the books of Scripture; and if so, there will be no
need of any recourse to oral Tradition. 5. If the books of s^ripture did not
certainly and intelligibly convey all matters of faith, what made them be
received with so much veneration in the first ages of the Christian Church?
which were best able to judge of the truth of the matters contained ^n them,
and the usefulness of the books themselves. And therein we still find that
appeals were made to them, that they thought themselves concerned to vindicate
them against all objections of Heathens and others; and the resolution of faith
was made into them, and not tradition, as I have already manifested, and must
not repeat. 6. Whether it be in the least Part. 1. chap. ^.
credible, since the books of Scripture were supposed to contain the doctrines
of faith, that every age of the Church should look on it self as obliged
absolutely to believe the doctrine of the precedent by virtue of an oral
tradition? For since they resolved their faith into the written books, how is
it possible they should believe on the account of an oral tradition? Although
then the Apostles did deliver the doctrine of Christ to all their disciples;
yet since the records of it were embraced in the Church, men judged of the
truth or falsehood of doctrines, by the convenience or repugnancy of them to
what was contained in those books. By which we understand that the obligation
to believe what was taught by the precedent age, did not arise from the oral
tradition of it, but by the satisfaction of the present age, that the doctrine
delivered by it was the same with that contained in S^ripture.

It is time now to return to Mr. S.. 16. ^. 229. etc.
who proceeds still to manifest this obligation in posterity to believe what
was delivered as matter of faith, by the precedent age of the Church; but the
force of all is the same still; viz. that otherwise one age must conspire to
deceive the next. But the inconsequence of that, I have fully showed already,
unless he demonstrates it impossible for errors to come in any other way: For
if we reduce the substance of what he says to a Syllogistical form, it comes
to this; Where there is no possibility of error, there is an absolute
obligation to faith; but there is no possibility of error in the tradition of
any age of the Church. Ergo in every age there is an absolute obligation to
believe the tradition of the present Church. The minor he thus proves. If no
age of the Church can be ignorant of what the precedent taught, or conspire to
deceive the next, then there is no possibility of error coming into the
tradition of the Church in any age; but the antecedent is true, and therefore
the consequent. Now who sees not that the force of all this, lies not in
proving the minor proposition, or that no age could conspire to deceive
another? but the consequence, viz. that no error can come into a Church, but by
a general mistake in one whole age, or the general imposture of it, which we
utterly deny: and have showed him already the falsness of it from his own
concessions. And I might more largely show it from those doctrin^s or opinions
which they themselves acknowledge to have come into their Church without any
such general mistake or imposture, as the doctrines of Papal Insallibility, and
the common belief of Purgatory. The very same way that Mr. White and Mr. S.
will show us how these came in, we will show him how many others came in as
erroneous and scandalous as those are. For whether they account these matters
of faith or no, it is certain many among them do, and that the far greatest
number, who assert and believe them to be the doctrine of their Church too. If
therefore these might come in without one age mistaking or deceiving the next,
why might not all those come in the same way which we ^harge upon them as the
errors of their Church? And in the same manner that corrupt doctrines come in,
may corrupt practices too, since these, as he says, spring srom the other. He
might therefore have saved himself the trouble of finding out how an acute Wit,
or great Scholar would discover the p. 231.
weakness of this way. For without pretending to be either of these, I have
found out another way of attaquing it, then Mr. S. looked for: viz. from his
own principles and concessions; showing how errors might come into a Church,
without a total deception or conspiracy in any one age. Which if it be true, he
cannot bind me to believe what ever he tells me the present Church delivers,
unless he can prove that this never came into the Church as a speculation or
private opinion, and from thence by degrees has come to be accounted a point
of faith. Therefore his way of proof is now quite altered, and he cannot say we
are bound to believe whatever the present Church delivers; for that which he
calls the present Church, may have admitted speculations and private opinions
into doctrines of faith; but he must first prove such doctrines delivered by
Christ or his Apostles, and that from his time down to our age they have been
received by the whole Church for matters of faith; and when he has done this,
as to any of the points in controversy between us, I will promise him to be
his Proselyte. But he ought still to remember that he is not to prove it
impossible for one whole age to conspire to deceive the next; but that
supposing that, it is impossible for any errors to come into the tradition of
the Church. Let us now see what Mr. S. objects against those words I then used,
against the demonstrating this way; It is hard to conceive what reason should
enforce it but such as proves the impossibility of the contrary; and they have
understandings of another mould from others who can conceive it impossible men
should not think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their
predecessors. And whatever Mr. S. says to the contrary, p. 234.
I cannot yet see, but that therein I argued from the very nature and
constitution of the thing. For that which ^ looked for, was a demonstration,
which I supposed could not be unless the impossibility of the contrary were
demonstrated. But if it be possible, for men, Christians, nay Romanists to
believe on other accounts then the tradition of the precedent age, I pray what
demonstration can there be, that men must think themselves obliged to believe
and do all just as their predecessors did? Surely if Mr. S's. fancy had not
been very extravagant, he could never have thought here of men's being obliged
to cut their Beards, or wear such Garters and Hat-bands as their forefathers
did. For do I not mention believing first and then doing? by which it were
easy to apprehend, that I meant matters of faith, and such practices as flow
from them. Neither was there any such crafty and sophistical dealing as he
charges me with; for p. 235.
I am content his doctrine be taken in his own terms; and I have now given a
larger and fuller account why I am far from being convinced by the way he has
used for resolving faith. Passing by therefore his challenge, which I accept
of, as long as he holds to the weapon of reason and civility, I come to
consider his last enquiry, why I should come to doubt of such an obligation p.
236.
in posterity to believe their ancestors in matters of faith; and he
judiciously resolves it into a strange distortion of human nature, but such as
it seems, is the proper effect of the Protestants temper, P. 237.
which is, says he, to choose every one his faith, by his private judgment or
wit working upon disputable words. Which as far as we own it, is, not to
believe what we see no ground for; and if this be such a distortion of humane
nature, I envy not Mr. S's. uprightness and perfection. If he means that we
build our faith on our private judgments in opposition to Scripture or the
Universal Tradition of the Church in all ages, let him prove it evidently in
one particular, and I engage for my self and all true Protestants, we will
renounce the belief of it. If he has any thing further to object against the
Grounds of our Religion, he knows where to attaque me; let him undertake the
whole; or else acknowledge it a most unreasonable thing thus to charge
falsities upon us, and then say we have nothing else to say for our selves. We
pretend not to choose our faith, but heartily embrace whatever appears to have
been delivered by Christ or his Apostles; but we know the Church of Rome too
well to believe all which she would impose upon us, and are loath to have her
choose our Religion for us, since we know she has chosen so ill for her self.
But if Mr. S. will not believe me in saying thus, what reason have I to believe
him in saying otherwise? such general charges then signify nothing, but every
one must judge according to the reason on both sides.

I now come to the last part of my. 17.
task; which is to show, that this way is repugnant to common sense and
experience, and that the Church of Rome has apparently altered from what was
the belief of former ages. To which purpose my words are: It is to no purpose
to prove the impossibility of motion when I see men move; no more is it to
prove that no age of the Church could vary from the preceding, when we can
evidently prove that they have done it. And therefore this argument is intended
only to catch easy minds that care not for a search into the history of the
several ages of the Church, but had rather sit down with a superficial
subtilty, then spend time in further enquiries. But two things Mr. S. tells me,
are required ere I can see that their faith varies p. 238.
from the former. First to see what their Church holds now, and then to see
what the former Church held before; and he kindly tells me, if he sees any
thing, I see neither well. It seems I want Mr. S's. spectacles of oral
tradition to see with; but as yet I have no cause to complain of the want of
them, but ^ see much better without them, the^ with them. He tells me, I cannot
see what their present Church holds, an^ therefore I cannot assure any what w^
held before; because if I renounce tradition I take away all means of knowing.
The reason why I cannot heartily see (as he phrases it) what their Church holds
now, is, because I cannot distinguish between faith and its explication, some
Schoolmen and the Church. By which it seems it is impossible for me to know
what their Church holds concerning Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images,
Communion in one kind; for those are the points I there mention, wherein it is
evident that the Church of Rome has receded from the doctrine and practice of
the Primitive Church. Or are these only the opinions and practices of some
Schoolmen among them, and not the doctrine and practice of their Church? But
that we might come to some fuller state of these controversies, I wish M. S.
would settle some sure way whereby we might know distinctly what are the
doctrines and practices of their Church. If the Council of Trent and
Roman-Catechism, be said to be the rule of doctrine, I desire no other; so that
those may be interpreted by practices universally allowed among them. As when
that Council only defined that due honor be given to Saints, the general
practice of that Church may tell us what they mean by that due honor; and if
that be not fair, I know not what is. But I see all the shift Mr. S. has, is,
when he is pinched,. to say those are the opinions of Schoolmen and private
speculators, and not the doctrine of their Church. And if such shifts as these
are, must serve the turn, I should wonder if ever he be to seek for an answer.
But the shortest answer of all would be that none but those of their Church can
know what she holds; and therefore it is to no purpose for Protestants to write
against her: or it may be, that none but Mr. S. and one or two more can tell;
for many among them say, those are the doctrines of their Church which they
deny to be. So that except Mr. White and Mr. S. and some very few demonstrators
more, all the rest are Schoolmen, private opinators, and not to be relied on.
But I cannot see what their Church held formerly neither. p. 239.
No wonder at all of that; for if I cannot see an object so near me as the
present Church, how can it be expected I should see one so much further off as
the doctrine of former ages? And his reason is so strong as may well persuade
me out of one at least of my five senses. For, says he, if I question
tradition, I question whether there be any doctrine delivered, and so any
Fathers. And is not this argued like a Demonstrator? First he supposes there
never was any way used in the world but oral tradition, and then strongly
infers, if I deny that, I can know nothing. But I can yet hardly persuade my
self that the Fathers only sat in Chimney corners teaching their Children by
word of mouth, and charging them to be sure to do so to theirs; but as they
loved preserving the doctrine of faith, they should have a great care never to
write down a word of it. But why I wonder, should Mr. S. think that if I do not
allow of ^ral tradition, I must needs question whether there were any Fathers?
I had thought I might have known there had ^een Fathers by their Children; I
mean ^he Books they left behind them. But if ^ll Mr. S. pleads for be only
this, that ^o books can be certainly conveyed without tradition, he disputes
without an adversary; but as I never op^ose this, so I am sure it does him lite
service. It is then from the books ^f the Fathers that I find what the sense ^f
the Church of their age was, and ^om thence I have showed how vastly ^ifferent
the opinions and practices of ^e Roman Church are from those of ^e Primitive.
Although then I may ^ot think my self obliged to believe ^ll that the present
Church delivers for ^atter of faith; yet I hope I may find that the opinions
and practice of the ^ormer Church were by the records that are left of it; And
the reason ^hy I cannot think any one obliged ^o believe what every age of the
church delivers, is, because I think no man obliged to believe contradictions;
and I see the opinions and practices of several ages apparently contrary to
each other.

Well, but I call this way a superficial. 18.
subtilty: and so I think it still; so little have Mr. S's. demonstrations
wrought upon me. But, says he, is that which is wholly built on the nature of
things superficial? No; but that which pretends to be so built, may. And of
that nature I have showed thi^ way to be, and not the former. Bu^ that I may
not think him Superficia^ as well as his way, he puts a profound Question to
me, What do I think Controversy is? and that he may the better let me know
what it is, he answers himself. I deal plainly with you, says he; you may take
it to be an a^ of talking, and I think you do so, though you will not profess
it; but I take it to be a noble science. But to let him see that I will deal as
plainly with him, as he does with me, I will profess it, that I not only think
Controversy as usually managed, but some men's way of demonstrating (Mr. S. may
easily know whom I mean) to be a mere art of ^alking, and nothing else. But he
takes ^t to be a noble science: yes doubtless, ^f Mr. S. manage it, and he be
the judge of it himself. His meaning I ^uppose is, by his following words, p;
240.
that be goes upon certain principles, and ^e do not. We have already seen how
^ertain his principles have been, and I should be somewhat ashamed of my
^eligion if I had no better. But what ^ur rule of faith is, has been so amply
^iscoursed already by you, and that in ^r. S's. clearing method, that nothing ^
left for me to do, but to touch at that remains, and concludes this an^er. I
had the better to illustrate ^he weakness of that argument from ^ral tradition,
brought an instance in that case parallel, viz. that if one ages ^elivering to
another would prove that ^e faith of Christ was in every age ^nalterable,
because no age did testify any such alteration to be in it; by ^he same
argument the world might be ^roved eternal, because no age did ^ver testify to
another, that the world ^as ever otherwise then it is. So that ^f oral
tradition were only to be relied on, there could be no evidence given of the
worlds being ever otherwise then it is, and consequently the world must be
believed to have been always what we see it is. This a^ far as I can
apprehend, is a clear and distinct ratiocination, and purposely designed to
prove that we must admit o^ other rules to judge of alterations i^ the Church
by besides oral tradition* But Mr. S. (in his own expression) strangely roving
from the mark I aime^ at, professes there is not a tittle in i^ p. 241.
parallel to his medium, nay that he never saw in his life more absurdities
couche^ in fewer words. But I must take al^ patiently from a man who still
perche^ on the specifical nature of things and never flags below the sphere of
science. Yet by his good leave, he either apprehends not, or wilfully mistakes
my meaning: for my argument does no^ proceed upon the belief of the world^
eternity, which in his answer he run^ wholly upon as far as eighthly and lastly
p. 242.
but upon the evidence of oral tradition as to no discernable alteration in an^
age of it. For the Question between us^ is, whether in matters of alteration i^
the fa^ or practice of the Church we are bound to rely only on the testimony of
oral tradition; so that if no age can be instanced in wherein any alteration
was made, and this delivered by that age, then we are bound to believe there
has been no alteraration since Christ and the Apostles times: now I say, if
this ^old good, I will prove the world eternal by the same argument; taking
this for our principle, that we are bound to rely only on oral tradition in the
case, originally derived from the matter of fact seen by those of the first
age; for that which never was otherwise then it is, is eternal; but we cannot
know by oral tradition that the world ever was otherwise then it is: for no age
of the world can be instanced in, wherein we have any testimony of any
alteration that was in it* Either then we must believe that the world ever was
what it is, i. e. Eternal; or else we must say, that we are not to rely barely
on oral tradition in this case, but we must judge whether the world were made
or no, by other mediums of Scripture and reason. And this was all which I aimed
at, viz. to show that where there is no evidence from oral tradition, yet if
there be Scripture and reason, there is sufficient ground for our faith to
stand upon. And so I apply it to the present case; though we could not prove
barely from the tradition of any one age that there had been any alteration in
the faith or practice of the Church; yet if I can prove that there has been
such from Scripture and reason, this is sufficient for me to believe it. And
now I dare appeal to the indifferent Reader, ^ether thi^ be so full of
absurdities, or it b^ such a rambling Chimerical argumen^ (as he calls it) no
two pieces ^ which hang together with themselves (...) p. 243.
any thing else. Which being expressions of as great modesty as science* I am
content Mr. S. should bear away the honor of them and his demo^strations
together.

The last thing he quarrels wit^ me for, is, that I say, if we can ^v dently.
19.
prove that there have been al^ rations in the Church, then it is to ^ purpose
to prove that impossible which we see actually done. And this appears not only
because the Scripture supposes a degeneracy in the Christian Church, which
could never be, if every age of the Church did insa^libly believe and practice
as the precedent up to Christ's time did: but because we can produce clear
evidence that some things are delivered by the present Church which must be
brought in by some age since the time of Christ. For which I refer the Reader
to what I had said about communion in one kind, Invocation of Saints, and
worship of Images: In all which, I say, I had proved evidently that they were
not in use in some ages of the Christian Church; and it is as evident that
these are delivered by the present Church, and therefore this principle must
needs be false. In answer to this, Mr. S. wishes, I would tell him first what
evidence means, whether a strong fancy or a demonstration? I mean that which is
enough to persuade a wise man who judges according to the clearest reason,
which I am sure is more then ever his demonstrations will do. But it is a
pleasant spectacle to see how Mr. S. lays about him at my saying that the
Scripture supposes a degeneracy in the Christian Church. Incomparably argued!
says he; why, see we not the place? does it evidently speak of faith or
manners, the Universal Church or particular persons? but be it in faith, be it
universal, does it suppose this degeneracy already past, which is only proper
to your purpose, or yet to come? That is, does it say there must be a total
Apostasy in faith before the year 1664.? Alas he had forgot this. Most
incomparably answered! For if the degeneracy be in 1665. or any years after,
what becomes of M. S's. d^monstration then, that no errors could come into the
Church? but it seems his demonstration holds but till 1664. and I easily
believe an other year will never believe the truth of it. But if such a thing
as a degeneracy be possible, how then stands the infallibility of tradition?
when there can be no degeneracy without falling from the doctrine and practices
of Christ and his Apostles. But that such a degeneracy has already been in
that which calls it self the Catholic Church, and that both in faith and
manners, I shall referr Mr. S. to the learned Author of the late Idea of
Antichristianism, and Synopsis Prophetica, where he may find enough to persuade
him that his demonstration was far from holding so long as 1664. And now I
leave the Reader to judge whether the foregoing evidences against the
infallibility of oral tradition, or Mr. S's. demonstrations have the greater
force of reason in them. And if he will not stoop so far from the height of his
perch as to take notice of what I have elsewhere said, I am resolved to let him
see I am not at all concerned about it: I begin to understand him so well by
this Appendix, that I can give my self a reasonable account why he thought it
not sit to meddle with any other part of my book. But if Mr. S. be resolved not
to answer any of the testimonies I there produce, unless I p. 244.
single them out and print them at the end of this Answer, (i. e. remove them
from that evidence which attends them in the series of the discourse) I can
only say, he is the most imperious answerer I have met with, who is resolved
never to deal with an adversary, but on his own unreasonable terms. Thus,
heartily wishing Mr. S's. Science as great as his opinion of it, and a good
effect of our endeavors to promote the one, by removing the other, I am

Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant, Edward Stillingfleet.
London. June 28.

FINIS.
Postscript.
SIR,
SInce the dispatch of the former Papers, I have met with another Treatise,
wherein I find my self concerned, written by the author of Fiat Lux, the Title
whereof is Diaphanta: I am afraid the Title affrights you; for I assure you it
is the most formidable thing in his whole Book. But the man is a very modest
man and hugely different from Mr. S's. humor; for he is so far from offering to
demonstrate the grounds of faith; that all he pretends to in the title of his
book, i^ to excuse Catholic Religion against the opposition of several
Adversaries. What fault I pray has the Catholic Religion committed, that it
must now come to be excused inst^ad of being defended? But when I look into
that part which concerns my self, I presently understand the meaning of it,
which is not to excuse Catholic Religion, but themselves, for not being able
to defend it. For he very ingenuously tells us, that faith is firm and
constant, p. 210.
though all his talk for it be miserably weak: i. e. he is sure they have an
excellent Religion, though he knows not what to say for it; and their faith is
a very good faith, but it has not yet had the good fortune to be understood by
them. For he acknowledges, that as often as they dispute, p. 2^9.
they are beyond the business, (so may any one believe, who reads their late
books,) which is in effect to say, there is no way left of disputing any longer
with adversaries about their faith; only they must believe it stoutly
themselves; but it is to no purpose to offer to defend it. Nay, it does their
faith a great deal of mischief; for, says he, in reading controversies we see
not so much the nature of the faith, as the wit of him who opposes or defends
it. From whence we may easily gather what unspeakable mischief they do their
cause by writing for it. By which expressions we may guess, at what a low ebb
the defense of their faith is among them: for the way now taken to defend it,
is by disowning the defenders of it, and by saying, that they only vent their
own opinions; and though we confute them never so much, yet their faith holds
good still. Was ever a good cause driven to such miserable shifts as these are,
especially among those who pretend to wit and learning? One, he says, T. C.
vents a private opinion of his own, and it is not a pin matter whether it stand
or fall; another, he says, the same of I. S. a third of J. V. C. and yet for
all this, their religion is very firm and sure, and they all at perfect
agreement about it. Is this the victory over me Mr. S. mentions to be so easy
a thing? I see that by the same figure Mr. S. calls his way of arguing
demonstration, running out of the field shall be accounted conquering. For I
never saw any person do it more openly then this author does. For he plainly
confesses, that his Catholic Gentleman went quite besides his business, that
he built upon indefensible principles, that his theological ratiocination was
indeed pretty, but too weak to hold. And are not we hugely too blame, if we do
not cry up such mighty Conquerors as these are? Truly Sir, I expect the very
same answer should be returned to your book; that Mr. S's. argument, is a
pretty theological ratiocination; and that your answer is not unwitty: but
though that way will not hold, another will. Thus when they are beaten off
Infallibility, they run to Tradition: and when they are again beaten off
Tradition, then back again to Infallibility. So that the short of all their
answers is, though such a one cannot defend our faith, yet I can; though I
cannot, yet the fai^ ^s firm and constant still. I wonder what their Superiors
think of this ^ay of proceeding among them; we should imagine if they be so
weak ^s they say themselves, they had much ^etter keep them from appearing
^broad and exposing their cause so ^idiculously to contempt. But it may ^e,
they think their faith is the better as well as their devotion, for their
^gnorance: and that it would be a ^ighty disparagement to their cause, ^or such
silly people to be able to de^end it. It is enough for them to ^dmire it
themselves, and to say as their common people use to do, though ^hey cannot
defend it, yet there are ^ome that can. And although it ^ay be no particular
person can do ^, yet their cause is able to defend ^ self. But for all that I
can see, by ^ck kind of answers, the intention of them, is, to entreat us, not
to tri^mph over the weakness of their pre^nt Writers, but to wait till the
^ause it self thinks fit to write. And when it does so, they may expect further
answer; but it were a great piece of cruelty for us to hasten the^ ruin, who
fall so fast before us b^ each others Pens.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 16. l. 16. for that, r. than: p. 2^ l. 8. for errors, r. concerns.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North door.
A Rational Account of the ^rounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord-Achbishop of Canterburyes Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer by T. C. wherein the true Grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the false discovered; the Church of England justified from the imputation of
Schism; and the most Important particular Controversies between us and those of
the Church of Rome thoughly Examined: by Edward Stillingflee^ B. D.

Origines Sacrae; or a Rational Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and the matters therein
contained: by the sam Author: The third Edition Correcte^ and Amended.

Irenicum: A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds: by the same Author.

Shecinah: A Demonstration of the Divine Presence in Places of Religious
Worship: by J. Stillingfleet Rector of Beckingham in Lincolnshire.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics Bain upon the Ephesians.

Knowledge and Practice: or a plain Discourse of the chief things necessary to
be known, believed and practiced in order to salvation: by Sa^ Cradock B. D.
The second Edition Corrected and Enlarged, etc.

The Believers Duty toward the Spirit; the Sprits Office toward Believers by
H. H. B. D.


