A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Bonds of Resignation OF BENEFICES, In Point of LAW and
CONSCIENCE.

By the Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THE Intention of Writing and Publishing the following Discourse, was to give a
stop, if possible, to a Dangerous and Prevailing Practice; and so much the more
Dangerous, because it is managed with so much Secrecy, and Persons are often
drawn into it, before they are aware of the Mischief of it. They are told, That
there is no Law against it; and that there are Adjudged Cases and Precedents in
Law for it; and that there is nothing amiss in the Bond of Resignation it self:
but if there be any corrupt or evil Practice after it, that makes it fit to be
condemned in Equity, but not in Law. But a general Bond of Resignation of a
Benefice upon Notice, in order to the obtaining a Presentation to that
Benefice, has such a Simoniacal Appearance; that any person who pretends to
Conscience cannot but think it necessary to Examine, how far such a Practice
can be consistent, not only with the Law, but with the Oath which he is to take
against all Simoniacal Contracts and Promises, directly or indirectly etc. for
or concerning the procuring or obtaining the Rectory or Vicarage of etc. How
can any man that enters into these Bonds, say that he does it not in order to
the Obtaining a Presentation? And does not such a Bond amount to a Contract?
How then can they satisfy themselves in taking this Oath after such a Bond? All
they can pretend is, that although it be a Contract for such an End, yet it is
no Simoniacal Contract. But which way are we to be satisfied in point of
Conscience, what is a Simoniacal Contract, and what not? Is it only from the
Statute 31 Eliz. c. 6. so that what is there forbidden is Simoniacal and
nothing else? But where has that Law determined what Simony is, when it is
never mentioned in it? It severely prohibits some corrupt Practices as to
Benefices; but it never goes about to restrain the Notion of Simony to them (as
will appear in the following Discourse) and the Ecclesiastical Laws, as to this
matter, are left as they were before. If therefore there be such a true Notion
of a Simoniacal Contract, as is allowed by our Laws, which is not confined to
that Statute; then it must follow, that there may be a Simoniacal Contract,
which is not condemned by that Law: and therefore all persons who understand
the Nature and Extent of our Laws, will have a care of Restraining the Nature
of a Simoniacal Contract to the Letter of that Statute.

It may be said, that a Simoniacal Contract is an ill Name put upon we know not
what, if we go beyond the Law of the Land: and that there must be some certain
bounds set to such hard Words; or else the snare may be greater another way:
and that here is no such thing as Real Simony in the case; but the Word is
applied to some indirect Practices in obtaining Benefices, but what those are
the Law must determine. To which I answer, that I am very far from going beyond
the Law of the Land for determining this matter. For I do acknowledge that
since the Notion of Simony is extended beyond the first Occasion of the Name,
there must be a certain Rule to determine it; and That I do freely grant is the
Law of the Land. But by it, I do not mean a particular Statute made with
respect to some more notorious Acts, which are punishable in the Courts of
Common Law; but I understand by the Law of England that Comprehensive Body of
Laws, which have been here received, as the Measure of our Judgment and Actions
in those things which are to be determined by them.

If a Question be made whether a Contract made at Sea be a good Contract; it
will be no good Answer, to say it must be a good Contract, because there is
nothing in it contrary to the Rules of the Common Law. For, if our Common Law
should happen to allow such Contracts, which the Civil Law does not; will it be
ground enough to Affirm, that it is a good Contract because our Common Law does
not condemn it? No certainly. But it must be determined by that Law which is
proper for it, and being here received for such, is in such Cases the Law of
the Land.

So I say here; the Ecclesiastical Law, so far as it is received and allowed by
the Common Law, is the Rule and Measure, whereby the Nature of Simony is to be
determined; and that is allowed by our most learned and judicious Interpreters
of our Common Law, to be of Ecclesiastical Cognizance: only such Acts as come
under Statutes belong to the Courts of Common Law. And there was a general
Presumption in Law before, that no Patron was to make any Advantage to himself
of a Right of Presentation. And therefore my Lord Coke says, 3. Inst. 156.
That a Guardian in Socage of a Manor whereunto an Advowson is appendant shall
not present to the Church, because he can take nothing for the Presentation for
the which he may account to the Heir: from whence he infers, that Simony is
odious in the Eye of the Common Law. And it is very well if it so continues;
which I can hardly imagine, if these Bonds of Resignation prevail. But if by
the Ecclesiastical Law, as received here, such Bonds are Simoniacal, being a
Contract in order to the obtaining a Presentation; then it can give little
satisfaction to any Man's Conscience to be told, that they are not against Law,
i.e. against the Statute 31 Eliz. c. 6.

My business is not here to give a full Account of the Matters contained in the
following Discourse; but only to remove some general Prejudices against the
Design of it. Which is truly no other, than to bring this secret Practice into
open View, and to have it fairly Examined and Discussed. For, while it is
managed in this manner, there is not only Mischief done to the Church, but to
the Consciences of Men; who are very apt to suspect a Snare in all such Bonds,
and are very uneasy at the thoughts of them afterward. If there be any better
Reasons to be given for them, than I have yet seen; I should be glad to be
convinced of the Lawfulness of such indirect Practices and Private Contracts:
but at present I think (if they be not timely prevented) they will end in
unspeakable Mischief to the Parochial Clergy, who are the main Ecclesiastical
Body of the Church of England; and in whose welfare we ought to be all
concerned.

And truly I cannot but be very tender in what relates to Their Rights; for
their Work and Duty is Great and Laborious, if it be performed as it ought to
be; and they ought not to have any new Burdens imposed upon them, under a
pretense of Law, which neither they nor their Successors will be able to bear.

I am very sensible, how much in this Age depends upon the Faithfulness and
Diligence and Good Reputation of the Parochial Clergy of England. For I am not
much afraid of any Designs of our open Enemies (or which may be worse, of our
pretended Friends) if we be true to our selves; i. e. if we seriously and
conscientiously do our Duties with respect to God, the People, and our own
Souls. If we do not give way to unreasonable Suspicions and causeless
Iealousies of one another; if we mind the Interest of Religion more than our
own, and serve God and not our own Lusts; if we sincerely promote the best Ends
in the World, the saving Souls and doing good to Mankind; God will not be
wanting to us: but He that has saved us from the Lion and the Bear, will
likewise save us from the Fox and the Viper; I mean such who under fair and
plausible pretenses eat through the Bowels of their Mother; and by secret and
indirect Practices go about to ruin the Church they profess themselves to be
of: although by their Works they deny it.

If I had not some more than ordinary Reason to believe such things to be not
only Practiced but Encouraged by such who pretend, not only to understand our
Law, but to Direct the Nation in it; I should hardly have undertaken a Task of
this Nature. But having so just an occasion to search into this Matter, as well
as I could, and finding so much Cause of Dissatisfaction as to these Bonds; I
thought it my Duty to do what lay in me to prevent that Mischief which is
hastening upon our Church by them. If I am mistaken in any part of the following
Discourse, I shall be glad to be better informed: and if I am not, I hope that
our Church may receive no disadvantage by it. And as I honor the Profession of
the Law, and the many Worthy Persons, who are and have been of it: so I cannot
but be concerned to find some Pretenses of Law made use of to such ill Purposes
and Designs; that if the number of Patrons that are against our Established
Religion should happen to exceed those that are for it; by the help of these
Bonds of Resignation, the Title to most of our Parochial Cures would in a
little time fall into the hands of Popish Priests: which would much facilitate
the Introducing their Religion; when so many Protestant Incumbents would so
easily be turned out, by no other means, but by these Bonds of Resignation. And
therefore it is not merely the Interest of our Parochial Clergy, but of our
Religion, which lies at stake. And this I suppose will be sufficient to justify
this Undertaking.

Westminster, July 10. 1695. E. W.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Bonds of Resignation etc.
THE Design of this Discourse, is to Enquire into a Case, too commonly
Practiced among us, and too little Examined; which is concerning Bonds of
Resignation given by Clergymen to Patrons in order to the obtaining a
Presentation to a Benefice with Cure of Souls. This is a Case which respects
both Law and Conscience: and it is not so easy a matter, as some seem to take
it for granted, to Resolve it as to either of them. For if such a Practice be
within the Reason and Intention of the Law, which forbids all Corrupt
Presentations and Resignations, 31 Eliz. c. 6. then it cannot be Justified by
Law; and if it be against the Scope and Design of the Oath against Simoniacal
Contracts, then it can much less be Justified in point of Conscience. And
whether it be or not, is the Subject of this present Discourse; which I am
sorry there is so much occasion for; but since there are too many that Practice
it, and others too ready to Defend it; and since it is of so mischievous
Consequence to the Interest of the Church of England, if it prevails* I think
it highly necessary to enquire more strictly into this Matter, than has been
hitherto done. Which I shall do in such a manner, as to make it appear that no
Considerations whatsoever have swayed me, but those of Law and Conscience; and
I hope those who have been drawn into such Snares will see cause to Repent, (if
they do it not already) and others take care how they run themselves into such
Perplexities, which no Precedents in point of Law, and no Authority in point of
Conscience can give them Satisfaction in.

But I intend no Reflections on particular Persons; and I cannot believe that
any who have impartially weighed these things can maintain the Lawfulness of
them so, as to wish them generally practiced. For, however there may be some
Cases wherein such Bonds may be thought far more Reasonable than in others: yet
it cannot be denied that there are far more Cases, wherein such a Practice must
be destructive to the Legal Rights of the Church. Suppose some Patrons to be
Persons of great Piety and Integrity, who do require these Bonds only to bind
the Clergy the more strictly to do their Duty: suppose others have no Regard to
their own Interest, but only take care of Minors, bred up with a prospect of
such Benefices which they are not yet capable of: (which are the most
Reasonable Considerations insisted upon in the Adjudged Cases:) but what are
these to the multitude of most unjust and unreasonable Considerations, which
may be made the Conditions of these Bonds? For the Bonds are supposed to be
General; and so the Patrons left at liberty to impose their own Conditions.
And, are there no such kind of Patrons among us who may be too justly suspected
to mind their own Interest above the Churches Good? and therefore will take all
ways to lessen the Profits of Benefices in their Disposal, as far as they are
told that the Law permits them? Such I mean, who have no Restraint but what the
Law lays upon them, having no Sense of Honor or Conscience in these matters.
And if it once pass for an allowed Doctrine in Law, that Bonds of Resignation
are lawful; what shall stop such Men from putting very unreasonable Conditions
upon their Incumbents, or else they may presently call them to an Account for
the Forfeiture of their Bonds? If then there be no effectual course so much as
offered, against very hard and unreasonable Terms; how can such Bonds be
thought Just and Reasonable?

It may be said, That if the Conditions be such as are allowed by Law, then the
Bonds are lawful, otherwise not. But this by no means clears the Difficulty.
For the main Question is, Whether such Bonds be lawful, where the Conditions
are not expressed; but mere notice of three or six Months? And these are the
general Bonds of Resignation: and such I think I may with Reason affirm to be
against both Law and Conscience. But suppose there may be Conditions of both
kinds required, but it is not expressed in the Bonds what they are: what a
miserable Slavery must the Clergy be under, who give general Bonds, and know
not what Conditions will be required? And then they must go to Law, and be at
greater Charge and Trouble than they can well bear, to know whether the
Conditions required of them be such as the Law allows or not? So that the
general Allowance of Bonds of Resignation upon Notice, although the Law be left
to determine the particular Conditions, is that which we have reason to look
upon as very hard and unjust, and inconsistent with the Nature and Design of
that Relation which the Law supposes between Patrons and Incumbents, as will
appear more afterward.

There are two things chiefly insisted on by those who plead for these Bonds of
Resignation:

I. That there is no Law against them;

II. That there have been Cases adjudged for them: and both these I shall
carefully examine.

I. That there is no Law against them. There are two Laws to be considered in
this matter:

1. The Law against Simoniacal Contracts 31 Eliz;

2. The Law which requires every Incumbent to take an Oath against Simony.

1. As to the Law against Simoniacal Contracts: The Statute is expressly against
Presenting to a Benefice for a Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit or Benefit,
directly or indirectly, or entering into Bond or Covenant for that purpose; 31
Eliz. c. 6. n. 5. Wherein these things are observable:

(1.) That it is not a mere Sum of Money which is here forbidden, but any
Benefit whatsoever, directly or indirectly.

(2.) That not mere doing the thing, but entering into Bond or Covenant to do it
is within the reach of this Law.

(3.) That the Penalty is against such who do Present for or by Reason of any
Promise or Agreement for any Benefit whatsoever: or those who do accept such
Presentations on those terms: i. e. so as it becomes the Motive of such
Presentation or Acceptance.

(4.) That the same Law declares n. 8. against corrupt Resigning or Exchanging
the Benefice he enjoys, for any Sum of Money or Benefit whatsoever.

(5.) That the Ecclesiastical Censures still remain in Force against these
Offenses: which supposes that this Law does not supersede the Ecclesiastical
Laws here in being. n. 9.

So that here are two material Questions to be resolved upon this Statute.

[1.] Whether since the making this Statute, there be any Simoniacal Contract,
but what is against the Purport of it?

[2.] Whether a Bond of Resignation, upon which a Benefice is given and
accepted, be within the Design of it?

[1.] As to the former; it is observable that the words Simony or Simoniacal
Contract are never mentioned in this Statute. For, if they had, the Judges
would have had sufficient Reason to have declared what was Simony and what not.
We are told indeed by the Reverend and Learned Judges in the Case of Mackaller
and Todderick, Cr. Car. 361.
That the Consideration to have Money to procure one to be Rector of a Church
is a Simoniacal Contract, and an unlawful Act condemned by all Laws: and that
the Common Law before the Statute 31 Eliz. took notice of it. But they do not
declare how far the Common Law could take notice of it, before that Statute;
any farther than that it was not a thing allowed by it. For certainly it was
then of Spiritual Cognizance: and the Persons guilty of it were to be proceeded
against by the Ecclesiastical Laws. And consequently, the Notion of Simony is
to be taken from thence, and not merely from this Statute: so that if Accepting
a Benefice upon giving a Bond of Resignation were Simoniacal before, it does
not cease to be so by this Statute. Indeed corrupt Resignation of a Benefice
has not the same Penalty by this Statute with corrupt Acceptance of it at
first: for that is a Disability, and the other double the Value. But hereby we
see that the one is against the Law, as much as the other. So far then it is
clear by this Statute, that any corrupt Resignation is against Law: and if the
Enquiry be after the Penalty, the Statute must determine that. But if the
Question be, Whether Resignation upon a Bond given beforehand in order to a
Presentation be a Simoniacal Act or not, as done in Pursuance of a Simoniacal
Contract? in That the Statute gives no Rule; but only declares the Penalties of
some particular Acts, which are there expressed.

Those who would have nothing now to be Simony, but what is there forbidden,
must first prove that the Intention of the Law was to Limit and Determine the
Nature of Simony; which (as is already observed) is not so much as mentioned in
it. The Reason of the Law as to Penalties is one thing, and the Nature of a
Simoniacal Contract another. If a Question be put, whether a Simoniacal
Contract be void in Law or not? 3. Inst. 153. Marg.
my Lord Coke says, That the Statute does not make the Bond, Covenant,
Promise, or other Assurance void, but the Presentment etc. and so it was
adjudged 40 Eliz. This is somewhat strange Doctrine: that a Presentment should
be void by Reason of a Simoniacal Bond, and yet that Bond not be void in Law.
For that which makes another thing void, one would think should be void in it
self: especially since he says in the same Chapter, F. 156.
That Simony is odious in the Eye of the Common Law. But not so very odious: if
a Simoniacal Contract be a good Contract according to the Common Law. But he
distinguishes between Malum in se against the Common Law, and Malum prohibitum
by Statute Law. How does this clear the point? The Presentation is void, being
prohibited by the Statute: But is not a Simoniacal Contract malum in se against
the Common Law? how then comes This not to be void? especially since it is
contractus ex turpi causa: and for that Reason my Lord Hobart held it void in
Law; Hob. f. 167.
and so the Court held in Mackaller's Case. Cr. Car. 361.
But suppose my Lord Coke in the right as to a Simoniacal Contract; that it is
not void at Common Law: it follows from thence, that the Consideration of Law
and Conscience is different in this matter. For I suppose none will deny that a
Simoniacal Contract is unlawful in point of Conscience: and yet he asserts it,
not to be void in Law. Why then may not Bonds of Resignation, although not
within the compass of this Statute, yet be unlawful in point of Conscience: as
well as a Simoniacal Contract be unlawful in point of Conscience, and yet be
good by the Common Law? Either therefore Simony, as odious as it is in the Eye
of the Law, must not be malum in se against Common Law, as my Lord Coke speaks:
or if it be, there must be another Rule of Conscience in this matter from this
Statute. I would fain know, what was Simony at Common Law before this Statute:
and whether that which was so before does not continue so still, if it be not
taken away by it? For, if there be no Simony now, but what is expressed in that
Statute: then it must declare; what is Simony and what not. Simony, says my
Lord Coke, is described by this Act, 31 Eliz. and he says in his Margin,
Injustum est illa vendere, quae gratis distribui debent: which is a very good
Illustration of it. But the Question is, what is meant by Selling? whether it
be merely for a Sum of Money, paid down, or secured by Bond or Covenant? or
whether it does not take in any kind of Benefit or Emolument accruing to the
Person who bestows it, which hinders it from being a Free Gift? The Casuists
say, Sylvestr. v. Simon.
Nomine emptionis and venditionis intelligitur omnis contractus non gratuitus.
But can that be called a Free Gift, where there is a Bond of Resignation of
such a thing, whereof the Possession and Reversion bear a Price, and have a
real Value? We need not run to Simon Magus to understand what Turpe Commercium
is. There were many Laws among the old Romans against purchasing any Public
Offices; Sigon. de Judic. l. 2. c. 30.
and they thought it a great Reproach to them for any Price to be set upon
them: as the great Roman Master said, Quintil. l. 12.
Pretium quod habet, hoc ipso vilescit. By the Laws Acilia, V. Ciceron. (...)to
Plancio. Dion. l. 36.
and Calpurnia, all that were Convict of giving Money for Offices, were under a
Disability, or Incapacity of any for the future; and the Mercatores Potestatum
were Infamous by their Laws. Lamprid. in Alex. Sever. Arist. Pol. l. 2. c. 12.
Aristotle thought it a matter of very ill Consequence to any Government to
have any thing of Money given for Offices: because it taught men to set a
greater value on Money than Virtue. These Considerations, setting aside the
Story of Simon Magus, were great enough to induce the Christian Church to be
extremely Nice and Tender in this matter of Benefices: and not only to forbid
the direct Sale of them for Money; but any indirect Trafficking which might
take of the entire Freedom of the Presentation of Persons to them. I know to
how little purpose it would be, to reckon up all the Canons which have been
made in the Christian Church from the Apostles Times downwards against Simony:
because some will say, That the Ecclesiastics were always true to their own
Interest. But let us set aside all Prejudice in this matter, and consider it
Impartially. If any Offices in the World ought to be free from the Suspicion of
Sordid Trafficking: certainly those of the Church ought, from the Nature and
Design of their Employments. The Question then will come to this, Whether
giving a Bond of Resignation in order to the Procuring a Benefice, be such a
Trafficking or not? And we have three Rules to Judge by:

1. The Nature and Reason of the thing: whether such Actings be not
inconsistent with that Freedom, which ought to be used, both in Giving and
Taking Ecclesiastical Benefices? So that, if there were no Laws either
Ecclesiastical or Civil in the Case; whether there be not something in these
Transactions unbecoming the Design and Dignity of the Employment?

2. The Ecclesiastical Law of England; which has been from time to time
received here and allowed by a general Consent; and still continues in Force,
where it is not repugnant to any Laws of the Realm: which cannot be pretended
in this Case.

3. The Statute Law; which does not abrogate the Ecclesiastical Law as to
Simony: it only Enacts some particular Penalties on some more Remarkable
Simoniacal Acts, as to Benefices and Orders; but never once goes about to
Repeal any Ecclesiastical Laws about Simony, or to determine the Nature and
Bounds of it.

[2.] But let us come more closely to the Statute it self; to see whether these
Bonds of Resignation be not against the Design of it. The Words are, If any
Person for any Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit or Benefit, directly or
indirectly; or for or by reason of any Promise, Agreement, Grant, Bond,
Covenant, or other Assurance of or for any Sum of Money, Gift or Profit
whatsoever, directly or indirectly; shall Present etc. Now we suppose a Patron
to Present one to a Benefice, without any Money, or Bond for Money; but he
declares before his Presenting him, that he must enter into a Bond to Resign
his Benefice upon six months Notice under a severe Penalty: to which he
submits, on the Condition of obtaining his Benefice. After this, the Patron
demands such a Portion of Tithes; or a Consent for him to Enclose, to the
apparent Benefit of the Patron, and Diminution of the Profits of the Living.
The Question is, Whether such a Bond be within the Design of this Statute? All
that can be said is, that no such Consideration is expressed in the Bond, which
is in General Terms: which implies, that if the Consideration had been
Expressed in the Bond, it had been plainly against the Law. But suppose it be
left out of the Bond: is not the Penal Sum of the Forfeiture of the Bond
sufficient to make the poor Incumbent comply with the Terms proposed
afterward? If none but just and reasonable things had been intended; why were
they not clearly expressed in the Bond it self, so as to prevent any Fear or
Jealousy of worse Designs? Have no such things ever been practiced, or heard of
among us? If there had not; does it not look like a Contrivance to Deceive the
Law, and to hamper the Consciences of those who take Benefices? And whatever is
done in Fraudem Legis, is against Law: for it frustrates the main Intention and
Design of a Law without breaking the Letter of it; which is the worst way of
defeating a Law.

But we are told, That our Courts of Law are to judge according to the Law; and
not according to an Equitable Construction of the Intention and Design of it.
If it be really so; it does only show that such Courts are under a strange
Limitation, which are tied up to the Letter of a Law, against the main Scope
and principal End of it. But by the Judges Oath 18 E. 3. n. 2. 20 E. 3. n. l.
they are bound to do Equal Law and Execution of Right to all the King's
Subjects etc. What is here meant by Equal Law? Is it to pursue the Letter of
the Law against the Reason and Design of it?

There are two sorts of Equity to be considered among us;

1. An Equity founded upon a Reasonable Construction of Law, according to the
Intention of it:

2. An Equity for which the Common Law has made no Provision; as in Cases of
Fraud, Accident and Trust: which is the true Foundation of the Court of Equity
in Chancery; viz. to supply the Defects of our Law in those Cases.

The Question now is, Whether the Judges at Common Law are so tied up to the
bare Letter of it, that they cannot take-in such Cases, which are according to
the Reason of a Law, but not within the Words of it? And my Lord Coke allows
this sort of Equity. For, says he, Equity is a Construction made by the
Judges, ^. Inst. 24. b.
that Cases out of the Letter of a Statute, yet being within the same Mischief
or Cause of making of the same, shall be within the same Remedy that That
Statute provideth. These are remarkable Words of this great Oracle of the Law,
and ought to be well weighed and considered in all such Cases as this. And he
afterward says, that Equity is the Reason of the Law, which weighs Cases
according to their due Measures; and so gives in paribus rationibus paria Iura
and Iudicia. If then these Bonds of Resignation are within the Reason of this
Law, and tend to the same Mischief; they ought to have the same Remedy: and it
cannot be made any just Plea for them, that they are not within the Letter of
the Law.

II. I now come to consider the Oath against Simony, which every Incumbent is
bound to take; which runs in these words: I, A. B. do swear that I have made no
Simoniacal Payment Contract or Promise, directly or indirectly, by my self or
by any other, to my Knowledge or with my Consent, to any Person or Persons
whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring or obtaining of the Rectory or
Vicarage; nor will at any time hereafter perform or satisfy any such kind of
Payment, Contract or Promise, made by any other without my Knowledge or Consent.

Simony, 3. Inst. 156.
says my Lord Coke, is the more odious, because it is ever accompanied with
Perjury; for the Presentee is sworn to commit no Simony.

Here are two things fit to be considered: 1. That the Oath is not merely
against direct Simony; but against any Simoniacal Contract for obtaining a
Benefice.

2. That this Oath is not limited to the Statute 31 Eliz. nor made in pursuance
of it; but was in being long before: and therefore must have its Interpretation
from the Ecclesiastical Law, as it was here received; and not from the words of
the Statute, which do not mention a Simoniacal Contract. Noy 25.
We must then enquire what was a Simoniacal Contract by our Ecclesiastical Law.

In our Provincial Constitutions, C. de jurejur. Present. stat.
which were received as part of our Law relating to Ecclesiastical Matters,
there is one about an Oath to be taken by every one presented before the
Bishop: That for the obtaining the Presentation he had neither promised nor
given any thing to him that presented him; nec aliquam propter hoc inierit
pactionem; nor entered into any Bond or Covenant for that end: not a Covenant,
to pay a Sum of Money, but to obtain the Presentation. Propter hoc, Lyndw. f.
56.
says Lyndwood, sc. ut praesentetur: and he declares it before, that whatever
is done with an Intention to induce the Patron to present, is Simoniacal; and
whatever Compact any enter into for that purpose, is a Simoniacal Contract. Nay
he goes so far as to say, the doing Any thing with that Design to obtain a
Benefice makes it a Mental Simony: (which reaches not to the Oath, and requires
no more but Repentance) but if there be a Bargain between the Patron and the
Party to be presented, he declares it to be a Simoniacal Contract. He puts the
Question, If a Person offers to serve a Patron for a Year or two, with that
Intention to obtain the Presentation to such a Benefice by it, Whether such a
one can with a safe Conscience take the Oath? He answers Negatively, If this
were his principal Design, and there were a Bond or Covenant between them to
that purpose: for this were Simony. From whence it follows; that any Bond or
Covenant entered into for that End, to obtain a Presentation, was Simoniacal
according to the sense of our Law Ecclesiastical.

In the time of Archbishop Courtney, the Form of the Oath was more full and
express, as it is extant in the Archbishop's Register called Morton, and in
Spelman's Councils: for there is this Clause added, That neither themselves nor
any Friends of theirs are under any Bonds about the Resignation or Exchange of
their Benefices. Here the Oath is express against any Bonds of Resignation. But
why is this Clause left out since? Because it was supposed to be sufficiently
implied in the other Words: since this was at least an indirect Simoniacal
Contract.

It may be said, That Men are not now tied up to the Canonists Opinions about
Mental and Conventional Simony: for out Law owns nothing but real Simony; i. e.
either Actual Payment, or a Bond to pay such a Sum of Money to obtain a
Presentation: and if there be no Contract for that End, it is no Simoniacal
Contract according to our Law.

This is all that can be said in this Case: but I think it can give no
considering Man satisfaction. For the Intention of the Law, in being so strict
and severe against all Simoniacal Contracts, was twofold:

1. To preserve the Dignity of the Sacred Function; which could never be
upheld, if mean and sordid Trafficking were allowed as to Benefices. For the
People can never have any due Respect or Veneration for a Person, whom they
suspect to have come into his Place among them by indirect Practices; although
it be not the Payment of so much Money. For they have so much Sense as to know,
that what is valuable by Money is as good as Money according to its proportion:
and if a Man gives a Bond to Resign his Living upon Notice; they know how much
this abates of the Value of it to him, when he holds it on such a Precarious
Title: and that he gives so much to obtain the Living, as it is of less Value
to him, than if he had it without any such Bond. He that is forced by a Bond to
resign his Benefice, must part with what was really valuable to him; as much as
the Possession of it for so many years, as he might otherwise enjoy it, would
come to: and he that gives a Bond to that purpose to obtain a Presentation,
does oblige himself to give to the Patron so much as that Interest can be
valued at. Is not a free unconditional Interest in a Benefice really more
valuable, than that which depends on the Pleasure of another? If it be; then he
that gives a Bond of Resignation, does give something really valuable in Money,
to obtain the Presentation. And how can this be excused from Simony? Yes; some
may say, Simony is only a frightfull Word used by Ecclesiastics to deter
people from making the best of their own: whereas the true Notion of Simony is
only buying the Gifts of the Holy Ghost: but what Relation is there between the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost and a Benefice?

I do not think there are any so weak, as to imagine the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost can be purchased with Money given to Patrons: and if they could, the
Dealers in such Bargains would not think them worth their Money; which they
could lay out upon things of greater value to them. But here lies the true
state of the Case. It has been the Wisdom and Charity of Princes and other
Persons of Estates, to make Endowments of Parochial Churches for the Support
and Encouragement of those in Holy Orders to attend upon the Service of God in
them: and the Law of the Land has so annexed the Spiritual Duty with the
Temporal Advantage, that no one can be capable of the latter, that is not
obliged to the other. So that the Right of Discharging a Spiritual Trust and
the Right of Enjoying the Profits go together. But to prevent the unspeakable
mischief of Purchasing the Profits which are devoted to such a Spiritual use,
this has been called by the detestable Name of Simony: and very severe Laws
have been made, not only against the giving of Money, but the using of any
indirect means to obtain a Presentation. Because such things do lessen the
Esteem of those who use them; and not only thereby make them more incapable of
doing Service, but expose the Sacred Function it self to Contempt.

2. Another great End of these Laws, is to keep the Clergy from Oppression and
Slavery. I am far from going about to lessen the Just and Legal Rights of
Patrons; who by our Laws enjoy some Privileges, which are not allowed them in
other Countries, where the Ecclesiastical Law is stricter than here in England:
as in the liberty of Selling the Rights of Advowsons; their Trial at Common
Law; the six Months for Patrons etc. But for our right understanding the
present matter, it must be considered, as to the Rights of Patrons, That it was
not an Original and Absolute Right to dispose of Benefices as they pleased; but
a limited Trust reposed in them, to put-in Fit Persons to Discharge the Duties
of their Places. It is very well known to all persons who have looked into
these matters, that in the first Settlement of this Church of England, the
Bishops of the several Dioceses had them under their own immediate Care; and
that they had the Clergy living in a Community with them, whom they sent abroad
to several parts of their Dioceses, as they saw occasion to Employ them: but
that by Degrees, they saw a necessity of fixing Presbyters within such a
Compass, to attend upon the Service of God among the People that were the
Inhabitants: that these Precincts which are since called Parishes, were at
first much larger, and cast into such Divisions in each Diocese, as probably
make up the several Deaneries since: that when Lords of Manors were inclined to
build Churches for their own Conveniences, they found it necessary to make
some Endowments, to oblige those who officiated in their Churches to a diligent
Attendance: that upon this, the several Bishops were very well content to let
those Patrons have the Nomination of Persons to those Churches; provided they
were satisfied of the Fitness of those Persons, and that it were not deferred
beyond such a limited time. So that the Right of Patronage is really but a
limited Trust; and the Bishops are still in Law the Judges of the Fitness of
the Persons to be Employed in the several parts of their Dioceses. But the
Patrons never had the Absolute Disposal of their Benefices upon their own
Terms; but if they did not present Fit Persons within the limited time, the
Care of the Places did return to the Bishop, who was then bound to provide for
them. 2. Inst. 361.
Some pretend, That before the Lateran Council, there was no time of Lapse to
the Bishop, if the Patron did not Present: but that the Bishop was to provide
one to serve the Cure in the mean time, and the Patron might present when he
would. But this is certainly a Mistake: however it be asserted by Persons of
great Authority. My Lord Coke cites Bracton and Fleta for it: but I can find
nothing like it in either of them. Bracton indeed speaks of the time of Lapse
by the Council of Lateran, Bract. l. 4. 341.
which was to be after six Months, if a Dispute happened about the Title; and
this Constitution is extant in the Decretals: Ext. de Jure Patron. c. 22.
and the same Words are used by Fleta: Fleta l. 5. c. 14.
but not a Word in either of them of any unlimited Power which Patrons had
before, as far as I can find. Which made me wonder at such a Maxim, as I find
by several fathered on Bracton, Seldom of Tithes, c. 12. 389.
Ante Concilium Lateranense nullum currebat tempus contra Praesentantes.
Abridgment 2. 354.
But Rolls very fairly reports it just as it is in Bracton; yet afterward he
recites Mr. Selden's words. Ext. de Officio Jud. Ordin. c. 4.
Before this Lateran Council, Alex. had sent a Constitution hither, which
allowed the Bishops, in case any Difference happened about the Patronage, to
sequester the Profits, without fixing the Time: which is all the Foundation I
can meet with for this famous Maxim. But before this we may observe several
Canons of Councils, Eugen. 2. in Synod. Romans c. 24.
which limited the Patrons to three Months. These Canons were never received in
England; Leo 4. in Synod. Romans c. 25. ed. Holst.
which, if I mistake not, had always the privilege of six Months for Patrons.
This I ground upon the Register, Registr. f. 42.
a Book of great Authority, and considerable Antiquity; where it is said
expressly, That the Bishops have not the Right of Lapse till six Months are
passed; which is said to be Secundum legem and Consuetudinem Regni Angliae;
according to the ancient Custom and Law of England. And the like was observed
in the old Customs of Normandy. Cust. Norm. Art. 69.


But by the Ancient Law of England, notwithstanding the Right of Patronage, the
Bishop of the Diocese had these Rights reserved to him:

1. The Right of Admission of the Person presented:

2. The Right of Lapse, or bestowing the Benefice, if the Patron failed his six
Months:

3. The Right of making an Avoidance, by Deprivation or Resignation.

1. The Bishop has by the Law the Right of Admission of the Person presented
by the Patron. For here from the time of Christianity being received among the
Saxons, at least as far as we can trace any Footsteps of the Settlement of a
Parochial Clergy, it was expressly provided for; That no Presbyters should be
fixed in any Places, without the Consent of the Bishop. For this we have a
Canon of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, preserved by Egbert Archbishop of
York (each the Seventh in their Sees, but at some distance of time) in his
Collection of Canons: the words are, pelm. Conil.
Statutum est ut sine Authoritate and Consensu Episcoporum, Presbyteri in
quibuslibet* Ecclesiis non constituantur, nec inde expellantur; and siquis hoc
facere tentaverit, Synodali Sententia feriatur. So that by the Original
Constitution of this Church the Bishops had the Power of Fixing Presbyters in
Churches, and of Removing them if there were occasion; and no other Persons
could do it without them. This does by no means infringe the Right of
Nomination or Presentation of Fit Persons to the Bishop: but it implies that no
such Presentation was sufficient, unless the Bishop did first Approve and
Consent to the Person. Wherein the Ancient Right of Patronage here in England
did consist, we cannot have a better Account; than from the Words of all the
Nobility of England in their Remonstrance to Gregory IX. when he attempted to
incroach upon them by Papal Provisions: Matt. Paris. A. D. 1239. p. 513.
Cum igitur a prima Christianitatis Fundatione in Anglia, tali fuerint hactenus
progenitores nostri gavisi liberate, quod decedentibus Ecclesiarum Rectoribus,
Ecclesiarum Patroni Personas idoneas eligentes ad easdem, Diocesanis
praesentaverunt ab eisdem Ecclesiarum Regimini praeficiendas. These are words
of great Weight; and do plainly show, that the Right of Patronage consisted in
the Nomination of Fit Persons to the Bishop of the Diocese for any vacant
Places: but that the Bishops were, if they approved them, to put them into the
Possession of them. In the time of Innocent III. the King wrote to the Pope;
Innocent Epist. l. 1.
that the Nobility and Bishops of England did insist upon it, as their Right by
the Ancient Custom, to build Churches on their own Lands: and the Pope yielded
it to the Laity, provided that they had the Consent of the Bishop of the
Diocese; and that the Rights of former Churches were not prejudiced thereby.
Seldom of Tithes 361.
But says Mr. Seldom, they challenged it without License. What to do? To build
Churches on their own Lands: but not a word of putting-in any Incumbents by
their own power without the Bishop's Consent and Approbation. Nay, it appears
that they could not build Churches on their own Lands without the Bishops
Allowance. Mr. Seldom would fain have it believed, ^. 387.
That the Right of Presentation to the Bishop of the Diocese came in by the
Canon Law about A. D. 1200. But the Insinuations of that kind, as they are
frequent in his Book of Tithes, so they do show his want of Skill or Ingenuity
at that time, as much as any one part of it. But I need go no farther, than
this Letter of the Nobility to the Pope; who were extremely jealous of their
Rights of Patronage, and yet they challenged nothing thereby, but a Right of
Nomination of a Fit Person to the Bishop of the Diocese: not a word of
Investiture or Collation by the Patron; which Mr. Seldom talks of. He does not
deny, That after A. D. 1200, 83. 86. 38^.
it was the undoubted Law of England for the Patrons to present to the Bishops.
But I say, it was the Law of England, before ever the Decretals were made: it
was the Original and Fundamental Law of the English Church; and as Ancient as
the Right of Patronage. In the same Epistle, they desire the Pope to leave them
to their ancient Liberty, which was Personas idoneas praesentare. But who is to
be Judge of the Fitness of the Persons? For that, we have a full Declaration of
the Ancient Law and Custom of England, in Artic. Cleri, c. 13. De Idoneitate
Personae praesentatae ad Beneficium Ecclesiasticum, pertinet Examinatio ad
Iudicem Ecclesiasticum, and ita est hactenus usitatum, and fiat in posterum.
Upon which my Lord Coke says, 2. Inst. 632.
That the Examination of the Ability and Sufficiency of the Person belongs to
the Bishop, who is the Ecclesiastical Judge; and in this Examination he is a
Judge and not a Minister; and may and ought to refuse the Person presented, if
he be not Persona idonea. And that this was no new Law, appears by the words,
That it had been hitherto so used, and should be so for the time to come. And
so Coke truly says, that this Act was but a Declaration of the Common Law and
Custom of the Realm. So that the Bishops Power of Examining and Judging the
Fitness of the Person presented is a part of the Common Law of England.

15 H. 7. 8. It is declared by all the Judges, That the Bishop in the
Examination of a Clerk, is a Judge and not a Minister. And if he misbehaves
himself, he is to be punished as a Judge.

18 H. 7. Keilway says, That the Bishop may refuse for Insufficiency; and is
to give notice to the Patron.

It was Resolved by the Court in Specot' s Case, 5 R. 57.
That the Court is to give Credit to the Bishop acting Iudicially: but then it
is said, That the Plea must be special and certain.

And so Coke says, that in a Quare Impedit brought against the Bishop for
Refusal of his Clerk, he must show the Cause of his Refusal specially and
directly.

But it was the Opinion of Lord Chief Justice Anderson, Anders. 190. Leon. 3.
200.
That in things not Triable at Common Law a General Plea was sufficient. But
when the Case came to the King's Bench 32 Eliz. it was there said, That the
Articuli Cleri mention a Reasonable Cause; which, say they, must be Special:
for Causa vaga and incerta non est rationabilis. But the main point is, Who is
to judge what is a Reasonable Cause? and I cannot but think that Anderson's
Opinion is the truest and most Reasonable. If it be for a matter Triable at
Common Law, that Court is to judge: but if not, I do not see how it can be
avoided, but the Bishop must judge: and his Judgment of Insufficiency must be
taken; as well as in any Certificate whatsoever. For, if the Law trust him with
the Judgment of a Matter proper for him to judge of; other courts, which have
no Cognizance of it, must give credit to such a Certificate: or else they must
take upon them to judge in Matters that are not of their Cognizance; which is
to confound the Jurisdiction of Courts. I grant, the Judgment of the Bishop is
not Conclusive: but the Appeal then lies to the Supreme Ecclesiastical Court;
and the Metropolitan is to be Judge of the Sufficiency of the Person.

But is not this a great Prejudice to the Right of Patrons, if the Bishops are
to judge of the Fitness of Persons presented; and so the Patrons Presentation
may signify nothing, if the Bishop pleases?

This is a Trust which the Law reposes in the Bishop, and it lies upon his
Conscience to act sincerely in this matter: and in case of Examination of Fit
Persons, a Trust must be placed somewhere: and in whom more properly than in
the Bishop of the Diocese? to whom the Care of it does especially belong; and
that by as plain Law as any we have. Are not all Judges trusted in Matters that
come before them? But this is no Decisive Judgment: for an Appeal lies
according to the Nature of the Matter. And this is no other Trust than has
been allowed in all other Christian Nations, where the Rights of Patronage are
owned. Justinian owns it several times in his Novels; Novel. 53. ^it. 12. c. 2.
23. c. 18.
not only that the Bishops are to Examine and Approve those who are nominated
by Founders of Churches; but if they find them unworthy, they may put others in
their room. By the Capitulars, Cap. l. 1. c. 84. l. 5. 98.
or old Ecclesiastical Laws of France, Addit. 4. 95.
the Lay Patrons are not only to present to the Bishop such as were Probabilis
Vitae and Doctrinae; but if upon Examination they found them otherwise, it was
in their power to reject them. Ext. de Jure Patr. c. 29.
As to the Canon Law, there can be no Dispute in this Point: but if the Bishop
refused, an Appeal did lie to the Pope; and if he were unjustly refused, the
Bishop was bound to provide for him: but during the Appeal, the Patron might
present another; whom if the Bishop approved, the Appeal did fall. Rebuffus
Rebuff. de Nomin. n. 10.
a noted Lawyer says, That it is a damning Sin in a Bishop, not to Examine the
Fitness of those who are presented by Patrons. And a late learned French
Canonist says, Those are to blame who lay the Fault of so many unworthy Men
being in Places on the Lay Patrons: Fra. de Roye de Jure Patron. Proleg. c. 25.
for, says he, the Bishops are to blame, who are bound to Examine, and if they
see Cause, to reject them. So that we have not only our own Law, but the
General Consent of the Christian World, where the Right of Patronage is
allowed; as to the Bishops Right of Examining and Judging the Fitness of
Persons presented to Benefices.

2. The Right of Collation upon Lapse belongs to the Bishop, notwithstanding
the Right of Patronage. It is said by Lord Hobart, Hob. 154.
That a Lapse is not an Interest naturally, but a mere Trust in Law; and
afterward; That the Ordinary, or he that is to present by Lapse, is as a kind
of Attorney made by Law, to do that for the Patron; which it is supposed he
would do himself, if there were not some let: and therefore the Collation by
Lapse is in the Right of the Patron and for his Turn. This seems to me to be a
mistaken Notion of a Lapse: for the true Question is, Whether upon a Lapse the
Ordinary does collate Iure pleno, or Iure devoluto? Some French Lawyers held
the latter; De Roye de Jure Patr. p. 95. 145.
but Car. Molinaeus and others utterly reject that Opinion, for this Reason;
Because Churches and Dioceses were Iure communi under the Care of the Bishops;
but it was by particular Indulgence, that the Patrons had the Right of
Presentation: which being neglected, things do return to Common Right: and
therefore the Bishop has a true Interest, and acts not in the Right of the
Patron, but his Own.

It Is true, there is a Devolution afterward by our Law: for as the Author of
the Doctor and Student says, Dr. and Stud. c. 36. 125.
The Law of the Realm is, that if a Benefice falls void, then the Patron shall
present within six Months; and if he do not, that then the Ordinary shall
present: but yet the Law is farther in this Case, that if the Patron present
before the Ordinary put-in his Clerk, that then the Patron shall enjoy his
Presentment: and so it is, though the time should fall to the Metropolitan.
For, as he says, by our Law, if the Bishop does not collate within six Months,
then the Metropolitan presents. But this is by a Right of Devolution, and then
why not the other?

The Answer is, That the Bishop is Ordinary of the Diocese, and therefore it
comes to him of Common Right: but it falls to the Archbishop, not as Ordinary,
but as Superior; to whom the Right of Devolution falls upon the Inferiour's
Neglect. For, although in some respects, and in the Excepted Cases, the
Archbishop may be said to be Ordinary of the whole Province: yet that is not so
much in respect of Immediate Jurisdiction; Hob. 17. Brownl. 21. 27.
which Hobart and others say, was by virtue of the Legatine Power which was
annexed to his See. But the Archbishop has a Power as Metropolitan, to supply
the Defects of the Suffragans of his Province; and so this Right of collating
upon defect of the Ordinary comes to him by Right of Devolution.

But how then comes the King to his Right after the Metropolitan's Neglect?
That is, Dr. and Stud. 124.
say our Lawyers, Because the King is Patron Paramount of all the Benefices
within the Realm. Plowd. Com. 498. b.
The meaning is, That the King by Right of his Crown is to see that all Places
be duly supplied with Persons fit for them: and if all others whom the Law
has entrusted, do neglect their Duties; then by the natural Order and Course
of Government, it falls to the Supreme Power, which is to supply Defects, and
to reform Abuses.

3. The Bishop has the Right of making an Avoidance by Deprivation or
Resignation. For, as he has the Power of putting-in; so the Law has lodged in
him the Judicial Power of proceeding against Offenders, and has not left that
to the Judgment of the Patron. If we enquire, Who by our Law is made the proper
Judge of a Beneficed Person, whether he behaves himself so as to deserve to
lose his Benefice? Will any one say, that the Law has put this into the
Patron's hands? Yet all those who justify these Bonds of Resignation must in
Effect say, that the Patrons are the proper Judges: for they have the real
Power of Deprivation in their Hands, and may execute it when they please. Which
is such an Arbitrary Jurisdiction, as would be thought intolerable in other
Hands.

In all Causes of Deprivation of a Person actually possessed of a Benefice,
these things must concur:

1. A Monition or Citation of the Party to Appear:

2. A Charge given him, to which he is to Answer, called the Libel:

3. A Competent Time assigned for the Proofs and Answers:

4. A Liberty for Counsel to defend his Cause; and to except against the Proofs
and Witnesses:

5. A Solemn Sentence after hearing all the Proofs and Answers.

These are the Fundamentals of all Judicial Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, in order to a Deprivation: and if these things be not observed, the
Party has just cause of Appeal, and may have Remedy by a Superior Court. And
these Proceedings are agreeable to the Common Justice and Reason of Mankind:
because the Party accused has the liberty of Defense, and the Right of Appeal.
But there is nothing of all this, in Bonds of Resignation: for the Patron takes
the Advantage of the Forfeiture of the Bond; and so without any Trial, or
Proof, or Sentence, deprives him of his Benefice.

Some who are no Friends to the Ecclesiastical Courts, would have no
Deprivation of a Benefice, but by Proceedings at Common Law: because it is a
Freehold. Suppose that it were so (which seems contrary to the course of the
Law: for the Bishop in a Plea to a Quare Impedit, says, Nihil clamat praeter
Institutionem and Destitutionem Clericorum; and Ecclesiastical Deprivations
have been still allowed at Common Law, if they have been according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws) but taking it for granted, that a Deprivation of a
Freehold ought to be at Common Law: what then? what, without an Indictment, and
without a Trial by a Jury? No Hearing of the Cause, no Witnesses examined, no
Counsel to be heard, no Judgment by his Peers? And can this be agreeable to the
Fundamental Laws of England; to have Men forced out of their Freeholds in such
an Arbitrary manner? What would they think; if other Freehold Estates, which
hold of a Superior Lord, were made so Arbitrary, as to Depend upon the Will of
the Lord so, as to be turned out upon six Months notice? Let us see Bonds of
Resignation practiced upon such Estates: and then we shall soon find, what
Clamours will be made against them, as overthrowing the Fundamental Rights and
Liberties of the People. Is there not the same Reason in this Case? Is there
not greater? because these Benefices are not Freeholds, which are held of the
Patrons; but they have only a Right to Present Fit persons to them. But it may
be, that the Defenders of these Bonds will deny Benefices to be Freeholds by
the Law of England. It is easy to guess, what some Men would have them to be,
by these Bonds: I am sure far enough from Freeholds. But such private
Transactions cannot alter the Nature of things: and we are now enquiring, What
Benefices are, by the Law of England? It is disputed at Common Law, In whom the
Freehold of the Glebeland of a Benefice is, 1. Inst. 341.
during the Voidance? And it is agreed, that it is neither in the Patron nor
Ordinary: because it was given to the Incumbents and their Successors. And
therefore they tell us, it is then in Abeyance; which is a pretty way of
expressing, That the Law takes care that it shall come to the next Incumbent,
notwithstanding the Discontinuance by Death of his Predecessor: and I think it
had been as well said, that it was in the Law, although not in any Person. But
it is not disputed, but that as soon as another Incumbent is in Possession, the
Freehold is in Him: for those are Littleton's words, Sect. 647. And my Lord
Coke says, That the Incumbent cannot be looked on, as a mere Tenant for Life:
because he may have such Writs, which none can have but a Tenant in Fee-simple
or Fee-tail; and he may receive homage, which Tenant for Life cannot do. And
for this he goes as far back as the time of E. 1. But long before that, in
Glanvil's time, which was of H. 2. it is said, Glanvil l. 13. c. 20.
That he that is possessed of a Benefice by Institution from the Bishop, and
judged fit by Him, shall enjoy it for his Life; although the Right of Advowson
be disputed. Which is several times affirmed by my Lord Coke upon good Reason.
In one place he says, That at the Common Law, 1. Inst. 343. b.
if a Church be once full, the Incumbent could not be removed: (excepting Just
Cause of Deprivation) and Plenarty generally was a good Plea in a Quare
Impedit, or Assise of Darein Presentment: and the Reason of this was, to the
Intent the Incumbent might apply himself to his Spiritual Charge. 2. The Law
intended, that the Bishop that had Cure of Souls within his Diocese would admit
and institute an able Man for the Discharge of his Duty and his own; and that
the Bishop would do right to every Patron in his Diocese. In another place he
says, 2. Inst. 357.
That by the order of Common Law, if one had presented unto a Church whereto he
had no Right, and the Bishop had admitted and instituted his Clerk, this
Incumbent could not be removed for diverse Reasons: 1. For that he came into the
Church by a Judicial Act of the Bishop. 2. That by the Common Law, in every
Town and Parish there ought to be Persona idonea: and when the Bishop had
admitted him able, which implied that he was idonea Persona, then the Law had
his final Intention, viz. that the Church should be sufficiently provided for.
3. That the Incumbent having Curam animarum might the more effectually and
peaceably intend so great Charge; the Common Law provided, that after
Institution he should not be subject to any Action, to be removed at the Suit
of any common Person; without all Respect of Age, Coverture, Imprisonment, or
Non-sane-memory; and without regard of Title, either by Descent or Purchase, or
of any Estate. Are these things consistent with Bonds of Resignation?

But it may be said, That here is no Deprivation supposed, but a voluntary
Resignation: and what hurt is there, if it be a Man's own Act?

I answer, that we are not only to consider the Act of the Person, but the
Interest and general Concernment of the Church in it. For in all matters of
such a Public nature, we are not to regard so much the Consent of the Party,
as the Nature and Consequence of the Act it self. If it be an illegal thing,
and tend to subvert the Rights of the Church; it cannot make it legal to say,
that it was his own Act. Now as to this kind of Resignation, we are to consider
these two things:

1. That if the Resignation be not into the hands of the Bishop, it is an
illegal Act, and void of it self:

2. That if it be into the Bishop's hands, he has the Power in Law to Accept
it or not.

1. That the Resignation must be into the hands of the Bishop. For a
Resignation into the hands of the Patron, is by the Canon Law declared to be
null and void of it self. So Innocent IV. ad c. 6. de rerum per. And this is
grounded on the Text of the Canon Law. C. 17. Q. 2. c. Gonsaldus: and on the
Appendix to the Lateran Council under Alex. III. v. Flamin. Paris. de Resignat.
l. 7. c. 1. n. 9.
De Renunt. tit. 15. c. pen. where it is declared to be an unworthy thing, and
contrary to the Canons, to Resign into the hands of Patrons. And Alex. III.
forbids it absolutely under an Anathema, De Renunt. c. 4. which is confirmed by
Innocent III. c. 8. in the Decretals. But we are to consider especially, how
far this part of the Canon Law was here received; and we can have no better a
Judge in this Case than Lyndwood, who says positively, Lyndw. f. 55. c. Ne
lepra.
that Renuntiatio facta in manus Laici etiam sponte non tenet; i. e. a
Resignation made into the hands of a Lay-Patron, if it be never so free, does
not hold: and therefore he says, it must be made into the hands of Him who
has the Ordinary Jurisdiction, and therefore has power to Admit.

He observes two things very material as to the point of Resignation:

1. That a Voluntary Resignation, though not to the Ordinary, deprives the
Party of the Possession; so as he cannot recover, although he be not wholly
divested of the Property, or Right to the thing: Quia sine Consensu Superioris
non tenet Resignatio: and this is founded on that Fundamental Reason, That the
Care of the Diocese belongs to him, who has the Ordinary Jurisdiction; who was
the Bishop: but as Lyndwood observes, by Custom and Composition, this is put
into other hands; as in Places of Exempt Jurisdiction. And so, where the Power
of granting Institution is lodged by the Bishop's Consent, and a Prescription
upon it; there is a Power likewise of Receiving a Resignation: but not in any,
who have only a Delegated Power from the Bishop. For there is a Difference in
Law and Reason between an Ordinary Power depending on an ancient Prescription
and Composition (as it is in several places in the Deans and Chapters within
certain Precincts) and an Ordinary Power in a Substitute, as a Chancellor or
Vicar General. For although such an Officer has the same Court with the
Bishop, 6. de Appel. c. Roman. Lyndw. f. 54.
so that the Legal Acts of the Court are the Bishop's Acts, by whose Authority
he sits there; so that no Appeal lies from the Bishop's Officer to himself, but
to the Superior: and although a Commissary be allowed to have the Power of the
Ordinary in Testamentary Causes, which were not originally of Spiritual
Jurisdiction, as it is said in Henslow's Case, 9 R. 41. De Testam. v. Stat. v.
Approbat.
with which Lindwood agrees: yet in Acts of Spiritual and Voluntary
Jurisdiction the Case is otherwise. For the Bishop by Appointing a Chancellor,
does not divest himself of his own Ordinary Power: but he may delegate some
parts of it by Commission to others, which goes no farther than is expressed in
it. For it is a very great Mistake in any to think, that such who act by a
Delegated Power, can have any more Power than is given to them; where a Special
Commission is required for the Exercise of it. 6. De Ossicio Vicarii c. 2.
For by the General Commission no other Authority passes, but that of hearing
Causes: but all Acts of voluntary Jurisdiction require a Special Commission,
which the Bishop may restrain as he sees Cause. For as Lyndwood says, Nothing
passes, virtute Officii, but the Hearing of Causes: so that other Acts depend
upon the Bishop's particular Grant for that purpose. And the Law nowhere
determins the bounds of a Chancellor's Power as to such Acts; nor can it be
supposed so to do, since it is but a delegated Power: and it is in the Right of
him that Deputes, to Circumscribe and Limit it. Neither can Use or Custom
enlarge such a Power, which depends upon another's Will. And however, by modern
Practice, the Patents for such Places have passed for the Life of the Person,
to whom they were first granted; yet it was not so, by the ancient
Ecclesiastical Law of England. De Sequestr. v. Officiales.
For Lyndwood affirms, That a Grant of Jurisdiction ceases by the Death of him
who gave it: Per Mortem deputantis cessat Potestas Officialium: (or else it
could never pass into the Dean and Chapter sede vacant; or to the Guardian of
the Spiritualties.) And he gives a good Reason for it; Ne invitus habeat
Officialem sibi fortassis odiosum. It Is true, that by the Statute 37 H. 8. c.
17. mere Doctors of Law are made capable of Exercising all manner of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But it does not assign the Extent of their
Jurisdiction; but leaves it to the Bishops themselves, from whom their
Authority is derived. And the Law still distinguishes between Potestas
Ordinaria and Delegata: Bracton l. 5. c. 2.
for the former supposes a Person to act in his own Right and not by
Deputation; Fleta l. 6. c. 37. 1. Inst. 96. Cowel. v. Ordin.
which, I suppose, no Chancellors or Officials will pretend to. But how far
now, a Commission to exercise Jurisdiction does hold, when the Person who gave
it is dead, is not my present business to enquire: but in Sutton's Case, it
seems to be taken for granted by the Counsel, that a Chancellor's Patent, Cr.
Car. 65.
confirmed by Dean and Chapter, does give a Man a Freehold for Life, if he be
capable of doing his Duty; otherwise he may be deprived for Insufficiency, as
Doctor Sutton was. But Noy says, Noy 91.
That the Court was in doubt, how far the Act of the Predecessor could bind the
Successor as to the Profits. And in the Prebend of Hatcherlies Case, 152.
Dodderidge declared, That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in Judicial Acts may be
executed by Substitute: but a Grant of it is not good, but during the Bishop's
Life; and shall not bind the Successor. And Coke thought it a very hard thing,
That the Successor should not remove him; but be bound to answer for the Acts
and Offenses of a Commissary, which he never put-in. But these things belong
not to our present business, any farther than to show, that however in some
Cases the Bishops may substitute others; yet as to Resignations of Benefices,
for all that I can find, the Law only takes notice of the Bishop himself.

Lyndwood observes, that there is a difference to be made between the
Resignation of a Simple Benefice, i. e. where there is no Cure of Souls; and of
such a one that has such a Cure going along with it. In the former Case he
says, That a Resignation may be to the prejudice of the Party, without the
Bishop's Consent: but in the latter, where it may be to the prejudice of Others
as well as of himself, it has no force without the Bishop's Ratification: In
hoc Casu necessaria est Ratihabitio Episcopi. So that no Resignation of a Cure
of Souls can be of any Validity without the Bishop's Acceptance. In the Case of
Smith against Foanes, it was resolved and agreed by all upon Evidence at Bar,
Noy 157.
That a Resignation to a Proctor, does not make the Church void, until it be
accepted by the Bishop, and acknowledged before him.

2. But suppose the Resignation be made into the hands of the Bishop, is he
bound to Accept it? By what Law? For what Reason? Must he not enquire into the
Reason and Inducements of the Resignation, whether it be Corrupt or not? No
Bishop can be bound to accept a Corrupt Resignation; and whether it be so or
not, he is bound to enquire: and if he be not satisfied; by what Law can he be
required to do that, which he cannot do with a good Conscience? If the Law has
trusted him with accepting a Resignation; it has likewise trusted him with
Judging, whether it be fit to be accepted or not. In Gayton's Case it is plain,
That the Bishop may refuse a Resignation before a Public Notary, ^wen 12.
when there was a Condition annexed to it, which the Law does not annex. For in
this Case, the Condition was, That if such or such a Person were not presented
within six Months, the Resignation should be null: which Coke then said, made
it void, because Resignations ought to be free: and this is a Judicial Act, to
which a Condition cannot be annexed, no more than an Ordinary may admit upon
Condition.

But it may be objected, that in Case of Donatives the Resignation must be into
the Patrons hands, as in Gays and Fairchild's Case: Yelvert. 60 Mar. 765.
why then may not a Resignation be good to a Patron in other Benefices, since
those are as really Benefices as the other?

The difference is, that there is no Presentation to the Bishop in Donatives.
For, it is agreed by the Judges in that Case, Cr. 2. 63.
That if there were a Presentation once made to the Bishop, 1. Inst. 344
it ceases to be a Donative, and becomes always Presentable. So that the Case
of Donatives is very different; for we say, that wherever the Bishop has a
Right to admit, it is his Right to accept of a Resignation. But in this Case,
the Bishop is supposed to have nothing to do in the Admission or Institution of
the Person. If it be asked, how the Bishops came to lose their Right of
receiving the Presentation to these Benefices? I answer, that they seem to me
to have come one of these two ways: 1. By Royal License: so my Lord Coke says,
That the King may not only found a Church, 1. Inst. 344.
or Free Chapel Donative himself; but may License any Subject to do the same.
But the Register supposes a Royal Foundation, Registr. 40. 3.
and not a mere Royal License; and that it must be proved to be Ancient too:
and therefore a New License will not come up to the Register. 2. By Peculiar
Privilege. As when a Lord of a Manor in a great Parish, having his Tenants
about him at a remote distance from the Parish Church, offers to build and
endow a Church there; provided that it should belong entirely to him and his
Family, to put in such Persons as they should think fit, if they were in Holy
Orders. It Is very possible, that the Bishops at that time, to encourage such a
Work, might permit them to enjoy this Liberty; which being continued time out
of mind, is turned into a Prescription. If these Donatives had been common, the
Mischief would have been more visible: but being so few in Comparison, they
have been less taken notice of. And they are to be distinguished from those
called Sine-cures and Exempt Jurisdictions.

For Sine-cures in Truth, are Benefices Presentable; but by means of Vicarages
endowed in the same places, the Persons who enjoy them, have by long Custom
been excused from Residence; which is the most can be said for them. And such
Sine-cures, if they be resigned, it must be into the Bishop's hands.

Exempt Jurisdictions are not so called, because under No Ordinary; but because
they are not under the Ordinary of the Diocese, but have one of their own.
These are therefore called Peculiars; and they are of several sorts:

1. Royal Peculiars: which are the King's Free Chapels, and are Exempt from any
Jurisdiction but the King's; and therefore such may be Resigned into the King's
hands as their proper Ordinary; ^ynd. f. 64. 80 ^olls Abrid. 356.
either by Ancient Privilege, ^oke 12. 41, (...).
or Inherent Right. But how far Resignations may be made to the King as Supreme
Ordinary, as in Goodman's Case, it is not here a place to examine.

2. Archbishops Peculiars: which are not only in the Neighbor. Dioceses, but
dispersed up and down in remoter places: For it appears by Eadmerus, Eadm.
Hist. in Anselm. p. 22.
That wherever the Archbishop had an Estate belonging to him, he had the sole
Jurisdiction as Ordinary.

3. Deans and Chapters Peculiars: which are Places wherein by Ancient
Compositions the Bishops have parted with their Jurisdiction as Ordinaries, to
those Societies; whose Right was not Original, but derived from the Bishop;
Rolls Abrid. 2. 357.
and where the Compositions are lost, it depends upon Prescription; as in the
Deans and Chapters of St. Paul's, and Litchfield, which are mentioned in the
Books, 11 H. 4. 9.

4. Peculiars belonging to Monasteries. For, the richer Monasteries were very
uneasy, until they had obtained either from the Bishops, or from the Popes
(which proved the most effectual, but more chargeable way) an Exemption from
Ordinary Jurisdiction. Those Churches, which the Monasteries had gotten to be
annexed to themselves, were called Appropriations: but how far these were
Exempt from the Ordinaries Jurisdiction, is not fully understood; and therefore
I shall endeavor to explain it.

1. Appropriations did not at first imply any Exemption from the Ordinary. For
it was expressly provided in the Canon Law, C. 16. Q. 2. c. ^ane.
that no Persons should be put into such Churches without Institution from the
Bishop: to whom the Incumbents were to be answerable in all Spiritual matters;
as in all Temporal, to the Abbots. And in the oldest Appropriations, which I
have seen, there is a Salvo per omnia Iure Episcopali: which words are
inconsistent with an Exemption.

2. The Forms of Appropriation were different afterward. For although none
could be made without the Bishop's Consent, yet that Consent was expressed in
different ways, and had different Effects.

If the Bishop only confirmed the Lay-Patron's Gift, then nothing but the Right
of Patronage passed, and his Jurisdiction remained. If the Bishop joined in the
Donation in these words, Ext. de Donat. c. Pastor
Concedimus vobis talem Ecclesiam; then he passed away his Temporal Rights, as
to that Church. If the Bishop granted the Church Pleno jure; Lyndw. f. 80
then the Canonists say, he passed his Diocesan Right: which consisted in
Rights which the Bishop had distinct from his Episcopal Jurisdiction: which it
was thought he could not part with by any Act of his; for that were to divest
himself of his Order.

3. Appropriations, confirmed by the Papal Authority, were allowed to carry
with them Exemptions from the Ordinary. And therefore the Monasteries which
could bear the charge, did not think themselves free from their Ordinaries,
till they had obtained Bulls for that purpose: and then they took themselves to
be free in their Conventual Churches, as well as their Chapels, or Oratories on
their own Lands.

4. All Papal Exemptions are taken away by Act of Parliament, 31 H. 8. c. 13.
and the Churches so exempted are put under the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary of
the Diocese; or such Commissioners as the King shall appoint. So that no Papal
Exemption can now be pleaded, as to Appropriated Churches; how clear and full
soever the Charters of Exemption were. This is a thing so little taken notice
of, that I shall set down the words, Sect. 23. Be it further enacted, that such
of the said Monasteries etc. and all Churches and Chapels, to them, or any of
them belonging; which before the Dissolution etc. were exempted from the
Visitation or Visitations, and all other Jurisdiction of the Ordinary or
Ordinaries, within whose Diocese they were situate or set, shall from
thenceforth be within the Jurisdiction and Visitation of the Ordinary or
Ordinaries, within whose Diocese they or any of them be situate and set; or
within the Visitation and Jurisdiction of such Person or Persons, as by the
King's Highness shall be limited or appointed; this Act, or any other
Exemption, Liberty or Jurisdiction, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Therefore no Persons who enjoy the Estates belonging to Monasteries, can now
plead an Exemption by virtue thereof from the Ordinaries Jurisdiction; nor that
they have a Power to put-in and put-out as they please, without any regard to
the Bishop's Authority.

But suppose there were no Endowment, and that the Churches were built on the
Site of the Monasteries, and so were supplied by their own Body; then such
Persons are wholly at their Will, and they may turn them out as they please. I
answer;

I confess the Condition of such Stipendiaries, is as bad as of those who hold
their Benefices under Bonds of Resignation. For Tenures at the Will of the Lord
are the worst of any. But it is to be hoped, that such Persons who enjoy such
Estates as were originally designed for the support of the Parochial Clergy,
(however at first fraudulently perverted by the Combination of the Monks and
Popes) will at the least take Care that the Cure of Souls be duly provided for
in such Places. For that Burden goes along with the Churches Revenue in whose
hands soever it be: and so they are both in Law and Conscience to see the
Places well supplied. And by the Statutes of Dissolution, as they do enjoy the
Rights, so they are bound to provide for the Churches: and where they were
Parochial, to see that there were a fixed Incumbent with a competent
Maintenance; which the Law always took a particular Care of.

II. It is time now to consider the Precedents, which have been produced to
show, that these Bonds of Resignation are not against Law.

The first is of Jones and Laurence, 8 Iac. A Bond was given to resign the
Benefice he was presented to, within three Months upon Request: and it was
alleged in Court, that it was a Simoniacal Contract, Cr. 2. 248.
and against Law. On the other side it was said, That there does not appear any
Simony upon the Condition: and therefore Judgment was given for the Bond. But a
Writ of Error was brought in the Exchequer Chamber: and the principal Error
insisted on was, That this Condition was against Law. But the Judges of the
Common Bench and Barons of the Exchequer held, That the Obligation and
Condition are good enough. For a Man may bind himself to resign upon good and
valuable Reasons, without any Color of Simony: as to be obliged to resign, in
Case of Plurality or Non-Residence; or if his Son be at Age. But if it had been
for a Lease of the Glebe, or Tithes, or a Sum of Money; That had been Simony
etc. and so the Judgment was affirmed.

To this Precedent, I answer, That the Reason of the Judges is insufficient.
For it comes to this: the Bond is good because there may be good Reason for it.
May it not be said on the other side, The Bond is naught, because there may be
a very bad Reason for it? And a Bond that may be turned to so very ill Uses, it
cannot but seem strange to me, that the Judges should affirm it to be a good
Bond. If the particular Reasons had been made the Conditions of the Bond, they
might have judged upon them: but the Bond was general, and no Condition in it
but Notice. Therefore their Judgment must be, that a Bond is reasonable, if no
bad Condition appears in it: which makes the Incumbent a Slave to the Patron,
and overthrows the just Rights and Liberties of the Clergy; and lays them open
to Perjury, when they give such a Bond merely to obtain a Presentation. And
they very well knew that none could be possessed of a Benefice without an Oath
against all Simoniacal Contracts, either directly or indirectly. Why did not
the Judges declare, that it was Simony within their Oath? But they were only
to judge of the Law. And how could they judge this not to be a Simoniacal
Bargain? Because there was no Simoniacal Condition in it. But what is a
Simoniacal Condition? Where has the Common Law determined it? And by what
Rule? Yes, say they, A Lease for Tithes, or a Bargain for Money, had been
Simony. But how come they to determine that no other Contracts are Simoniacal;
when they own, That Simony is not under their Cognizance? Did they ever offer
to advise with the Civilians, What was a Simoniacal Contract, according to the
Ecclesiastical Law? Not the least mention of this: and therefore I cannot but
think this a Judgment without sufficient Reason to support it.

The same Cause came on again the next Year: and there it is declared, That it
was not Simony, but good Policy to tie him to resign; and if it were, it is not
material. Cr. 2. 274.
Here are two good Points declared: 1. That Bonds of Resignation are good
Policy. To what End? To ensnare Men's Consciences; to make the Church a Prey to
corrupt Patrons; to keep Men from doing their Duties, lest they should
displease their Patrons. If this be good Policy, let it rather pass for that,
than for good Law. 2. That it is not material as to the Goodness of the Bond,
whether it be Simony or not. Then it seems a Simoniacal Contract holds good in
Law: which I think was no good Policy for Judges to declare.

But we are told, That 15 Iac. in the Case of Paschal and Clerk, it was said by
the Court upon Evidence, ^oy 2^.
That if the Patron takes a Bond of Resignation at three Months warning, it was
Simony within the Statute. And for this we are referred to the Roll, 2051. I
wonder this Judgment is not hitherto disproved, if the Roll be falsified: and
if not, here is Judgment against Judgment.

But again, ^. Car. 180. ^utton 110. ^nes 220. ^eble 2. 446.
in the Case of Babington and Wood, it was resolved on the same Grounds with
that of Jones and Laurence, and so deserves no new Consideration: and several
other Judgments are said to have been given since on the same Grounds.

But let us compare this Case with such as have been adjudged to be Simony in
the Courts of Common Law.

In the Case of Byrte and Manning, Cr. Car. 42^*
The Court held, that if a Man entered into a Contract to procure a Presentation
in Consideration of the Marriage of his Son, that had been a Simoniacal
Contract. Why is not a Bond of Resignation, as much Simony, as a Consideration
of Marriage; when both are made equally the Conditions of obtaining a
Presentation?

If a Simoniacal Contract be made, Cr. Eliz. 789 C. 12. 100. Cr. 2. 385. Noy
25. Bulstrod. 3. 90.
and the Person presented not at all privy to it, he is to incurr the Penalty
of it: but if a Man be Privy to a Bond of Resignation in order to a
Presentation, he shall not be guilty. And yet in the one Case, a Man swears
with a good Conscience: which I think he cannot in the other.

In the Case of Winchcomb and Pulleston, Hob. 165.
it was declared to be Simony, to purchase the next Presentation, when the
Incumbent was still alive, but in a Fit of the Strangury. And yet this was not
within the Letter of the Law: for the Living was not actually void. Therefore
such Acts, as are against the Design and Reason of the Law, are forbidden by
it. And the like was affirmed by Justice Hutton in the Case of Sheldon and
Bret. Wynch 63.
In a late Judgment in Chancery, Bonds of Resignation at Pleasure to Patrons by
their Clerks, Rep. Chancery 2. 399.
are damned in Equity, when any ill use is made of them. But why should any
such Bonds be allowed in Law, which are liable to such ill Uses?

I conclude with the Words of my Lord Coke, 1. Inst. 17. b.
That the Common Law does detest Simony, and all corrupt Bargains for
Presentation to any Benefice: and its design is, that a fit Person for the
Discharge of the Cure should be presented freely without Expectation of any
thing. How then can Bonds of Resignation be agreeable to Law?

Having thus dispatched the main Point against all General Bonds, which are
made the Conditions of obtaining a Presentation; there remain only some
Quaere's to be resolved.

(1.) Suppose a Bond be required only to tie Men up to do their Duties, and to
keep them from Non-Residence. I answer, (1.) That the Patron is to blame to
pitch upon a Person to discharge such a Cure, of whom at the same time he
discovers such a mistrust, as to need a Bond to make him do his Duty. And if a
Man makes no Conscience of his Duty without a Bond, I doubt he will make very
little with it. If he could make him a good Man by his Bond, it were of great
Use; but if he be not, he may do the more Mischief by continuing in his Place
by the Force of a Bond. So that I look on such Bonds, as apt to raise Scruples
in good Men's Minds; and to do no good upon bad ones.

2. That all wise and good Patrons will consider the general Mischief, more
than a particular Inconvenience. And what greater Mischief can come to our
Church, than to have Bonds of Resignation brought into Request? For, besides
corrupt Patrons as to Bargains; what Advantage will corrupt Patrons as to
Religion make of it? who by that Means will be able to turn out the Incumbents
upon Notice given, when Opportunity serves them: as is before observed in the
Preface.

(2.) Suppose it be a very equitable Case, as for a Minor; is a Bond of
Resignation unlawful?

I answer, That there may be a Lawful Trust, in such a Case I do not question:
but whether the Person who takes this Trust, can enter into a Bond, and take
the Oath, I very much question, upon the Reasons already mentioned. For there
may be a confidential Simony, as the Casuists call it: and the way to prevent
it, is, say they, That the Trust be sine pretii, Navarr. Man. c. 23. n. 109.
pacti, modi, vel conditionis interventu. For the taking of a Bond argues a
Mistrust; and is therefore contrary to the Nature of a Trust.

(3.) Suppose the Bishop himself requires a Bond of Resignation, as to a
Prebend of his Church, if the Prebendary quit the Diocese; is such a Bond
justifiable, or not?

The Bishop, is no doubt, bound to take all possible care of the Good of his
Diocese, and to make his Preferments serviceable to that End. But if a Man
knows beforehand, that without this Condition he cannot obtain it, and with it
he may, he runs into a Snare by giving a Bond for that End; and after, taking
the Oath against any Simoniacal Contract, directly or indirectly. I do think
these Bonds of so bad a Nature and Tendency, that I do wish, that no
Countenance or Encouragement be given to them: especially by such, whose
Example may encourage others, to do that for Bad Designs, which they do for
Good. And Wise and Good Men will always show the greatest Regard to that, which
serves the most Public Interest, and prevents the most growing Mischief.

(4.) Suppose the Incumbent of a Living makes an Agreement with another Clergy
man, that he shall have a Lease of his Benefice from three Years to three
Years; upon which he takes a Sum of Money, and gives a Bond of Resignation
before Harvest, and is to procure a Presentation from the Patron: is this
Simony or not, by our Law?

Here the Patron is only supposed barely to know and to consent, (which is
hardly to be supposed in such kind of Cases) and that the Terms are only
between the two Parties, (for I will not suppose the Bishop accessory to such
Bargains) the Question is, Whether the Incumbent can with a safe Conscience
part with his Benefice on such Terms? and whether the other can give a valuable
Consideration for his Interest in it, if the Patron consents?

I answer, That the Law is as express against corrupt Resignations, as against
corrupt Bargains for a Presentation; only the Penalty is not so great. The
Words of the Act are, That if any Incumbent of any Benefice with Cure of Souls,
shall corruptly resign or exchange the same, or corruptly take for, or in
respect of the Resigning or Exchanging of the same directly or indirectly, any
Pension or Sum of Money or Benefit whatsoever; that then as well the Giver as
the Taker etc. shall lose double the Value of the Money so given, and double
the Value of one years Profit. 31 Eliz. c. 6.

It may possibly be said, That this is a distinct Clause from the other, and
has another kind of Penalty; and so cannot reach Persons in point of
Conscience as the other does. But this is a strange way of dealing with Laws.
For there is the same Penalty in the former Clause; only there is added a
present Avoidence, and a disability in Law: supposing these two left out, the
one stands upon the same Foot with the other. And I would know, whether if
these were gone, they could not as well make a Bargain for a Presentation, as
for such a Resignation? And is there nothing of Conscience, or Honor, or a
Regard to the Dignity of the Sacred Function in the Case? No Reverence to Laws
made on purpose to deter Men from such fordid Practices? Is a Benefice to be
looked on as a mere Livelihood, to be bought and sold as other Estates are? Is
there no Sense of any Spiritual Employment going along with it? No Regard to
the Charge and Trust that attends it? If nothing of a Spiritual Nature is to be
considered in a Benefice, then there can be no such thing as Simony: and then
their Hearts are at Ease, and they may publish Papers for Presentations, as
well as for Resignation of Incumbents. But I will not suppose such hard things
of Persons, who pretend to be in Holy Orders: but this I must put them in mind
of; that there is an Oath to be taken, and a very strict one, against all
Simoniacal Contracts, either directly or indirectly. And is wilful Perjury a
thing to be slighted by any? especially by Churchmen, and in order to a Cure of
Souls? I have already mentioned my Lord Coke's Saying, 3. Inst. 156.
That Simony is the more odious, because it is ever accompanied with Perjury;
for the Presentee is sworn to commit no Simony: and for this he referrs to
Lyndwood. And I have already showed, how Simony is to be understood according
to him. If a solemn Oath comes to be slighted and made little or nothing of;
how can such Men pretend to Religion or Conscience? But it may be said, That
Simony is to be determined by the Law; and the Law makes a Bargain with the
Patron to be Simony, and not with the Incumbent. I have said enough already to
show, that the Statute does not determine what Simony is, but only inflicts a
severe Penalty on some sorts of it: and therefore it may be Simony, although
not expressly against the Words of the Law. But the Words of the Law are express
against corrupt Resignations: and I would fain know, whether a Resignation for
Money be not a Corrupt Resignation? And supposing the Patron innocent, can any
Man of common Sense or Honesty take the Oath, who comes in upon such Terms,
that he has made no Simoniacal Contract or Promise, to any Person or Persons
whatsoever, concerning the procuring or obtaining the Rectory or Vicarage etc.
Is not this Bargain in order to the Procuring or Obtaining the presentation?
Let it be with whom it will, if it be for this End, it is Simoniacal; or else
it will be hard to determine what Simony is. And as to such kind of Bonds of
Resignation between Parties, without the Patron's privity; how can they signify
any thing, if the Bishop do not accept the Resignation? which I have showed
before must be into his hands. But these Men seem to set the Bishop quite
aside; or to suppose him very Weak and Inconsiderate. All they look at, is the
Point of Law: And they may say, They have advised with Council; and they have
told them, that there is nothing against Law in this Practice. How? not against
Law? Did they ask them, whether this were not a Corrupt Resignation within the
Statute? No; but whether it were Simony or not? I hardly suppose any man that
understands what Simony is by our Law, would go so far: but they might say, it
does not void the Living, nor bring a disability on the Person; and so far they
said as the Statute does. But is this all, which Men of Conscience, and who
take the Care of Souls, are to enquire after? What! nothing but whether the
Benefice will be void or not? Or, whether the King may Present or not? Are
these all the Considerations, even of Clergymen, in such cases? Such kind of
Practices, which savor only of this world, are those which give such
Advantages against our Profession, in such an Age of Infidelity as ours. Do not
you see, say they, that they mind nothing but their bare Interest as to this
World, and have no regard to Law or Conscience, where they contradict it? I am
sensible, how unreasonable it is, to charge a Profession with the Faults of a
Few; and those in comparison, I hope, not considerable in it. But we ought, if
possible, to avoid any Scandal of this kind; for it strikes at the whole Body
of the Clergy of our Church, and at Religion it self: which if we have any our
selves, we shall be very tender of the Honor of. Some men have a mighty
Prejudice against any Churchmen meddling in Secular Affairs; although they be
matters of Justice and Mercy, which the Law of the Land calls them to: but my
great Prejudice is against such Churchmen, who bring Secular ways of
Trafficking into Church Matters; as though nothing were really minded, but
buying, and selling, and getting gain. Advancing of Trade is a Noble Design in
a Nation; and that which makes it considerable at Home and Abroad: but God
forbid, that such a way of Trading should ever be brought into the Church, or
be suffered to go unpunished in it: for it will certainly Ruin the best Church
in the World; by lessening the Reputation of Churchmen; by taking off the good
Affections of the People; and making them to run into Factions and Infidelity.

There is certainly something more to be regarded in these things besides our
own Interest: there is that of Religion, of our Church, and of the Laws of the
Land; which ought to overrule it. Suppose there were nothing but the bare Law
in the case, which expressly forbids all Corrupt Resignations; is it not fit for
those who are to Preach Obedience to Laws, to observe them, in what relates to
themselves? Ought they not to be Examples to others, in every thing of good
Report? and to abstain from whatever tends to take off from the Influence of
their Doctrine upon the People? and nothing does it more, than when they are
suspected to come among them by unlawful and indirect means.

I have taken the Liberty in this Discourse, to speak my Mind freely about
Matters, which touch upon Law and Conscience; the Duties of Patrons and
Incumbents: but I have done it, without any other Design, than of doing some
Good, or at least preventing some Mischief to the Church I live in, and which I
have a true and a just value for. If I had not thought, that this kind of
Simoniacal Contracts were a great and growing Mischief; and had not had too
much Reason to think so; I should have spared my Pains, as others have done:
for I do not love to be uneasy to my self or others. I know very well, how ill
such Discourses are apt to be taken by all that are concerned in them; viz.
Patrons, Incumbents, and all such Lawyers that go about to defend them. But
before I conclude this Discourse, I must request some things of all these: and
then let them judge as they please; so it be without Prejudice and Partiality.

1. That Patrons would consider, that the Right of Patronage is a Trust
committed to them; of which they must give an Account to God: for there is an
Obligation in Point of Conscience, going along with it. It is hard to believe
what is commonly Reported, how slight many great Patrons make of their
Bestowing of Benefices, by letting Servants make their best Advantage of them;
who scandalously expose the Livings, and themselves, and the Honor of those
they depend upon. If Servants deserve to be gratified; for God's sake, let it
not be at the Price of Souls. If there were no such thing as Religion; but that
the pretended Care of Souls is nothing but an Artificial way of Maintaining a
Sert of Men, to keep the People in a little better Order, by telling them of
Moral Duties, and another World; then there were some Color for such an
Affected Negligence in these Matters: But I do not believe that any of these
Persons can satisfy themselves in such Absurd and Unreasonable Imaginations;
against the Sense of all the Wiser and more Considerate part of Mankind. But it
cannot be denied, that the Things which they are to Teach the People in point
of Morality, are very good things, and necessary to be told them. This is all I
desire at present. And is it of no Consequence, what sort of Men those are, who
are entrusted with the Teaching People their Duties to God and Man? If Religion
were only to be regarded in point of Policy; those must be far from
Politicians, who have no regard to the Qualifications of the Persons they put
into such Places. For Ignorant and Illiterate Men can never give them good
Instructions; Scandalous and Debauched Persons will certainly do abundance of
Mischief, making the People more loose and debauched than otherwise they would
be. Men of ill Principles will instill them into the Heads of the busy part of
those they converse among, and take upon them to guide; and make them far more
ungovernable than otherwise they would be. I have no very great Opinion of the
World as it is; but I cannot but think, that it would be yet much worse, if an
Ignorant, Vicious, Turbulent, Seditious Clergy were put into all such Places as
Patrons dispose of: and they know not, but they may be all such whom they
Present, if they take no more care about them; but suffer their Servants to
make what Bargains they think fit; who mind not the Men, but the Advantage they
are to get by them. And there is a just Presumption, that those are not very
Deserving, who are ready to drive such Bargains for themselves: and such Men
are not to be valued, as Cattle in a Market, by the Money they will yield.

2. That Lawyers would not encourage their Clients in indirect methods of
obtaining Presentations. For here lies a great part of our present Mischief:
the Clergymen who want Benefices, They say; We are Ignorant of the Law; but we
go to those whose business it is to understand it: and they tell us, they have
Cases and Precedents in their Books, for such Bonds; and they have been many
times adjudged in the Courts of Law to be good; and therefore why are we to
blame if we submit to them? But here lies the great Mistake: the Point is
really a Point of Conscience as to the Oath; but the Question put to them can
be only a Point of Law; who are to give Judgment upon the Statute, and
according to the Rules of Judgment allowed in their Courts. But I cannot but
observe, that there is no Precedent offered before 8 Iac. 1. and in the 15th.
was a contrary Judgment. In the Beginning of Charles I. the former Judgment was
affirmed; and from hence it has come to be such a prevailing Opinion. I
confess, that I am not satisfied, how far such Precedents, or one or two
Judicial Sentences make a thing to pass for Law; nor whether the Authority of
such a Sentence, or the Reason, is to give the Force of Law to it. I observe
that my Lord Coke, when he speaks of the Laws of England; he reckons up
Common Law, 1. Inst. 11. 110. b. 115. b.
Statute Law, Customs reasonable etc. but he never mentions the Judgment of the
Courts, as any Part of our Law; they being no more but a Declaratory Sentence
of the Majority of the Judges, when it may be the other differ upon better
Reasons; and when such Reasons come to be thought better by one more at another
time, then the contrary must pass for Law on the same grounds. How often do we
hear that the Judges were divided in their Opinions in point of Law? How often,
that the greater number went one way, but Law and Reason on the other? Suppose
a Lord Chief Justice of great Skill and Knowledge in the Law, to be unequally
yoked with others of far less Judgment; how is it possible to prevent that
Judgment shall not be given on the wrong side, if the three happen to be of an
Opinion against him; or one be absent, and two be against one? In a late great
Cause, viz. of Commendam; although three Judges concurred in Opinion, and the
General Practice was allowed to be of that side; yet because one Judge differed
from the rest, his Authority was produced against the Sentence of the Court:
and for what Cause can this be, but the Supposition, that it is not the
Sentence, but the Reason which makes the Law. My Lord Chief Justice Hales in a
MS. Discourse of the History and Analysis of the Laws of England, Chap. 4.
makes three Constituents of the Common Law of England: 1. The Common Usage and
Custom: 2. The Authority of Parliament: 3. The Judicial Decisions of Courts of
Justice: but how? Consonant to one another in the Series and Succession of
Time. This is spoken with great Judgment: For, no doubt, a mighty Regard ought
to be showed to a Concurrent Sense of so many Persons of Ability in the Law, in
the different Times wherein such Matters have been before them; and this is the
highest Authority for expounding the Law; but it cannot amount to the Making of
a Law. For, as the same Excellent Person adds; It is true, the Decisions of
Courts of Justice, although by the strength of the Law of this Kingdom, they do
bind as a Law between the Parties to it in that particular Case in Question,
till Reversed by Error or Attaint; yet they do not make a Law: for that only
the King, by the Assent of Parliament, can do. All that I aim at, is not in the
least to take off from the Authority and Reverence due to Judicial Decisions,
built upon a General Agreement from time to time; or upon Evident Reason in
point of Law: but only that things should not be so positively asserted to be
Law, which are built only on a few Modern Precedents, without any convincing
Evidence. Which I take to be the present Case.

3. That the Clergy would mind their own Honor and Interest, and that of the
Church and Religion so much, as not to Accept of Benefices upon such Ensnaring
Terms, as those of Bonds of Resignation.

If what I have said on this Argument be true; I am sure they have all the
Reason in the World to Refuse them: when they know not what the Consequence of
them may be; and they do know what kind of Oath they are to take. And no Man
can honestly take an Oath, that is not satisfied, that such Bonds are no
Simoniacal Contract in the Sense of that Law, by which he is required to take
the Oath. Now the Oath is not imposed by the Courts of Common Law in pursuance
of the Statute; for then it were to be understood according to the Sense and
Meaning of it; but that very Statute leaves the Ecclesiastical Laws as they
were; by which Simony is of a larger Extent than it is understood at Common
Law; and by those Laws this Oath is required. Therefore my Request is to all
such Clergymen, as are in danger of having such put upon them; that they would
study the Case, and satisfy their Minds before they venture upon taking an
Oath; which may afterward rob them of that Peace and Tranquillity of Mind,
which every Good man will Esteem above any Benefice in the World.

FINIS.
Page 73. lin. 13. for Gays read Gayr. Ibid. Marg. for Mar. read Moor.

A Catalogue of Books published by the Right Reverend Father in God Edward Lord
Bishop of Worcester, and sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer of T. C. wherein the true Grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the false discovered; the Church of England vindicated from the imputation of
Schism, and the most important particular Controversies between us and those of
the Church of Rome thoroughly examined: the second Edition. Folio.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions, with a Discourse annexed concerning
the true Reasons of the Sufferings of Christ, wherein Crellius his Answer to
Grotius is considered. Folio.

Origines Britannicae, or the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a
Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in
vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph. Folio.

Irenicum, A Weapon Salve for the Churches Wounds. Quarto.

Origines Sacrae, or a Rational Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures and the matters therein
contained. Quarto.

The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an Impartial account of the History,
Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Church of
England; to which several late Letters are annexed of eminent Protestant
Divines abroad concerning the Nature of our Differences, and the way to compose
them. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it, in Answer to some Papers of a
revolted Protestant, wherein a particular account is given of the Fanaticism
and Divisions of that Church. Octavo.

An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it; Part I. Octavo.

A Second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against
the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide in
Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason, and
Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into
the Miracles of the Romans Church. Octa.

An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching
his Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet. Octavo.

A Defense of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, in answer to a Book entitled Catholics no Idolaters: Octavo.

Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine
of the Church of England; being a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G.
Octavo.

The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right to vote in Parliament in Cases
Capital stated and argued, from the Parliament Rolls and the History of former
times; with an Enquiry into their Peerage, and the Three Estates in Parliament.
Octavo.

The Bishop of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his Diocese, in his primary
Visitation begun at Worcester, Sept. 11. 1690.

A Discourse concerning the Illegality of the Ecclesiastical Commission, in
Answer to the Vindication and Defense of it: wherein the true notion of the
Legal Supremacy is cleared; and an Account is given of the Nature, Original and
Mischief of the Dispensing Power.

The Council of Trent Examined and Disproved by Catholic Tradition, in the
main points in Controversy between Us and the Church of Rome; with a
particular. Account of the Times and Occasions of Introducing them.

Twenty Sermons preached upon several occasions, not yet collected into a
Volume. Quarto.


