THE DOCTRINES AND PRACTICES OF THE Church of Rome TRULY REPRESENTED; In Answer
to a Book Entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1686.

The Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly represented, etc.
An Answer to the Introduction.
THE Introduction consists of two parts.

I. A general Complaint of the Papists being Misrepresented among us.

II. An account of the Method he has taken to clear them from these
Misrepresentations.

I. As to the First; Whether it be just, or not, must be examined in the
several Particulars. But here we must consider, whether it serves the End it is
designed for in this place, which is, to gain the Reader's good Opinion of
their Innocence: Not merely because they complain so much of being injured, but
because the best Men in all Times have been Misrepresented; as he proves at
large in this Introduction, from several Examples of the Old and New Testament,
but especially of Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians. But it
is observable, that when Bp. Jewel began his excellent Apology for the Church
of England, with a Complaint much of the same Nature, and produced the very
same Examples, his Adversary would by no means allow it to have any Force,
being, as he called it, Exordium Commune, which might be used on both sides,
and therefore could be proper to neither. And although it be reasonable only for
those to complain of being Misrepresented, who having Truth on their side, do
notwithstanding suffer under the Imputation of Error; yet it is possible for
those who are very much mistaken, to complain of being misrepresented; and
while they go about to remove the Misrepresentations of others, to make new
Ones of their own. And as the best Men, and the best Things, have been
Misrepresented; so other Men have been as apt to complain of it, and the worst
things are as much Misrepresented, when they are made to appear not so bad as
they are. For Evil is as truly Misrepresented under the appearance of Good, as
Good under the appearance of Evil; and it is hard to determine whether has
done the greater Mischief.

So that if the Father of Lies be the Author of Misrepresenting, (as the
Introduction begins) we must have a care of him both ways. For when he tried
this Black Art in Paradise, (as our Author speaks) it was both by
misrepresenting the Command, and the Danger of transgressing it. He did not
only make the Command appear otherwise than it was, but he did very much lessen
the Punishment of Disobedience, and by that means deluded our first Parents
into that Sin and Misery, under which their Posterity still suffers. Which
ought to be a caution to them, how dangerous it is to break the Law of God
under the fairest Color and Pretenses; and that they should not be easily
imposed upon by false Glosses, and plausible Representations, though made by
such as therein pretend to be Angels of Light.

But although the Father of Lies be the Author of Misrepresenting: yet we have
no reason to think but that if he were to plead his own Cause to Mankind, he
would very much complain of being Misrepresented by them; and even in this
respect, when they make him the Father of those Lies which are their own
Inventions. And can that be a certain Argument of Truth, which may as well be
used by the Father of Lies?

And the great Instruments he has made use of in deceiving and corrupting
Mankind, have been as forward as any to complain of being Misrepresented. The
true Reason is, Because no great Evil can prevail in the World, unless it be
represented otherwise than it is; and all Men are not competent Judges of the
Colors of Good and Evil; therefore when the Designs of those who go about to
deceive, begin to be laid open, they then betake themselves to the fairest
Representations they can make of themselves, and hope that many will not see
through their Pretenses.

If I had a mind to follow our Author's Method, I could make as long a
Deduction of Instances of this kind. But I shall content my self with some few
Examples of those who are allowed on both sides to have been guilty of great
Errors and Corruptions.

The Arrians pleaded they were Misreprented, when they were taken for Enemies
to Christ's Divinity; for all that they contended for, was only such a Moment
of Time, as would make good the Relation between Father and Son.

The Pelagians, with great Success for some time (and even at Rome) complained,
that they were very much Misrepresented, as Enemies to God's Grace; whereas
they owned and asserted the manifold Grace of God; and were only Enemies to
Men's Idelness and Neglect of their Duties.

The Nestorians gave out, that they never intended to make two Persons in
Christ, as their Adversaries charged them; but all their design was to avoid
Blasphemy, in calling the Blessed Virgin the Mother of God; and whatever went
beyond this, was their Adversaries Misrepresentations, and not their own
Opinions.

The Eutychians thought themselves very hardly dealt with, for saying there was
but one Nature in Christ, they did not mean thereby (as they said) to destroy
the Properties of the Humane Nature, but only to assert that its Subsistence
was swallowed up by the Divine; and of all Persons, those have no Reason to
blame them, who suppose the Properties of one Substance may be united to
another.

Even the Gentile Idolaters, when they were charged by the Christians, that
they Worshipped Stocks and Stones, complained, they were Misrepresented, for
they were not such Idiots to take things for Gods, which had neither Life, nor
Sense, nor Motion in them. And when they were charged with worshipping other
Gods as they did the Supreme; they desired their Sense might not be taken from
common Prejudices, or vulgar Practices, but from the Doctrine of their
Philosophers; and they owned a Sovereign Worship due to him that was Chief; and
a subordinate and Relative to some Celestial Beings, whom they made
Application to as Mediators between him and them. Must all these Complaints now
be taken for granted? what then becomes of the Reputation of General Councils,
or the Primitive Christians? But as, if it were enough to be Accused, none
would be Innocent; so none would be Guilty, if it were enough to complain of
being Misrepresented.

Therefore in all Complaints of this Nature it is necessary to come to
Particulars; and to examine with Care and Diligence the Matters complained of,
and then to give Judgment in the Case. I am glad to find our Author professing
so much Sincerity and Truth without Passion; and I do assure him I shall follow
what he Professes: For the Cause of our Church is such, as needs neither Tricks
nor Passion to defend it; and therefore I shall endeavor to state the Matters
in Difference with all the clearness and calmness that may be, and I shall keep
close to his Method and Representations, without Digressons, or provoking
Reflections.

II. But I must declare my self very much unsatisfied with the Method he has
taken to clear his Party from these Misrepresentations. For,

1. He takes upon him to draw a double Character of a Papist; and in the one he
pretends to follow a certain Rule, but not in the other, which is not fair and
ingenuous.

As to the one, he says, He follows the Council of Trent, and their allowed
Spiritual Books and Catechisms: and we find no fault with this. But why must
the other Part then be drawn by Fancy, or common Prejudices, or ignorant
Mistakes? Have we no Rule, whereby the Judgment of our Church is to be taken?
Are not our Articles as easy to be had and understood, as the Decrees and
Canons of the Council of Trent? I will not ask, How the Council of Trent comes
to be the Rule and Measure of Doctrine to any here, where it was never
received? But I hope I may, why our Representations are not to be taken from
the Sense of our Church, as their's from the Council of Trent? If he says,
^his Design was to remove common Prejudices, and vulgar Mistakes; it is easy to
answer, if they are contra^y to the Doctrine of our Church, we utterly disown
them. We know very well there are Persons, who have so false a Notion of
Popery, that they charge the Rites and Customs of our Church with it: but we
pity their Weakness and Folly, and are far from defending such
Misrepresentations. But that which we adhere to, is the Doctrine and Sense of
our Church, as it is by Law established; and what Representations are made
agreeable thereto, I undertake to defend, and no other. But if a Person take
the liberty to lay on what Colors he pleases on one side, it will be no hard
matter to take them off in the other, and then to say, How much fairer is our
Church than she is painted! It is an easy, but not so allowable a way of
disputing, for the same Person to make the Objections and Answers too; for he
may so model and frame the Arguments by a little Art, that the Answers may
appear very full and sufficient; whereas if they had been truly represented,
they would be found very lame and defective.

2. He pretends to give an account why he quotes no Authors for his
Misrepresentations, which is very unsatisfactory, viz. That he has described
the Papist therein, exactly according to the apprehension he had of him when he
was a Protestant. But how can we tell what sort of Protestant he was; nor how
well he was instructed in his Religion? And must the Character now supposed to
be common to Protestants, be taken from his ignorant, or childish, or wilful
Mistakes? Did ever any Protestant that understands himself, say, That Papists
are never permitted to hear Sermons which they ar^ able to understand, (p. 58.)
or that they held it lawful to commit Idolatry, (p. 9.) Or, that a Papist
believes the Pope to be his great God, and to be far above all Angels, etc? Yet
these are some of his Misrepresentations, (p. 40.) Did he in earnest think so
himself? I^ he did, he gives no good account of himself: if he did not, he
gives a worse; for then how shall we believe him in other things, when he
says, He has draw^ his Misrepresentations exactly according to his own
Apprehensions. It is true, he says, he added some few Points, which were
violently charged on him by his Friends: but we dare be bold to say, this was
none of them. But let us suppose it true, that he had such Apprehensions
himself. Are these fit to be printed as the Character of a Party? What would
they say to us, if a Spanish Convert should give a Character of Protestants,
according to the common Opinion the People there have of them; and set down in
one Column their monstrous Misrepresentations, and in another, what he found
them to be since his coming hither; and that in good Truth he saw they were
just like other Men. But suppose he had false Apprehensions before he went
among them; why did he not take care to inform himself better before he
changed? Had he no Friends, no Books, no Means to rectify his Mistakes? Must he
needs leave one Church, and go to another, before he understood either? If this
be a true Account of himself, it is but a bad Account of the Reasons of his
Change.

3. The Account he gives of the other Part of his Character, affords as little
satisfaction; For although in the general, it be well that he pretends to keep
to a Rule, yet

(1.) He shows no Authority he has to interpret that Rule in his own sense.
Now several of his Representations depend upon his own private Sense and
Opinions, against the Doctrine of many others as zealous for their Church as
himself; and what Reason have we to adhere to his Representation, rather than
to theirs? As for instance, he says, The Pope's personal Infallibility is no
Matter of Faith, (p. 42.) But there are others fay it is, and is grounded on
the same Promises which makes him Head of the Church. Why now must we take his
Representation rather than theirs? And so as to the Deposing Power, he grants,
it has been the Opinion of several Popes (and Councils too) but that it is no
Matter of Faith, (p. 47.) But whose Judgment are we to take in this Matter,
according to the Principles of their Church? A private Man's, of no Name, no
Authority, or of those Popes and Councils who have declared it, and acted by
it? And can any Man of their Church justify our relying upon his Word, against
the Declaration of Popes and Councils? But suppose the Question be about the
Sense of his own Rule, the Council of Trent: what Authority has he to declare
it, when Bulla Pli 4ti super Conf^rm ^ra^ Council. Tridentini.
the Pope has expressly forbidden all Prelates to do it, and reserved it to the
Apostolical Sea?

(2.) He leaves out, in the se^eral Particulars, an essential part of the
Character of a Papist since the Council of Trent; which is, that he does not
only believe the Doctrines there defined to be true, but to be necessary to
Salvation. And there is not a word of this in his Representation of the Points
of Doctrine, but the whole is managed as though there were nothing but a
difference about some particular Opinions; whereas in Truth, the Necessity of
holding those Doctrines, in order to Salvation, is the main Point in
difference. If Men have no mind to believe their own Senses, we know not how to
help it; but we think it is very hard to be told, we cannot be saved unless we
renounce them too. And this now appears to be the true State of the Case, since
Pius the 4th drew up and published a Confession of Faith, according to the
Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent, wherein Men are not only required
to believe their Traditions as firmly as the Bible, the seven Sacraments,
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, Indulgences, Supremacy, etc. but they must believe, that
without believing these things, there is no Salvation to be had in the ordinary
Way; for after the enumeration of those Points, it follows, Hanc veram
Catholicam Fidem extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, etc. This is the true
Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be saved; i. e. The belief of these
things is thereby declared as necessary to Salvation, as of any other Articles
of the Creed. But it may be objected, The subscribing this Profession of Faith,
is not required of all Members of that Church. To which I answer, That to make
a Man a Member of it, he must declare that he holds the same Faith which the
Church of Rome holds: And this is as much the Faith of the Roman Church, as the
Pope and Council of Trent could make it. And it is now printed in the Roman
Ritual at Paris, set forth by Paul V. as the Confession of Faith owned by the
Church of Rome. And therefore this ought to have been a Part of the true
Representation, as to the Doctrinal Points; but when he comes to the 35th Head,
he then owns, That unless Men do believe every Article of the Roman Faith, they
cannot be saved, (p. 96.) and he that disbelieves one, does in a manner
disbelieve all, (p. 97.) Which may as well reach those who disown the Deposing
Power, and the Pope's personal Infallibility, as Us, since those are accounted
Articles of Faith by the ruling part of their Church, to whom it chiefly
belongs to declare them; and the former has been defined both by Popes and
Councils.

(3.) He never sets down what it is which makes any Doctrine to become a
Doctrine of their Church. We are often blamed for charging particular Opinions
upon their Church; but we desire to know what it is which makes a Doctrine of
their Church; i. e. whether frequent and public Declaration, by the Heads and
Guides of their Church, be sufficient or not to that End? Our Author seems to
imply the Necessity of some Conditions to be observed; for besides the Pope's
Authority, he requires due Circumstances, and proceeding according to Law, (p.
42.) But who is to be Judge of these Circumstances and legal Proceedings? And he
never tells what these Circumstances are. And yet after all, he says, The
Orders of the Supreme Pastor are to be obeyed, whether he be Infallible or not.
And this now brings the Matter home; The Popes, he confesses, have owned the
Deposing Doctrine, and acted according to it: And others are bound to obey
their Orders, whether infallible or not; and consequently they are bound by the
Doctrine of their Church to Act, when the Popes shall require it, according to
the Deposing Power. But he seems to say, in this Case, that a Doctrine of their
Church is to be judged by the Number; for, says he, There are greater Numbers
that disown this Doct^^ne, (p. 47.) I will not at present dispute it; but I
desire to be informed, Whether the Doctrines of their Church go by majority of
Votes, or not? I had thought the Authority of the Guides of the Church ought to
have over-ballanced any Number of Dissenters. For, what are those who refuse to
submit to the Dictates of Popes and Councils, but Dissenters from the Church of
Rome? The Distinction of the Court and Church of Rome is wholly impertinent in
this Case. For, we here consider not the mere Temporal Power which makes the
Court, but the Spiritual Capacity of Teaching the Church: and if Popes and
Councils may err in Teaching this Doctrine, why not in any other? I know there
are some that say, Universal Tradition is necessary to make a Doctrine of their
Church. But then no submission can be required to any Doctrine in that Church,
till the Universal Tradition of it, in all Times, and in all Parts of the
Christian Church, be proved. And we need to desire no better Terms than these,
as to all Points of Pope Pius IV his Creed, which are in dispute between us and
them.

(4.) He makes use of the Authority of some particular Divines as delivering
the Sense of their Church, when there are so many of greater Authority against
them. Whereas, if we proceed by his own Rule, the greater Number is to carry
it. Therefore we cannot be thought to Misrepresent them, if we charge them with
such things as are owned, either by the general and allowed Practices of their
Church, or their Public Offices, or the generality of their Divines and
Casuists; or in case of a Contest, with that side which is owned by the Guides
of their Church, when the other is censured; or which was approved by their
Canonized Saints, or declared by their Popes and Councils, whose Decrees they
are bound to follow. And by these Measures I intend to proceed, having no
design to misrepresent them, as indeed we need not.

And so much in Answer to the Introduction.

I. Of Praying to Images.
IN this, and the other Particulars, where it is necessary, I shall observe
this Method;

1. To give a clear and impartial Account of the State of the Controversy in as
few Words as I can.

2. To make some Reflections on what he says, in order to the clearing them
from Misrepresentations.

As to the State of this Controversy, as it stands, since the Council of Trent,
we are to consider.

1. We must distinguish between what Persons do in their own Opinion, and what
they do according to the Sense of the Divine Law. It is possible that Men may
intend one thing, and the Law give another Sense of it: as is often seen in the
Case of Treason; although the Persons plead never so much they had no intention
to commit Treason, yet if the Law makes their Act to be so, their disavowing
it, does not Excuse them. So it is in the present, Case; Men may have real and
serious Intentions, to refer their final, ultimate, and Sovereign Worship only
to God; but if the Law of God strictly and severely prohibits this particular
Manner of Worship by Images, in as full, plain, and clear Words as may be, and
gives a Denomination to such Acts, taken from the immediate Object of it; no
particular Intention of the Persons can alter that Denomination, or make the
Guilt to be less than the Law makes it.

2. There can be no Misrepresenting as to the lawfulness of many External Acts
of Worship, with Respect to Images, which are owned by them. But it does not
look fairly to put the Title, Of Praying to Images; for the Question is, about
the Worship of Images: whereas this Title would insinuate, as though we did
directly charge them with Praying to their Images, without any farther Respect.
Which we are so far from charging them with, that I do not know of any People
in the World, who are not like Stones and Stocks themselves, who are liable to
that Charge. The PENDETS in the East Indies are fully cleared from it, by
Thevenot, as Thevenot Voyage des Indes. p. 188. Bernier Memoirs. Tom. 3. p. 172.
well as Bernier. And it would be hard we should not allow the same to our
Fellow Christians. I do therefore grant what our Author says, viz. That all
the veneration they express before Images, whether by kneeling, praying,
lifting up the Eyes, burning Candles, Incense, etc. is not at all done for the
Image, but is wholly referred to the things represented, which he intends to
honor by Page 3.
these Actions. But I hope now, it is no Misrepresenting for us to say, that
they do kneel, pray, lift up their Eyes, burn Candles, Incense, etc. before
their Images; which is all I charge them with at present.

3. To perform these Acts before Images, without a Design to worship the Images
by them, is declared, by great Divines of the Church of Rome, to be next to
Heresy. The Case was this; there were before the Council of Trent, several
Persons who lived in Communion of that Church, but by no means approved the
Worship of Images, such as Durandus, Holcot, Picus Mirandula, and others. Now
these Persons thought fit to comply in these External Acts, but declared they
intended not to worship the Images, but the Objects before them. Since the
Council of Trent decreed Images were to be worshipped, this Case has been
debated by the Divines and Casuists of greatest Reputation among them; And
Suarez says, this Way of Durandus, Suarez in 3. part. Qu. 25. Disp. 53.
is dangerous, rash, and savours of Heresy; and he says further from Medina,
that it was Victoria 's, Opinion, Sect. 3. 2do. principaliter. and Sect. 5.
that it was Heretical; but he adds, that his own Opinion, that Images were
truly and properly to be Worshipped, was generally received by their Divines;
and therefore I need name no more.

4. It is granted by their Divines and Casuists, that the People in the Worship
of Images may easily fall into Idolatry.

1. If the Worship do not pass from the Image to the thing represented. And so
Aquinas himself determins, that no irrational Creature is capable of Worship,
but as it has Respect to a Rational Being. But here lies the Difficulty, how
an extrinsical Relation to an Object of Worship, where the thing is confessed
to deserve none, can give any Reason, for its being properly worshipped. But
they all grant, if the Worship stop at the Inanimate Part, it can be no other
than the Worship of Stocks and Stones.

2. If the Worship be given to the Image, which is proper to God alone. This
Bellarmin is forced to grant, because the Evidence is so clear in Antiquity,
that the Bellarmin. de Imag. l. 2. c. 24.
Gnostics were condemned for some Worship which they performed to the Image of
Christ. Now, we cannot think that these Gnostics were such Sots, as to take
the Image of Christ to be Christ himself; and therefore whatever Worship it
was, it must be Relative, i. e. given to the Image for the sake of Christ
represented by it.

3. If the People believe any Divinity to be in the Images, or put any Trust or
Confidence in them, then the Council. Triden^. Sess. 25.
Council of Trent it self owns such to be like the Heathen Idolaters. Now, how
shall it be known when the People believe Divinity to be in Images, but by some
more than ordinary Presence or Operation in or by them? by their having a
greater Opinion of one Image than of another of the same Person? by their going
long Pilgrimages to certain Images in hopes of Relief, when they might easily
cause Images to represent at home?

And that such are no extravagant Imaginations, is known to all who have heard
of Loretto, or Compostella, or other Places nearer home. I need not mention the
Complaints of Polydore Virgil, Cassander, or Wicelius to this purpose, who died
all in the Communion of the Church of Rome; for the same is very lately
complained of by a considerable Person in that Communion, who says, The
greatest part of the Devotion Moyens Surs and honestes pour la Conversion de
tous les Heretics. To. 2. p. 115.
of the People of Italy, Spain, and Portugal, consists in prostrating
themselves before Images, and going in Pilgrimage to them, and hoping for
Remission of their Sins by so doing. And another very lately yields, That to
avoid the Peril of Idolatry, to which, he says, the People is evidently
exposed by the use of Images, it would be necessary to take them away from the
Altars, and by no means to have them allowed for the Objects of Religious
Worship.

The Question now is, Whether the Council of Trent has taken any effectual
Course to prevent these Abuses? If not, what Misrepresenting is it to charge
the Abuses upon the Doctrines and Practices allowed by it?

The Remedies prescribed by the Council, are these;

1. Declaring that there is no Divinity or Virtue in them for which they should
be worshipped; and that nothing is to be desired of them, nor any Trust or
Confidence to be put in them.

2. Expressing their earnest desire, that if any Abuses have crept in, they may
be removed.

But in the mean time the Council decrees, the Images not only to be useful to
be set up in Churches, but to have due Honor and Worship given them there, for
the sake of those they represent; as not only putting off the Hat, but falling
down before them. And the Roman Catechism declares, That this Worship is very
beneficial to Catechis. Romans Part. 3. c. 2. S. 14.
the People, and so much is to be told them; and that Images are to be in
Churches, not merely for Instruction, sed ut colantur, that they may be
worshipped.

But what could the Council do more, than to desire all Abuses may be taken
away; and is it not them the fault of others, and not of the Council if they be
not?

I grant, the Council does desire Abuses may be taken away, if any such be; but
then it enumerates those Abuses, in Heterodox Images, in making Gain of Images,
in painting them too wantonly; but besides, it does say, that all Superstition
be removed in the Sacred Use of Images; but it does not say in the Worship of
them; and so it may relate to Magic and Divination. But that the Council could
not prevent, or design to prevent the Abuses mentioned in the Worship of
Images, will appear by these things.

1. The Council of Trent allows the highest Relative Worship to be given to
them; it setting no bounds to it, so it be for the sake of the Prototypes.

2. It allows a Worship to be given to the Images themselves too; for it
confirms the second Council of Nice, which decreed an inferior Adoration to be
given to them.

3. It disapproves no Customs then practiced among them in the Worship of
Images; which were all known, and by many complained of, both as Pilgrimages to
them, and the carrying of them about in Procession, and the solemn Consecration
of them; the Form whereof is not only inserted, but enlarged in the new
Pontifical since the Council of Trent. And it is to be observed, that in the
old Pontifical, A. D. 1511. there is no Form for consecrating an Image; in that
of Paul the 3d, it is inserted, but out of Durandus; but in that of Clement the
8th, it is put in more largely, and as authentically as if it had been always
there. And is not this the way to reform the Worship of Images?

To come now to our Author's Reflections on the Misrepresentation he says has
been made as to this Point.

1. A Papist represented, believes it damnable to worship Stocks and Stones for
Gods; to pray to Pictures or Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other
Saints.

These Expressions are capable of a double sense, and therefore this is not
fair Representing.

(1.) To worship Stocks or Stones for Gods, may signify two things. (1.) To
believe the very Stocks and Stones to be Gods. And this we do not charge them
with. (2.) To give to Images made of Wood and Stone, the Worship due only to
God; and so by construction of the Fact, to make them Gods, by giving them
Divine Worship. And if they will clear themselves of this, they must either
prove that external Adoration is no part of Divine Worship, (notwithstanding
the Scripture makes it so, and all the rest of Mankind look upon it as such,
even Jews, Turks, and Infidels) or that their external Adoration has no
respect to the Images (which is contrary to the Council of Trent) or that
Divine Worship being due to the Being Represented, it may be likewise given to
the Image. And how then could the Gnostics be condemned for giving Divine
Worship to the Image of Christ, which Bellarmine confesses; and is affirmed by
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and Damascen?

(2.) To pray to Images of Christ, or the blessed Virgin, may likewise be taken
in two senses. (1.) To pray to them, so as to expect to be heard by the mere
Images, and so we do not charge them with it. (2.) To pray to them, so as to
expect to be rather heard by themselves for praying to them by their Images.
And if this be not so, to what end are the Prayers made in the Consecration of
Images, for those that shall pray before them? To what purpose do so many go in
long Pilgrimages to certain Images, if they do not hope to be better heard for
praying there?

But he goes on, 2. He keeps them by him indeed, to keep in his mind the memory
of the things represented by them. And is this all in good Truth? We will never
quarrel with them, if this be true Representing. No, that he dares not say.

But, 3. He is taught to use them, p. 2. But how? by casting his Eye upon the
Pictures or Images, and thence to raise his heart to the Prototypes. And is
this all yet? No.

But, 4. He finds a double convenience in the use of them. (1.) They represent
at one glance; and Men may easily make good Reflections, as upon the sight of a
Death's Head, or old Time painted with his Forelock, Hourglass, and Sith. And
will he undertake, that Images shall be used in Churches for no other End? Was
the Picture of old Time ever Consecrated, or placed upon the Altar, or
elsewhere, that it might be worshipped? as the Roman Catechism speaks of their
Images. (2.) They cure Distractions; for they call back his wandering Thoughts
to the right Object. What is this Right Object? the Image, or the Person
represented? And that must be either a Creature, or God himself. If it be a
Creature, does not this imply that it is made a Right Object of Worship? If God
himself, how does an Image cure our Distraction, in the Worship of an Infinite
Invisible Being; when the very Image is most apt to distract our thoughts, by
drawing them down from his Divine and Adorable Perfections, to the gross and
mean Representations of an Image. But are we yet come to the utmost use of
them? No.

But, 5. He cannot but love, honor, and respect the Images themselves, for the
sake of those they represent. Will this content them? And will he promise to go
no further? It is hard to part upon Terms of mere Respect and Decent Regard,
where there is no encroachment upon Divine Worship. And here we are at a stand.

But he goes further. 6. And so he is come at last, to veneration before
Images. And is this all? Dares he deny veneration to Images? When the Council
of Trent has determined it. Eisque venerationem impartiendam. What is this
veneration before Images only? Bellarmine has a Chapter on purpose to prove,
that true and proper Worship is to be given to Images. And was he a
Misrepresenter? Suarez says, It is an Article of Faith, that Worship is to be
given to them. But if the Veneration be only before them, why are they
Consecrated, and set up in Places proper for Adoration?

But, 7. To satisfy any one that he is far from making Gods of his Images, he
is ready to break them into a thousand pieces. What, a Consecrated Image? Dares
he take a Crucifix from the Altar and tear it in pieces? This does not look
like the Love, Honor, and Respect he mentioned before, not to name Veneration.
And I am afraid this is a strain beyond true Representing: Yet at length he
has found some pretty Parallels for the veneration of Images themselves; and
so we are come at last to the main Point. But this is not directly owned; yet
in the way of his Representing, it is fairly insinuated by his Parallels.

1. A Christian loves and honors his Neighbor, because he bears the Image of
God in his Soul. But does he therefore take him and set him before him when he
kneels at his Devotion, to raise his Mind, and cure his Distractions? Would he
set him upon the Altar, and burn Incense before him, because of the Image of
God in him? Is there no difference between the Object of Christian Love, and of
Divine Worship? Nor between a Spiritual Invisible Divine Image in the Souls of
Men, and a Material and Corporeal Representation?

2. We may kiss and esteem the Bible, because it contains and represents to Us
God's Word. But when we kiss and esteem the Bible, we remember the Second
Commandment is in it; and we dare not break his Law, when we pretend to honor
his Word. But we think there is some difference between Reverence and Respect
to the Bible, and falling down before an Image. The Circumstances of the one
declare it to be mere Respect, and a Religious Decency; and if the other be not
external Adoration, we know not what it is.

3. A good Preacher is loved, because he minds Men of their Duty. But what
should we say to him that should therefore kneel down and say his Prayers, and
burn Candles and Incense before him, out of a respect to his good Doctrine? Did
S. Peter, or S. Paul like this, when Men would have worshipped them? A good
Preacher would tell them of their Duty, as they did; and take Men off from the
Worship of any Creature, animate or inanimate, and direct them to worship God
alone, who made Heaven and Earth.

II. Of Worshipping Saints.
FOr the clear stating this Controversy, these things are to be premised.

1. We do not charge them, that they make Gods of dead Men, i. e. that they
believe the Saints to be Independent Deities. For this our Author confesses
were a ^ost damnable Idolatry.

2. We do not say, that the State of the Church of Rome, with respect to the
Worship of dead Men, is as bad as Heathenism. For we acknowledge the true Saints
and Martyrs to have been, not only Good and Virtuous, but extraordinary
Persons, in great Favor with God, and highly deserving our Esteem and
Reverence as well as Imitation; whereas the Heathen Deified Men, were vile and
wicked Men, and deserved not the common Esteem of Mankind, according to the
Accounts themselves give of them. And we own the common Doctrine and Advantages
of Christianity to be preserved in the Church of Rome.

3. We do not deny, that they do allow some external Acts of Worship to be so
proper to God alone, that they ought to be given to none else besides him. And
this they call Latria; and we shall never dispute with them about the proper
signification of a Word, when the Sense is agreed, unless they draw Inferences
from it, which ought not to be allowed. To this Latria, they refer not only
Sacrifice, but all that relates to it, as Temples, Altars, and Priests: so that
by their own Confession, to make these immediately and properly to the Honor
of any Saint, is to make a God of that Saint, and to commit Idolatry.

4. They confess, that to pray to Saints to bestow Spiritual or Temporal Gifts
upon us, were to give to them the Worship proper to God, who is the only Giver
of all good things. For else I do not understand, why they should take so much
pains to let us know, that whatever the Forms of their Prayers and Hymns are,
yet the Intention and Spirit of the Church, is only to desire them to pray for
us, and to obtain things for us by their Intercession with God.

But two things cannot be denied by them.

1. That they do use solemn Invocation of Saints in Places of Divine Worship,
at the same time they make their Addresses to God himself withal the
Circumstances of External Adoration, with bended Knees and Eyes lifted up to
Heaven; and that this Practice is according to the Council Trent, which not
only decrees a humble Invocation of them, but declares it to be impiety Sect.
25.
to condemn mental and vocal Supplication to the Saints in Heaven.

2. That they do own making the Saints in Heaven to be their Mediators of
Intercession, but not of Redemption; although Christ be our Mediator in both
senses.

And upon these two Points, this Controversy depends.

Let us now see what our Representer says to them.

1. His Church teaches him indeed, and he believes that it is good and
profitable to desire the Intercession of the Saints reigning with Christ in
Heaven; but that they are either Page 4.
Gods, or his Redeemers, he is no where taught, but detests all such Doctrine.

There are two Ways of desiring the Intercession of others for us.

1. By way of Friendly Request, as an Act of mutual Charity; and so, no doubt,
we may desire others here on Earth to pray for us.

2. By way of humble Supplication, with all the external Acts of Adoration: and
we cannot think S. Peter, or S. Paul, who refused any thing like Adoration from
Men, would have been pleased to have seen Men fall down upon their Knees before
them; and in the same posture of Devotion in which they were praying to
Almighty God, to put their Names into the middle of their Litanies, and so pray
them then to pray for them.

But how are we sure that their Church teaches no more than this? I have read
over and over the Council of Trent, and the Roman Catechism about it, and I can
find no such limitation of their sense there, where, if if any where, it ought
to be found. The Council of Trent mentions both the Prayers, and the Help and
Assistance of the Saints which they are to fly to. If this Help and Assistance
be no more than their Prayers, why is it mentioned as distinct? Why is their
reigning together with Christ in Heaven spoken of, but to let us understand
they have a Power to Help and Assist? For what is their Reigning to their
Praying for us? But I have a further Argument to prove the Council meant more,
viz. the Council knew the common Practices and Forms of Invocation then used
and allowed, and the general Opinion, that the Saints had power to Help and
Assist those who prayed to them. If the Council did not approve this, why did
it insert the very words upon which that Practice was grounded? They likewise
very well knew the Complaints which had been made of these things; and some of
their own Communion cried shame upon some of their Hymns. Wicclius Wicel. in
Elencho Abusuum.
says, one of them, Salve Regina, etc. is full of downright Impiety, and
horrible Superstition, and that others are wholly inexcusable. Lud. Vives had
said, Vives in Aug. de Civit. Dti, l. 8. c. 27.
He found little difference in the Peoples Opinion of their Saints in many
things, from what the Heathens had of their Gods. These things were known, and
it was in their Power to have redressed them, by declaring what the sense of
the Council was, and that whatever Forms were used, no more was to be
understood by them, but praying to them to pray for them. Besides, the Council
of Trent, in the very same Session, took care about Reforming the Missal and
Breviary; why was no care taken to Reform these Prayers and Hymns, which they
say are not to be construed by the Sense of the Words, but by the Sense of the
Church? There was time enough taken for doing it; for the Reformed Missal was
not published till six Years after the Council, nor the Breviary till four. In
all that time, the Prayers and Hymns might easily have been altered to the
Sense of the Church, if that were truly so. But instead of that, a very late
French Writer cries out of the necessity of Reforming the Breviaries as to
these things; wherein he Entritiens de P^ilalethe and Philerene. Part 2. p.
160, 163, 165.
confesses, Many Hymns are still remaining, wherein those things are asked of
Saints, which ought to be asked of God alone; as being delivered from the
Chains of our Sins, being preserved from spiritual Maladies and Hell Fire;
being inflamed with Charity, and made fit for Heaven. In good Conscience, says
he, is not this joining the Saints with God himself, to ask those things of
them which God alone can give? And whatever Men talk of the Sense of the
Church, he confesses, the very Forms, and natural Sense of the Words, do raise
another Idea in Men's Minds; which ought to be prevented.

But does not the Roman Catechism explain this to be the sense of the Church? I
have examined that too, with all the care I could, about this Matter. And I
cannot find any Necessity from thence of putting this Sense upon them. I grant
in one place, where it explains the difference of the Invocation of God and
Saints, it says, We are to pray to God as the Giver, and to Catech. Romans Part
4. c. 6. n. 2, 3.
Saints that they would obtain things of God for us; and then it adds, the
Forms differ, that to God is Miserere Nobis and Audi Nos; that to Saints is,
Ora pro Nobis. Very well! And is there then no other Form owned or allowed in
the Church of Rome to Saints besides this? Hold a little, says the Catechism,
for it is lawful to make use of another Form; and that is, we may pray to
Saints too, Ut nostri misereantur. And how does this now differ from that to
God, but only in Number? But it adds, that the Saints are very pitiful; then
surely we are encouraged to pray to them for help and pity. Yes, says the
Catechism, we may pray to them, that being moved with pity toward us, they
would help us with their Favor and Intercession with God. But yet this does
not clear the Matter; for elsewhere the Roman Catechism attributes more to
Saints than mere Intercession; and we may pray to them for what is in their
Power: For where it undertakes to give an exact Account of the Catech. Romans
Part 3. c. 2. n. 4, 6.

Cum praesint nobis Sancti and rer^m nostrarum curam gerant. Bellarm. de Sanct.
Beatit. l. 1. c. 20.. deinde. Non solum ab Angels sed etiam ^ spiritibus
beatorum hominum Regi and Gubernarl fideles ^iventes. Id. ib. c. 18.. nos autem.


Reason of Invocation^ of Saints and Angels; it there parallels them with
Magistrates under a King; and says, they are God's Ministers in governing the
Church; Invocandi itaque sunt quod and perpetuo Deum intuentur, and Patrocinium
Salutis nostrae libentissime suscipiunt. What is this Patrocinium falutis
nostrae? Is it only Praying and Intercession with God? That cannot be, for it
instances presently in deliverances by Angels, and Jacob 's praying to the
Angel to bless him, and not merely to intercede for him. But though this is
spoken of Angels, yet from hence it infers the Invocation of Saints too. But
what need we insist more on this, since they do own the Ministry of Saints as
well as Angels, with respect to the Church; and do Canonize Saints for
particular Countries, as lately S. Rosa for Peru. And where there is such a
particular Protection supposed, what incongruity is it to interpret the Form of
their Prayers, according to a Doctrine so received and allowed? But of this
more under the next Head.

2. He confesses that we are all redeemed by the Blood of Christ alone, and
that he is our only Mediator of Redemption; but as for Mediators of
Intercession, he does not doubt but it is acceptable with God we should have
many.

I would ask concerning this Distinction, the Question which Christ asked
concerning John's Baptism, Is it from Heaven, or of Man? No doubt there may be
such a Distinction of Mediators, if God please to make them. But who has
Authority to appoint Mediators with him besides himself? Is it not usurping his
Prerogative, to appoint the great Officers of his Kingdom for him? Would any
Prince upon Earth allow this, viz. when he has absolutely declared his
Pleasure, that his own Son should present Petitions to him, that others shall
take upon them to set up Masters of Requests themselves? Can any thing be
plainer in the New Testament, than that God has appointed the Mediator of
Redemption, to be our Mediator of Intercession? John 14. 13, 14, 16, 23, 24.
Heb. 7. 25. and 9. 7, 24. 1 Jo. 2. 1.
And that his Intercession is founded upon his Redemption. As the High Priest's
going into the Holy of Holies to intercede for the People, was upon the Blood
of the Sacrifice of Expiation, which he carried in with him. If there were no
Revelation in this Matter, there might be some reason for it. But since the
Revelation is so clear in it, this Distinction looks just like the Socinians
Distinction of a God by Nature, and a God by Office; which was framed on
purpose to avoid the plain Texts of Scripture which called Christ God. So does
this look as if it were intended to avoid that clear Text, which says, There
is but one Mediator between 1 Timothy 2. 5.
God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. Which is pre^ently answered with this
Distinction; although there ^e not the least ground in that or any other Text
for it.

Yes, says our Author, Moses was such a Mediator for the Israelites; Job for
his three Friends; Stephen for his Persecutors: The Romans were desired by S.
Paul to be his Mediator, and the Corinthians and Ephesians; so almost every
sick Person desires the Congregation to be his Mediator, that is, to be
remembered in their Prayers, p. 4, 5.

But is there no difference between Men praying for one another, and desiring
others to pray for them here on Earth, and an humble Invocation of the Saints
in Heaven to be our Mediators of Intercession with God there? There is a
threefold disparity in the Case.

1. Here upon Earth we converse with one another as Fellow Creatures, and there
is no danger of our having an Opinion thereby, that we are able to assist one
another any other way than by our Prayers. But the Case is very different as to
the Saints in Heaven, who by being addressed to there by such solemn
Invocation, may too easily be conceived to have the Power of bestowing such
Blessings upon those who call upon them.

2. Heaven is looked on by all Mankind who direct their Devotions thither, as
the particular Throne of God, where he dwells, and discovers himself after
another manner than he does upon the Earth. And we are directed to pray to our
Father in Heaven; where he is represented as infinitely above all his
Creatures; and the great Concernment of Religion is, to keep up the
apprehension of this distance between him and them. Now it is hardly possible
to keep it up, if in the Public Offices of Religion, in the solemnest postures
of Devotion, with Eyes lifted up to Heaven, they do make Addresses, both to God
and to his Creatures.

3. Men are sure, when they pray to others on Earth, to pray for them, that
they do no more than they can justify in point of Discretion, when they speak
or write to those that can understand what their desire is; but no Man on Earth
can be certain that the Saints in Heaven can do it: For it is agreed they
cannot do it without Revelation, and no Man can be assured there is a
Revelation; and it is not reasonable to expect it; for they pray to Saints to
pray to God for them; and they cannot tell what they pray for, unless God to
whom they are to prav, reveal to them what it is they must pray to him for. Is
it not then the better, the safer, the wiser way, to make our Prayers to him,
who we are sure is able to hear and help us; and has promised to grant what we
ask in his Son's Name? But there is no other Name, either under Heaven, or in
Heaven, whereby we can be saved, or our Prayers accepted, but His alone.

But our Author says, It is no part of his Faith, how the Saints in Heaven
know the Prayers and Necessities of such who address themselves to them, p. 5.

But how comes it to be any part of his Faith, that they know them? However he
does not doubt but God can never want means of letting the Saints know them, p.
6. And is this a sufficient ground for solemn Invocation of Saints? God does
not want Means to let the Emperor of Japan know a Request any one here has to
make to him; but is this a reasonable Ground, for him at this distance to make
it to him? God does not want Means to let the Pope know what a mighty Service
it would be to the Christian World, to make a wise and truly
Christian-Reformation in the Church; but would this be a Ground sufficient for
me at this Distance, to make a Speech to him about it? I knew a Man who
understood not a word of Latin, but yet would needs go hear a Latin Sermon:
some asked him afterward, what he meant by it? and the chief Reason he gave
was much like this, God did not want Means to let him know what the Preacher
meant.

But after all, Suppose God should make known to the Saints what is desired of
them; I ask, Whether this be sufficient Ground for solemn Invocation? When
Socinus was not able to defend the Invocation of Christ himself, supposing that
he could know our Hearts only by Revelation. And he had nothing material to
say, but only that there was a Command for it; which can never be so much as
pretended in this Case.

As to what he alleadges of the Elders falling down before the Lamb, having
Vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of the Saints, Apoc. 5. 8. It must
be strained hard to be brough^ to this purpose, when both Ancient and Modern
Interpreters take it for a Representation of what was done upon Earth, and not
in Heaven. And if it were in Heaven, Prophetical Visions were never intended
for a Measure of our Duties. If the Angels do pray for mankind, Zech. 1. 12.
Does it therefore follow we must pray to them? But we say as the Angel did to
S. John, Revel. 19. 10. in a like Case; See thou do it not: worship God.

III. Of Addressing more Supplications to the Virgin Mary, than to Christ.
HEre is no need of farther stating the Question; this only relating to the
extraordinary Service of the Blessed Virgin. And therefore we are presently to
attend his Motions.

He believes it damnable to think the Virgin Mary more powerful in Heaven than
Christ, or that she can in any thing command him, p. 6.

But in good earnest, Is it not damnable, unless a Man thinks the Blessed
Virgin more powerful than Christ? Suppose one should think her to have an equal
share of Power with Christ; Is this damnable, or not? Is it not setting up a
Creature equal with God?

But what thinks he then of those who have attributed an universal Dominion to
her, over Angels, Men, and Devils? What thinks he not only of Psalters, but of
a Creed, Litany, and all the Hymns of Scripture being applied to her? All which
was done by a Canonized S. Bonavent. Opust. Tom. 1. ad sin.
Saint in their Church; and the Books printed out of the Vatican Manuscripts,
and dedicated to the Pope. And there we find something more than an Ora pro
nobis in the Litany; for there is Parce nobis Domina, Spare us, Good Lady: and
ab omni malo, libera nos Domina: From all Evil, Good Lady, deliver us.

What thinks he of another Canonized Saint, who said, S. Bernardin. Sen. apud
Bernardin. a Bustis Marial. Part. 12. Sermon. 2.
these two Propositions are both true, All things are subject to God's Command,
even the Virgin; and All things are subject to the Command of the Virgin, even
God. Was this damnable in a Canonized Saint?

What thinks he of the noted Hymn?

O felix Puerpera nostra pians scelera
Jure Matris impera Redemptori!
Was not this damnable? And I have not only seen it in the old Paris Missal,
but Balinghem a Jesuit says, it was Balinghem. Parnass. M^^i^^ p. 268.
in the Missals of Tournay, Liege, Amiens, Artois, and the Old Roman. I could
produce many other Passages cited by him out of the old Offices to the same
purpose; but I forbear.

But I cannot omit the Approbation given to the blaspemous saying of S.
Bernardin by Mendoza, Mendoza. Virid. Sacr. l. 2. Probl. 1, and 4.
(who endeavors to prove the blessed Virgin's Kingdom, not to be a
Metaphorical, but a true and real Kingdom). And by Salazar, another noted
Jesuit, who Salazar pro Immac. Concept. c. 32.
says, Her Kingdom is as large as her Sons. And we have lately seen how far
this Divinity is spread, for not many Years since, this Proposition was sent
from Mexico;

Filius non tantum tenetur audire Matrem, sed and obedire; Hier. Peers de
Nueros Lapidi^^na Sacra Tr. 1. Sect. 12. N. 148.
The Son is bound, not only to hear, but to obey his Mother. And is it still
damnable for to say, she commands him?

But our Author says, What ever esteem they have for her, They own her still
as a Creature. Is he sure of Page 7.
that? What thinks he of another Saying, which Mendoza approves of, viz. of
Christ's saying to his Mother, As thou have communicated Humanity to me, I will
Viridar. Sacr. l. 2. Probl. 2. N. 11.
communicate my Deity to thee. But it may be said, We are by no means to judge
the sense of a Church by some Men's extravagant sayings. I grant it; but I have
something considerable to reply; viz. That we may easily judge which way the
Guides of that Church incline by this following passage. About ten years since
a Gentleman of that Communion published a Book, called, Wholesome Advice to the
Worshippers of the blessed Virgin; and the whole design of it, being printed in
Latin and French, was to bring the People of that Church to a bare Ora La
veritable Devotion envers la S. vierge Etable and Defendu par le Pere Crasset a
Paris A. D. 1679.
pro nobis to the Blessed Virgin. But this was so far from being approved, that
the Book was condemned at Rome, and vehemently opposed by the Jesuits in
France; and a whole Volumn published against it.

Here I have reason to enquire, Whether the Virgin Mary then, according to the
sense of the Church of Rome, be only a Mediatrix of Intercession or not, since
so large Power and Dominion is attributed to her? And why should not her
Suppliants go beyond an Ora pro nobis, if this Doctrine be received; as it must
be, if the contrary cannot be endured? For that Author allowed her
Intercession, and Prayer to her on that account; but he found fault with those
who said she had a Kingdom Monita Salutaria B. V. Mariae ad Cultores suos
indiscretos. 3. n. 56.. 4.
divided with her Son; that she was the Mother of Mercy, or was a Co-savior,
or Co-Redemptrix; or that she was to be worshipped with Latria; or that Men
were to be Slaves to her. Now, if these things must not be touched without
Censure and no Censure pass on the other Books; is it not ea^y to judge, which
is more agreeable to the Spirit of the Guides of that Church?

But we have a fresh Instance of this kind at home, in a Book very lately
published; Permissu Superiorum. There we are told in the Epistle, That not only
the Contemplations of the Life and Glory of Holy Mary, the Mother of Jesus, A.
D. 1685.
Blessed Virgin is the Empress of Seraphims -- the most exact Original of
Practical Perfection which the Omnipotency of God ever drew; but that by
innumerable Titles she claims the utmost Duty of every Christian, as a proper
Homage to her Greatness. What can be said more of the Son of God in our Nature?
In the Book it self she is said Page 4.
to be Queen of Angels, Patroness of the Church, Advocate of Sinners; that the
Power of Mary in the Kingdom of Jesus, is suitable to her Maternity, and Page 8.
other Privileges of Grace; and therefore by it she justly claims a Servitude
from all pure Creatures. But wherein does this special Devotion to her consist?
He names several Particulars.

1. In having an inward, cordial and passionate value of the Maternity of Mary,
and all other Excellencies proper to, and inseparable from the Mother of God.

2. In External Acts of Worship, of eminent Servitude toward her, by reason of
the Amplitude of her Power in the Empire of Jesus. And can we imagine these
should go no farther, than a poor Ora pro Nobis? He instances in these External
Acts of her Worship. (1.) Frequent visiting holy Places dedicated to her
Honor. And are not those her Temples then? which Bellarmin confesses to be a
peculiar part of the Worship Billarmin. de Cultu. Sanct. l. 3. c. 4. inis.
due to God. And the Distinction of Basilicae cannot hold here: because he
believes the Assumption of the B. Virgin; and he will not pretend to her Honor
is only for Discrimination. (2.) A special Reverence toward Images
representing her Person. (3.) Performing some daily Devotions containing her
Praises, congratulating her Excellency, or imploring her Mediation; and by often
calling upon the Sacred Name of holy Mary, etc.

3. In having a firm and unshaken Confidence in her Patronage amidst the
greatest of our inward Conflicts, and outward Tribulations; through a strong
Judgment of her eminent Power within the Empire of Jesus, grounded upon the
singular Prerogative of her Divine Maternity. I have not Patience to transcribe
more, but refer the Reader to the Book it self; only the eighth Particular of
special Devotion is so remarkable, that it ought not to be passed over, viz.
Entering a solemn Covenant with Holy Mary, to be for ever her Servant, Client
and Devote under some special Rule, Society or Page 12.
Form of Life, and thereby dedicating our Persons, Concerns, Actions, and all
the Moments and Events of our Life to Jesus, under the Protection of his Divine
Mother, choosing her to be our Adoptive Mother, Patroness and Advocate; and
entrusting her with what we are, have, do or hope, in Life, Death, and through
all Eternity. And is all this no more than an Ora pro Nobis? And it follows,
Put your self wholly under her Page 14.
Protection. What a pitiful thing was the old Collyridian Cake, in comparison
of these special Acts of Devotion to her! But there are some extraordinary
strains of Devotion afterward, which it is pity to pass over. As, I will ever
observe thee as my Sovereign Lady, Adoptive Mother, and most powerful
Patroness; relying on Page 22.
thy Bowels of Mercy, in all my Wants, Petitions, and Tribulations of Body and
Mind. Could any thing greater be said to the Eternal Son of God? And in the
Praise:

Verse. Open my Lips, O Mother of Jesus.
Resp. And my Soul shall speak forth thy Praise.
Verse. Divine Lady, be intent to my Aid.
Resp. Graciously make haste to help me.
Verse. Glory be to Jesus and Mary.
Resp. As it was, is, and ever shall be.
Then follows the eighth Psalm, applied thus to her.

Mary, Mother of Jesus, how wonderful is thy Name, even unto the Ends of the
Earth! Page 24.


All Magnificence be given to Mary, and let her be exalted above the Stars and
Angels.

Reign on high as Queen of Seraphims and Saints; and be thou crowned with
Honor, and Glory, etc.

Glory be to Jesus and Mary, etc.

In the next Page, follows a Cantique in imitation of the Te Deum.

Let us praise thee, O Mother of Jesus! Let us acknowledge Page 25.
thee our Sovereign Lady.

Let Men and Angels give Honor to thee, the first conceived of all pure
Creatures, etc.

I think I need mention no more; only three things I shall observe, (1.) That
this is now printed Permissis Superiorum; and we thank them for the
seasonableness of it, in helping us in true Representing, what their allowed
Doctrines and Practices are. (2.) That this is published English, that our
People as well as theirs; may be convinced how far we have been from unjust
charging them as to such things as these. (3.) That at the same time they plead
for keeping the Bible out of the hands of the People, wherein their Discretion
is so far to be commended, since the Scripture, and this new Scheme of
Devotion, can never stand together. There being not one word in the Bible
toward it, but very much against it; and the Psalms and Hymns must be
burlesqu'd to found that way.

But what says our Author to their Rosaries, wherein there are ten Ave Mary's
to one Pater noster; which is accounted a special piece Devotion; and great
things are said of the Effects of it by Alanus de Rupe, and many others.

1. As to the Ave Mary's, he says, there is no more Dishonor to God in
reciting the Angelical Salutation, than Page 7.
in the first pronouncing it by the Angel Gabriel and Elizabeth. But it may not
be altogether so pertinent. But does he really think they said the whole Ave
Maria, as it is used among them? Did the Angel and Elizabeth say, Sancta Maria,
Matter Dei? (...), or a pro nobis peccatoribus, nunc and in hora mortis nostrae?
If not, to what purpose are they mentioned here?

2. As to the Repetition, that, he says, is no more an idle Superstition, than
David' s repeating the same words 26 times in the 136 Psalm. But what is this
to the Question, why more Supplications to the Blessed Virgin, than to Alanus
de Rupe de usu Psalt^^ii, l. 1. c. 6.
Christ? And not one word of Answer is given to it. But Alanus de Rupe answers
it roundly, Because the Blessed Virgin is our Mediatrix to Christ, the Mother
of Mercy, and the special Patroness of Sinners. This is indeed true
representing.

IV. Of paying Divine Worship to Relics.
FOR the right understanding this Controversy, we are to consider,

1. That there is a due Veneration to the Bodies of Saints and Martyrs, allowed
on both sides; and there is an undue Worship of them, which is disowned on both
sides. The due Veneration is, a Religious Decency to be observed toward them;
which lies in avoiding any thing like Contempt or Dishonor to them, and using
all such Testimonies of Respect and Decency, which becomes the Remains of
Excellent Persons; provided we are satisfied of their Sincerity, without having
recourse to Divine Omnipotency to prove them; which Ferrandus the Jesuit runs
so much to, to prove the Truth of many Relics, worshipped in the Church of
Rome in many places at once. But that it is possible to exeeed in the Worship
of true Relics, even Bellarmin confesses, who says, that God took away the
Body of Moses, lest the People should give Divine Worship to it. And St. Jerome
as hot as he was against Vig^antius, yet he utterly denied giving any De Imag.
Sanct. l. 2. c. 4.
Adoration to the Relics of Martyrs. It seems then it is very possible to
exceed that way.

2. The Question then is, Whether those Acts of Worship which are allowed in
the Church of Rome, do not go beyond due Veneration? For it is unreasonable to
suppose those who give it, to believe those Relics to be Gods; and therefore
it must be such a Worship as is given to them, supposing them to be only
Relics of such Persons. The Council of Trent decrees Honor and Veneration to
be given to them, but never determines what is due, and what not: it forbids
all Excesses in drinking and eating, in the visiting of Relics; but not a
word of Excesses in worshipping of them, unless it be comprehended under the
name of Superstition. But Superstition lies in something forbidden, according
to their notion of it: therefore, if there be no Prohibition by the Church,
there can be no Superstition in the Worship of them. And if they had thought
there had been any in the known Practices of the Church, they would certainly
have mentioned them; and because they did not, we ought in Reason to look on
them as allowed. And yet not only Cassander complains of the great Superstition
about them; but even the Walenbergii lately confess, that the Cassand. Consult.
Art. 21. Tract. special. 4. Controv. 4.
Abuses therein, have not only been offensive to us, but to themselves too.

But what says our Representer to them?

He believes it damnable to think there is any Divinity in the Relics of
Saints, or to adore them with Divine Honor. P. 7. But what is this adoring
them with Divine Honor? A true Representer ought to have told us what he meant
by it, when the whole Controversy depends upon it. Is it only saying Mass to
Relics, or believing them to be Gods? Is there no giving Divine Honor by
Prostration, burning of Incense, etc.? Nothing in expecting help from them?
Yes, if it be from any hidden Power of their own. But here is a very hard
Question: If a Man does not believe it to be an intrinsic Power in the
Relics, may a Man safely go to them, Opis impetrandae causa, as the Council
of Trent says, in hopes of Relief from them? Is it not possible for the Devil
to appear with Samuel's true Body, and make use of the Relic of a Saint to a
very bad end? Then, say I, no Relics can secure Men against the Imposture of
Evil Spirits, who, by God's Permission, may do strange things with the very
Relics of Saints.

But God has visibly worked by them, says our Author, by making them
Instruments of many Miracles; and it is as easy for him to do it now. P. 8, 9.
This is the force of all he says. To which I answer, (1.) It is a very bold
thing to call in God's Omnipotency, where God himself has never declared he
will use his Power; for it is under his own Command, and not ours. But there is
no Reason to deduce the Consequence of using it now, because he has done it
formerly. And that they may not think this is cavilling in us, I desire them
Rabat. Joy de Jasenists, A. D. 1656.
to read Pere Annat's Answer to the Jansenists pretended Miracle at Port Royal,
viz. of the Cure wrought by one of our Savior's Thorns. There he gives another
account of such Miracles than would be taken from us. But where he says, It is
as much for the Honor of God's Name to work such Miracles now; their own
Authors will tell him the contrary; and that there is no such Reason now, as in
former times, when Religion was to be confirmed by them; and when Martyrs
suffered upon the sole account of the Truth of it; and therefore their
Reputation had a great Influence upon converting the unbelieving World. (2.)
Suppose it be granted, yet it proves not any Religious Worship to be given to
them. For I shall seriously ask an important Question: Whether they do really
believe, any greater Miracles have ever been done by Relics, than were done
by the Brazen Serpent? And yet, although that was set up by God's own Appointment,
when it began to be worshipped after an undue manner, it was thought fit by
Hezekiah to be broken in pieces. What now was the undue Worship they gave to
it? Did they believe the Serpent, which could neither move nor understand, was
it self a God? But they did burn Incense to it. And did that make a God of it?
Suppose Men burn Incense to Relics; What then, are they made Gods presently?
Suppose they do not, but place them upon Altars, carry them in Procession, fall
down before them, with intention to show the Honor they do them; are not these
as much as burning a little Incense, which could not signify so much Honor as
the other do? and it is hard then to make the one unlawful, and not the other.

V. Of the Eucharist.
THere are two material Points under this Head which are to be examined,
because he endeavors to set them off with all the advantage he can, viz.
Adoration of the Host, and Transubstantiation.

I. Of the Adoration of the Host.
1. The Question is far enough from being, Whether it be lawful to commit
Idolatry? as our Representer puts it. For the Misrepresenter says, That a
Papist believes it lawful to commit Idolatry: and to clear this, our Author
gravely says, He believes it unlawful to commit Idolatry. Page 9. As tho any
Men ever owned it to be lawful: Which is, as if the Question were, Whether such
a Man committed Adultery, and he should think to clear himself by saying, he
believed it unlawful to commit Adultery.

2. The Question is not, Whether Christ may be lawfully adored by us in the
Celebration of the Eucharist; which we are so far from denying, that our Church
requires our receiving it in the posture of Adoration.

3. The true Question is, Whether the Body of Christ, being supposed to be
present in the Host by Transubstantiation, be a sufficient ground to give the
same Adoration to the Host, which they would do to the Person of Christ?

And that this is the true state of the Question, will appear by these things.

1. The Council of Trent first defined Transubstantiation, and from thence
inferred Adoration of the Host; as is most evident to any one that will read
the fourth and fifth Decrees of the 13th Session. Nullus itaque dubitandi
locus, etc. i. e. If Transubstantiation be true, then Adoration follows. It Is
true, the sixth Canon only speaks of Christ being there worshipped; but that
ought to be compared with the first, second, and fourth Canons, where the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is fully set down, as the Foundation of that
Adoration.

2. The Adoration is not fixed on the Person of Christ, as separate from the
Host, but as making one Object of Worship together with it. And so the Council
of Trent declares in the sixth Decree; when it says, The Sacrament is never
the less to be adored, because it was instituted to be received. This cannot be
otherwise understood, than as relating to the Sacrament: and so that whatever
it be, must be granted to be the Object of Adoration. By the Sacrament, says
Cardinal Pallavicini, is understood the Object made up of the Body of Christ,
and the Accidents. The Worship then Pallavicin. Hist. Council. Trident. l. 12.
c. 6.
being confessed to be Adoration, which is due to God alone, and that Adoration
directed to the Sacrament as its proper Object; the Question now is, Whether
such a Supposition in the Sacrament, does justify that Adoration?

Our Author says, He accounts it most damnable to worship or adore any
Breaden God, or to give Divine Honor to any Elements of Bread and Wine, p. 9.

Then, I say, by his own confession, if it be only Bread, he commits Idolatry;
for the Adoration he cannot deny. But our Representer loves ambiguous
Expressions, which to the People sound very well, but have no sincere meaning:
for what is it he understands by his Breaden God? If it be that he worships a
God which himself supposes to be nothing but Bread, we do not charge him with
it; but if it be what we believe it to be, the Substance of Bread, but himself
believes to be turned into the Body of Christ, then he cannot deny his
Adoration to be given to it.

All that can excuse them is, the Supposition; and whether that will or not, is
now to be considered.

1. If it be not true, themselves grant it to be Idolatry. The Testimonies of
Bishop Fisher, and Costerus, Rossens. c. Oecu. lamp. l. 1. c. 2. Coster.
Euchi^id. c. 8. n. 10.
are so well known to the purpose, that I shall not repeat them. And
Catharinus, a Divine of Note in the Council of Trent, confesses it is Idolatry
to worship an unconsecrated Host, although the Person, through a Mistake, believes
it Consecrated. And he quotes Catherin. in Cajet. p. 133, etc. Ed. Paris, 1535
St. Thomas and Paludanus for his Opinion; and gives this Reason for it;
because Christ is not worshipped simply in the Sacrament, but as he is under
the Species; and therefore if he be not so present, a Creature has Divine
Worship given it. As those were guilty of Idolatry, who worshipped any
Creatures of old, supposing God to be there, as that he was the Soul of the
World. They were not excused, says he, that they thought they worshipped but
one God; because they worshipped him as present in such a manner, as he was
not. And this Book of his, he says, in the I^g^^^. 1542.
Review of it, was seen and approved by the Pope's Order, by their Divines at
Paris.

2. If the Bread were taken to be God, our Author does not deny it would be
Idolatry, for that were to worship a breaden God. Yet here would be a Mistake,
and a gross one; yet the Mistake would not excuse the Persons committing it
from most damnable Idolatry, as he confesses: Why then should the other Mistake
excuse them, when they suppose the Substance of the Bread not to be there, but
the Body of Christ to be under the Species? Yes, say they, then no Creature is
supposed to be the Object of Worship. But when the Bread is supposed to be God,
it must be supposed not to be a Creature. There is no Answer to be given in
this Case, but that the Bread really is a Creature, whatsoever they imagined;
and if this Mistake did not excuse, neither can the other.

2. Of Transubstantiation.
Three Things our Author goes upon, with respect to this.

1. He supposes Christ's words to be clear for it.

2. He shows the possibility of it, from God's Omnipotency. P. 9, 10, 11, 12.


3. He argues against the Testimony or Evidence of Sense or Reason in this
Case, from some parallel Instances, as he thinks.

1. He believes Jesus Christ made his words good, pronounced at his last
Supper, really giving his Body and Blood to his Apostles; the Substance of
Bread and Wine being, by his powerful words, changed into his own Body and
Blood; the Species only, or Accidents of the Bread and Wine, remaining as
before. The same he believes of the Eucharist consecrated now by Priests.

This is a very easy way, of taking it for granted that the words are clear for
Transubstantiation. And from no better Ground, to fly to God's Omnipotency to
make it good, is as if one should suppose Christ really to be turned into a
Rock, a Vine, a Door; because the words are every jot as clear, and then call
in God's Omnipotency, which is as effectual to make them good. I confess, these
words are so far from being clear to me for Transubstantiation, that if I had
never heard of it, I should never have thought of it, from these or any other
words of Scripture, i. e. not barely considering the sound of words, but the
Eastern Idioms of speaking; the Circumstances of our Savior's real Body at
that time when he spoke them; the uncouth way of feeding on Christ's real Body,
without any Objection made against it by his Disciples. The Key our Savior
elsewhere gives for understanding the manner of eating his Flesh; and withal,
if these words be literally and strictly understood, they must make the
Substance of Bread to be Christ's Body; for that is unavoidably the literal
sense of the words. For can any Men take This to be any thing but this Bread,
who attend to the common sense and meaning of Words, and the strict Rules of
Interpretation? Yet this sense will by no means be allowed; for then all that
can be inferred from these words is, that when Christ spoke these words, The
Bread was his Body. But either Christ meant the Bread by This, or he did not;
if he did, the former Proposition is unavoidable in the literal Sense: if he
did not, then by virtue of these words, the Bread could never be turned into
the Body of Christ. For that only could be made the Body of Christ which was
meant, when Christ said, This is my Body. This seems to me to be as plain and
convincing as any Demonstration in Euclid. Which has often made me wonder at
those who talk so confidently of the plain Letter of Scripture, being for this
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But several Divines of the Church of Rome,
understood themselves better, and have confessed, That this Doctrine could not
be drawn out of the literal sense of these words; as it were easy to show, if
it had not been lately done already. It is enough here to observe, that Vasquez
confesses Vasq. in 3 Part. Disc. 180. Q. 75 Art. 2. C. 5.
it of Scotus, Durandus, Paludanus, Ockam, Cameracensis; and himself yields
that they do not, and cannot signify expressly the Change of the Bread and Wine
into the Body of Christ. For how can, This is my Body, literally signify, this
is changed into my Body? If that Proposition were literally true, This is my
Body, it overthrows the change; For how can a thing be changed into that which
it is already?

2. He believes Christ being equal to his Father in Truth and Omnipotency, can
make his Words good. We do not in the least dispute Christ's Omnipotency, but
we may their familiar way of making use of it to help them out, when Sense and
Reason fail them. And therefore Cajetan well said; We ought not to dispute
Cajetan. in 3 Part. Q. 75. Art. 1, 2, 3.
about God's Absolute Power in the Doctrine of the Sacraments, being things of
such constant use; and that it is a foolish thing to attribute to the Sacrament
all that God can do.

But we must consider what he says against Sense and Reason. For the believing
this Mystery, he does not at all think it meet for any Christian to appeal from
Christ's Words, to his own Senses or Reason, for the examining the Truth of
what he has said, but rather to submit his Senses and Reason to Christ's Words
in the obsequiousness of Faith. What! whether we know this to be the meaning of
Christ's Words, or not? And thus we shall be bound to submit to every absurd
Interpretation of Scripture, because we must not use our Senses or Reason for
examining the Truth of what is said there. Can any thing be plainer said in
Scripture, than that God has Eyes, and Ears, and Hands? Must now every Man
yield to this in the obsequiousness of Faith, without examining it by
Principles of Common Reason? And we think we are therefore bound to put another
Sense upon those Expressions, because they imply a Repugnancy to the Divine
Perfections. Why not then where something is implied which is repugnant to the
Nature of Christ's Body, as well as to our Senses? But the Question about
judging in this Matter by our Senses, is not, as our Author is willing to
suppose, viz. Whether our Senses are to be believed, against a clear and
express Divine Revelation; but whether the Judgment of our Senses and Reason is
not to be made use of for finding out the true sense of this Revelation? And we
think there is great reason for it.

(1.) Because we have no more certain way of judging the Substance of a Body,
than by our Senses. We do not say our Senses go beyond the Accidents; but we
say, our Senses, by those Accidents, do assure us of the bodily Substance, or
else it were impossible for us to know there is any such thing in the World.

(2.) Because Christ did himself appeal to the judgment of his Disciples Senses
concerning the Truth of his own Body after the Resurrection; Behold my Hands
and my Feet, that it is I my self: handle and see, for a S. Luke 24. 39.
Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye see me have. Now we think we have Reason
to allow the same Criterion which Christ himself did about the very same Body.
Unless he had then told his Disciples, that there was to be another
supernatural manner of Existence of the same Body, concerning which their
Senses were not to be Judges.

(3.) Some of the most important Articles of the Christian Faith do suppose the
Judgment of our Senses to be true. As about the Truth of Christ's Body; whether
he had really a Body, or only the outward Accidents and Appearance of a Body:
if he had not, he did not really suffer upon the Cross, and so the Sacrifice of
Propitiation there offered up to the Father for the Sins of Mankind is lost.
There was a great Controversy in St. John's Time, and afterward, Whether
Christ had any real Body? Those who denied it, brought Revelation for it; those
who asserted it, proved it by their Senses, as S. John himself, That which we
have seen, and heard, and our hands have handled; etc. S. Joh. 1. 1, 3.
He does not tell Men, they must submit their Sense and Reason to the pretense
of Revelation; but they ought to adhere to the Judgment of their Senses
concerning the Reality of Christ's Body. Since therefore Christ himself
appealed to it, the Apostles made use of it, without any Caution or Limitation,
we have great reason to rely still on the Judgment of our Senses concerning the
same Object, viz. the Body of Christ.

3. But we must now consider his Instances to overthrow the Judgment of our
Senses and Reason in this Point.

1. He believes Christ to be God, though to Senses he seemed nothing but Man.
Do we ever pretend to judge of Christ's Divinity by our Senses? How then can
this be pertinent, when our only Dispute is about judging his Body, and the
Substance of Bread and Wine by them? And yet the Senses were of great use as to
the proof of his Divinity by the Miracles which he wrought? which if they had
been like the pretended Miracles in Transubstantiation, could have convinced no
Man, because they could never see them.

2. He believes the Holy Ghost descended on our Savior, though Senses or
Reason could discover it to be nothing but a Dove. If there were no reason to
judge otherwise, the Judgment of Sense were to be followed: but since the
Scripture declares it was the Holy Ghost descending as a Dove, we have no
reason to question that Revelation. For we do not pretend that our Senses are
so far Judges of Divine Appearances, as to exclude the possibility of God's
assuming the shape and figure of his Creature when he pleases, by moulding the
substance of a real Body into such a Representation. Thus we do not deny the
possibility of an appearance of the Holy Ghost under Bread and Wine, if God
thought fit, any more than under a Dove; and in this Case we do not pretend
that our Senses can exclude the presence of a Spirit under the Elements; but
that is very different from the present Case, for here the Substance is
supposed to be gone, and nothing but Accidents remaining; and no spiritual
Presence of Christ is denied, but that of his Body, the very same Body which
suffered on the Cross.

3. He believes the Man who appeared to Joshua, (chapter 5. 13.); and the three Men
to Abraham, (Genesis 18.) were really and substantially no Men, notwithstanding
all the Information and Evidence of Sense to the contrary, from their Color,
Features, Proportion, Talking, Eating, and many others. And what follows from
hence, but that Spiritual Invisible Substances may be under the appearance of
Bodies, and that our Senses cannot be Judges of them? Which is not our
Question, but, Whether Bodies can be so present after the manner of Spirits, as
to lose all the natural Properties of Bodies? and whether a Material Substance
can be lost, under all the Accidents proper to it, so as our Senses cannot be
proper Judges of one by the other?

But our Author seems to grant this, in a natural way of the Existence of a
Body: but he says, Christ gives to his Body a supernatural manner of
Existence, by which being left without extension of Parts, and rendered
independent of Place, it may be one and the same in many Places at once, and
whole in every part of the Symbols, and not obnoxious to any corporeal
contingencies.

This is to me a Mystery beyond all comprehension by Sense or Reason; and there
is certainly a great difference between governing our Understandings, and
giving them up, as we must do if this Doctrine hold good; for it overthrows any
fixed Principles of Reason in Mankind concerning the Nature and Properties of
Bodies.

For, 1. We must still suppose the Body of Christ to be the very same
individual Body which suffered upon the Cross; but if it have no extension of
Parts, and be reckoned independent upon Place, it cease to be a Body. It is
granted, that after a natural way of Existence, a Body cannot be in more Places
than one; but let the way of Existence be what it will, if it be a Body, it
must be finite; if finite, it must be limited and circumscribed; if it be
circumscribed within one place, it cannot be in more places, for that is to
make it circumscribed, and not circumscribed; undivided from it self, and
divided from it self at the same time. Which is a manifest Contradiction, which
does not depend only on Quantity or Extension, but upon the essential Unity of
a Body.

2. If it be possible for a Body to be in several Places by a Supernatural
Existence; why may not the same Body be in several Places by a Natural
Existence? Is it not because Extension and Circumscription are so necessary to
it, that in a natural Way it can be but in one Place. Then it follows that
these are essential Properties of Bodies; so that no true Body can be conceived
without them.

3. This Supernatural Existence does not hinder the Body's being individually
present in on Place: My meaning is this; A Priest Consecrates an Host at
London, and another at York; is the Body of Christ at London, so present there
by virtue of Consecration, as to be present at York too, by this Supernatural
Existence: What then does the Consecration at York produce? If it be not, then
its Presence is limited to the Host, where the Consecration is made; and if it
be so limited, then this supernatural Existence cannot take off its Relation to
Place.

4. The same Body would be liable to the greatest Contradictions imaginable:
For the same Body after this supernatural way of Existence, may not only be
above and below, within and without, near and far off from it self: but it may
be hot and cold, dead and alive; yea, in Heaven and Hell at once.

5. What is it that makes it still a Body after this supernatural way of
Existence, etc. if it lose extension and dependency on Place? If it be only an
aptitude to extension, when that supernatural Existence is taken off, then it
must either be without Quantity, or with it. If it be without quantity, how can
it be a Body? If with quantity, how is it possible to be without Extension?

6. This confounds all the differencs of Greater and Less, as well as of
Distance and Nearness. For upon this Supposition, a thing really greater may be
contained within a less: for the whole Original Body of Christ, with all its
Parts, may be brought within the compass of a Waser; and the whole be in every
part without any distance between Head and Feet.

7. This makes Christ to have but one Body, and yet to have as many Bodies as
there are consecrated Hosts. No, says our Author, This supernatural manner of
Existence is without danger of multiplying his Body, or making as many Christ's
as Altars. P. 11. But how this can be, is past all human Understanding: For
every Consecration has its Effect, which is supposed to be the Conversion of
the Substance of the Bread into the Body of Christ. Now, when a Priest at
London converts the Bread into the Body of Christ there, he does it not into
the Body of Christ at York, but the Priest there does it; therefore the Body of
Christ at London, is different from that at York; or else the Conversion at
London would be into the Body, as at York. But if not, what is the substantial
Term of this substantial Change, where nothing but an accidental Mode does
follow? If there be any such Term, whether that must not be a Production of
something which was not before; and if it be so, Christ must have as many new
Bodies, as there are Consecrations.

8. This makes that which has no particular Subsistence of its own, to be the
Subject of a substantial Change; for this is the condition of Christ's Body,
whatever its manner of Existence be, after the Hypostatical Union to the Divine
Nature. For, when Bellarmin, Petavius, and others of their greatest Divines,
Bellarm. de Incarn. l. 3. c. 8. P^^av. de Incarnatione, p. 6. c. 1.. 3.
undertake, against Nestorius, to explain the Hypostatical Union, they tell us
it consists in this, that the Human Nature loses its proper Subsistence, and
is assumed into the Subsistence of the Divine Nature. From whence I infer, That
the Body of Christ, having no proper Subsistence of its own, there can be no
substantial Change into that which has no proper Subsistence, but into that
which has; and consequently the Change must be into the Divine Nature
principally; from whence it will follow, the Elements losing their Subsistence,
upon Consecration the Divinity must be united hypostatically to them, as to the
Human Nature; and so there will be as many Hypostatical Unions, as there are
Consecrations. And so this Doctrine not only confounds Sense and Reason, but
the Mysteries of Christ's Incarnation too: Which I think is sufficient for this
Head.

VI. Of Merits and Good Works.
FOR the true stating this Controversy, we are to observe;

1. That we do not charge those of the Church of Rome, That they believe
Christ's Death and Passion to be ineffectual and insignificant, and that they
have no dependence on the Merits of his Sufferings, or the Mercy of God for
attaining Salvation; but that they are to be saved only by their own Merits and
Good Works; as the Misrepresenter says, Page 12.

2. We do not charge them with denying the necessity of Divine Grace in order
to Merit; or with asserting that they can merit independently thereupon.

3. We do by no means dispute about the Necessity of Good Works, in order to
the Reward of another Life; or assert that Christ's Merits will save Men
without working out their own Salvation; but do firmly believe, that God will
judge Men according to their Works.

The Question then is, Whether the Good Works of a just Man, as our Author
expresses it, are truly meritorious of Eternal Life? Which he affirms, but
qualifies with saying, That they proceed from Grace, and that Page 13.
through God's Goodness and Promise, they are truly meritorious. But the
Council of Trent denounces an Anathema against those who deny the Good Works of
justified Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 32.
Persons, to be truly meritorious of the increase of Grace, and of Eternal Life.

Here then lies the Point in difference, (1.) Whether such Good Works can be
said to be truly meritorious? (2.) Whether those who deny it, deserve an
Anathema for so doing? As to what relates to God's Acceptance and Allowance,
and his Goodness and Promise, we freely own all that he says about it; and if
no more be meant, what need an Anathema about this matter? There must therefore
be something beyond this, when Good Works are not only said to be truly
meritorious, but we are cursed if we do not say the same.

To make any thing truly meritorious, we must suppose these Conditions
requisite.

1. That what we pretend to merit by, be our own free Act.

2. That it be not defective.

3. That there be an Equality between it, and the Reward due to it.

4. That there be an Obligation in point of Justice, to give that Reward to him
that does it.

And from these Considerations, we deny that, Good Works, even of justified
Persons, can be truly meritorious.

1. It is granted by themselves, That what is truly meritorious, must be a free
Act of the Person who does it. Now the Good Works of Justified Persons cannot
Meritum est Actio libera cui Merces debetur ex justitia. Coster. Enchirid. de
Merit is bo^. Oper. c. 7.
be said to be their own free Acts, if the Power of doing them depend upon
Divine Assistance, and there was an antecedent Obligation upon them to perform
them: So that they can do nothing but what they are bound to, as God's
Creatures; and their very Power of doing it is from the Grace of God. If Men
pretended to merit at another hands by what God gives, there were some color
for it; but to merit from God himself by what he gives us, seems very
incongruous. If I owe a Man an 100 l. and another knowing me unable to pay it,
gives me so much to pay the Debt, this is no more In quantum homo propria
voluntate facit id quod debet, meretur apud Deum, alioquin reddere debitum non
esset mer^torum. Aquin. 1, 2. qu. 114, artic. 1. resp. ad 1.
than what may be called strict Payment, as to the Creditor; but if the
Creditor himself gives me this 100 l. to pay himself with, will any Man call
this strict Payment? He may call it so himself, if he pleases, but that only
shows his Kindness and Favor; but it does not look very modestly or
gratefully, for the Debtor to insist upon it as true legal Payment. Just so it
is in good Works done by the power of God's Grace, which we could never have
done without it; and therefore such cannot be truly Meritorious.

2. What is truly meritorious must not be defective; because the Proportion is
to be equal between the Act, and the Reward due to it; which being perfect,
requires that there be no Defect in the Acts which merit it. But this can never
be said of Good Works of Justified Persons, that they have no Defects in them.
We do not say, they are not Good Works, but they are not exact and perfect: for
although the Grace of God, as it comes from him, be a perfect Gift; yet as it acts
upon Men's Minds, it does not raise them to such a degree, but that they have
Imperfections in their best Actions. And whatever is defective, is faulty;
whatever is faulty, must be forgiven; whatever needs forgiveness, cannot be
truly meritorious. But not only their Good Works are defective; but if they
would merit, they ought to have none but Good Works, whereas the mixture of
others renders the good incapable of being meritorious, because there is so
much to be pardoned, as takes away all claim of Merit in the good they perform.
And themselves do not pretend, that Men can merit the Grace of Remission; but
it is very strange that those who cannot deserve to be forgiven, should deserve
to have an infinite Reward bestowed upon them.

3. There must be an exact Proportion between the Meritum se habt ad praemium
sicut pretium ad illud quod emitur. Altisiodor. l. 3. tr. 12.

Absoluta aequalitas inter mercedem and meritum ponitur per modum Justitiae
commutativae. Bell. Justif. l. 5. ^. 14.


Act and the Recompense: for to merit, is to pay a Price for a thing; and in
such Acts of commutative Justice, there must be an Equality of one thing with
another. But what Equality can there be between the imperfect Good Works of the
best Men, and the most perfect Happiness of another World? especially when that
consists in the fruition of the Beatifical Vision? For what Proportion can
there be between our Acts toward God, and God's Acts toward the Blessed in
Heaven? Let the Acts be of what Person soever, or of what Nature soever, or
from what Principle soever; as long as they are the Acts of finite imperfect
Creatures, it is impossible there should be any Equality, or exact Proportion
between them and the Eternal Favor of God, which is the Reward promised.

4. Where Acts are truly meritorious, there follows an Obligation of strict
Justice, to pay the Recompense due to them. But what strict Justice can there
be between the Creator and his Creatures, to recompense the Service they are
bound to perform; when their very Being, Power to act, Assistance in acting,
and Recompense for it, are all from his Bounty and Goodness? But our Author
would avoid all this, by saying, that though Good Works are truly meritorious;
yet it is through the Merits of Christ, and as they proceed from Grace, and
through his Goodness and Promise that they are so; i. e. they are truly
meritorious, because it appears from all these things they neither are, nor can
be meritorious. For,

(1.) How come the Merits of Christ to make Good Works truly meritorious? Are
the Merits of Christ imputed to those Good Works? Then those Good Works must be
as meritorous as Christ's own Works; which I suppose he will not assert. Or, is
it that Christ has merited the Grace whereby we may merit? But even this will
not make our personal Acts truly meritorious; and the nature of Merit relates
to the Acts, and not to the Power.

(2.) How comes the Power of Grace to make them truly meritorious; when the
Power of Grace does so much increase the Obligation on our side? If it be said,
That the state of Grace puts Men into a Capacity to merit: we might more
reasonably infer the contrary, that it puts them out of a Capacity of meriting;
because the Remission of Sins, and the Favor of God, are things for which we
can never make him any Recompense.

(3.) How comes a Divine Promise to make Acts truly meritorious? For God's
Promise is an Act of mere Kindness, which is very different from strict
Justice: and although by the Promise God binds himself to performance; yet how
come those Acts to be more meritorious of Heaven, than the Acts of Repentance
are of Remission of Sins? Yet none will now say, that there can be any Acts
meritorious of that. Yet certainly there is as clear a Promise of Pardon upon
Repentance, as there is of Heaven upon Good Works: and if the Promise in the
other case, does not make Repentance meritorious of Pardon; how can it make
Good Works truly meritorious of Eternal Life? But notwithstanding, we do not
deny God's Fidelity to his Promise may be called Justice; and so God, as a
Righteous Judge, may give a Crown of Rightcousness 2 Timothy 4. 8.
to all that follow St. Paul 's Example, without making Good Works to be truly
meritorious.

VII. Of Confession.
1. WE do not charge the Church of Rome, that in the power of absolving, they
make Gods of Men; P. 14. as our Misrepresenter pretends.

2. We do not deny, That Christ gave to the Bishops and Priests of the
Catholic Church, Authority to absolve any truly penitent Sinner from his Sins,
(which he therefore needlessly proves out of Scripture) and that such Absolution
is ratified in Heaven.

3. We are glad to find that our Author declares, That no Man receives benefit
by Absolution, without Repentance from the bottom of his Heart, and real
Intention of forsaking his Sins; P. 15. by which we hope he means more than
Attrition.

But yet there are some things which stick with us, as to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome in this matter, which he takes no notice of.

1. That secret Confession of Sins to a Priest is made so necessary to
Salvation, that an Anathema is S^ss. 14. Can. 6.
denounced against all that deny it, when they cannot deny that God does
forgive Sins upon true Contrition. Forth Council of Trent does say, That
Contrition, with S^ss. 14. c. 4.
Charity, does reconcile a Man to God before the Sacrament Lomb. l. 4. Did.
17. Great. de Poenit. Did. 1. c. 90. Quidam.
of Penance be actually received. But then it adds, That the desire of
Confession is included in Contrition: Which is impossible to be proved by
Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity. For so lately, as in the time of the Master of
the Sentences, and Gratian (in the 12th Centurie) it was a very disputable
Point, whether Confession to a Priest were necessary. And it is very hard for
us to understand how that should become necessary to Salvation since, which was
not then. Some of their own Writers confess, that some good Catholics did not
believe the necessity Greg. de Valentia de Necessit. Confess. c. 2. Maldonat.
Oper. To. 2. de Poenit. c. 2, and 3.
of it. I suppose the old Canonists may pass for good Catholics; and yet
Maldonat says, That all the Interpreters of the Decrees held, that there was
no Divine Precept for Confession to a Priest; and of the same Opinion he grants
Scotus to have been. But he thinks it is now declared to be Heresy, or he
wishes it were. And we think it is too much already, unless there were better
ground for it.

2. That an Anathema is denounced against those who do not understand the words
of Christ, Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. of the Sacrament John
20. 23.
of Penance, so as to imply the Necessity of Confession: Whereas there is no
appearance in the words of any such Sense; and themselves grant, that in order
to the Remission of Sins, by Baptism, (of whch St. Matthew and St. Mark speak
in the Apostles S. Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Jansen. Concord Evang. c. 147
Commission) there is no necessity of Sacramental Confession, but a General
Confession is sufficient. And from hence the Elder Jansenius concludes, That
the Power of Remission of Sins here granted, does not imply Sacramental
Confession. Cajetan yields, There Cajetan. in loc. Ed. Paris, 1540. Catharin.
in Cajeta^. l. 5. p. 444.
is no Command for Confession here. And Catharinus adds, That Cajetan would not
allow any one Place of Scripture to prove Auricular Confession. And as to this
particular, he denies that there is any Command for it; and he goes not about
to prove it, but that Cajetan contradicts himself elsewhere, viz. when he wrote
School Divinity, before he set himself to the study of the Scriptures. Vasquez
says, That if Vasquez in 3 Part. Th. Tom. 4. Qu. 90. Art. 1. Dub. 2. Nam. 2.
Greg. de Valent. in Thom. Tom. 4. Disp. 7. Qu. 9. Punct. 2. p 284.
these words may be understood of Baptism, none can infer from them the
Necessity of Auricular Confession. But Gregory de Valentia evidently proves,
that this place does relate to Remission of Sins in Baptism; not only from the
Comparison of Places, but from the Testimonies of S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and
others.

3. That it is expressed in the same Anathema's that this has been always the
Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church from the beginning. We do not
deny the ancient practice, either of Canonical Confession, as part of the
Discipline of the Church for public Offenses; nor of Confession, for ease and
satisfaction of the perplexed Minds of doubting or dejected Penitents; but that
which we say was not owned nor practiced by the Church from the Beginning, was
this Sacramental Confession as necessary to the Remission of Sins before God.
It is therefore to no purpose to produce out of Bellarmine, and others, a great
number of Citations, to prove that which we never deny; but if they hold to the
Council of Trent, they must prove from the Fathers, that Sins after Baptism
cannot be forgiven without Confession to Men: Which those who consider what
they do, will never undertake, there being so many Testimonies of undoubted
Antiquity against it. And it is observable, that Bonaventure grants, that
before the Lateran Bonavent. in l. 4. Sent. Did. 17. part. 2.
Decree of Innocentius 3. it was no Heresy to deny the Necessity of Confession;
and so he excuses those who in the time of Lombard and Gratian, held that
Opinion. And all other Christians in the World besides those of the Church of
Rome, do to this day reject the Necessity of Particular Confession to a Priest,
in order to Remission, as the Writers of the Church of Rome themselves confess.
So Godignus does of the Abyssins; Godign. de rebus Abassin. l. 1. c. 28.
Itinerarium Ori^ntale. l. 5. c. 8.
Philippus a SS. Trinitate, of the Jacobites; Clemens Galanus of the
Nestorians, who says, 'They made a Decree against the use of Confession to any
but to God alone. And Alexius Meneses of the Christians, of Galan. Council.
Eccles. Armenae To. 2. p. 605.
of S. Thomas in the Indies. The Greeks believe Confession only to be of
Positive and Ecclesiastical Institution, as the late Author of the Critical
History of the History Critique de la Creance and de Coutums des Nations du
Levant. chapter 8. p. 105. Chapter 1. p. 14. Resp. 1. Jer m. Patriarch. ad Theolog.
Wirte^tberg. p. 87. Arcud. de Concord. Ecclesiae Occident. and Orient. in 7
Sacram. l. 4. c. 3. Goar in Eucholog. p. 681.
Faith and Customs of the Eastern Nations, proves. And the very Form of their
Absolution declares, that they do not think particular Confession of all known
Sins, necessary to Pardon: for therein the Priest absolves the Penitent from
the Sins he has not confessed through forgetfulness, or shame. And now let any
one prove this to have been a Catholic Tradition by Vincentius his Rules, viz.
That it has been always received, every where, and by All.

VIII. Of Indulgences.
1. THey must be extremely ignorant, who take the Power of Indulgences, to be a
Leave from the Pope to commit what Sins they please; and that by virtue
thereof, they shall escape Punishment for their Sins, without repentance in
another World. Yet this is the sense of the Misrepresentation which, he says,
is made of it. And if he says true in his Preface, That Page 15, 16.
he has described the Belief of a Papist, exactly according to the
apprehension he had when he was a Protestant: He shows how well he understood
the Matters in Difference, when I think no other Person besides himself ever
had such an apprehension of it, who pretended to be any thing like a Scholar.

2. But now he believes it damnable to hold that the Pope, or any other Power
in Heaven or Earth, can give him leave to commit any Sins whatsoever; or that
for any Sum of Money, he can obtain any Indulgence or Pardon for Sins that are
to be committed by him, or his Heirs hereafter. Very well! But what thinks he
of obtaining an Indulgence, or Pardon, after they are committed? Is no such
thing to be obtained in the Court of Rome for a Sum of Money? He cannot but have
heard of the Tax of the Apostolic Chamber for certain Sins, and what Sums are
there set upon them. Why did he not as freely speak against this? This is
published in the vast Collection of Tracts of Canon Law, set forth by the
Pope's Authority, where there are certain Rates for Perjury, Murder, Apostasy,
etc. Now Tractat. Tractatuum. To: 15. Part. 1. f. 368.
what do these Sums of Money mean? If they be small, it is so much the better
Bargain, for the Sins are very great. And Espencaeus complains, that this Book
was so far from being called in, that he says, the Pope's Espencae. in Ep. ad
Tit. c. 1. degress. 2.
Legates renewed those Faculties, and confirmed them. It seems then a Sum of
Money may be of some consequence toward the obtaining Pardon for a Sin past,
though not for a License to commit it. But what mighty difference is there,
whether a Man procures with Money a Dispensation, or a Pardon? For the Sin can
hurt him no more, than if he had License to commit it.

3. He does believe there is a Power in the Church to grant Indulgences; which,
he says, concern not at all the Remission of Sins, either Mortal or Venial,
but only of some Temporal Punishments remaining due after the Guilt is
remitted. Here now arises a Material Question, viz. Whether the Popes, or the
Representer, be rather to be believed. If the Popes, who grant the Indulgences
to be believed; then not only the bare Remission of Sins is concerned in them,
but the Plenary, and most Plenary Remission of Sins is to be had by them. So
Boniface the 8th, in his Bull of Jubilee granted, Non solum plenam and
largiorem, imo plenissimam Bullar. Cherubin. in To. 1. p. 204.
veniam peccatorum. If these words had no relation to Remission of Sins, the
People were horribly cheated by the sound of them. In the Bull of Clement the
6th, not extant in the Bullarium, but published out of the Utrecht Manuscript,
not only a Plenary Absolution from all Sins is declared to all Persons who died
in the way to Rome; but he commands the Angels of Paradise to carry the Prorsus
mandamus Angelis Paradisi, quantum animam illius a Purgatorio penitus absolutam
in Paradisi gloriam introducant. Bulla Clem. 6. ultrajecti A. D. 1653. Gobel.
Person. Cosmodr. aet. 6. c. 86. p. 278. Bellar. To. 3. p. 74. To. 4. p. 85.
Soul immediately to Heaven. And I suppose, whatever implies such an Absolution
as carries a Soul to Heaven, does concern Remission of Sins. Boniface the 9th
granted Indulgences, a Poena and a Culpa; and those certainly concerned
Remission of Sins; being not barely from the Temporal Punishment, but from the
Guilt it self. Clement the 8th, whom Bellarmine magnifies for his care in
reforming Indulgences, in his Bull of Jubilee, grants a most Plenary Remission
of Sins; and Urban the 8th, since him, not only a Relaxation of Penances, but
Remission of Sins; and so lately as A. D. 1671. Clement the 10th published an
Indulgence upon the Canonization of five new Saints, wherein he not only grants
a Plenary Indulgence of Sins, but upon invocation of one of these Saints in the
point of Death, a Plenary Indulgence of all his Sins. And what does this
signify in the point of Death, if it do not concern the Remission of Sins?

4. Indulgences, he says, are nothing else but a Mitigation or Relaxation,
upon just Causes, of Canonical Penances, which are or may be enjoined by the
Pastors of the Church on penitent Sinners, according to their several degrees
of Demerits. If by Canonical Penances, they mean those enjoined by the
Penitential Canons, Greg. de Valentia says, This Opinion differs not from that
of Greg. de Valent. de Indulg. c. 2.
the Heretics, and makes Indulgences to be useless and dangerous things.
Bellarmine brings several Arguments Bell. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 7.
against this Doctrine. (1.) There would be no need of the Treasure of the
Church; which he had proved to be the Foundation of Indulgences. (2.) They
would be rather hurtful than profitable, and the Church C. 2.
would deceive her Children by them. (3.) They could not be granted for the
Dead. (4.) They who receive Indulgences, do undergo Canonical Penances. (5.)
The form of them does express, that they do relate to God, and not only to the
Church. And this, I think, is sufficient to show how far he is from true
Representing the Nature of Indulgences; for we do not dispute the Church's
Power in relaxing Canonical Penances to Penitent Sinners upon just Causes.

IX. Of Satisfaction.
1. HE believes it damnable to think any thing injuriously of Christ's Passion:
But then he distinguishes the Eternal and Temporal Pain due to Sin. As to the
Guilt and Eternal Pain, the Satisfaction, he says, ^ proper to Christ; but as
to the Temporal Pain, which m^^ remain due by God's Justice, after the other
are remitted, he says, that Penitent Sinners may in some measure satisfy for
that by Prayer, Fasting, Alms, etc. p. 17.

2. These Penitential Works, he says, are no otherwise satisfactory, than as
joined and applied to Christ's Satisfaction, in virtue of which alone our good
Works find a grateful acceptance in God's sight. p. 19.

But for right apprehending the State of the Controversy, we must consider;

1. That they grant both Eternal and Temporal Pain due to Sin, to be remitted
in Baptism; so that all the Satisfaction to be made, is for Sins committed
after Baptism.

2. We distinguish between Satisfaction to the Church before Absolution, and
Satisfaction to the Justice of God for some part of the punishment to Sin which
is unremitted.

3. We do not deny that truly Penitential Works are pleasing to God, so as to
avert his Displeasure; but Catech. Roman. Part. 2. c. 5. n. 52, 56.
we deny that there can be any Compensation in way of equivalency, between what
we suffer, and what we deserve.

The Matter in Controversy therefore on this Head, consists in these things.

1. That after the total Remission of Sins in Baptism, they suppose a Temporal
Punishment to remain, when the Eternal is forgiven; which the Penitent is to
satisfy God's Justice for; and without this being done in this Life, he must go
into Purgatory for that End. Of which more under that Head.

2. That this Satisfaction may be made to the Justice of God, after Absolution
is given by the Priest. So that although the Penitent be admitted into God's
Favor, by the power of the Keys, according to their own Doctrine; yet the
Application of the Merits of Christ, together with the Saints in the Sentence
of Absolution (according to their Form) do not set him so free, but he either
wants a new Supply from the Treasure of the Church, i. e. from the same Merits
of Christ and the Saints; or else he is to satisfy for the Temporal Punishment
by his own Penances.

3. That these penitential Works are to be joined with the Merits of Christ, in
the way of proper Satisfaction to Divine Justice. And however softly this may
be expressed; the meaning is, that Christ has merited, that we may merit, and
by his Satisfaction, we are enabled to satisfy for our selves. And if the
Satisfaction by way of Justice be taken away, the other will be a Controversy
about Words.

4. That these penitential Works may not only be Catech. Romans de Paenit. Sacr.
n. 61.
sufficient for themselves, but they may be so over-doing, that a great share
may be taken from them to make up the Treasure of the Church, for the benefit
of others who fall short, when they are duly applied to them in the way of
Indulgences. And about these Points, we must desire greater Proof than we have
yet ever seen.

X. Of reading the Holy Scripture.
1. HE believes it damnable in any one, to think, speak, or do any thing
irreverently toward the Scripture, or by any means whatsoever to bring it into
disrepute or disgrace; but not being contented with this, he adds, That he
holds Page 19.
it in the highest Veneration of all Men living. Now, here we must desire a
little better Representation of this matter. For certainly, those who derive
its Authority from the Church; who set Traditions in equal esteem with it; who
complain so much of its Obscurity, can never be said to hold it in equal
Veneration with those who maintain its independent Authority, its Sufficiency,
and Perspicuity. And these are known and material Points in Controversy between
us and them: therefore let them not say, they hold it in the highest Veneration
of all Men living; though those thought themselves through Catholioks, who have
compared it to a Nose of Wax, to a Lesbian Rule, to a dead Letter, unsensed
Characters, and to other things, not fit to be repeated. But we are well
pleased to find them express such Veneration for it. Wherefore then are the
People to be kept from reading it?

2. He says, It is not out of disrespect to it. But why then? (1.) Because
private Interpretation is not proper for the Scr^ture, (2 Pet. 1. 20.) One
would think the Scripture were not kept only from the People, by such a Sense
being put upon it: for any one that would but consider that place, will find it
must relate to the Prophets themselves; and does he think the Prophets were to
be debarred from reading the Scriptures? But this is playing with Scripture,
and not reasoning from it. (2.) Because in the Epistles of St. Paul are certain
things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also
the rest of the Scriptures, to their own Perdition. (2 Pet. 3. 16.) Now in my
Opinion, such Men deserve more to be debarred from the meddling with the
Scripture, who make such perverse Inferences from it, than ordinary Readers.
And if they use all other places, as they do this, they cannot be excused from
depraving it. It is granted, there were then unlearned and unstable Men, who
misunderstood, or misappled the Writings of St. Paul, and other Scriptures. And
what then? There are Men of all Ages, who abuse the best things in the World,
even the Gospel it self, and the Grace of God. Does it hence follow, that the
Gospel must not be preached to them, or the Grace of God made known to them,
for fear of Men's making ill use of it? If this had been the just Consequence,
would not St. Peter himself have thought of this? But he was so far from making
it, that he advises those Persons he writes to, to have a mighty regard to the
Scriptures, even to the Prophetical Writings, as to a Light shining in a dark
place, 1 Pet. 1. 19. According to this way of deducing Consequences, S. Peter
should have argued just contrary; The Prophetical Writings are dark and
obscure, therefore meddle not with them, but trust your Guides: Whereas the
Apostle, after he had told them what the Apostles saw and heard, he adds, That
they have a more sure Prophetical Word, as the Rhemists translate it. How could
that be more sure to them, unless they were allowed to read, consider, and make
use of it? (3.) Because God has given only some to be Apostles, some Prophets,
other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4. 11. Does
it hence follow that the People are not to read the Scriptures? In the
Universities, Tutors are appointed to interpret Aristotle to their Pupils; does
it hence follow that they are not to read Aristotle themselves? It is, no
doubt, a mighty Advantage to have such Infallible Interpreters as the Apostles
and Prophets; and all Christians are bound to follow their Sense, where they
have delivered it. But suppose the Question be about the Sense of these
Interpreters; must their Books not be looked into, because of the danger of
Error? This Reason will still hold against those who go about to deliver their
Sense; and so on, till by this Method of Reasoning, all sorts of Books and
Interpretations be rejected; unless any such can be found out, which is not
liable to be abused or misunderstood. And if there be any such to be had, they
are much to blame who do not discover it. But as yet we see no Remedy for two
things in Mankind, a proneness to Sin and to Mistake. But of all things, we
ought not to take away from them one of the best Means to prevent both, viz. a
diligent, and careful, and humble reading the Holy Scriptures.

But 3. he denies that all persons are forbid to read the P. 21.
Scriptures, but only such as have no License, and good Testimony from their
Curates: And therefore their design is not to preserve Ignorance in the People,
but to prevent a blind, ^gnorant presumption.

These are plausible pretenses to such as search no far^her; but the Mystery of
this Matter lies much deeper. ^t was no doubt the design of the Church of Rome
to keep the Bible wholly out of the hands of the People. But upon the
Reformation they found it impossible; so many Translations being made into
vulgar Languages; and therefore care was taken to have Translations made ^y
some of their own Body; and since the People of ^etter Inclinations to Piety
were not to be satisfied without the Bible; therefore they thought it the
better way ^o permit certain Persons whom they could trust, to have License to
read it: And this was the true Reason of the ^ourth Rule of the Index Libr.
prohibit. made in pursu^nce of the Order of the Council of Trent, and published
^y Pius IV. by which any one may see it was not an Original Permission out of
any good Will to the Thing; ^ut an Aftergame to get the Bible out of the Hands
of ^^e People again: And therefore Absolution was to be ^enied to those who
would not deliver them to their Or^naries when they were called for: And the
Regulars ^^emselves were not to be permitted to have Bibles with^^t a License:
And as far as I can understand the Addi^on of Clement VIII. to that Fourth
Rule, he withdraws ^y new Power of granting such Licenses; and says ^ey are
contrary to the Command and Usage of that ^^urch, which he says is to be
inviolably observed: Quod quidem inviolate servandum est. Clem. VIII. ad Reg.
4. Indicis Roman.
^herein I think he declares himself fully against such ^censes: And how
Inferior Guides can grant them a^inst the Command of the Head of the Church, is
a thing ^t very agreeable to the Unity and Subordination they ^ast of.

XI. Of Apochryphal Books.
1. WE do not charge the Church of Rome with m^king P. 21.
what Additions to Scripture they thi^ good, as the Misrepresenter says; but
we charge the^ with taking into the Canon of Scripture such books ^ were not
received for Canonical by the Christian Church as those Books himself mentions,
viz. Toby, Judith, Eclesiasticus, Wisdom, and Maccabees.

2. We do not only charge them with this, but with Council Trident. Sess. 4. 8.
Apr. de Canon Script.
Anathematizing all those who do not upon this Decla^tion believe them to be
Canonical; since they cannot (...) but know, that these Books never were in the
Jewish ^^non, and were left out by many Christian Writers. A^ if the Church
cannot add to the Scripture, and (...) Author thinks it damnable to do it; how
can it man any Books Canonical, which were not so received by t^^ Church? For
the Scripture in this sense is the Canon; a^ therefore if it add to the Canon,
it adds to the Scripture i. e. it makes it necessary to believe some Books to
be ^ infallible Authority, which were not believed to be ^ either by the Jewish
or Christian Church, as appears (...) abundant Testimonies to that purpose
produced by Learned Bishop of this Church; which ought to ha^ been considered
by the Representer, that he might (...) Bp. Cosins Scholastical History of the
Canon of Scripture.
have talked so crudely about this matter.

But however, I must consider what he says,

1. He produces the Testimony of Greg. Nazia^^ who is expressly against him, and
declares but Twe^^ Greg. Nazianzen. in Carmin, 2. Vol. p. 98.
Two Books in the Canon of the Old Testament but how does he prove that he
thought these Boo^ Canonical? He quotes his Oration on the Maccabe^ where I can
find nothing like it; and instead of it (...) Orat. de Mac. cab. vol. 1. p. 308.
expressly follows, as he declares, the Book of Josephus, (...) the Authority of
Reason concerning them. So that if ^his proves any thing, it proves Josephus
his Book Canonical, and not the Maccabees.

2. He adds the Testimony of St. Ambrose, who in the Ambros de Jacob and Vi^ae
Erat l. 2. c. 10, 11, 12. Cocci. These. Catho. l. 6. Act 18.
Place he refers to, inlarges on the Story of the Maccabees, ^ut says nothing
of the Authority of the Book: And even Coccius himself grants, that of old
Melito Sardensis, Amphilochius, Greg. Nazianzen. the Council of Laodicea, S.
Hierom, Ruffinus, and Gregory the Great, did not own the Book of Maccabees for
Canonical.

3. Innocentius ad Exuperium speaks more to his Purpose; and if that Decretal
Epistle be allowed, against Scholastical History, n. 83.
which Bishop Cosins has made considerable Objections; then it must be
granted, that these Books were then in the Roman Canon; but that they were not
received by the Universal Church, appears evidently by the Canon of the Council
of Laodicea, c. 60. Wherein these Books are ^est out; and this was received in
the Code of the Uni^ersal Church; which was as clear a Proof of the Canon
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24. Orig. pref. in Psalm. Athan. in Synopsi. Hilar. pref. in
Psalm. St. Cyril. Catech. 4. Epiph. haer. 8. 76. Basil. Philocal. c. 3. Amphil.
Epist. Canon. ad Seleuc. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in Genesis Scholastical History. n. 71.
^hen generally received, as can be expected. It is true, the Council of
Carthage took them in; and St. Augustine seems ^o be of the same Opinion: But
on the other side they ^re left out by Melito Bishop of Sardis, who lived near
^he Apostles times; Origin, Athanasius, St. Hilary, St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
Epiphanius, St. Basil, Amphilochius, St. Chrysostom, and especially St Jerome,
who has labored ^n this point so much, that no fewer than Thirteen Places ^re
produced out of him to this purpose, by the forementioned Learned Bishop of our
Church, who clearly ^roves there was no Tradition for the Canon of the Council
of Trent in any one Age of the Christian Church. But our Author goes on.

4. It is of little concern to him, whether these Books were ever in the Hebrew
Copy. I would P. 22.
^nly ask whether it be of any concern to him, whether they were divinely
inspired or not? He says it is damnable to add to the Scripture; by the
Scripture we mean Books written by Divine Inspiration Can the Church make Books
to be so written, which were not so written? If not, then all it has to do, is
to deliver by Tradition what was so, and what not. Whence should they have this
Tradition, but from the Jews? and they owned no Divine Inspiration after the
time of Malach How then should there be any Books so written afte^ that time?
And he that says in this Matter, as he does It is of little concern to him
whether they were in the Hebrew Canon, does little concern himself what he
oug^^ to believe, and what not, in this matter.

5. Since the Churches Declaration, he says, no Cathlicks ever doubted. What
does he mean by the Church^ P. 23.
Declaration, that of Innocentius, and the Council of Cathage? Then the same
Bishop has showed him, the since that time, there have been very many, both
(...) the Greek and Latin Church of another Opinion. An^ but a little before
the Council of Trent, Catharinus says that a Friend of his, and a Brother in
Christ, deride Cathar. Adv. Cajet. p, 48. ed. Paris 1535.
him as one that wanted Learning for daring to assert the^ Books were within
the Canon of Scripture; and it is plain, Card. Cajetan could never be persuaded
of it: B^ if he means since the Council of Trent, then we are ^^turned to our
first Difficulty, how such a Council c^^ make any Books Canonical, which were
not received (...) such by the Catholic Church before? For then they (...) not
declare the Canon, but create it.

XII. Of the Vulgar Edition of the Bible.
1. WE do not dispute about the Vulgar Editi^^ whether it may not be preferred
before modern P. 24, 25.
Latin Editions because of its great Antiquity in some parts of it, and its
general Reception since the time of Gregory I. But our dispute is, whether it
be made so Authentic since the Council of Trent, that no Appeals are to be
made to the Originals, i. e. whether that Council by its Authority could make a
Version equal to the Originals out of which it was made? Especially since at
the time of that Decree, the Vulgar Edition was confessed to be full of Errors
and Corruptions by Sixtus V. who says, In hac Vulgata Editione visa sunt
nonnulla mutanda, quae consulto mutata non sunt. Clem. VIII. in Bulla.
he took infinite pains to Correct them, and yet left very many behind, as
appeared by Clement VIII. who corrected his Bibles in very many places, and
grants some faults were left uncorrected still; Now, how was it possible for
the Council of Trent to declare that Edition Authentic, which was afterward
so much corrected? And, whether was the correct Edition of Sixtus V. Authentic
or not, being made in pursuance of the Decree of the Council? If not, how comes
Clemens his Edition to be made Authentic when the other was not, since there
may be corruptions found in that, as well as the other; and no one can tell,
but it may be Reviewed and Corrected still; as some of their own Writers
confess it stands in need Luc. Brugens. in variis Lect.
of it?

2. Our Controversy is not so much about the Authority Not. Alexand: dissert.
de vulg. verse. Quaest. 6.
of the Vulgar Latin above other Latin Versions to those who understand them;
but whether none else but the Latin Version must be used by those who
understand it not? And here our Representer says, That he is commanded not to
read any of these Translations (speaking of P 26.
Tindal's, and that in Q. Elizabeth's time) but only that which is recommended
to him by the Church. If this relate to the Vulgar Latin, then we are to seek,
why the common people should have none to Read but what they cannot understand;
if to Translations of their own, then we doubt not to make it appear, that our
Translation allowed among us, is more exact and agreeable than any they can put
into their hands.

XIII. Of the Scriptures as a Rule of Faith.
THE only thing insisted on here is, That it is not P. 27.
the Words, but the Sense of Scripture is the Rule; and that this Sense is not
to be taken from men's private Fancies, which are various and uncertain; and
therefore where there is no security from Errors, there is nothing capable of
being a Rule.

To clear this, we must consider,

1. That it is not necessary to the making of a Rule, to prevent any
possibility of mistake, but that it be such that they cannot mistake without
their own fault. For Certainty in it self, and Sufficiency for the use of
others, are all the necessary Properties of a Rule; but after all, it is
possible for men not to apply the Rule aright, and then they are to be blamed,
and not the Rule.

2. If no men can be certain of the right sense of Scripture, then it is not
plain in necessary things; which is contrary to the Design of it, and to the
clearest Testimonies of Antiquity, and to the common sense of all Christians,
who never doubted or disputed the sense of some things revealed therein; as the
Unity of the Godhead, the making of the World by him, the Deluge, the History
of the Patriarchs, the Captivity of the Jews, the coming of the Messiah, his
sending his Apostles, his coming again to Judgment, etc. No man who reads such
things in Scripture can have any doubt about the sense and meaning of the Words.

3. Where the sense is dubious, we do not allow any Man to put what sense he
please upon them; but we say, there are certain means, whereby he may either
attain to the true Sense, or not be damned if he do not. And the first thing
every man is to regard, is not his security from being deceived, but from being
damned. For Truth is made known in order to Salvation; if therefore I am sure
to attain the chief end, I am not so much concerned, as to the possibility of
Errors, as that I be not deceived by my own fault. We do not therefore leave
men either to follow their own fancy, or to Interpret Scripture by it; but we
say, They are bound upon pain of Damnation to seek the Truth sincerely, and to
use the best means in order to it; and if they do this, they either will not
err, or their Errors will not be their Crime.

XIV. Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
1. THE Question is not, Whether Men are not bound to make use of the best
means for the Right Interpretation of Scripture, by Reading, Meditation,
Prayer, Advice, a humble and teachable temper, etc. i. e. all the proper means
fit for such an end? but whether after all these, there be a necessity of
submitting to some Infallible Judge, in order to the attaining the certain
sense of Scripture?

2. The Question is not, Whether we ought not to have a mighty regard to the
sense of the whole Christian Church in all Ages since the Apostles, which we
profess to have; but whether the present Roman Church, as it stands divided
from other Communions, has such a Right and Authority to interpret Scripture,
that we are bound to believe that to be the Infallible sense of Scripture which
she delivers.

And here I cannot but take notice how strangely this matter is here
Misrepresented; for the Case is put,

1. As if every one who rejects their pretense of Infallibility, had nothing to
guide him but his own private P. 29.
Fancy in the Interpretation of Scripture.

2. As if we rejected the sense put upon Scripture by the whole Community of
Christians in all Ages since the Apostles times. Whereas we appeal in the
matters in difference between us, to this universal sense of the Christian
Church, and are verily persuaded they cannot make it out in any one point
wherein we differ from them. And themselves cannot deny, that in several we
have plainly the consent of the first Ages, as far as appears by the Books
remaining, on our side; as in the Worship of Images, Invocation of Saints,
Papal Supremacy, Communion in both kinds, Prayer and Scripture in known
Tongues; and I may safely add, the Sufficiency of Scripture,
Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession, Public Communions, Solitary Masses,
to name no more.

But here lies the Artifice; we must not pretend to be capable of Judging
either of Scripture or Tradition, but we must trust their Judgment what is the
sense of Scripture, and what has been the Practice of the Church in all Ages,
although their own Writers confess the contrary; which is very hard.

But he seems to argue for such a submission to the P. 29.
Church; 1. Because we receive the Book of Scripture from her; therefore from
her we are to receive the sense of the Book. An admirable Argument! We receive
the Old Testament from the Jews, therefore from them we are to receive the
sense of the Old Testament; and so we are to reject the true Messiah. But this
is not all; if by the Church they mean the Church of Rome in distinction from
others, we deny it; if they mean the whole Christian Church, we grant it; but
then the force of it is quite lost. But why is it not possible for the Church
of Rome to keep these Writings, and deliver them to others, which make against
her self? Do not persons in Lawsuits often produce Deeds which make against
them? But there is yet a farther Reason; it was not possible for the Church of
Rome to make away these Writings, being so universally spread.

2. Because the Church puts the difference between true and false Books,
therefore that must be trusted for the true sense of them. Which is just as if
one should argue, The Clerks of the Rolls are to give an account to the Court
of true Records, therefore they are to sit on the Bench, and to give Judgment
in all Causes. The Church is only to declare what it finds as to Canonical
Books; but has no Power to make any Book Canonical which was not before
received for such. But I confess Stapleton says, the Church if it please may
make Hermes his Pastor, and Clemens his Constitutions Canonical: but Controv.
5. Qu. 4. art. 2.
I do not think our Author will therein follow him.

XV. Of Tradition.
1. THE Question is not about Human Traditions supplying P. 30, 31.
the Defects of Scripture, as he misrepresents it; but whether there be an
Unwritten Word, which we are equally bound to receive with the Written Word:
Although these things which pass under that Name, are really but Humane
Traditions; yet we do not deny that they pretend them to be of Divine Original.

2. We do not deny, but the Apostles might deliver such things by Word, as well
as by Epistle, which their Disciples were bound to believe and keep: but we
think there is some difference to be made between what we certainly know 2
These. 2. 13.
they delivered in Writing, and what it is now impossible for us to know; viz.
what they delivered by Word without Writing.

3. We see no ground why any one should believe any P. 37.
Doctrine with a steadfast and Divine Faith, which is not bottomed on the
Written Word; for then his Faith must be built on the Testimony of the Church
as Divine and Infallibe, or else his Faith cannot be Divine. But it is
impossible to prove it to be Divine and Infallible, but by the Written Word;
and therefore, as it is not reasonable that he should believe the Written Word
by such a Divine Testimony of the Church; so if any particular Doctrine may be
received on the Authority of the Church without the Written Word, then all
Articles of Faith may, and so there would be no need of the Written Word.

4. The Faith of Christians does no otherwise stand upon the Foundation of the
Churches Tradition, than as P. 32.
it delivers down to us the Books of Scripture; but we acknowledge the general
Sense of the Chrstian Church to be a very great help for understanding the true
sense of Scripture; and we do not reject any thing so delivered; but what is
all this to the Church of Rome? But this is still the way of true Representing.

XVI. Of Councils.
1. WE are glad to find so good a Resolution as seems P. 33.
to be expressed in these words, viz. That he is obliged to believe nothing
besides that which Christ taught, and his Apostles; and if any thing contrary
to this should be defined, and commanded to be believed, even by Ten Thousand
Councils, he believes it damnable in any one to receive it, and by such Decrees
to make Additions to his Creed. This seems to be a very good Saying, and it is
pity any thing else should overthrow it. But here lies the Misrepresenting; he
will believe what Christ and his Apostles taught, from the Definitions of
Councils; and so all this goodly Fabric falls to nothing; for it is but as if
one should say, If Aristotle should falsely deliver Plato's sense, I will never
believe him, but I am resolved to take Plato's sense only from Aristotle's
Words. So here, he first declares he will take the Faith of Christ from the
Church; and then he says, if the Church Representative should contradict the
Faith of Christ, he would never believe it.

2. We dispute not with them, the Right and Necessity of General Councils,
(upon great occasions) if they be truly so, rightfully called, lawfully
assembled, and fairly managed; which have been, and may be of great use to the
Christian World, for settling the Faith, healing the Breaches of Christendom,
and reforming abuses. And we farther say, that the Decrees of such Councils
ought to be submitted to, where they proceed upon certain Grounds of Faith, and
not upon unwritten Traditions; Which was the fatal stumbling at the Threshold
in the Council of Trent, and was not to be recovered afterward; for their
setting up Traditions equally with the Written Word, made it easy for them to
define, and as easy for all others to reject their Definitions, in case there
had not been so many other Objections against the Proceedings of that Council.
And so all our Dispute concerning this matter is taken off from the general
Notion, and runs into the particular Debate concerning the Qualifications and
Proceedings of some which were called Free, General Councils; but were neither
General, nor Free; and therefore could not deliver the sense of the Catholic
Church, which our Author requires them to P. 33.
do.

XVII. Of Infallibility in the Church.
1. HE does not pretend this belongs to the Pastors and P. 36.
Prelates of his Church, who may fall, he says, into Heresy and Schism; but
that the whole Church is secured by Divine Promises from all Error and Danger
of Prevarication; which he proves from the Promises of the New Testament, Mat.
16. 18 -- 28. 20. John 14. 16, 26. But however the former seems to take away
Infallibility from the Guides of the Church, yet that this is to be understood
of them separately, appears by what follows.

2. The like Assistance of the Holy Ghost he believes P. 38.
to be in all General Councils, which is the Church Representative; by which
they are specially protected from all error in all definitions and declarations
in matters of Faith.

Now here are two sorts of Infallibility tacked to one another by virtue of
these general Promises, which ought more distinctly to be considered.

1. To preserve Christ's Church so as it shall never cease to be a Church, is
one thing; to preserve it from all Error is another: The former answers the End
of Christ's Promises as to the Duration of the Church; and the latter is not
implied in them.

2. The promise of teaching them all Truth, Joh. 16. 13. is not made to the
whole Church, but to the Apostles: And their case was so peculiar and
extraordinary, that there can be no just inference from the assistance promised
to them, of what the Church should enjoy in all Ages.

3. If the diffusive Church have no infallible Assistance promised, then no
infallible Assistance can from thence be proved for the Church Representative;
so that some particular Promises to the Guides of the Church as assembled
together, are necessary to prove the Infallibility of Councils.

4. It by no means proves following Councils to be Infallible, because the
Apostles said, Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us. Our
Author does not P. 38.
doubt, but the same may be prefixed to all determinations in point of Faith,
resolved on by any General Council lawfully assembled since that time, or to be
held to the Worlds end. But what Reason he had for not doubting in this matter,
I cannot see; the Assistance, he says, being to extend as far as the Promise:
But shall Assistance imply Infallibility? Then there must be good store, as
long as the Promises of Divine Grace hold good: But this Assistance of Councils
is very different from the Assistance of Grace; for the Church may subsist
without Councils, but cannot without Grace: What General Council was there from
the meeting, Acts 15. to the Council of Nice? Were not Christ's Promises
fulfilled to his Church all that time, when it increased in all parts against
the most violent Opposition?

5. No Parity of Reason from the Jewish Church can be sufficient Proof for
Infallibility in the Christian. But our Author argues thus, If Gods special
Assistance was never wanting to the Church of the Jews so as to let it fail in
the Truth of its Doctrine, or its Authority; Why should not he believe the same
of the Church of Christ, which is built on better Promises? What special
Assistance was it P. 39.
which Israel had, when it is said, that for a long time Israel had been
without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law? And as to
Judah, was there no failing in point of Doctrine in our Saviors time? It 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
is true they had the Law entire, and that was all that was good among them;
for their Teachers had corrupted themselves and the People, and made the Law of
no effect among them: If there were Infallibility any where, it must be in the
High Priest and Sanhedrim; but is it possible for any Christian to think them
infallible, when they were so grossly mistaken about the main Article of their
Faith as to the Messiah, and pronounced him worthy of death? Is not this a fine
Argument for the Infallibility of the Guides of the Christian Church? But the
Church of Christ has better Promises: No doubt of it, greater Promises of
Grace and Mercy in this World, and in that to come: but what is all this to
Infallibility in Councils?

6. Christ's Command of Obedience to those who sat in Moses Chair, (Matt. 23.
2.) does not prove the Infallibility of those who sat there. Yet this is
alleged to that purpose; and that men ought not to doubt of the Reasonableness
of the Commands of their Superiors. P. 39.
But St. Chrysostom says, our Savior speaks of the things Chrysostom. in Matt.
Hom. 72.
commanded by the Law of Moses. Per Cathedram Doctrinam Legis ostendit, says
S. Jerome; Not their own Doctrine, Hieron. in loc. Caten. Gr. in loc. Hilaer.
Canon. 24. Theophilact. in loc.
but that of Moses, says Isidore; and so Hilary and Theophylact. Maldonate
confesses, our Saviors Words are to be understood, not of their own Doctrine,
but of that of the Law; and therefore he yields the Obedience here required is
to be restrained to that; All things, says Cajetan, which they teach out of
Moses 's Chair: Not all their Doctrines, but as far as they were conformable to
the Law, says Ferus. Now, can any one hence infer, that no men ought to
dispute any Commands of Superiors, when it is supposed, that there is a Rule
and Standard for them to speak according to; and our Savior elsewhere does
suppose these very Men to teach things contrary to the Matt. 15.
Law; as in the Case of Corban. Would our Savior contradict himself? or
require a blind Obedience in things repugnant to the Law? We do not deny a due
submission to our Superiors in the Church; yea, we allow them a Power to
determine things not forbidden; and think obedience due in such things by
virtue of their Authority; but yet this is far enough from Infallibility, or an
unlimited implict Obedience, which would overthrow the force of all our
Saviors Reasonings against the Scribes and Pharisees, as to their
misinterpreting the Law, and the Superstitious Practices they imposed upon the
People.

XVIII. Of the POPE.
1. WE do not charge them with believing the Pope to be God; which it seems
himself did, if we believe the Misrepresenter in his Preface; but there is some
Reason to doubt whether they do not at some times give him greater Honor than
becomes a Man. I instance in the Adoration after his Election, when the new
Cerem. Sect. 1. c. 2.
Pope is placed upon the Altar to receive the Submissions of the Cardinals; but
the Altar, themselves do confess to be Sacred to God alone; And there they
profess to Worship Jesus Christ, as present in the Host. This therefore looks
too much like assuming the Place of Christ, and not becoming the Distance
between God and Man.

2. The Question is, Whether Christ has appointed the Pope or Bishop of Rome
to be Pastor, Governor, and Head of his Church under him? This, he says, he
believes, and this he knows we deny, and therefore had P. 40.
Reason to expect some Proof of it. But instead, he tells us how they look on
themselves as obliged to show him the Respect due to his Place, which he knows
is not the matter in Question. Two things however he says, which seem to
justify his Title.

1. He is the Successor of St. Peter, to whom Christ P. 41.
committed the care of his Flock. But how far is this from proving the Pope to
be Head of the Church under Christ? For, how does it appear that Christ ever
made S. Peter Head of the Church, or committed his Flock to him, in
contradistinction to the rest of the Apostles? This is so far from being
evident from Scripture, that the Learned men of their Church are ashamed of the
Places commonly produced for it; it being impossible ever to justify the sense
of them according to their own Rules of Interpreting Scripture, viz. by the
unanimous consent of the Fathers. For, 1. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
Matt. 16. 18.
will I build my Church, is interpreted by many of the Fathers both Greek and
Latin, of S. Peter's Confession, and not of his Person; so by S. Chrysostom, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Pentec. Tom. 5. ed Savil. p 979.
Ambros de Incarnat. Dom. Sacramento c. 5. Aug. de verbis Dom. ad Evang. secund.
Matthew. Sermon. 13. Tract. in Joh. 124. Basil. Seleuc. Orat. 25. ad fin. Hilar. de
Trinit. l. 6. Greg. Nyssen de Advent. Domini cap. ult. Theodoret Epist. 77. 146.
S. Basil of Selucioe, S. Hilary, S. Gregory Nyssen, and Theodoret; all great
and considerable Persons in the Christian Church, whose words are plain and
full to that purpose; and so they can never produce the unanimous consent of
the Fathers for S. Peter's Supremacy out of these Words. 2. And unto thee will
I give the Keys of the Matt. 16. 19.
Kingdom of Heaven, are interpreted by the Fathers of S. Peter in common with
the other Apostles; so Origin, S. Orig. Comment. in Matt. Gr. Lat. p. 275.
Cyprian. de Unit. Ecclesiae. Hilar. de Trinit. 1. 6. Hier. c. Jovin. l. 1. c.
14. in Matt. 16. Aug. in Joh. Tr. 118. 124. in Epist. Joh. To. 10. Moyens su^^
and honestes, etc. p. 34, etc. Entretiens de Philaleth. in Phile^ p. 121. Joh.
Launoi. Epist. part. 5. Reim. Formentino, and Part. 2. Ep. 5. p. 47, etc.
Cyprian, S. Hilary, S. Hierom, and S. Augustine, as they are all owned by a
Member of the Roman Communion. And 3. For these Words, Feed my Sheep, a late
Learned Doctor of the Sorban shows, that if they prove any thing Peculiar to S.
Peter, they must prove him sole Pastor of the Church, which was the thing S.
Gregory disputed against so warmly. But that there was nothing peculiar to S.
Peter, above or beyond the rest of the Apostles, he shows at large from S.
Chrysostom, S. Cyril, S. Augustine and others, to whom I refer the Reader, and
to the former Authors. But suppose it were made to appear, that S. Peter was
Head of the Church, How does the Bishop of Rome's Succession in that Headship
show it self? To that he says, 2. That there has been a visibile Succession
of above Two hundred and fifty Bishops, acknowledged as such in all past Ages
by the Christian World. As such: What is that? As Bishops of Rome? That is not
of weight enough to put it upon Trial; as Heads of the Catholick-Church? That
he knows is not only denied by us, but by all the Greek, Armenian, Nestorian,
Abyssin Churches; so that we dare say, it was never allowed in any one Age of
the Christian Church. But we need not insist on the proof of this, since the
late mentioned Authors of the Roman Communion have taken so great pains, not
only to prove the Popes Supremacy to be an Incroachment and Usurpation in the
Church, but that the laying it aside is necessary to the Peace and Unity of it.
And until the Divine Institution of the Papal Supremacy be proved, it is to no
purpose to debate what manner of Assistance is promised to the Pope in his
Decrees. P. 42.
Our Author is willing to decline the debate about his Personal Infallibility,
as a matter of Opinion, and not of Faith; and yet he says he doubts not but
God does grant a special Assistance to the High Priest, for the good of the
whole Flock, under the New Law, as he did under the Old; and produces the
Instance of Caiaphas, Joh. 11. 51. This is a very surprising way of Reasoning;
for if his Arguments be good from Scripture, he must hold the Popes personal
Infallibity as a matter of Faith; and yet one would hardly think he should
build an Article of Faith on the instance of Caiaphas: For what consequence can
be drawn from Gods overruling the mind of a very bad man, when he was carrying
on a most wicked design, to utter such words, which in the event proved true in
another sense than he meant them; that therefore God will give a special
Assistance to the Pope in determining matters of Faith? Was not Caiaphas
himself the man who proposed the taking away the Life of Christ at that time?
Was he assisted in that Council? Did not he determine afterward Christ to he
guilty of Blasphemy, and therefore worthy of Death? And is not this a rare
Infallibility which is supposed to be consistent with a Decree to crucify
Christ? And does he in earnest think such Orders are to be obeyed, whether the
supreme Pastor be Infallible or not? For so he concludes, That his Sentence is
to be obeyed, whether he be infallible or no?

XIX. Of Dispensations.
HERE the Misrepresenter says, That a Papist believes that the Pope has
Authority to dispense P. 43.
with the Laws of God, and absolve any one from the Obligation of keeping the
Commandments. On the other side, the Representer affirms, That the Pope has no
Authority to dispense with the Law of God, and that there is no Power upon Earth
can absolve any one from the Obligation of keeping the Commandments: This
matter is not to be determined by the ones affirming, and the others denying;
but by finding out, if possible, the true sense of the Church of Rome about
this matter. And there are Three Opinions about it.

1. Of those who assert, That the Pope has a Power of Dispensing in any Divine
Law, except the Articles of Faith: The Gloss upon the Canon Law says, That
where De Concess. Praebend. e proposuit. Abb. c. proposuit de Conc. Praebend.
c. 15. Q. 6. c. Auctoritate
the Text seems to imply, that the Pope cannot dispense against the Apostle, it
is to be understood of Articles of Faith: And Panormitan says, This Exposition
pleases him well; for the Pope may dispense in all other things: Contra
Apostolum dispensat, says the Gloss on the Decree: And the Roman Editors in
the Margin, refer to 34 Did. c. Lector to prove it: And there indeed the Gloss
is very plain in the Case, sic ergo Papa dispensat contra Apostolum: And the
Roman Correctors there justify it, and say it is no absurd Doctrine as to
positive Institutions: But the former notable Gloss, as Panormitan calls it,
sets down the particulars wherein the Pope may dispense. As 1. Against Sum.
Angelic. v. dispensatio.
the Apostles and their Canons. 2. Against the Old Testament. 3. In Vows. 4. In
Oaths. The Summa Angelica says, the Pope may dispense as to all the Precepts
of the Old Testament. And Clavasi^^ founds this Power upon the Plenitude of the
Popes Power, according to that Expression in the Decretal mentioned, that he
can, ex plenitudine Potestatis de Jure supra Jus dispensare; and Jacobat. de
Conciliis l. 5. p. 215.
without such a Power, he says, God would not have taken that care of his
Church, which was to be expected from his Wisdom. Jacobatius brings several
Instances of this Power in the Pope, and refers to the Speculator for more.
Jac. Almain says, That all the Canonists are of Almain. de Potest. Ecclesiae
c. 13.
Opinion, that the Pope may dispense against the Apostle, and many of their
Divines, but not all: For,

2. Some of their Divines held that the Pope could not dispense with the Law of
God, as that implies a proper Relaxation of the Law, but could only
Authoritatively declare that the Law did not oblige in such a particular Case;
because an Inferior could not take away the force of a Superiors Law; and
otherwise there would be no fixed and immutable Rule in the Church; and if the
Pope might dispense in one Law of God, he might dispense in the rest: And of
this Opinion were some of the most eminent School-Divines, as Thomas Aquinas,
Catharin. c. Cajetan. 6. p. 524.
Bonaventure, Major, Soto, and Catbarinus, who at large debates this Question,
and denies that the Pope has any Power to dispense with Gods Law: But then he
adds, that the Pope has a kind of Prophetical Power to declare in what Cases
the Law does oblige, and in what not; which he parallels with the Power of
declaring the Canon of Scripture; and this he does not by his own Authority,
but by Gods; He confesses the Pope cannot dispense with those Precepts which
are of themselves indispensable; nor alter the Sacraments; but then, says he,
there are some Divine Laws, which have a general force, but in particular Cases
may be dispensed with; and in these cases the Law is to be relaxed, so that the
Relaxation seems to come from God himself: But he confesses this Power is not
to be often made use of; so that he makes this Power to be no Act of
Jurisdiction, but of Prophetical Interpretation, as he calls it; and he brings
the Instance of Caiaphas to this purpose: And he adds, that the difference
between the Divines and Canonists was but in Terms; for the Canonists were in
the right as to the Power, and the Divines in the manner of explaining it.

3. Others have thought this too loose a way of explaining the Popes Power, and
therefore they say, That the Pope has not a bare declaratory Power, but a real
Power of dispensing in a proper sense in particular Cases: For say they, the
other is no act of Jurisdiction, but of Discretion, and may belong to other men
as well as to the Pope; but this they look on as more agreeable to the Popes
Authority and Commission; and a bare declaratory Power would not be sufficient
for the Churches Necessity; as Sanchez shows at large, and quotes many Authors
for this Opinion, and Sayr. more; and he says the Practice of the Church
cannot be justified without it: Which Suarez much insists upon; and without it,
he Sanchez. de Matrim l. 8. Disp. 6. n. 5. Sayr. Clavis Reg. l. 6. c. 11.
Suarez. de vot. l. 6. c. 9. n. 7. 8, 9, 17.
says, the Church has fallen into intolerable Errors; and it is evident he
says, the Church has granted real Dispensations, and not mere Declarations.
And he founds it upon Christ's Promise to Peter, To thee will I give the Keys,
and the Charge to him, Feed my sheep. But then he explains this Opinion, by
saying that it is no formal Dispensation with the Law of God, but the matter of
the Law is changed or taken away.

Thus I have briesly laid together the different Opinions in the Church of Rome
about this Power of dispensing with the Law of God; from which it appears, that
they do all consent in the thing, but differ only in the manner of explaining
it.

And I am therefore afraid our Representer is a very unstudied Divine, and does
not well understand their own Doctrine, or he would never have talked so boldly
and unskilfully in this matter.

As to what he pretends, that their Church teaches that every Lie is a Sin,
etc. it does not reach the Case; For the Question is not, whether their Church
teach men to lie, but whether there be not such a Power in the Church, as by
altering the Nature of things, may not make that not to be a Lie, which
otherwise would be one: As their Church teaches that Men ought not to break
their Vows; yet no one among them questions, but the Pope may dissolve the
Obligation of a Vow, although it be made to God himself. Let him show then, how
the Pope comes to have a Power to release a Vow made to God, and not to have a
Power to release the Obligation to veracity among men.

Again, We do not charge them with delivering any such Doctrine, That men may
have Dispensations to lie P. 45.
and forswear themselves at pleasure; for we know this Dispensing Power is to
be kept up as a great Mystery, and not to be made use of, but upon weighty and
urgent Causes, of great Consequence and Benefit to the Church, as their Doct^^^
declare. But as to all matters of fact, which he alludes to, I have nothing to
say to them; for our debate is only, whether there be such a Power of
Dispensation allowed in the Church of Rome, or not?

XX. Of the Deposing Power.
TO bring this matter into as narrow a compass as may be, I shall first take
notice of his Concessions, which will save us a labor of Proofs.

1. He yields that the Deposing and King-killing Power has been maintained by
some Canonists and Divines P. 46.
of his Church, and that it is in their opinion lawful, and annexed to the
Papal Chair.

2. That some Popes have endeavored to act according to this Power.

But then he denies that this Doctrine appertains to the Faith of his Church,
and is to be believed by all of that Communion. And more than that, he says,
The affirming of it is a malicious Calumny, a downright Falsity.

Let us now calmly debate the matter, Whether according to the received
principles of the Church of Rome, this be only a particular opinion of some
Popes and Divines, or be to be received as a matter of Faith. The Question is
not,

Whether those who deny it, do account it an Article of Faith; for we know they
do not: But whether upon the Principles of the Church of Rome they are not
bound to do it.

I shall only, to avoid cavilling, proceed upon the Principles owned by our
Author himself, viz.

1. That the sense of Scripture, as understood by the Community of Christians
in all Ages since the Apostles, P. 29.
is to be taken from the present Church.

2. That by the present Church he understands the Pastors and Prelates
assembled in Councils, who are appointed P. 34.
by Christ and his Apostles for the decision of Controversies; and that they
have Infallible assistance.

3. That the Pope as the Head of the Church, has a P. 40, 41.
particular Assistance promised him, with a special regard to his Office and
Function.

If therefore it appear that Popes and Councils have declared this Deposing
Doctrine, and they have received other things as Articles of Faith upon the
same Declarations, Why should they then stick at yielding this to be an Article
of Faith, as well as the other?

It is not denied, that I can find, that Popes and Councils for several Ages
have asserted and exercised the Deposing Power; but it is alleged against
these Decrees, and Acts, 1. That they were not grounded upon Universal
Tradition. 2. That they had not Universal Reception.

Now, if these be sufficient to overthrow the Definitions of Councils, let us
consider the consequences of it.

1. Then every Man is left to examine the Decrees of Councils, whether they are
to be embraced or not; for he is to judge whether they are founded on Universal
Tradition; and so he is not to take the sense of the present Church for his
Guide, but the Universal Church from Christ's time: which overthrows a
Fundamental Principle of the Roman Church.

2. Then he must reject the pretended Infallibility in the Guides of the
Church, if they could so notoriously err in a matter of so great consequence to
the Peace of Christendom, as this was; and consequently their Authority could
not be sufficient to declare any Articles of Faith. And so all Persons must be
left at Liberty to believe as they see cause, notwithstanding the Definitions
made by Popes and Councils.

3. Then he must believe the Guides of the Roman Church to have been mistaken,
not once or twice, but to have persisted in it for Five hundred years, which
must take away, not only Infallibility, but any kind of Reverence to the
Authority of it. For whatever may be said as to those who have depended on
Princes, or favor their Parties against the Guides of the Church, it cannot be
denied that for so long time the leading Party in that Church did assert and
maintain the Deposing Power. And therefore Lessius truly understood this
matter, Discussio Decreti Magni Council. Lateran. p. 89.
when he said, That there was scarce any Article of the Christian Faith, the
denial whereof was more dangerous to the Church, or did precipitate Men more
into Heresy and Hatred of the Church, than this of the Deposing Power; for, he
says, they could not maintain their Churches Authority without it.

And he reckons up these ill Consequences of denying it. P. 90, etc.


1. That the Roman Church has erred for at least Five hundred years, in a
matter fundamental as to Government, and of great Moment: Which is worse than
an Error about Sacraments, as Penance, Extreme Unction, etc. and yet those who
deny the Church can err in one, hold that it has erred in a greater matter.

2. That it has not only erred, but voluntarily and out of Ambition,
perverting out of Design the Doctrine of the Primitive Church and Fathers
concerning the Power of the Church, and bringing in another contrary to it,
against the Right and Authority of Princes; which were a grievous sin.

3. That it made knowingly, unrighteous Decrees, to draw persons from their
Allegiance to Princes; and so they became the Causes of many Seditions and
Rebellions, and all the ill Consequences of them, under a show of Piety and
Religion.

4. That the Churches Decrees, Commands, Judgments and Censures may be safely
contemned as Null, and containing intolerable Errors. And that it may require
such things which good Subjects are bound to disobey.

5. That Gregory VII. in the Canon Nos Sanctorum, etc. Urban II. Gregory IX.
the Councils of Lateran under Alex. III. and Innocent III. the Councils of
Lions, of Vienna, of Constance, of Lateran under Leo X. and of Trent, have all
grievously and enormously erred about this matter; For that it was the Doctrine
of them all, he shows at large; and so Seven General Councils lose their
Infallibility at one blow.

6. That the Gates of Hell have prevailed against the Church: For the true
Church could never teach such pernicious Doctrine as this must be, if it be not
true. And if it erred in this, it might as well err in any other Doctrine, and
so Men are not bound to believe or obey it.

7. That Princes and all Laymen have just Cause to withdraw from their Church;
because it showed it self to be governed by a spirit of Ambition, and not by
the Spirit of God; and not only so, but they may justly prosecute all that
maintain a Doctrine so pernicious to Government, if it be not true.

Let us now see what our Author says to clear this from being a Doctrine of
the Church of Rome.

1. That for the few Authors that are abettors of this Doctrine, there are of
his Communion Three times the number that publicly disown all such Authority.

If this be true, it is not much for the Reputation of their Church, That there
should be such a number of those who are liable to all these dreadful
Consequences, which Lessius urges upon the deniers of it: But is it possible to
believe there should be so few followers of so many Popes, and Seven General
Councils, owned for such by the disowners of this Doctrine, except the Lateran
under Leo Discuss. Discuss. Part 3. Sect. 3. p. 1.
10.? The poor Eastern Christians are condemned for Heretics by the Church of
Rome, for refusing to submit to the Decrees of One General Council, either that
of Ephesus, or of Chalcedon: And they plead for themselves, That there was a
misinterpretation of their meaning, or not right understanding one another
about the difference of Nature and Person, which occasioned those Decrees. I
would fain know, whether those Churches Philip. a SS. Trinir. Itiner. Orient.
l. 5 c. 5. Clem. Galau. Council. Eccl. Arm. Qu. 2. SS. ^. p. 92.
which do not embrace the Decrees of those Councils, are in a state of Heresy
or not? If they be, then what must we think of such who reject the Decrees of
Seven General Councils, one after another, and give far less probable accounts
of the Proceedings of those Councils in their Definitions, than the other do?

2. He says, Those who have condemned it, have not been in the least suspected
of their Religion, or of denying any Article of Faith. Let any one judge of this
by Lessius his Consequences: And the Author of the first Treatise against the
Oath of Allegiance says in plain Terms, That the Opinion that the Pope has no
such Power, is Jesuits Loyalty, first Treatise, p. 1, etc
erroneous in Faith, as well as temerarious and impious; And he proves it by
this substantial Argument; Because they who hold it, must suppose that the
Church has been for some time in a damnable Error of Belief, and Sin of
Practice: And he not only proves that it was defined by Popes and Councils, but
for a long time universally received; and that no one Author can be produced
before Calvin's time, that denied this Power absolutely, or in any case
whatsoever. But a few Authors A Professor of Lovain, now living, has
undertaken to see^, that the number is far greater of those who assert this
Doctrine, than of those who deny it. Auctoritas sedis.

P. 47, 48. Apostolicae vindicata adversus Natal. Alexand. per Francisc. D.
Erast. Colon. A. D. 1684.


that are Abettors of it, says our Representer: Not one total Dissenter for a
long time, says the other: And which of these is the true Representer? The
deniers of it not in the least suspected of their Religion; says one: Their
Opinion is erroneous in Faith, temerarious and impious, says the other.

3. If we charge their Church with this Opinion, may not they as well charge
ours with the like; since Propositions as dangerous were condemned at Oxford,
July 26. 1683. as held not by Jesuits, but by some among our selves? This is
the force of his Reasoning: But we must desire the Reader to consider the great
disparity of the Case. We cannot deny, that there have been men of ill Minds,
and disloyal Principles, Factious and Disobedient, Enemies to the Government,
both in Church and State; but have these Men ever had that Countenance from the
Doctrines of the Guides of our Church, which the Deposing Doctrine has had in
the Church of Rome? To make the Case parallel, he must suppose our Houses of
Convocation to have several times declared these damnable Doctrines, and given
Encouragement to Rebels to proceed against their Kings, and the University of
Oxford to have condemned them; for this is truly the Case in the Church of
Rome; the Popes and Councils have owned, and approved, and acted by the
Deposing Principle; but the Universities of France, of late years, have
condemned it. How comes the Principles of the Regicides among us to be
paralleled with this Doctrine, when the Principles of our Church are so
directly contrary to them; and our Houses of Convocation would as readily
condemn any such damnable Doctrines, as the University of Oxford? And all the
World knows how repugnant such Principles are to those of the Church of
England; and none can be Rebels to their Prince, but they must be false to our
Church.

As to the Personal Loyalty of many Persons in that Church, as I have no Reason
to question it, so it is not proper for me to debate it, if I did; since our
business is not concerning Persons, but Doctrines; and it was of old observed
concerning the Epicureans, That tho their Principles did overthrow any true
Friendship, yet many of them made excellent Friends.

XXI. Of Communion in One Kind.
FOR our better proceeding in this Controversy, I shall set down the State of
it as clearly as I can.

1. The Question is not, Whether the first Institution of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist by Jesus Christ, were in one Kind, or two; for all confess it was
under both Kinds.

2. It is not, Whether both Kinds are not still necessary for the due
Celebration of it; for it is granted that both Kinds are necessary to be upon
the Altar, or else there could be no complete Sacrifice.

3. It is not, Whether the People may be wholly excluded from both Kinds, and
so the Sacrifice only remain; for they grant that the People are bound to
communicate in one Kind.

4. It is not concerning any peculiar and extraordinary Cases, where no Wine is
to be had, or there be a particular Aversion to it, or any such thing, where
positive Institutions may be reasonably presumed to have no force; But
concerning the public and solemn Celebration, and participation of it in the
Christian Church.

5. It is not concerning the mere disuse or neglect of it, But concerning the
lawfulness of Excluding the People from both Kinds, by the Churches
Prohibition, notwithstanding the Institution of it by Christ in both Kinds,
with a Command to keep up the Celebration of it to his Second Coming.

Here now consists the point in Controversy, Whether the Church being obliged
to keep up the Institution in both Kinds, be not equally obliged to distribute
both as our Savior did, to as many as partake of it? Our Author not denying
the Institution, or the continuance of it, says, Our Savior left it
indifferent to receive it in one Kind, or both. And that is the point to be
examined.

1. He says, Christ delivered it to his Apostles, who only were then present,
and whom he made Priests just before; yet he gave no command that it should be
so received by all the Faithful.

But were not the Apostles all the Faithful then present? I pray in what
capacity did they then receive it? As Priests? How did they receive the Bread
before the hoc facite? As Priests or as faithful? It is ridiculous to suppose
the hoc facite changed their capaciy; and if it did, it only relates to
consecrating, and not to receiving: but if Christ gave it only to the Apostles
as Priests, then for all that I can see, the People are not at all concerned in
one kind or other; but it was intended only for Priests: If the People be
concerned, how came they to be so? Where is there any command but what refers
to the first Institution? And it had been more plausible, according to this
Answer, to exclude the People wholly, than to admit them to one Kind, and to
debar them the other.

2. Christ attributes the obtaining Life Everlasting, the end of the
Institution, sometimes to receiving under both Kinds, sometimes under one, John
6. 51, 57, 58. He could not easily have thought of any thing more against
himself; for our Savior there makes it as necessary to drink his Blood, as to
eat his Flesh, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, a^ drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you: If this be understood
S. John 6. 51.
of the Sacrament, as he says, how is it possibl^ for him to make the Cup
indifferent? Unless it be ind^ ferent whether the People be saved or not.

3. Christ himself administered the Sacrament to some of his Disciples under one
kind only, Luke 24. 30. But is he sure Christ did then administer the Sacrament
to them? Or that if he did, the Cup was not implied, since breaking of Bread,
when taken for an ordinary Meal in Scripture, does not exclude drinking at it?
But S. Augustine, he says, (l. 49. de Consensu Evangel.) understands that place
of the Sacrament. If he does, it cannot be where he says; for S. Augustine
wrote but Four Books of that Subject; but l. 3. 25. he does say something
toward it; yet S. Augustine in another place supposes that these Disciples did
both eat and drink. The Disciples did not know him, but in the breaking of
Bread; and truly he that Tract. 2. in Epist. S. Joh.
does not eat and drink Judgment to himself, does in the breaking of Bread own
Christ. Where it is plain, that he applies both, to the breaking of Bread here
spoken of.

4. He says, it was the Custom of the Primitive Christians to give it under
one kind to Children, the Sick, and to Men in a journey. I would he had
produced his Authorities to prove these things; for I can bring several to
prove the direct contrary as to Children, and Sick persons, and Travelers, and
not only Ancient Writers, but the most Learned of their own Church. And
therefore I cannot but wonder to find him saying, This was attested by all
Ancient Writers, and Modern Historians. But I have ever found those have been
most mistaken, who produce all Writers and Historians; when it may be, there is
not one that speaks home to the business. At least, we have here none
mentioned, and therefore none to examine; and it would be too hard a task to
search All.

5. He adds to this extravagancy, in saying, That Receiving in one or both
kinds, was indifferent for the first Four hundred years; when the contrary is
so manifest, that the most ingenuous of their own Writers consess it. If any
persons did carry home one kind (which is very questionable; for Baronius and
Albasinoeus say, they carried both Kinds) to receive it in times of
Persecution, at what season they thought fit afterward; This ought not to be
set up against the general and constant Rule of the Church; which is attested,
not only by Cassander and such like, but even by Salmero, Ruardus, Tapperus,
and Lindanus, who make no scruple of saying, The public Celebration in the
Primitive Church was in both Kinds. But then, how is it possible for us to
judge better, what they thought themselves bound to do, than what they
constantly observed in all their public Celebrations? The Church is not
accountable for the particular Fancies or Superstitions of Men; but what was
observed in all public Offices, we have reason to think the Church thought it
self obliged so to do, out of regard to the Institution of Christ. And to show
how Universal this Observation was in the Church, those who give account of the
Eastern Church say, That the Greeks, Nestorians, Cotovic. Itiner. Hierosolymit.
l. 2. c. 6. Histoir. Critique, p. 14.
Armenians, Maronites, Cophtites and Abyssins, do all observe it still, viz.
That the public Communicants do partake of both Kinds. And not one of all
these Churches but think themselves bound to observe it, out of regard to the
Institution of Christ; and why then should any think the Primitive Church
thought it indifferent?

6. The first Precept of receiving under both Kinds, was given to the Faithful
by Pope Leo, A. D. 443. and confirmed by Gelasius, A. D. 490. This is a great
mistake, for Leo gave no Precept about it; but only told the people how they
might certainly discover the Manichees, for they would conform in other things,
but they would not taste of the Wine: which argued, that all other Communicants
did then partake in both Kinds. Gelasius not only confirms the Custom then
used, but he says, That it is Sacrilege to divide that Holy Mystery. And
surely he did not account Sacrilege an Indifferent thing.

7. Lastly he says, That those who receive in one Kind, P. 52.
are truly partakers of the whole Sacrament. This is a new way of
Concomitancy; we used to hear of Whole Christ under either species, and that
Whole Christ was therefore received; But how comes it to be the whole
Sacrament, which consists of two distinct Parts? And if it be a Sacrifice, the
Blood must be separated from the Body, else the Blood of Christ is not
considered as shed, and so the Notion of the Sacrifice will be lost; Which is
our next Head.

XXII. Of the MASS.
UNder this Head, which is thought of so great Consequence in the Roman Church,
I expected a fuller Representation than I here find; as about the Opus
Operatum, i. e. how far the mere Act is effectual; About their Solitary Masses,
when no Person receives but the Priest; About the People having so little to
do, or understand, in all the other parts of the Mass; About the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Mass, how useful and important they are; About reconciling
the present Canon of the Mass, with the present Practices; About offering up
Masses for the honor of Saints. All which we find in the Council of Trent, but
are omitted by our Representer; Who speaks of the Mass, as though there were no
Controversy about it, but only concerning the Sacrifice there supposed to be
offered up, and which he is far from true Representing: For the Council of
Trent not only affirms a true proper propitiatory Sacrifice to be Sess. 22.
cap. ^. can. 1, 2, 3, etc.
there offered up for the quick and dead, but denounces Anathema's against
those that deny it. So that the Question is not, Whether the Eucharist may not
in the sense of Antiquity be allowed to be a Commemorative Sacrifice, as it
takes in the whole Action; but whether in the Mass there be such a
Representation made to God of Christ's Sacrifice, as to be it self a true and
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Quick and the Dead?

Now, all that our Representer says to the purpose, is,

1. That Christ bequeathed his Body and Blood at his last P. 53.
Supper, under the Species of Bread and Wine, not only a Sacrament, but also a
Sacrifice. I had thought it had been more proper to have offered a Sacrifice,
than to have bequeathed it. And this ought to have been proved, as the
Foundation of this Sacrifice, viz. That Christ did at his last Supper offer up
his Body and Blood, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God. And then what need his
suffering on the Cross?

2. He gave this in charge to his Apostles, as the first and chief Priests of
the New Testament, and to their Successors, to offer. But Where? When? and How?
For we read nothing at all of it in Scripture. Christ indeed did bid them do
the same thing he had there done in his last Supper. But did he then offer up
himself, or not? If not, How can the Sacrifice be drawn from his Action? If he
did, it is impossible to prove the necessity of his dying afterward.

3. This Sacrifice was never questioned till of late years. We say, it was
never determined to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice, till of late. We do not deny
the Fathers interpreting Mal. 1. 11. of an Offering under the Gospel; but they
generally understand it of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Eucharistical
Sacrifices; and although some of them, by way of Accommodation, do apply it to
the Eucharist, yet not one of them does make it a Propitiatory Sacrifice, which
was the thing to be proved: For, we have no mind to dispute about Metaphorical
Sacrifices, when the Council of Trent so positively decrees it to be a True,
Proper, and Propitiatory Sacrifice.

XXIII. Of PURGATORY.
HEre our Author begins with proving from Scripture and Antiquity, and then
undertakes to explain the Doctrine of Purgatory from substantial Reasons.

1. As to his Proof from Scripture.

1. Is that from 2 Maccab. c. 12. where he says, Money was sent to Jerusalem,
that Sacrifices might be offered for the slain; and it is recommended as a Holy
Cogitation, to pray for the dead.

To this, which is the main foundation of Purgatory, I answer, 1. It can never
prove such a Purgatory as our Author asserts; For he supposes a Sinner
reconciled to God, P. 57.
as to eternal Punishment, before he be capable of Purgatory; but here can be
no such supposition; for these Men died in the sin of Achan, which was not
known till their Bodies were found among the slain. Here was no Confession, or
any sign of Repentance, and therefore if it proves any thing, it is deliverance
from Eternal Punishment, and for such as dye in their Sins without any show of
Repentance. 2. We must distinguish the Fact of Judas from the interpretation of
Jason, or his Epitomizer. The Fact of Judas was according to the strictness of
the Law, which required in such Cases a Sin-Offering; and that is all which the
Greek implies, (...). And so Leo Allatius confesses Leo Allat. de Purgat. p.
889.
all the best Greek Copies agree; and he reckons Twelve of them. Now what does
this imply, but that Judas remembering the severe punishment of this Sin in the
Case of Achan, upon the People, sent a Sin-offering to Jerusalem? But says Leo
Allatius, It was the sin of those men that were slain. I grant it. But the
Question is, Whether the Sin-offering respected the dead or the living? For the
Law in such a Case required a Sin-offering for the Levit. 4. 13.
Congregation. And why should not we believe so punctual a Man for the Law, as
Judas, did strictly observe it in this point? But the Author of the Book of
Macchabees understands it of those that were slain. I do not deny it; but then
3. We have no Reason to rely upon his Authority in this matter; which I shall
make appear by a parallel Instance. He does undoubtedly commend the fact of
Razias in Killing himself (2. Macc. 14. 42.) when he says he did it (...),
like a brave Man; and if he had thought it a fault in him, he would never have
given such a Character of it, but he would have added something of Caution
after it. And it is no great advantage to Purgatory, for him that commends
Self-murder to have introduced it. The most probable account I can give of it
is, That the Alexandrian Jews, of whose number Jason of Cyrene seems to have
been, had taken in several of the Philosophical Opinions, especially the
Platonists, into their Religion, as appears by Philo; and Bellarmin Bellar. de
Purgat. l. 1. c. 8.
himself confesses, that Plato held a Purgatory; and they were ready to apply
what related to the Law, to their Platonic Notions. So here the Law appointed
a Sin-offering with respect to the Living; but Jason would needs have this
refer to the dead; and then sets down his own remark upon it, That it was a
holy cogitation to pray for the dead; as our Author renders it. If it were holy
with respect to the Law, there must be some ground for it in the Law. And that
we appeal to: and do not think any particular Fancies sufficient to introduce
such a Novelty as this was; which had no Foundation either in the Law or the
Prophets. And it woul be strange for a new Doctrine to be set up, when the
Spirit of Prophecy was ceased among them. P. 55.


But S. August. hold these Books for Canonical, and says, they are so received
by the Church, l. 18. de Civit De^. To answer this, it is sufficient to
observe, not only the different opinions of others before mentioned as to these
Books: But that as Canus notes, it was then lawful to doubt of their Authority:
Can. l. 2. c. 10. ad 4.
And he goes as low as Gregory I. Whom he denies not to have rejected them. And
I hope we may set the Authority of one against the other; especially when S.
August in himself, being pressed hard with the fact of Razias, confesses, 1.
That the Jews have not the Book of Macchabees Aug. c^nt 2d. Epist. Gaudent l.
2. c. 23.
in their Canon, as they have the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, to whom
our Lord gave Testimony as to his Witnesses. Which is an evident Proof, he
thought not these Books sufficient to ground a Doctrine upon, which was not
found in the other. 2. That however this Book was not unprofitably received by
the Church, if it be soberly read and heard. Which implies a greater Caution
than S. Augustine would ever have given, concerning a Book he believed truly
Canonical. But says Bellarmin, his meaning De Purgat. l. 1. c. 3.
is only to keep men from imitating the Example of Razias; whereas that which
they pressed S. August in with, was not merely the Fact, but the Character that
is given of it. Sanctarum Scripturarum Auctoritate laudatus est Razias, are
their very Words in S. Augustine. And therefore the Caution relates to the
Books, and not merely to his Example. And he lessens the Character given by the
Author, when he says, He chose to dye nobly; It had been better, says he, to
have died humbly. But the other is the Elogium given in the Heathen Histories,
and better becomes brave Heathens, than true Martyrs. Can any one now think S.
Augustine believed this Writer Divinely inspired, or his Doctrine sufficient to
ground a point of Faith upon? And I wonder they should not every jot as well
commend Self-Murder as an Heroical Act, as prove the Doctrine of Purgatory from
these words of Jason, or his Epitomizer. For the Argument from the Authority of
the Book, will hold as strongly for one as the other. And yet this is the
Achilles for Purgatory; which Natalis Alexander (whom our Author follows in
this matter) says, is a Demonstrative Natal. Alex. Sec. 4. Diss. 4.
Place against those that deny it. But I must proceed.

2. Purgatory is plainly intimated by our Savior, Matt. 12. 32. Whosoever
speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall P. 56.
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. By
which words, Christ evidently supposes, that some sins are forgiven in the
world to come. I am so far from discerning this plain intimation, that I wonder
how any came to think of it out of this place. Well! But does it not hence
follow, that Sins may be forgiven in the World to come? Not near so plainly, as
that Sins will not be forgiven in the World to come. Not That particular Sin,
but others may; How does that appear? What intimation is there, that any Sins
not forgiven here, shall be forgiven there? Or that any Sins here remitted as
to the Eternal Punishment, shall be there remitted as to the Temporal? And
without such a kind of Remission, nothing can be inferred from hence. But if
there be a Remission in another World, it can be neither in Heaven nor Hell,
therefore it must be in Purgatory. But those who own a Remission of Sins in
another World, say it will be on the Day of Judgment: For the actual
Deliverance of the Just from Punishment, may be not improperly called the full
Remission of their Sins. So S. Augustine, whom he quotes, plainly says, Si
nulla remitterentur in judicio illo novissimo, etc. c. Julian, l. 6. c. 5.
where it is evident S. Augustine takes this place to relate to the Day of
Judgment; and so in the other, (De Civit. Dei l. 21. c. 24.) But as he supposed
a Remission, so he did a Purgation as by Fire in that day. In illo judicio
poenas quasdam purgatorias futuras. De Civit. Dei l. 20. c. 25. And so he is to
be understood on Psalm. 37. to which he applies 1 Cor. 3. 15. But our Author was
very much out, when he says S. Augustine applied 1 Pet. 3. 15. to some place of
temporal Chastisement in another World, when Bellarmin sets himself to confute
S. Augustine about it, as understanding it of this World. And therefore he has
little cause to boast of S. Augustins Authority about Bell. de An. Christi l.
4. c. 13.
Purgatory, unless he had brought something more to the purpose out of him. His
other Testimonies of Antiquity are not worth considering; which he borrows from
Natalis Alexander; that of Dionysius Areopag. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 7. is a known
Counterfeit, and impertinent, relating to a Region of Rest and Happiness. And
so do Tertullians Oblations for the dead, De Cor. Milit. c. 3. For they were
Eucharistical, as appears by the Ancient Liturgies, being made for the greatest
Saints. St. Cyprian Ep. 66. speaks of an Oblation for the dead; and he there
mentions the Natalitia of the Martyrs; but by comparing that with his Epist.
33. it will be found that he speaks of the Anniversary Commemoration of the
dead, which signifies nothing to Purgatory; for the best men were put into it;
and St. Cyprian threatens it as a Punishment to be left out of the Diptychs;
but surely it is none to escape Purgatory; Arnobius, l. 4. only speaks of
praying for the dead, which we deny not to have been then used in the Church,
not with respect to any temporary pains in Purgatory, but to the Day of
Judgment: And therein lies the true state of the Controversy, with respect to
Antiquity; which is not, Whether any solemn prayers were not then made for the
dead; But whether those prayers did relate to their deliverance out of a state
of Punishment before the Day of Judgment: For whatever state Souls were then
supposed to be in, before the great Day, if there could be no deliverance till
the Day of Judgment, it signisies nothing to the present Question.

As to the Vision of Perpetua concerning her Brother Dinocrates, who died at
Seven Years old, being baptized, it is hardly reconcilable to their own
Doctrine, to suppose such a Soul in Purgatory; I will not deny that Perpetua
did think she saw him in a worse condition; and thought likewise that by her
Prayers she brought him into a better; for she saw him playing like little
children; and then she awaked, and concluded that she had given him ease: But
is it indeed come to this, that such a Doctrine as Purgatory must be built on
such a Foundation as this? I do not call in question the Acts of Perpetua, nor
her sincerity in relating her Dream; but must the Church build her Doctrines
upon the Dreams or Visions of Young Ladies, tho very devout? for Ubia Perpetua
was then but Twenty Two, as she says her self. But none are to be blamed, who
make use of the best supports their Cause will afford.

It is time now to see what strength of Reason he offers for Purgatory. 1. He
says, When a Sinner is reconciled to God, tho the eternal Punishment due to
his sins is always P. 57.
remitted, yet there sometimes remains a temporal Penalty to be undergone; as
in the case of the Israelites, and David. But does it hence follow, that there
is a Temporal Penalty that must be undergone either here or hereafter, without
which there will be no need of Purgatory? Who denies, that God in this Life,
for example sake, may punish those whose sins he has promised to remit as to
another World? This is therefore a very slender Foundation. 2. There are some
sins of their own nature light and venial. I will not dispute that; but suppose
there be, must men go then into Purgatory for mere Venial Sins? What a strange
Doctrine does this appear to any Man's Reason? That God should forgive the
greater sins, and require so severe a punishment for sins in their own Nature
venial; i. e. so inconsiderable in their Opinion, that no man is bound to
confess them; which do not interrupt a State of Grace; which require only an
implicit detestation of them; which do not deserve eternal punishment; S. Th.
part. 3. q. 87. art 3. in cor. v. Marsil. Column. Hydragiolog. Sect. 7. c. 3.
n. 32. Sect. 3. c. 2. n. 15. 29. c. 3. n. 1. Bell. de Cultu. Sanct. l. 3. c. 7.
Sect. secundo.
which may be remitted by Holy Water, or a Bishops Blessing, as their Divines
agree. 3. That to all sins some Penalty is due to the Justice of God. And what
follows from hence but the Necessity of Christ's Satisfaction? But how does it
appear, that after the Expiation of Sin by Christ, and the remission of eternal
Punishment, there still remains a necessity of farther satisfaction for such a
temporal penalty in another World? 4. That generally speaking, few men depart
out of this Life, but either with the guilt of venial sins, or obnoxions to
some Temporal punishment; No doubt all men are obnoxious by their sins to the
punishment of another World; but that is not the point, but whether God has
declared, That although he remits the eternal punishment, he will not the
temporal; and although he will forgive thousands of pounds, he will not the pence
and farthings we owe to him: But if Mortal sins be remitted as to the guilt,
and Venial do not hinder a State of Grace, what room is there for Vindictive
Justice in Purgatory?

Yet this is the Doctrine which so much weight is laid upon; that Bellarmine
says, They must go directly to Hell, De Purgatorio l. 1. c. 11. SS. Haec sunt.
who do not believe Purgatory. If this be true, why was it not put into the
Representation, that we might understand the danger of not believing so
credible, so reasonable a Doctrine as this? But we believe it to be a much more
dangerous thing to condemn others for not believing a Doctrine which has so
very slender a pretense either to Scripture or Reason.

XXIV. Of Praying in an unknown Tongue.
THE Question in short is, Whether the Church Service, at which Persons are
bound to assist, ought not to be in a Language understood by those who are
bound to assist?

For our Author grants, That a Papist is bound to assist at the Church Service,
and to hear Mass; but he is P. 59.
not bound to understand the Words there spoken.

This is a plain state of the case; and one would have thought St. Paul's
Discourse about Edification in the Church Service, and a known Tongue, and the
Primitive practice, had deserved a little consideration, but not a Word is said
to either of them; and the whole is so managed, as tho there had been no Rule,
or any appearance of practice to the contrary. But I must consider what he does
say.

1. The Mass is a Sacrifice: And what then? Have they no other Church Service
but the Mass? What then becomes of their Breviaries, Litanies, and all other
Offices? But suppose the Priests Office in the Mass, be to offer the Sacrifice;
are there no Prayers in the Canon of the Mass, wherein the people are
concerned? Why must not they understand what they are required to assist in
Prayer for? If they have English Books, as he says, to teach them every part
and Ceremony of the Mass, why not as well P. 61.
the Prayers in the Mass, wherein they are to join? They tell us, It is
unseasonable then for the People to say their Beads, and other Devotions: And I
suppose as unseasonable to talk, or think of other matters. Why then should not
they know what it is they are to do, and what Petitions they are then to make
to God? Are there no Responses to be made? No Lessons to be read? No Creed: to
be professed? Does not the Priest speak to the people to pray, and they answer
him? Is there no Thanksgiving after the Communion which the people is concerned
in? We are as much for their Devout Affections, as they can be; but we think
they are not hindered by understanding what they are about: We cannot but
wonder, that P. 60.
any man should say, That it nothing concerns his Devotion, that the Mass is in
Latin, if he understand it not. Is it P. 61.
no part of Devotion to join in the public prayers, not merely by rote, but
from a due apprehension of the matter contained in them? He requires, That they
accompany the Priest in Prayer and Spirit: And why not in understanding also?
But the Church has so ordered it: And that is the thing we complain of, as
done against St. Paul, against the Primitive Church, against the natural sense
of Mankind, who think it is fit for them to know what they do, especially in
the Worship of God: But it is to preserve Unity: Methinks however Unity in
Spirit and Understanding is better than without it: There are other good
Reasons: I know not one good one; and if there were more, he would have
produced them: The greatest part is said in a low voice, that it is not
possible he should hear it: And to what purpose should it be spoken louder, if
they are not to understand it? But why so low in public? Yet the people might
have Books, and join, if they understood what was said. But why should not the
rest be understood, which is spoken as if it were.

2. As to other Offices, he says, He is taught, that he P. 62.
may perform them in a Language which he understands not, with great benefit to
his Soul, and the acceptance of God, if at those occasions he endeavors to
raise his thoughts to Heaven, and fix his heart upon his Maker. But the
Question is not, Whether a Man may not have devout Thoughts at that time, but
whether he can perform his part in the public Offices, with true Devotion,
without Understanding? For the public Offices of Devotion were designed for
the uniting the Hearts and Desires of the people in the same things. It is not,
Whether one Man may not pray for Heaven, and another for fair Weather, and
another for pardon of his Sins, and a Fourth for Patience, and so on, in the
same place, and at the same time; for all this may be done as well in a silent
Meeting, where not a Word is spoken: But there being one Form of Prayer for all
to join together in, that with the united force of the whole Congregation,
their Petitions may go up to Heaven; The Matter now in dispute is, Whether it
be not necessary in order to this united Devotion, that the people all know
what they pray for? And one would think nothing need to be said to prove this:
But what our Author adds in justification of this, overthrows all public
Devotion; For he says, It is not necessary to have attention on the Words, or
on the Sense of Prayers, but rather purely on God: Which is to make all public
Forms unnecessary, and to turn all Devotion into Prayer of Contemplation: For
if this be true, all Forms whatsoever, are not only useless, but burdensome; and
by the stinting the Spirit, do hinder the nimbler flights of the Soul, in pure
silence toward God: And this Principle must lead men to Enthusiasms, and
unintelligible Unions, and make them despise Forms as a mean and dull
Dispensation.

But at last he says, A Petitioner may accompany his Petition with an earnest
desire of obtaining it, tho the Language in which it is written, be unknown to
him. Very true, if he indicted the matter of the Petition, and trusted another
to put it into that Language, which the Person to whom he makes it, does
understand, but not his own: But all Languages are alike to Gods Infinite
Wisdom, and so there can be no pretense on that account, to keep only to some
particular Tongues, tho unknown to the Party; and if it were so to all men, no
man would have a Petition presented in a Language which he did not know: But in
Prayer to God, the design of it is not to acquaint him with something which he
knew not, but to excite the hearts and affections of men to an earnest desire
of the things which are fit for them to ask; Now let any man undertake to
prove, that men's affections are as easily moved by Words they do not
understand, as by those they do; and I will give up this Cause.

XXV. Of the Second Commandment.
THE Dispute about this is not, Whether the Second Commandment may be found in
any of their Books, but by what Authority it comes to be left out in any: As he
confesses it is in their short Catechisms and Manuals: But not only in these;
for P. 63.
I have now before me the Reformed Office of the Blessed Virgin, Printed at
Salamanca, A. D. 1588. published by Order of Pius V. where it is so left out:
And so in the English Office at Antwerp, A. D. 1658. I wish he had told us in
what public Office of their Church it is to be found: But himself pleads for
the leaving it out, when he says, The People are in no danger of Superstition
or Idolatry by it; since the First Commandment secures them from it; and there
is nothing in this, but what is vertually contained in the First, and is rather
an Explanation, than a new P. 64.
and distinct Precept. But is this so plain and clear, that a Man's Conscience
can never make any just and reasonable Doubt concerning it? There is a terrible
sanction after it; and men had need go upon very good Grounds in a matter of
such moment. Has God himself any where declared this to be only an Explication
of the First Commandment? Have the Prophets, or Christ and his Apostles ever
done it? How then can any man's Conscience be safe in this matter? For it is not
a trifling Controversy, whether it be a distinct Commandment, or an
Explication of the First; but the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of the Worship of
Images depends very much upon it: For if it be only an Explication of the
First, then unless one takes Images to be Gods, their Worship is lawful, and so
the Heathens were excused in it, who were not such Idiots; But if it be a new
and distinct Precept, then the Worshipping any Image or Similitude, becomes a
grievous sin, and exposes men to the Wrath of God in that severe manner
mentioned in the end of it: And it is a great confirmation that this is the
true meaning of it, because all the Primitive Writers of the Christian Church,
not only thought it a Sin against this Commandment, but insisted upon the force
of it against those Heathens who denied that they took their Images for Gods:
And therefore this is a very insufficient Account of leaving out the Second
Commandment.

XXVI. Of Mental Reservations.
UNder this Head he denies Two Things.

1. That they are ever taught to break Faith with Heretics.

2. That their Church does allow any Equivocations, or Mental Reservations.

As to the former I am sincerely glad to find a Principle so destructive to all
humane Society, so utterly disowned, when he says, He is taught to keep Faith
with all sorts of People, of whatsoever judgment or persuasion P. 64.
they be; and to stand to his Word, and observe his Promise given, or made to
any whatsoever. And whatever Opinions and Practices there may have been of that
kind formerly, we hope there will never be occasion given to revive that
dispute.

2. As to the Second, We embrace his Declaration against it, and hope there is
no Equivocation, or mental Reservation in it. But there are some things which
must here be taken Notice of.

1. He cannot deny that there are Authors in Communion with his Church, which
may be charged with teaching another Doctrine; and those not a few, nor
inconsiderable; who not only allow the Practice of Mental Reservations and
Equivocations, but say with great confidence, it has been received in the
Roman Church for no less than Four hundred years; and that in some Cases they
are all still agreed in it. See Parsons Treatise of Mitigation, c. 7. Sect. 2.
3. c. 10. Sect. 1.

2. We do not deny, that Innocent XI. has condemned Equivocations, and Mental
Reservations in Swearing, as at least Scandalous and Pernicious in Practice;
and therefore we cannot charge the Pope with abetting this Doctrine. But we
cannot but reflect on what our Author said about the Deposing Doctrine, That
although Popes had believed it, and acted by it, yet the greater number opposed
it. And what shall we say in this Case, if the Generality of their Casuists in
some Cases approve it, and think it no Lie or Perjury, as in that of
Confession; but if it be really so in any one Case, then it may be some other
fault, but it is not a Lie or Perjury in any other, when a Man does not think
himself bound to speak all he knows.

3. That as we highly commend the Popes condemning such Doctrines and Practices
now; so we have Reason to think the contrary did not once want the
encouragement and approbation of the Roman See. As may be sound in the
Resolution of some Cases by Pius V. relating to some Missionaries, who were to
be sent hither; and then it was declared, That if they were summoned before our
Judges, they might Sophistice Jurare and Sophistice Respondere; and that they
were not bound to Apud G. Ab^bot de Mendacio, etc. in Praef. p. 6, etc.
answer according to the Intention of the Judges, but according to some true
sense of their own, i. e. which was made true by the help of a Mental
Reservation. But it is very well, that now the very same things are condemned
at Rome, as Scandalous and Pernicious in Practice.

XXVII. Of a Deathbed Repentance.
WE have no difference with them about this matter, as far as they hold to
these points: 1. That Men are strictly obliged to Work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling in time of Health. 2. That it is very P. 67, 68.
dangerous to defer their Repentance to the last. 3. That if any are surprised,
they ought in Charity to have all possible assistance, to put them into the
best way for their Salvation.

But yet there may be some particular Doctrines owned in the Church of Rome,
which may give men too much encouragement to put off true Repentance; as 1. The
easiness of being put into a state of Grace by the Sacrament of Penance; for
which no more is required than removing the impediment; as appears by the
Council of Trent. Sess. 7. Can. 6. and afterward it defines that bare
Attrition does sufficiently dispose a Man to receive Grace in that Sacrament,
Sess. 14. c. 4. So that although a Man has led a very bad Life, if he has but
this Attrition for his sins when he does confess them, he is put into a state
of Grace by this Sacrament. And what can any Man expect more, and what can he
do less! I do not mean a bare natural Attrition, the sufficiency whereof is
condemned by Innocent XI. in the same Proposition, Fifty seventh; but that
which the Council of Trent calls Imperfect Contriti^n, i. e. a good Motion in a
Man's mind to ^orsake his Sins for fear of Punishment; if really no more be
required for a state of Grace but this, it is no wonder if Men put off the
doing of that which may be done at any time so easily by the help of a Priest.

2. The Treasure of the Church is another thing which is very apt to hinder
Men's speedy Repentance; for by that they believe there is a stock ready of so
many Merits and Satisfactions of others, if duly applied to them by
Indulgences, that they need not be at such pains to Work out their own
Salvation with fear and trembling. When a Man by the Sacrament of Penance is
put into a state of Grace, the Eternal Punishment is discharged, and nothing
remains but some Temporal Pains; and to ease him of these he has many helps,
but especially the Treasure of the Church, which the Pope has the dispensing
of, as he is bound to believe; and by Indulgences he may easily get off some
Thousands of years of Purgatory-Pains; and if these should fail him, there is
another help yet left, which is leaving a stock for Prayers for his Soul when
he dies; which, even our Author assures him, are very available toward bis
speedier release out of Purgatory, p. 58.

XXVIII. Of FASTING.
THE Question here is, Whether a Man does not observe their Churches Command
about Fasting, who forbears all forbidden things, but takes liberty in those
which are not forbidden?

It is not, Whether they may not break the Commands of God, against Gluttony
and Drunkenness; But whether they break the Law of the Church about Fasting?
And notwithstanding what our Author has said, I see no Reason for the
Affirmative. I do not deny, 1. That it is a very indifferent sort of Fasting,
to abstain P. 69.
from Flesh, unless all other sorts of Excesses at the same time be carefully
avoided. 2. That Excesses on such days are more scandalous, because there is a
pretense of Fasting. 3. That God's Command does at all times sorbid
Intemperance. Which are the chief things he insists upon. But P. 71.
yet this does not reach the point, which is about their Churches Command. For
their Casuists distinguish Fasting into 1. Natural; which is total Abstinence;
and this is required only in order to receiving the Eucharist. 2. Moral; which
is the same with Temperance, or Fasting for Health. 3. Ecclesiastical; which is
defined by them to be, An Abstinence from Food forbidden by the Church. And if
this Definition be true, it cannot be broken but by eating what the Church has
prohibited.

And therefore their Casuists, as far as I can find, are agreed in these things,

1. That a Man may eat a full Meal of what is not forbidden, and not break the
Churches Precept of Fasting, provided Vespers be first said. And the later
Casuists blame Covarr^vias for making any scruple about it. If a Man's Excess
comes to be a Mortal sin; yet for all that, says Reginaldus, He shall not be
judged as a breaker of his Fast. Reginald. Praxis l. 4. c. 14. n. 163. Less. de
Justit. l. 4. c. 2. Dub. 2. n. 10. Instruct. Sacerd. l. 6. c. 2. n. 4. P.
Zacch. Qu. Medico. legales l. 5. tit. 1. Qu. 1. p. 29, 30, 31. Pasqual. Decis.
120. n. 5. Dian. Sam. v. Jejun. n. 7. Zach. Pasqualigi. Praxis Jejunii Eccles
Decis. 116. n. 3. Dec. 117. 1. 2, 3.
Nay, Lessius goes further, and says, He does not lose the Merit of Fasting.
Quamvis aliquis multum excedet non solvit Jejunium, says Card. Tolet. And
Paulus Zacchias says, This is the common Opinion; and he thinks the Intention
of the Church is sufficiently answered. And so does Pasqualigus in his Praxis
of Fasting.

2. A Man may drink Wine, or other drink, as often as he pleases, without
breaking his Fast. He may toties quoties bibere, says Diana. Zach.
Pasqualigus, who has Written most fully on this Subject, shows, That it is the
general Opinion, that no quantity of Wine or other drink, though taken without
any Necessity, is a violation of the Precept of Fasting; no, not although the
Wine be taken for nourishment, because the Church does not forbid it; but this
last, he says, is not the general, but the more probable Opinion.

3. A Man may eat something when he drinks, to prevent its doing him hurt;
besides his good Meal, he may take what quantity he pleases of Sweetmeats or
Fruit; he may have a good Refection at Night, and yet not break this strict
Precept of Fasting; For the eating as often as one drinks, it is the common
Opinion, says the same Casuist (who was no Jesuit) That it is not forbidden,
because Decis. 119. n. 2.
it is taken by way of a Medicine; and he quotes a great number of their
Casuists for it. A Collation at evening Decis. 86. n. 3, 4. Less. ubi supr. n.
11. Tolet. ubi sup.
is all^wed, says he. And Lessius says, There is no certain Rule for the
Quantity of it. And Card. Tolet says, very large ones are all^wed at Rome by
the Popes Connivence; even in the Court of Rome, says Reginaldus. Regin ubi
sup. n. 185.
And now I leave the Reader to judge of the severity of Fasting requir^d in the
Church of Rome.

XXIX. Of Divisions and Schisms in the Church.
TWO things he says upon this Head.

1. That they are all agreed in matters of Faith.

2. That they only differ in some School Points; from whence he infers, That
they have no Schisms or Separations among them.

But that this is no just consequence, will appear by the Schisms and
Separations among us, made by such who profess to agree in all matters of
Faith. Yet let us see how he P. 72.
proves that they agree in all matters of Faith; because they agree to submit
equally to the Determinations of the Church.

Now this very way evidently proves that they do not all agree, because they do
not equally submit to the Churches determinations. For,

1. Some say they are bound to submit to the Churches Determinations, as it
represents the Universal Church; Others say no; but as the Churches Power is
virtually lodged in the Guides of it. Now this is a very material Difference:
For if it be on the former Account, then not the Popes and Councils
Declarations are to be regarded, but as they express the sense of the Universal
Church; and so the Majority of Votes, and Numbers in the Representative and
Diffusive Church is chiefly to be regarded. And on this Ground some reject the
Deposing-Power, though plainly decreed by Popes and Councils; but they unhinge
their Churches Authority by it: Now how is it possible for them to agree about
matters of Faith, who differ fundamentally about the way how any things come to
be matters of Faith. If they be decreed by Popes and Councils, say some; and so
the Deposing Power is become an Article of Faith. No such matter, say others,
for a greater Number in the diffusive Church oppose it, as in the Gallican
Church, and elsewhere. Very well! But how then can these Parties be said to
agree in matters of Faith. and an equal Submission to the Determinations of the
Church?

2. Some again say, That it is not the consent of the present Church can make
any Article of Faith, but there must be an universal Tradition from the
Apostles times. And so they tell us the Deposing Power can never be an Article
of Faith, because it wants the Consent of all the Ages before Gregory VII. So
that upon this Ground there can be no Article of Faith which cannot be proved
to be thus delivered down to us. Others again say, this is in effect to give up
their Cause, knowing the impossibility of proving particular Points in this
manner; and therefore they say, the present Church is wholly to be trusted for
the sense of the foregoing.

Now these differences are still on Foot in their Church; and from these do
arise daily disputes about Matters of Faith, and the Seat of Infallibility,
whether in the Guides, or the Body of the Church; if the former, whether in the
Church Representative, or Virtual? whether the Personal Infallibilty of the
Pope be a matter of Faith or not? Our Author says, Not; others say, Yes; and
yet he says they are agreed in matters of Faith. So that by his own Confession
they differ about other things than mere School-Points.

But suppose they were agreed in Articles of Faith, can there be no Schisms or
Divisions in their Church? What thinks he of all the Schisms between Popes and
Popes? Of all the Schisms between the Popes and the Emperors Parties? Which
were as notorious, and scandalous, and mischievous, as ever were in the World.
What thinks he of the Schisms between the Bishops and the Regular Orders, which
were as cross and peevish toward the Bishops and SecularClergy, as our
Dissenters themselves? And among the Regular Orders, what Heats and Contentions
have been, Not about the practice of a devout Life, I assure him, but about
matters of Doctrine; and which both Parties severally plead to be matters of
Faith? As in the noted Controversies of this last Age, about the Immaculate
Conception of the Blessed Virgin, the power of Grace, and the Popes Personal
Infallibility; and they cannot say they are as yet agreed about these things.

XXX. Of Friars and Nuns.
OUR Dispute is not, About the lawfulness of retiring from the World by such
Persons who are rendered unfit for doing Service in it; and the more they spend
their time in Devotion and Contemplation, so much the better.

But it lies in these Things,

1. Whether the Perfection of a Christian State of Life lies in being
cloystered up from the World, or laboring to do good in it? For this was the
great snare made use of, to draw men into it, because they represented this as
the most perfect state; whereas according to the Doctrine and Example of Christ
and his Apostles, the active Life of doing good, is far beyond it.

2. Whether, although such a retirement be allowed, it be a thing pleasing to God,
to tie such Persons up by indispensable Vows, whatever their Circumstances may
be, not to alter that State of Life; who either in Youth, or through Force,
Passion, or Discontent, have entered into it? And this may be so much rather
questioned, because those who assert the Pope may dispense, go upon this
Ground, because Circumstances may alter the obligation of a Vow; and when a
greater good is to be attained, it cease to oblige; which to my apprehension
does not prove the Popes Power to dispense, but the dispensable Nature of the
Vows themselves.

Whether all things of this nature being liable in continuance of time, to
great Degeneracy and Corruptions; and the numbers of such Places being
unserviceable either to Church or State, it be not in the Power of the King and
States of the Kingdom, to dissolve and reduce them to ways more suitable to the
Conveniences of both?

As to what he discourses about Councils of Perfection, the Distractions of the
World, the Corruptions of the best Things, etc. They reach not the main Points,
but are only general Topics, which we are not concerned to debate.

XXXI. Of Wicked Principles and Practices.
THE Misrepresenter charges the Church of Rome with many horrid Practices, as
the French and Irish Massacres, the Murders of Two Kings of France, the Holy
League, the Gunpowder Treason, etc. And charges these as being done according
to the Principles of that Church.

But in Answer to this he says. 1. In General, That the Doctrine of it is
holy, teaching the Love of God and our P. 77.
neighbor; and that none can be saved by Faith alone. In which Doctrine we
heartily concur with them. 2. That although many uncertain things pass for
certain, and false for true, yet P. 79.
he cannot deny that all ranks and degrees of men have been corrupted among
them, being scandalous in their Lives, wicked. in their designs, without the
Fear of God in their hearts, or care of their own Salvation. This is a general
Acknowledgment, but no particular Answer to the things objected. 3. That tbe
whole Cburch is not to be charged for the P. 81.
sake of such villainies. Very true, unless some Doctrine owned in that Church
gave encouragement to them: As suppose any should ever have fallen into
Rebellion upon the belief of the Deposing Power; is not that Doctrine
chargeable with the Consequences of it? They are extremely to blame who charge
a Church with what her Members do in direct Opposition to her Doctrine; but it
is quite another Case, when the main Ground they alledg for their Actions is
some allowed Principle in it. 4. They are not accountable for the Actions of
every Bishop, Cardinal, or Pope; for they extend not their Faith beyond P. 82.
the Declaration of General Councils. But suppose General Councils have
declared such Doctrines, and Popes act but according to them; is not their
Church then accountable for their Actions? 5. There is more Praying and
Fasting, P. 83.
and receiving the Sacraments, more visiting the Prisoners, and the Sick, more
Almsgiving in any of our neighboring Popish Towns, as. Paris, Antwerp, Gant,
etc. than in any Ten Towns of the Reformation. And is there more Charity too?
It does not appear, if they be as ready to censure others, and admire
themselves, as our Author, who so freely gives his Judgment about a matter it
is impossible for him to know.

We see no reason to admire or imitate the manner of their Praying, and
Fasting, and receiving the Sacraments; for to pray without understanding, to
fast without Abstinence, to receive a maimed Sacrament, are things we do not
envy them for; But although our Devotion be not so pompous, and full of show, yet
We may pray and fast in secret, according to our Saviors Directions, far more
than they do; however our People are mightily to blame if they do not
understand what they pray for, if they do not receive more of the Sacrament
than they; and we verily believe there is as great and remarkable Instances of
true Charity among those of the Church of England, as among any People in the
World.

XXXII. Of MIRACLES.
1. OUR Author says, He is not obliged to believe any one Miracle besides what
is in Scripture. P. 83.


2. He sees no Reason to doubt the truth of many Miracles, which are attested
by great numbers of Eyewitnesses, examined by Authority, and found upon
Record, with all the Formalities due to such a Process.

Now, how can these two things stand together? Is not a Man obliged to believe
a thing so well proved? And if his other Arguments prove any thing, it is, that
he is bound to believe them. For he thinks there is as much Reason to believe
Miracles still, as in the time of the old or new Law. If he can make this out,
I see no reason why he should not be as well obliged to believe them now, as
well as those recorded in Scripture. But I can see nothing like a proof of
this. And all Persons of Judgment in their own Church, do grant there is a
great difference between the Necessity of Miracles for the first establishing a
Religion, and afterward. This is not only asserted by Tostatus, Erasmus,
Stella, Andradius, and several others formerly; but the very late French Author
I have several times mentioned, says it in express Terms. Moyens Surs and
Honestes, etc. To. 2. p. 149.
And he confesses the great Impostures of modern Miracles, which, he says,
ought to be severely punished; and that none but Women and weak People think
themselves bound to believe them. And he cannot understand what they are good
for: Not to convert Heretics; because not done among them: Not to prove there
are no corruptions or errors among them, which is a thing incredible; with much
more to that purpose, and so concludes with Monsieur Paschal, That if they have
no other use, we ought not to be amused with them.

But Christ promised, that his Apostles should do greater Miracles than himself
had done. And what then? Must therefore S. Francis, or S. Dominic, or S. Rosa,
do as great as the Apostles had done? What Consequence can be drawn from the
Apostles times to latter Ages? We do not dispute God's Omnipotency, or say his
hand is sho^tned; but we must not from thence infer, that every thing which is
called a Miracle is truly so; or make use of God's Power, to justify the most
incredible stories. Which is a way will serve as well for a false as a true
Religion; and Mahomet might run to Gods Omnipotency for cleaving the Moon in
two pieces, as well as others for removing a House over the Seas, or any thing
of a like nature.

But, he says, their Miracles are not more ridiculous and absurd than some in
the Old Testament. Which I utterly deny; but I shall not run out into the
examination of this Parallel, by showing how very different the Nature, Design,
and Authority of the Miracles he mentions, is from those which are believed in
the Roman Church. And it had been but fitting, as he set down the Miracles of
the Old Testament, so to have mentioned those of the Roman Church which were to
vye with them; but this he was willing to forbear, for certain good Reasons. If
most of poor Man's Impossibles be none to God, as he concludes, yet every thing
is not presently true which is not impossible; and by this way of Arguing,
there can be nothing objected against the most absurd and idle Fictions of the
Golden Legend, which all Men of Understanding among themselves, not only reject
for want of Authority, but of Credibility.

XXXIII. Of Holy Water.
THE Misrepresenter charges him with approving superstitious uses of inanimate
things, and attributing wonderful effects to them; as Holy Water, Candles, Oil,
Bread, etc.

In Answer, our Author 1. declares, That the Papist truly represented, utterly
disapproves all sorts of Superstition. P. 86.
But if he had designed to have represented truly, he ought to have told us
what he meant by Superstition, and whether any Man who observes the Commands of
the Church can be guilty of it.

2. He says, That these things are particularly deputed by the Prayers and
Blessing of the Priest to certain uses for God's Glory, and the Spiritual and
Corporal Good of Christians.

This is somewhat too general; But Marsilius Columna, Hydragiolog. Sect. 3. c.
2. 12. p. 45.
Archbishop of Salerno, who has taken most pains in this matter, sums them up;
1. As to Spiritual, they are Seven. 1. To fright Devils. 2. To remit Venial
sins. 3. To cure Distractions. 4. To elevate the Mind. 5. To dispose it for
Devotion. 6. To obtain Grace. 7. To prepare for the Sacrament.

2. As to Corporal. 1. To cure Barrenness. 2. To multiply Goods. 3. To procure
Health. 4. To purge the Air from pestilential Vapors.

And now, as our Author says, What Superstition in the use of it? He names
several things of God's own appointing to Parallel it; as the Waters of
Jealousy, the Shewbread, the Tables of Stone; but the first was miraculous,
the other had no such effects that we ever heard of. Elisha's Salt for
sweetning the Water, was undoubtedly a Miracle. Is the Holy Water so? As to the
liver of the Fish for expelling the Devil, in the Book of Tobit, he knows the
Book is not owned for Canonical by us; and this very place is produced as an
Argument against it; there being no Ground from Scripture, to attribute the
Power of expelling Devils, to the Liver of a Fish, either naturally or
symbolically: Vallesius offers at the only probable account of it, that it must
be a Divine Power given to it, which the Angel Raphael did not discover;
Valles. Sacr. Philosoph. c. 28. p. 229.
and yet it is somewhat hard to conceive, how this Liver should have such a
power to drive away any kind of Devil, as it is there expressed, unless by a
Devil there, no more be meant than some violent Disease, which the Jews
generally believed to arise from the possession of evil Spirits: But however
here is an Angel supposed, who made this known to Tobit; but we find not
Raphael to discover the virtue of Holy Water against Devils. As to Christ's
using Clay to open the eyes of the blind, it is very improperly applied, unless
the same miraculous Power be supposed in it, which was in Christ himself: And
so is the Apostles laying on of hands, and using Oil for miraculous cures;
unless the same Gift of Miracles be in every Priest which consecrates Holy
Water, which was in the Apostles: And Bellarmine himself confesses, That no
infallible effect does follow the use of Holy Water, because there is no
Promise of God in the case, but only the Prayers of the Church: But De Cultu
Sanct. l. 3. c. 7.
these are sufficient to sanctify the Water, says our Author: And to what
end? For all the spiritual and corporeal benefits beforementioned? Is no
Promise of God necessary for such purposes as those? How can any Church in the
World dispose of Gods Power without his Will? It may appoint significant and
decent Ceremonies, but it can never appropriate Divine Effects to them; and to
suppose any Divine Power in things which God never gave them, is in my Opinion,
Superstition; and to use them for such ends, is a superstitious use: St. Cyril,
whom he quotes, speaks of the Consecration of the Water of Baptism, Catech. 3.
St. Augustine only of a consecrated Bread, which the Catechumens had (De
Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. l. 2. c. 26.) but he attributes no Divine Effects to
it. Pope Alexanders Epistle is a Notorious Counterfeit. Those Passages of
Epiphanius, Theodoret, and S. Jerome, all speak of miraculous effects; and those
who had the power of Miracles, might sometimes do them with an external sign,
and sometimes without, as the Apostles cured with anointing, and without: But
this is no ground for consecrating Oil by the Church, or Holy Water, for
miraculous effects. If these Effects which they attribute to Holy Water, be
miraculous, then every Priest must have not only a power of Miracles himself,
but of annexing it to the Water he consecrates; if they be supernatural but
not miraculous, then Holy Water must be made a Sacrament to produce these
effects ex opere operato; if neither one nor the other, I know not how to
excuse the use of it from Superstition.

XXXIV. Of breeding up People in Ignorance.
THE Misrepresenter charges them with this, on these Acccounts. 1. By keeping
their Mysteries of Iniquity from them. 2. By performing Divine Service in an
unknown Tongue. 3. By an implicit Faith. To which the Representer answers. 1.
That they give encouragement to Learning; and he instances in their
Universities P. 89.
and Conventual Libraries; But what is all this to the common People? But their
Indices Expurgatorii, and prohibiting Books so severely, which are not for
their Turn, (as we have lately seen in the new one of Paris) argues no great
confidence of their Cause, nor any hearty love to Learning: And is it could be
rooted out of the World, their Church would fare the better in it; bur if it
cannot, they must have some to be able to deal with others in it. 2. As to the
common People he says, They have P. 90.
Books enough to instruct them. Is it so in Spain or Italy? But where they live
among Heretics, as we are called, the People must be a little better
instructed to defend themselves, and to gain upon others. 3. If the People did
know their Church-Offices and Service, etc. they would not find such faults,
since the Learned approve them. Let them then try the Experiment, and put the
Bible and their Church-Offices every where into the vulgar tongues: But their
severe Prohibitions show how much they are of another Opinion: What made all
that rage in France against Voisins Translation of the Missal? such Proceedings
of the Assembly of the Clergy against it; such complaints both to the King and
the Pope against it, as tho all were lost, if that were suffered? Such an Edict
from the King, such a Prohibition from the Pope in such a Tragical Style about
it? Such a Collection of Authors to be printed on purpose against it? Do these
things show, even Collectio Authorum Vulg. Versionis damnantium Jussu ac
Mandato Cleri Gallicani edita. Lutet. Paris. 1661.
in a Nation of so free a Temper, in Comparison, as the French, any mighty
Inclination toward the encouraging this Knowledge in the People? And since
that, what stirs have there been about the Mons Testament? What prohibitions by
Bishops? What vehement opposition by others? So that many Volumes have already
been written on the occasion of that Translation. And yet our Author would
persuade us, that if we look abroad, we shall find wonderful care taken to keep
the People from Ignorance; but we can d^scern much greater to keep them in it.

XXXV. Of the Uncharitableness of the Papists.
THE Misrepresenter, (as he is called) charges this Point home, Because they
deny Salvation to those who believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith in
the Apostles Creed, and lead virtuous and good Lives, if they be not of their
Communion.

To this the Representer answers in plain terms, That this is nothing but what
they have learnt from the mouth P. 92.
of Christ and his Apostles. And to this end he musters up all their sayings
against Infidels, false Apostles Gnostics, Cerinthians, as tho they were
point blank levelled against all that live out of the Communion of the Church
of Rome.

But this is no uncharitableness, but pure zeal, and the same the Primitive
Church showed against Heretics, such P. 95.
as Marcion, Basilides, and Bardesanes, who were condemned in the first Age for
denying the Resurrection of the dead, etc. What in the first Age! Methinks the
Second had been early enough for them: But this is to let us see what Learning
there is among you. But do we deny the Resurrection of the dead? Or hold any
one of the Heresies condemned by the Primitive Church? What then is our Fault,
which can merit so severe a Sentence? We oppose the Church: What Church? The
Primitive Apostolical Church? The Church in the time of the Four General
Councils? I do not think that will be said, but I am sure it can never be
proved: What Church then? The present Church? Is it then damnable to oppose the
present Church? But I pray let us know what ye mean by it; The universal Body
of Christians in the World? No, no, abundance of them are Heretics and
Schismatics as well as we: i. e. All the Christians in the Eastern and
Southern parts, who are not in Communion with the Church of Rome: So that two
parts in three of Christians, are sent to Hell by this Principle; and yet it is
no uncharitableness. But suppose the Church of Rome be the only true Church,
must men be damned presently for opposing its Doctrines? I pray think a little
better on it, and you will change your Minds. Suppose a Man do not submit to
the Guides of this Church in a matter of Doctrine declared by them; Must he be
Damned? What if it be the Deposing Power? Yet his Principle is, If a Man do not
hold the Faith entire, he is P. 96.
gone. But Popes and Councils have declared this to be a point of Faith:
therefore if he does not hold it, he must (...) damned. There is no way of
answering this, but he must abate the severity of his Sentence against us. For
upon the same Reason he questions that, we may question many more. And all his
Arguments against us, will hold against himself; For, says he, he that
disbelieves P. 97.
one Article of Catholic Faith, does in a manner disbelieve all. Let him
therefore look to it, as well as we. But he endeavors to prove the Roman
Catholic Church to be the true Church, by the ordinary Notes and P. 98.
Marks of the Church. Although he is far enough from doing it; yet this will
not do his business. For he must prove, that we are convinced that it is the
true Church; and then indeed he may charge us with Obstinate Opposition, but
not before. And it is a very strange thing to me, that when their Divines say,
that Infidels shall not b^ damned for their Infidelity, where the Gospel has
not been sufficiently proposed to them; and no Christian for not believing any
Article of Faith till it be so proposed; that we must be damned for not
believing the Articles of the Roman Faith, which never have been, and never can
be sufficiently proposed to us. Methinks such men should Study a little better
their own Doctrine, about the sufficient Proposal of matters of Faith, before
they pass such uncharitable and unlearned Censures.

XXXVI. Of Ceremonies and Ordinances.
HIS Discourse on this Head is against those who refuse to obey their
Superiors in things not expressed in Scripture, which is no part of our
Controversy with them. But yet there are several things about their Ceremonies
we are not satisfied in: As 1. The mighty Number of them; which have so much
mussled up the Sacraments, that their true face cannot be discerned. 2. The
Efficacy attributed to them, without any promise from God; whereas we own no
more but decency and significancy. 3. The Doctrine that goes along with them,
not only of Obedience, but of Merit; and some have asserted the Opus Operatum
of Ceremonies as well as Sacraments, when the Power of the Keys goes along with
them; i. e. when there has been some Act of the Church exercised about the
Matter of them; as in the Consecration of Oil, Salt, Bread, Ashes, Water, etc.

XXXVII. Of Innovation in matters of Faith.
THE Substance of his Discourse on this Head may be reduced to these things. 1.
That the Church in every Age has Power to declare what is necessary to be
believed, P. 108, 109
with Anathema to those who Preach the Contrary; and so the Council of Trent,
in declaring Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. to be necessary Articles, did
no more than the Church had done before on like Occasions. 2. That if P. 112,
etc.
the Doctrines then defined had been Innovations, they must have met with great
Opposition when they were introduced. 3. That those who charged those points to
be Innovations, P. 116.
might as well have laid the scandal on any other Article of Faith which they
retained.

These are things necessary to be examined, in order to the making good the
charge of Innovation in matters of Faith, which we believe does stand on very
good Grounds.

1. We are to consider, Whether the Council of Trent had equal Reason to define
the necessity of these Points, as the Council of Nice and Constantinople had to
determine the point of the Trinity; or those of Ephesus and Chalcedon, P. 109.
the Truth of Christ's Incarnation. He does not assert it to be in the Churches
Power to make new Articles of Faith, as they do imply new Doctrines revealed;
but he contends earnestly, That the Church has a Power to declare the
necessity of believing some points which were not so declared before. And if
the Necessity of believing does depend upon the Churches Declaration, then he
must assert, that it is in the Churches Power to make points necessary to be
believed which were not so; and consequently to make common Opinions to become
Articles of Faith. But I hope we may have leave to enquire in this Case, since
the Church pretends to no new Revelation of matters of Doctrine, therefore it
can declare no more than it receives, and no otherwise than it receives. And so
nothing can be made necessary to Salvation but what God himself has made so by
his Revelation. So that they must go in their Declaration either upon
Scripture, or Universal Tradition; but if they define any Doctrine to be
necessary without these Grounds, they exceed their Commission, and there is no
Reason to submit to their Decrees, or to believe their Declarations. To make
this more plain by a known Instance: It is most certain that several Popes and
Councils have declared the Deposing Doctrine, and yet our Author says, It is
no Article of Faith with him. Why not, since the Popes and Councils have as
evidently delivered it, as the Council of Trent has done Purgatory, or
Transubstantiation? But he may say, There is no Anathema joined to it. Suppose
there be not; But why may it not be, as well as in the other Cases? And if it
were, I would know, whether in his Conscience he would then believe it to be a
necessary Article of Faith, though he believed that it wanted Scripture and
Tradition? If not, then he sees what this matter is brought to, viz. That although
the Council of Trent declare these new Doctrines to be necessary to be
believed; yet if their Declaration be not built no Scripture and Universal
Tradition, we are not bound to receive it.

2. As to the impossibility of Innovations coming in without notorious
opposition, I see no ground at all for it, where the alteration is not made at
once, but proceeds gradually. He may as well prove it impossible for a Man to
fall into a Dropsy or a Hectick-Fever, unless he can tell the punctual time
when it began. And he may as well argue thus, Such a Man fell into a Fever upon
a great Debauch, and the Physicians were presently sent for to advise about
him; therefore the other Man has no Chronical Distemper, because he had no
Physicians when he was first sick; as because Councils were called against some
Heresies, and great Opposition made to them, therefore where there is not the
like, there can be no Innovation. But I see no Reason why we should decline
giving an Account, by what Degrees, and Steps, and upon what Occasions, and
with what Opposition several of the Doctrines defined at Trent were brought in.
For the matter is not so obscure as you would make it, as to most of the Points
in difference between us. But that is too large a Task to be here undertaken.

3. There is no Color for calling in Question the Articles of Faith received
by us on the same Grounds that we reject those defined by the Council of Trent;
for we have the Universal Consent of the Christian World for the Apostles
Creed; and of the Four General Councils for the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation; who never pretended to determine any Point to be necessary which
was not revealed in Scripture; whose sense was delivered down by the Testimony
of the Christian Church from the Apostles times. But the Council of Trent
proceeded by a very different Rule; for it first set up an Unwritten Word to be
a Rule of Faith, as well as the Written; which although it were necessary in
order to their Decrees, Sess. Quarta.
was one of the greatest Innovations in the World; and the Foundation of all
the rest, as they were there established.

An Answer to the CONCLUSION.
HAving thus gone through the several Heads, which our Author complains have
been so much Misrepresented; it is now fit to consider what he says in his
Conclusion, which he makes to answer his Introduction, by renewing therein his
doleful Complaints of their being Misrepresented just as Christ and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians were. I hope the former Discourse P. 119.
has showed their Doctrines and Practices are not so very like those of Christ
and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, that their Cases should be made
so parallel; but as in his Conclusion he has summed up the substance of his
Representations, so I shall therein follow his Method, only with this
difference, that I shall in one Column set down his own Representations of
Popery, and in the other the Reasons, in short, why we cannot embrace them.

Wherein Popery consists as Represented by this Author.
1. IN using all external Acts of Adoration before Images, as Kneeling,
Praying, lifting up the Eyes, burning Candles, Incense, etc. Not merely to
worship the Objects before them, but to worship the Images themselves on the
account of the Objects represented by them; or in his own Words, Because the
Honor that is exhibited to them, is referred to the Prototypes which they
represent. P. 3.


2. In joining the Saints in Heaven together with Christ in Intercession for
us, and making Prayers on Earth to them on that Account. P. 5.

3. In allowing more Supplications to be used to the Blessed Virgin, than to
Christ; For he denies it to be an idle Superstition, to repeat Ten Ave Maria's
for one Pater Noster.

4. In giving Religious Honor and Respect to Relics. Such as placing them
upon Altars, burning Wax-Candles before them, carrying them in Processions, to
be seen, touched, or humbly kissed by the People: Which are the known and
allowed Practices in the Church of Rome. P. 8.

5. In adoring Christ as present in the Eucharist on the account of the
Substance of Bread and Wine being changed into that Body of Christ which
suffered on the Cross. P. 10.

6. In believing the Substance of Bread and Wine by the Words of Consecration,
to be changed into his own Body and Blood, the Species only or Accidents of
Bread and Wine remaining as before. P. 10.

7. In making good Works to be truly meritorious of Eternal Life. P. 13.

8. In making Confession of our ^^s to a Priest in order to Absolu^on. P. 14.

9. In the use of Indulgences for taking away the Temporal Punishments of sin,
remaining due after the Guilt is remitted.

10. In supposing that Penitent Sinners may in some measure satisfy by Prayer,
Fasting, Alms, etc. for the Temporal Pain, which by order of God's Justice
sometimes remains due, after the Guilt and the Eternal Pain are remitted. P. 17.

11. In thinking the Scripture not fit to be read generally by all, without
License, or in the Vulgar Tongues. P. 19.

12. In allowing the Books of Tobit, Judith, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Maccabees,
to be Canonical. P. 21.

13. In preferring the Vulgar Latin Edition of the Bible before any other, and
not allowing any Translations into a Mother Tongue to be ordinarily read. P.
24, 26.

14. In believing that the Scripture alone can be no Rule of Faith to any
Private or Particular Person. P. 28.

15. In relying upon the Authority of the present Church for the Sense of
Scripture. P. 29.

16. In receiving and believing the Churches Traditions as the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, and assenting to them with Divine Faith, just as he
does to the Bible. P. 31, 32.

17. In believing that the Present Guides of the Church being assembled in
Councils for preserving the Unity of the Church, have an Infallible Assistance
in their Decrees. P. 38.

18. In believing the Pope to be the Supreme Head of the Church under Christ,
being Successor to S. Peter to whom he committed the care of his Flock. P. 40.
41.

19. In believing that Communion in both Kinds is an indifferent thing; and was
so held for the first Four hundred years after Christ; and that the first
Precept for Receiving under both Kinds, was given to the Faithful by Pope Leo
I. and confirmed by Pope Gelasius. P. 51.

20. In believing that the Doctrine of Purgatory is founded on Scripture,
Authority, and Reason. P. 54, etc.

21. In believing that to the saying of Prayers well and devoutly, it is not
necessary to have attention on the Words, or on the Sense of Prayers. P. 62.

22. In believing that none out of the Communion of the Church of Rome can be
saved; and that it is no uncharitableness to think so. P. 92.

23. In believing that the Church of Rome, in all the New Articles defined at
Trent, has made no Innovation in matters of Faith. P. 107.

Our Reasons against it in the several Particulars.
1. THou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing in Heaven, or Earth, etc. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship
them. Which being the plain, clear, and express Words of the Divine Law, we
dare not worship any Images, or Representations, lest we be found Transgressors
of this Law. Especially since God herein has declared himself a Jealous God;
and annexed so severe a Sanction to it. And since he that made the Law is only
to interpret it, all the Distinctions in the World can never satisfy a Man's
Conscience, unless it appear that God himself did either make or approve them.
And if God allow the Worship of the thing Represented by the Representation, he
would never have forbidden that Worship absolutely, which is unlawful only in a
certain respect.

2. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.
1. And but one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
For Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the Presence of God
for us, Heb. 9. 24. And therefore we dare not make other Intercessors in Heaven
besides him; and the distance between Heaven and us, breaks off all
Communication between the Saints there, and us upon Earth; so that all
Addresses to them now for their Prayers, are in a way very different from
desiring others on earth to pray for us: And if such Addresses are made in the
solemn Offices of Divine Worship, they join the Creatures with the Creator in
the Acts and Signs of Worship, which are due to God alone.

3. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm. 50. 15. When we pray to Our Father in Heaven, as our Savior
commanded us, we do but what both Natural and Christian Religion require us to
do: But when men pray to the Blessed Virgin for Help and Protection now, and at
the Hour of Death, they attribute that to her, which belongs only to God, who
is our Helper and Desender: And although Christ knew the Dignity of his Mother
above all others, he never gives the least encouragement to make such Addresses
to her: And to suppose her to have a share now in the Kingdom of Christ in Hea.
ven, as a Copartner with him, is to advance a Creature to Divine Honor, and to
overthrow the true Ground of Christ's Exaltation to his Kingdom in Heaven, which
was, His suffering on the Cross for us.

4. And no man knows of the Sepulcher of Moses unto this day, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
Why should God hide the Body of Moses from the People, if he allowed giving
Religious Honor and Respect to Relics? Why should Hezekiah break in Pieces
the Brazen Serpent, because the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it? 2
Kings 18. 4. Especially when it was a Type or Representation of Christ himself,
and God had wrought many Miracles by it.

5. Whom the Heaven must receive until the times of the Restitution of all
things, Acts 3. 21. And therefore in the Eucharist we adore him, as sitting on
the Right Hand of God; but we dare not direct our Adoration to the Consecrated
Host, which we believe to be the Substance of Bread and Wine, (tho consecrated
to a Divine Mystery), and therefore not a fit Object for our Adoration.

6. The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1
Cor. 10. 16. This is spoken of the Bread after Consecration, and yet the
Apostle supposes it to be Bread still, and the Communion of his Body is
interpreted by the next Words, For we being many, are one Bread, and one Body;
for we are all Partakers of that one Bread, v. 17. Which is very different from
the Bread being changed into the very Body of Christ; which is an Opinion that
has no Foundation in Scripture, and is repugnant to the common Principles of
Reason, which God has given us, and exposes Christian Religion to the Reproach
and Contempt of Jews, Turks, and Infidels.

7. When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, St. Luke
17. 10. And therefore in no sense can our best Works be truly Meritorious of
Eternal Lise: Which consisting in the enjoyment of God, it is impossible there
should be any just Proportion, or due Commensuration between our best Actions,
and such a Reward.

8. And the Son said unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
sight, St. Luke 15. 21.

Where Confession to God is required because the Offense is against him, but it
is impossible for any Man upon earth to forgive those whom God does not
forgive: And he alone can appoint the necessary Conditions of Pardon, among
which true Contrition and Repentance is fully declared; but Confession to a
Priest, tho it may be useful for the ease of the Penitent, is no where in
Scripture made necessary for the Forgiveness of Sin.

9. I said, I will consess my Transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32. 5.

If God does fully forgive the Guilt of sin, there remains n^ Obligation to
punishment; for wherever that is, the guilt remains: It is true, God may no
sometimes fully pardon; but h^ may reserve some temporal p^ nishment here for
his own Ho^our, or the Chastisement of penitent Sinner; But then wh^ have any
men to do, to prete^ that they can take off what G^ thinks fit to lay on? Can
any Ind^gences prevent pain or Sickness sudden Death? But if Indulgen^ be
understood only with respe^ to Canonical Penances, they a^ a most notorious and
inexcu^ ble Corruption of the Discipli^ of the Ancient Church.

10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5. 10.
And therefore no Satisfaction to the Justice of God is now required from us,
for the Expiation of any remainder of Guilt. For if Christ's Satisfaction were
in it self sufficient for a total Remission, and was so accepted by God; what
Account then remains for the Sinner to discharge, if he perform the Conditions
on his part? But we do not take away hereby the Duties of Mortification,
Prayer, Fasting, and Alms, etc. but there is a difference to be made between
the Acts of Christian Duties, and Satisfaction to Divine Justice for the Guilt
of Sin, either in whole or in part. And to think to join any Satisfactions of
ours, together with Christ's, is like joining our hand with Gods in Creating or
Governing the World.

11. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; teaching and
admonishing one another, etc. Coloss. 3. 16.

How could that dwell richly in them, which was not to be communicated to them,
but with great Caution? How could they teach and admonish one another in a
Language not understood by them? The Scriptures of the New Testament were very
early perverted; and if this Reason were sufficient to keep them out of the
Hands of the People, certainly they would never have been published for common
use, but as prudently dispensed then, as some think it necessary they should be
now. But we esteem it a part of our Duty, not to think our selves wiser than
Christ or his Apostles, nor to deprive them of that unvaluable Treasure which
our Savior has left to their use.

12. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

Therefore, where there is no Evidence of Divine Inspiration, those Books
cannot be made Canonical. But the Jewish Church, To whom the Oracles of God
were committed, never delivered these Books as any part of them, being Written
when Inspiration was ceased among them. And it is impossible for any Church in
the World to make that to be divinely inspired, which was not so from the
Beginning.

13. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily: their sound went into all the
Earth, and their Words unto the ends of the World. Romans 10. 18.

Therefore the Intention of God was, that the Gospel should be understood by
all Mankind; which it could never be, unless it were translated into their
several Languages. But still the difference is to be observed, between the
Originals and Translations; and no Church can make a Translation equal to the
Original. But among Translations, those deserve the greatest esteem which are
done with the greatest Fidelity and Exactness. On which account our last
Translation deserves a more particular Regard by us; as being far more useful
to our People, than the Vulgar Latin, or any Translation made only from it.

14. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Path, Psalm 119. 105.

Which it could never be, unless it were sufficient for necessary direction in
our way to Heaven. But we suppose Persons to make use of the best means for
understanding it, and to be duly qualified for following its Directions:
without which, the best Rule in the World can never attain its End. And if the
Scripture has all the due Properties of a Rule of Faith, it is unconceivable
why it should be denied to be so; unless men find they cannot justify their
Doctrines and Practices by it, and therefore are forced to make Tradition equal
in Authority with it.

15. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge; ye
entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, ye hindered. S. Luke
11. 52.

From whence it follows, that the present Guides of the Church may be so far
from giving the true Sense of Scripture, that they may be the chief Means to
hinder Men from right understanding it. Which argument is of greater force,
because those who plead for the Infallibility of the Guides of the present
Church, do urge the Promises made to the Jewish Church at that time; as our
Author does from those who sat in the Chair of Moses, and from Caiaphas his
Prophesying.

16. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

And yet here the Apostle speaks of something delivered by the Testimony of
those who were with Christ in the holy Mount. From whence we infer, that it was
not the Design of Christ to leave us to any Vocal Testimony, but to refer us to
the Written Word, as the most certain Foundation of Faith. And it is not any
persons assuming the Title of the Catholic Church to themselves, can give them
Authority to impose any Tradition^ on the Faith of Christians; or require them
to be believed equally with the Written, Word. For before any Traditions can be
assented to with Divine Faith, the Churches Authority must be proved to be
Divine and Infallible, either by a written or unwritten Word; but it can be
done by neither, without overthrowing the Necessity of such an Infallibility in
order to Divine Faith; because the Testimony on which the Churches
Infallibility is proved, must be received only in a way of Credibility.

17. Also of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse things to draw
away Disciples after them, Act. 20. 30.

Which being spoken of the Guides of the Christian Church, without limitation
of Number, a possibility of Error is implied in any Assembly of them; unless
there were some other Promises which did assure us, That in all great
Assemblies the Spirit of God shall always go with the Casting Voice, or the
greater Number.

18. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers -- for the edisying of the Body of Christ -- till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc. Ephesians. 4. 13, 14, 15.

Now here being an account given of the Officers Christ appointed in his
Church, in order to the Unity and Edification of it, it had been unfaithfulness
in the Apostle to have left out the Head of it, in Case Christ had appointed
any. Because this were of more consequence than all the rest; being declared
necessary to Salvation to be in subjection to him. But neither this Apostle,
nor S. Peter himself, give the least intimation of it. Which it is impossible
to conceive should have been left out in the Apostolical Writings upon so many
Occasions of mentioning it, if ever Christ had instituted a Headship in the
Church, and given it to S. Peter and his Successors in the Sea of Rome.

19. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's death till he come, 1 Cor. 15. 26.

The Apostle speaking to all Communicants, plainly shows, that the Institution
of Christ was, That all should partake of both Kinds, and so to continue to do
as long as this Sacrament was to show forth the Death of Christ, viz. till his
Second coming. And there is no color for asserting the Christian Church ever
looked on observing Christ's Institution in this matter as an indifferent thing;
no not for a thousand years after Christ. Although the Practice and the Obligation
are two things, yet when the Practice was so agreeable to the Institution, and
continued so long in the Church; it is hardly possible for us to prove the
sense of the Obligation, by a better way, than by the continuance of the
Practice. And if some Traditions must be thought binding, and far from being
indifferent, which want all that Evidence which this Practice carries along
with it, How unreasonable is it in this Case to allow the Practice, and to deny
the Obligation?

20. And whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30.

But whom God justifies, they have the Remission of their Sins as to Eternal
Punishment. And if those who are thus justified, must be glorified, what place
is there for Purgatory? For there is not the least intimation of any other
state of Punishment that any who are justified must pass through before they
are admitted to Glory. We grant they may, notwithstanding, pass through many
intermediate trials in this World; but we say, where there is Justification,
there is no Condemnation; but where any part of Guilt remains unremitted, there
is a condemnation remaining so far as the punishment extends. And so this
distinction as to Eternal and Temporal Pains, as it is made the Foundation of
Purgatory, is wholly groundless; and therefore the Doctrine built upon it can
have no Foundation in Scripture or Reason.

21. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also,
1 Cor. 14. 15.

What need this Praying with the Understanding, if there were no necessity of
attending to the Sense of Prayers? For then praying with the Spirit were all
that was required: For that supposes an attention of the Mind upon God. And I
can hardly believe any Man that thinks with understanding, can justify praying
without it: Especially when there are Exhortations and Invitations to the
People to join in those Prayers, as it is plain there are in the Roman Offices.

22. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is
no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10. 34, 35.

Whereby we perceive, that God does not limit the possibility of Salvation
under the Gospel to Communion with the Sea of Rome; for if S. Peter may be
believed, the capacity of Salvation depends upon Men's fearing God and working
Righteousness and it is horrible uncharritablebleness to exclude those from a
possibility of Salvation, whom God does not exclude from it.

23. That ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, Jude v. 3.

Therefore all necessary Doctrines of Faith were at first delivered; and
whatever Articles cannot be proved to have been delivered by the Apostles, can
never be made necessary to be believed in order to Salvation. Which overthrows
the additional Creed of Pius IV. after the Council of Trent; and puts them upon
the necessity of proving the Universal Tradition of those Doctrines from the
Apostostolical Times: And when they do that, we may think better of them than
at present we do; for as yet we can see neither Scripture, nor Reason, nor
Antiquity for them.



THUS I have Represented that kind of Popery which our Author, (who complains
so much of Misrepresenting) allows; and I have in short, set down how little
ground we have to be fond of it; nay, to speak more plainly, it is that we can
never yield to, without betraying the Truth, renouncing our Senses and Reason,
wounding our Consciences, dishonouring God and his Holy Word and Sacraments,
perverting the Doctrine of the Gospel as to Christ's Satisfaction, Intercession
and Remission of Sins; depriving the People of the Means of Salvation which God
himself has appointed, and the Primitive Church observed, and damning those
for whom Christ died.

We do now in the sincerity of our Hearts, appeal to God and the World, That we
have no design to Misrepresent them, or to make their Doctrines and Practices
appear worse than they are: But take them with all the Advantages even this
Author has set them out with, we dare appeal to the Judgments and Consciences
of any impartial men, whether (the Scripture being allowed on both sides) our
Doctrines be not far more agreeable thereto than the new Articles of Trent,
which are the very Life and Soul of Popery? Whother our Worship of God be not
more suitable to the Divine Nature and Perfections, and the Manifestations of
his Will, than the Worship of Images, and Invocation of Fellow Creatures?
Whether the plain Doctrine of the necessity of Repentance and sincere Obedience
to the Commands of Christ, do not tend more to promote Holiness in the World,
than the Sacrament of Penance, as it is delivered and allowed to be practiced
in the Church of Rome, i. e. with the easiness and efficacy of Absolution, and
getting off the remainders by Indulgences, Satisfactions of others, and Prayers
for the dead? Whether it be not more according to the Institution of Christ to
have the Communion in both Kinds, and to have Prayers and the Scriptures in a
Language which the People understand? And lastly, whether there be not more of
Christian charity in believing and hoping the best of those vast bodies of
Christians, who live out of the Communion of the Church of Rome, in the
Eastern, Southern, Western, and Northern Parts, than to pronounce them all
incapable of Salvation on that Account? And therefore out of regard to God and
the Holy Religion of our Blessed Savior; out of regard to the Salvation of our
own and others Souls, we cannot but very much prefer the Communion of our own
Church, before that of the Church of Rome.

But before I conclude all, I must take some notice of his Anathema's: And here
I am as much unsatisfied, as in any other part of his Book, and that for these
Reasons,

1. Because he has no manner of Authority to make them, suppose they were
meant never so sincerely: And if we should ever object them to any others of
that Church, they would presently say, What had he to do to make Anathema's? It
belongs only to the Church and the General Councils to pronounce Anethema's,
and not to any private Person whatsoever. So that if he would have published
Anathema's with Authority, he ought to have printed those of the Council of
Trent; viz. such as these, Cursed is he that does not allow the Worship of
Images. Cursed is he that says Saints are not to be invocated. Cursed is he
that dotb not believe Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc.


2. Because he leaves out an Anathema in a very material point, viz. As to the
Deposing Doctrine. We do freely, and from our Hearts Anathematize all such
Doctrines as tend to dissolve the Bonds of Allegiance to our Sovereign, on any
pretense whatsoever. Why was this past over by him, without any kind of
Anathema? Since he seems to approve the Oxford Censures, p. 48. Why did he not
here show his zeal against all such dangerous Doctrines? If the Deposing
Doctrine be falsely charged upon their Church, let us but once see it
Anathematized by public Authority of their Church, and we have done: But in
stead thereof, we find in a Book very lately published with great approbations,
by a present Professor at Lovain Fr. D' Enghien, all the Censures on the other
side censured and despised, and the holding the Negative as to the Deposing
Doctrine, is declared by him to be Heresy, or next Auctoritas Sed^s
Apostolicae in Reges. p. 374, 408. ad 430.
to Heresy: The Censure of the Sorbon against Sanctarellus. he says, was only
done by a Faction; and that of Sixty Eight Doctors there were but Eighteen
Present; and the late Censure of the Sorbon, he says, was condemned by P. 549.
the Inquisition at Toledo, Jan. 10. 1683. as erroneous and Schismatical; and
so by the Clergy of Hungary, Oct. 24. 1682.

We do not question but there are Divines that oppose it; but we fear there
are too many who do not; and we find they boast of their own numbers, and
despise the rest as an inconsiderable Party: This we do not Misrepresent them
in, for their most approved Books do show it.

However, we do not question, but there are several Worthy and Loyal Gentlemen
of that Religion, of different Principles and Practices: And it is pity such be
not distinguished from those who will not renounce a Doctrine so dangerous in
the Consequences of it.

3. Because the Anathema's he has set down, are not Penned so plainly and
clearly, as to give any real Satisfaction; but with so much Art and Sophistry,
as if they were intended to beguile weak and unwary Readers, who see not into
the depth of these things, and therefore may think he has done great matters
in his Anathema's, when if they be strictly examined, they come to little or
nothing; as

1. Cursed is he that commits Idolatry. An unwary Reader would think herein he
disowned all that he accuses of Idolatry; but he does not curse any thing as
Idolatry, but what himself thinks to be so. So again, Cursed is he (not that
gives Divine Worship to Images, but) that prays to Images, or Relics as Gods,
or Worships them for Gods. So that if he does not take the Images themselves
for Gods, he is safe enough from his own Anathema.

2. Cursed is every goddess worshipper, i. e. That believes the Blessed Virgin
not to be a Creature. And so they escape all the force of this Anathema. Cursed
is he that Honors her, or puts his trust in her more than in God. So that if
they Honor her and trust in her but just as much as in God, they are safe
enough; Or that believes her to be above her Son: But no Anathema to such as
suppose her to be equal to him.

3. Cursed is he that believes the Saints in Heaven to be his Redeemer, that
prays to them as such. What if men pray to them as their Spiritual Guardians
and Protectors? Is not this giving Gods Honor to them? Does this deserve no
Anathema?

4. Cursed is he that worships any breaden God, or makes God of the empty
Elements of Bread and Wine: viz. That supposes them to be nothing but Bread and
Wine, and yet supposes them to be Gods too. Does not this look like nonsense:
And yet I am afraid our Author would think it a severe Anathema in this matter,
to say, Cursed is he who believes Nonsense and Contradictions.

It will be needless to set down more, since I have endeavored by clear
stating the several Controversies to prevent the Readers being ^mposed upon by
deceitful Anathema's. And yet after all he says, (...) Cursed are we, if in
answering and saying Amen to any of these C^rses, we use any Equivocations or
Mental Reservation, or do not assent to them in the common and obvions use of
the Words.

But there may be no Equivocation in the very Words, and yet there may be a
great one in the intention and design of them: There may be none in saying Amen
to the Curses so worded; but if he would have prevented all susp^cion of
Equivocation, he ought to have put it thus,

Cursed are we if we have not fairly and ingenuously expressed the whole
Meaning of our Church as to the Points condemned in these Anathema's; or if we
have by them designed to deceive the People: And ^^e^ I doubt he would not so
readily have said

Amen.
THE CONTENTS.
AN Answer to his Introduction. Page 1. 1. Of Praying to Images. p. 16. 2. Of
Worshipping Saints. p. 25. 3. Of Addressing more Supplications to the Virgin
Mary than to Christ. p. 34. 4. Of Paying Divine Worship to Relics. p. 40. 5.
Of Adoration of the Host. p. 43. 6. Of Transubstantiation. p. 46. 7. Of Merits
and good Works. p. 55. 8. Of Confession. p. 60. 9. Of Indulgencies. p. 63. 10.
Of Satisfaction. p. 66. 11. Of Reading the Holy Scriptures. p. 68. 12. Of
Apocryphal Books p. 82. 13. Of the Vulgar Edition of the Bible. p. 84. 14. Of
the Scripture as a Rule of Faith. p. 86. 15. Of the Interpretation of
Scripture. p. 87. 16. Of Tradition. p. 89. 17. Of Councils. p. 90. 18. Of
Infallibility in the Church. p. 91. 19. Of the Pope. p. 94. 20. Of
Dispensations. p. 97. 21. Of the Deposing Power. p. 101. 22. Of Communion in
one Kind. p. 107. 23. Of the Mass. p. 108. 24. Of Purgatory. p. 113. 25. Of
Praying in an Unknown Tongue. p. 119. 26. Of the Second Commandment. p. 123 27.
Of Mental Reservations. p. 124. 28. Of a Deathbed Repentance. p. 126. 29. Of
Fasting. p. 127. 30. Of Schisms and Divisions in the Church. p. 129. 31. Of
Friars and Nuns. p. 131. 32. Of Wicked Principles and Practices. p. 132. 33. Of
Miracles. p. 134. 34. Of Holy Water. p. 136. 35. Of Breeding up People in
Ignorance. p. 138. 36. Of the Uncharitableness of the Papists. p. 139. 37. Of
Ceremonies and O^dinances. p. 141. 38. Of Innovations in matters of Faith. p.
142. An Answer to his Conclusion. p. 145.
FINIS.
The ERRATA.
PAge 12. Margin, for Conformat, read Confirm. p. 14. l. 19. for DoDrine, r.
Doctrine. p. 35. Margin, for Lapidiana, r. Lapidicina. p, 39. l. 13. after
publis^^d insert in l. 26. after piece insert of. p. 40. l. 4. blot out? Or. p.
41. l. 4. for vigdantius, r. vigilantius. p. 82. l. 10. after cannot, blot out
say. p. 88. l. 12. for Solemn, r. Solitary. p. 96. Margin, for Sues, r. Surs.
ib. for Philean, r. Philerene. p. 98. l. 26. for Claevasus, r. Clavasius. p.
101. l. 12. for Doctrine, r. Doctors. p. 106. Margin, for D' Erast, r. D'
Eng^ien. p. 112. (...) 26. for Ecclesiastical, r. E^charistical. p. 132. l. 11.
before whether, insert (3.) p. 134. (...) ^. for i^. r. are. l. 20. blot out as
well. p. 141. l. 4. and l. 19. for de r. be.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Discourse against Transubstantiation, Printed for W. Rogers.


