Imprimatur.

Z. Isham R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris. 1685.

AN ANSWER TO SOME PAPERS Lately Printed, concerning the AUTHORITY OF THE
Catholic Church In MATTERS of FAITH, and the REFORMATION of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

AN Advertisement.
IF the Papers, here answered, had not been so publicly dispersed through the
Nation, a due Respect to the Name they bear, would have kept the Author from
publishing any Answer to them. But because they may now fall into many hands,
who without some assistance may not readily resolve some difficulties started
by them, He thought it not unbecoming his duty to God and the King, to give a
clearer light to the Things contained in them. And it can be no reflection on
the Authority of a Prince, for a private Subject to examine a piece of Coin as
to its just value, though it bears His Image and Superscription upon it. In
matters that concern Faith and Salvation, we must prove all things, and hold
fast that which is good.

AN ANSWER TO THE First Paper.
IF all men could believe as they pleased, I should not have failed of
satisfaction in this First Paper; the Design of it being to put an end to
Particular Disputes; to which I am so little a Friend, that I could have been
glad to have found, as much reason in it to convince, as I saw there was a fair
appearance to deceive. But there is a Law in our Minds distinct from that of
our Inclinations; and out of a just and due regard to That, we must examine the
most plausible Writings, though backed with the greatest Authority, before we
yield our Assent unto them.

If particular Controversies about Matters of Faith could be ended by a
Principle, as visible as that the Scripture is in Print, all men of sense would
soon give over Disputing; for none who dare believe what they see, can call
that in Question. But what if the Church, whose Authority, it is said, they
must submit to, will not allow them to believe what they see? How then can this
be a sufficient reason to persuade them to believe the Church, because it is as
visible as that the Scripture is in Print? unless we must only use our senses
to find out the Church, and renounce them as soon as we have done it. Which is a
very bad requital of them, and no great Honor to the Church which requires it.

But with all due submission, it is no more visible that the Roman Church is
the Catholic Church, than it is, that a part is the whole, and the most
corrupt part, that one Church, which Christ has here upon Earth.

It is agreed among all Christians, That Christ can have but one Church upon
Earth, as there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. And this is that
Church we profess to believe in the two Creeds. But if those, who made those
Creeds for our direction, had intended the Roman Catholic Church, why was it
not so expressed? How came it to pass that such a limitation of the sense of
Christ's Catholic Church to the Roman, should never be put to Persons to be
Baptized in any Age of the Church? For I do not find in the Office of Baptism,
even in the Roman Church, that it is required that they believe the Roman
Catholic Church, or that they deny the validity of Baptism out of the
Communion of the Roman Church. From whence it is to me as visible as that the
Scripture is in Print, that the Church of Rome it self does not believe that it
is, the one Catholic Church mentioned in the two Creeds. For then it must void
all Baptism out of its Communion, which it has never yet done. And as long as
Baptism does enter Persons into the Catholic Church, it is impossible, that
all who have the true form of Baptism, though out of the Communion of the Roman
Church, should be Members of the Catholic Church, and yet the Communion of the
Roman and Catholic be all one; as it must be if the Roman Church, be the
Catholic and Apostolic Church professed in the Creeds.

If we had been so happy to have lived in those Blessed Times, when the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul, it had been
no difficulty to have showed that one visible Church, which Christ had here
upon Earth. But they must be great strangers to the History of the Church, who
have not heard of the early and great Divisions in the Communion of it. And
there was a remarkable difference in the Nature of those Schisms, which
happened in the Church; which being not considered has been the occasion of
great misaplication of the sayings of the Ancients about the One Catholic
Church. Some did so break off Communion with other parts of the Catholic
Church, as to challenge that Title wholly to themselves; as was evident in the
case of the Novatians and Donatists; for they rebaptiz'd all that embraced
their Communion. Others were cast out of Communion upon particular differences;
which were not supposed to be of such a nature, as to make them no members of
the Catholic Church. So the Bishops of Rome excommunicated the Bishops of Asia
for not keeping Easter when They did; and the Bishops both of Asia and Africa,
for not allowing the Baptism of Heretics. But is it reasonable to suppose,
that upon these Differences they shut out all those Holy Bishops and Martyrs
from the possibility of Salvation, by excluding them from their Communion? If
not, then there may be different Communions among Christians, which may still
continue Parts of the Catholic Church; and consequently no one Member of such
a Division ought to assume to it self the Title and Authority of the One
Catholic Church. But if any One Part does so, though never so great and
conspicuos, it is guilty of the same Presumption with the Novatians and
Donatists, and is as much cause of the Schisms, which happen thereupon in the
Church, as they were.

For a long time before the Reformation, there had been great and considerable
breaches, between the Eastern and Western Churches; insomuch that they did
renounce each other Communion. And in these Differences four Patriarchal
Churches joined together against the fifth, viz. that of the Bishop of Rome.
But the Eastern Patriarchs sinking in their Power, by the horrible Invasion of
the Enemies of the Christian Faith; and the Bishops of Rome advancing
themselves to so much Authority, by the advantages they took from the kindness
of some Princes, and the Weakness of others, They would hear of no other terms
of accommodation with the Eastern Churches, but by an entire submission to the
Pope as Head of the Catholic Church. Which all the Churches of the East
refused, however different among themselves; and to this day look on the Pope's
Supremacy as an Innovation in the Church, and Usurpation on the Rights of the
other Patriarchs and Bishops. In all those Churches the Two Creeds are
professed, true Baptism administered, and an undoubted Succession of Bishops
from the Apostles; How then come They to be excluded from being Parts of the
One Catholic and Apostolic Church? And if they be not excluded, how can the
Roman Church assume to it self that glorious Title? So that it seems to me as
visible as that the Scripture is in Print, that the Roman Church neither is,
nor can be that One Church, which Christ left upon Earth.

And this Principle being removed (which ought to be taken for granted, since
it can never be proved) we must unavoidably enter into the Ocean of Particular
Disputes. And I know no reason any can have to be so afraid of it, since we
have so sure a Compass, as the Holy Scripture to direct our passage. But the
reason of avoiding particular Disputes is, because the evidence is too clear in
them, that the Church of Rome has notoriously deviated from this infallible
Rule. And it is as impossible for a Church, which has erred, to be Infallible,
as for a Church really Infallible, to err. But if a Church pretend to prove her
Infallibility by Texts, which are not so clear, as those which prove her to
have actually erred; then we have greater reason to recede from her Errors,
than to be deceived with such a fallible pretense to Infallibility.

Well! But it is not left to every fantastical man's head to believe as he
pleases, but to the Church.

And is it indeed left to the Church to believe as it pleases? But the meaning
I suppose is, that those, who reject the the Authority of the Roman Catholic
Church, do leave every man to believe according to his own fancy. Certainly
those of the Church of England, cannot be liable to any imputaion of this
Nature. For our Church receives the three Creeds, and embraces the four General
Councils, and professes to hold nothing contrary to any Universal Tradition of
the Church from the Apostles times. And we have often offered to put the
Controversies between Us and the Church of Rome upon that issue. And do not
those rather believe as they please, who believe the Roman Church to be the
Catholic Church, without any color from Scriptures, Antiquity or Reason? Do
not those believe as they please, who can believe against the most convincing
evidence of their own senses? Do not those believe as they please, who can
reconcile the lawfulness of the Worship of Images, with Gods forbidding it, the
Communion in one kind with Christ's Institution, and the praying in an unknown
Tongue with the 14 Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians?

But all these and many other Absurdities may go down by virtue of the Churches
Authority, to whom, it is said, Christ left the Power upon Earth to govern us
in matters of Faith. We do not deny that the Church has Authority of declaring
matters of Faith, or else it never could have condemned the Ancient Heresies.
But then we must consider the difference between the Universal Church in a
General and free Council, declaring the sense of Scripture in Articles of
Faith, generally received in the Christian Church from the Apostles Times, as
was done when the Nicene Creed was made; and a Faction in the Church assuming
to it self the Title of Catholic, and proceeding by other rules, than the
first Councils did, and imposing new Opinions and Practices, as things
necessary to the Communion of the Catholic Church. And this is the true Point
in difference between us, and those of the Roman Church about the Churches
Authority in matters of Faith, since the Council of Trent. For we think we have
very great reason to complain, when a Party in the Church, the most corrupt and
obnoxious, takes upon it self to define many new Doctrines, as necessary Points
of Faith, which have neither Scripture, nor Universal Tradition for them.

It were a very irrational thing, we are told, to make Laws for a Country, and
leave it to the Inhabitants to be Interpreters and Judges of those Laws; for
then every Man will be his own Judge, and by consequence no such thing, as
either Right or Wrong.

But is it not as irrational to allow an Usurper to interpret the Laws to his
own advantage, against the just Title of the Prince, and the true Interest of
the People? And if it be not Reasonable for any private Person to be his own
Judge, why should a public Invader be so? But we hope it will be allowed to
the Loyal Inhabitants of a Country, so far to interpret the Laws, as to be able
to understand the Duty they owe to their King, and to justify his Right
against all the Pretenses of Usurpers. And this is as much as we plead for in
this case.

Can we therefore suppose, That God Almighty would leave us at those
uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and leave every Man to be his own
Judge?

And can we resonably suppose, That God Almighty should give as a Rule not
capable of being understood by those to whom it was given, in order to the
great End of it, viz. the saving of their Souls? For this was the main end of
the Rule, to direct us in the way to Heaven, and not merely to determine
Controversies. The Staff, which a Man uses, may serve to measure things by, but
the principal design is to walk with it. So it is with the Holy Scripture, if
Controversies arise: It is fit to examine and compare them with this Infallible
Rule; but when that is done, to help us in our way to Heaven is that which it
was chiefly intended for. And no Man can think it of equal consequence to him,
not to be mistaken, and not to be damned. In matters of Good and Evil, every
man's Conscience is his immediate Judge, and why not in matters of Truth and
Falsehood? Unless we suppose men's involuntary mistakes to be more dangerous than
their wilful sins.

But after all, We do not leave every Man to be his own Judge, any further than
it concerns his own Salvation, which depends upon his particular Care and
Sincerity. For to prevent any dangerous Mistakes by the Artifice of Seducers,
we do allow the Assistance of those Spiritual Guides, which God has appointed
in his Church, for the better insturcting and governing private Persons: We
embrace the Ancient Creeds, as a summary comprehension of the Articles of
Faith; and think no Man ought to follow his own particular Fancy against
Doctrines so universally received in the Christian Church, from the Apostles
Times.

I do ask any Ingenuous Man, whether it be not the same thing to follow our own
Fancy, or to interpret Scripture by it.

If we allowed no Creeds, no Fathers, no Councils, there might have been some
color for such a Question. But do we permit Men to interpret Scripture
according to their own Fancy, who live in a Church, which owns the Doctrine of
the Primitive Church more frankly and ingenuously, than any Church in the World
besides, without setting up any private Spirit against it, or the present Roman
Church to be the Interpreter of it. And now I hope I may have leave to ask some
Questions of any ingenuous Man; as, whether it be not the same thing for the
Church of Rome to make the Rule, as to assume to it self the fool Power of
giving the sense of it? For what can a Rule signify without the sense? And if
this were the intention of Almighty God, had it not been as necessary to have
told us, to whom he had given the Power of Interpreting the Rule, as to have
given the Rule it self? Whether it be reasonable for the Church of Rome, to
interpret those Texts, wherein this Power of Interpreting, is to be contained?
For this is to make it Judge in its own Cause, which was thought an Absurdity
before. And whether it be not as mischievous to allow a Prosperous Usurper the
Power of interpreting Laws, according to his own Interest, as any private
Person, according to his own Fancy? Whether it be possible to reform Disorders
in the Church, when the Person principally accused is Supreme Judge? Whether
those can be indifferent Judges in Councils, who beforehand take an Oath, to
defend that Authority which is to be Debated? Whether Tradition be not as
uncertain a Rule, as Fancy, when Men judge of Tradition according to their
Fancy?

I would have any Man show me, where the Power of deciding matters of Faith is
given to every particular Man.

If by deciding Matters of Faith be understood the determining them in such a
manner, as to oblige others, I do not know where it is given to every
particular Man, nor how it should be. For then every particular Man would have
a Power over every particular Man; and there would want a new Decision, whose
should take place. But if by deciding Matters of Faith, no more be meant, but
every man's being satisfied of the Reasons, why he believes one thing to be
true, and not another; that belongs to every Man, as he is bound to take care
of his Soul, and must give an account both to God and Man of the Reason of his
Faith. And what can be meant in Scripture by Proving all things, and holding
fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. By trying the Spirits, whether they be
of God, 1 John 4. 1. By judging of themselves what is right, Luke 12. 57.
unless God had given to Mankind a Faculty of discerning truth and falsehood in
Matters of Faith. But if every Man has not such a Power, how comes he to be
satisfied about the Churches Authority? Is not that a Matter of Faith? And where
ever any Person will show me, that every Man has a Power to determine his
Faith in that matter, I Will undertake to show him the rest.

Christ left his Power to his Church* even to forgive Sins in Heaven, and left
his Spirit with them, which they exercised after his Resurrection.

But where then was the Roman Catholic Church? And how can it be hence
inferred, That these Powers are now in the Church of Rome, exclusive to all
others, unless it be made appear that it was Heir-General to all the Apostles?
I suppose it will be granted, that the Apostles had some gifts of the Spirit,
which the Church of Rome will not in Modesty pretend to; such as the Gift of
Tongues, the Spirit of Discerning, Prophecy, Miraculous Cures and Punishments.
Now, here lies the difficulty, to show what part of the Promise of the
Infallible Spirit (for the ordinary Power of the Keys relates not to this
matter) was to expire with the Apostles, and what was to be continued to the
Church in all Ages. A Promise of Divine Assistance is denied by none but
Pelagians: But how far that extends, is the Question. In the Souls of good Men
it is so as to keep them in the way to Heaven, but not to prevent any lapse
into sin; and it were worth our knowing, where God has ever promised to keep
any Men more from Error, than from Sin. Does he hate one more than the other?
Is one more disagreeing to the Christian Doctrine than the other? How came then
so much to be said for the keeping Men from Error, when at the same time, they
confess they may not only commit great sins, but err very dangerously in the
most Solemn manner, in what relates to the Doctrine of Manners. Would any have
believed the Apostles Infallible, if they had known them to be Persons of ill
Lives; or that they had notoriously erred in some Rules of great Consequence to
the Welfare of Mankind? Now, all this is freely yielded, as to the Pretense of
Infallibility in the Church of Rome. It is granted, that the Guides of that
Church have been very bad Men; and that in Councils they have frequently erred
about the Deposing Power, being only a Matter of Practice, and not of Faith.
Whether it be so or not, I now dispute not; but it is granted, that
notwithstanding this Infallible Spirit, the Roman Church may grossly err in a
matter of mighty Consequence to the Peace of Christendom; and yet it cannot err
in decreeing the least Matters of Faith. As for Instance, it can by no means
err about the seven Sacraments, or the Intention of the Priest about them; but
it may err about Deposing Princes, and Absolving Subjects from their
Allegiance: Which in easier terms is, They can never err about their own
Interest, but they may about any other whatsoever.

I pass over the next Paragraph, the sense being imperfect, and what is
material about the Creeds, has been spoken to already.

That which next deserves Consideration, is,

That the Church was the Judge even of the Scripture it self, many years after
the Apostles, which Books were Canonical, and which were not.

We have a distinction among us of Judges of the Law and Judges of the Fact:
The One declare what the Law is, the Fact being supposed; the Other gives
judgment upon the Fact, as it appears before them. Now in this Case about the
Canonical Books, the Church is not judge of the Law. For they are not to
declare whether a Book appearing to be Canonical ought by it to be received for
Canonical; (which is taken for granted among all Christians) but all they have
to do, is to give Judgment upon the Matter of Fact, i. e. whether it appear
upon sufficient Evidence to have been a Book written by Divine Inspiration. And
the Church of Rome has no particular Privilege in this matter, but gives its
Judgment as other parts of the Christian World do: And if it takes upon it to
judge contrary to the general sense of the Christian Church, we are not to be
concluded by it; but an Appeal lies to a greater Tribunal of the Universal
Church.

And if they had this Power, then I desire to know, how they came to lose it?

Who are meant by They? And what is understood by this Power? It is one thing
for a Part of the Church to give Testimony to a matter of Fact, and another to
assume the Power of making Books Canonical, which were not so. This latter no
Church in the World has, and therefore can never lose it. The former is only
Matter of Testimony, and all parts of the Church are concerned in it, and it
depends as other Matters of Fact do, on the Skill and Fidelity of the Reporters.

And by what Authority Men separate themselves from that Church?

What Church? The Catholic and Apostolic? We own no Separation from that; but
we are dis-joyned from the Communion of the Roman Church, that we may keep up
the stricter Union with the truly Catholic and Apostolic Church. And this is
no Separating our selves, but being cast out by an Usurping Faction in the
Church; because we would not submit to the unreasonable Conditions of Communion
imposed by it; the chief whereof is owning all the Usurpation, which has by
degrees been brought into it. To make this plain by an Example: Suppose a
prosperous Usurper in this Kingdom had gained a considerable Interest in it,
and challenged a Title to the whole, and therefore required of all the Kings
Subjects, within his Power, to own him to be Rightful King: Upon this, many of
them are forced to withdraw, because they will not own his Title: Is this an
act of Rebellion, and not rather of true Loyalty? Schism in the Church is like
Rebellion in the State. The Pope declares himself Head of the Catholic Church,
and has formed himself a kind of Spiritual Kingdom in the West; although the
other parts of the Christian World declare against it, as an Usurpation.
However, he goes on, and makes the owning his Power a necessary Condition of
being of his Communion. This many of the Western Parts, as well as Eastern,
disown and reject, and therefore are excluded Communion with that Church,
whereof he is owned to be the Head. The Question now is, Who gives the Occasion
to this Separation? whether the Pope, by requiring the owning his Usurpation,
or We, by declaring against it? Now, if the Conditions, he requires, be unjust
and unreasonable; if his Authority, he challenges, over the Catholic Church, be
a mere Usurpation (for which we have not only the Consent of the other Parts of
the Christian World, but of Scripture and the Ancient Church) then we are not
to be condemned, for such a Separation, which was unavoidable, if we would not
comply with the Pope's Usurpation. And upon this Foot the Controversy about
Schism stands between Us and the Church of Rome.

The only Pretense I ever heard of, was, because the Church has failed in
wresting and interpreting the Scripture contrary to the true sense and meaning
of it; and that they have imposed Articles of Faith upon us, which are not to
be warranted by Gods Word. I do desire to know who is to be Judge of that,
whether the whole Church, the Succession whereof has continued to this day
without interruption; or particular Men, who have raised Schisms for their own
advantage.

The whole force of this Paragraph depends upon a Supposition, which is taken
for granted, but will never be yielded by Us, and we are sure can never be
proved by those of the Church of Rome, viz. That in the new imposed Articles,
the whole Church in a continued Succession has been of the same judgment with
them, and only some few Particular Men in these last Ages have opposed them.
Whereas the great thing we insist upon next to the Holy Scripture, is, that
they can never prove the Points in diference, by an Universal Tradition from
the Apostles Times, either as to the Papal Supremacy, or the other Articles
defined by the Council of Trent. We do not take upon our selves to contradict
the Universal sense of the Christian Church from the Apostles Times in any one
Point. But the true Reason of the proceeding of the Church of England was this.
While the Popes Authority was here received and obeyed, there was no liberty
of searching into abuses, or the ways of Reforming them. But when Men were
encouraged to look into the Scripture, and Fathers, and Councils, they soon
found the state of things in the Church extremely altered from what they ought
to have been, or had been in the Primitive Church: But they saw no possibility
of Redress, as long as the Popes Authority was so absolute and inviolable. This
therefore in the first place they set themselves to the accurate Examination
of, and the Result was, that they could find it neither in the Scriptures, nor
Fathers, nor Councils, nor owned by the Eastern Churches: And therefore they
concluded it ought to be laid aside, as an Usurpation. Our Church being by this
means set free (even with the consent of Those, who joined with the Church of
Rome in other things) a greater liberty was then used in examining particular
Doctrines and Practices, which had crept into the Church by degrees, when
Ignorance and Barbarism prevailed; and having finished this enquiry, Articles
of Religion were drawn up, wherein the sense of our Church was delivered,
agreeable to Scripture and Antiquity, though different from the Modern Church
of Rome; and these Articles are not the private sense of particular Men, but
the Public Standard whereby the World may judge, what we believe and practice;
and therefore these are the sense of our Church, and not the opinions or
fancies of particular Men. And those who call the retrenching the Popes
exorbitant Power by the name of Schism, must by parity of reason call the
casting off an Usurper Rebellion. But certainly those who consider the mighty
advantages and privileges of the Clergy in the Church of Rome, can never
reasonably suspect any of that Order should hope to better themselves by the
Reformation. And if we judge of Men's actings by their Interest, one of the most
surprising considerations at this day is, that the Clergy should be against,
and Princes for the Church of Rome.

AN ANSWER TO THE Second Paper.
IT is a sad thing to consider, what a world of Heresies are crept into this
Nation.

But is it not a strange thing to consider, that no distinction is here put
between the Religion by Law established, and the Parties disowned by it, and
dissenting from it? And yet many of these, though justly liable to the charge
of Schism, embrace no Heresies against the Four or Six first General Councils.
But if the Dissenters were guilty of never so many Heresies, how comes the
Church of England to bear the blame of them; when the weakening its Power and
Authority was the occasion of such an overflowing of Schisms and Heresies among
us? And it is indeed a sad thing to consider how many Ways and Means have been
used by all Parties to introduce and keep up Schisms and Divisions amongst us,
and then how the Church of England is blamed for not being able to suppress
them. But if all Doctrines opposite to the Church of Rome be accounted
Heresies, then we desire to be informed, how the Church of Rome came to have
this Power of defining Heretical Doctrines; or how any Doctrine comes to be
Heresy by being contrary to its definitions. For Heresy is an obstinate
opposing some necessary Article of Faith. It must therefore be proved, that
what the Church of Rome declares, does thereby become a necessary Article of
Faith, or it is very unreasonable to lay the imputation of Heresy upon us. And
this can never be maintained, without proving that the Church of Rome has a
Power to make Doctrines not necessary before, to become necessary by her
Definition: which is the same thing with making New Articles of Faith. But
these can never be proved to be such by Universal Tradition; which the Church
of Rome pretends for all her Articles of Faith.

Every Man thinks himself as competent a Judge of Scripture, as the very
Apostles themselves.

Does Every Man among us pretend to an infallible Spirit? And yet Every Man
owns that the Apostles had it. But what is meant by being a Judge of Scripture?
If no more be understood, then that every Man must use his understanding about
it, I hope this is no Crime nor Heresy. The Scripture must be believed in
order to Salvation, and therefore it must be understood; for how can a Man
believe, what he understands not the sense or meaning of? If he must understand
the sense he must be Judge of the sense; so that every Man, who is bound to
believe the Scripture in order to his Salvation, must be Judge of the sense of
the Scripture, so far as concerns his Salvation. But if by being a Judge of the
Scripture be meant giving such a judgment, as obliges others to submit to it,
then among us no particular Man does pretend to be a competent Judge of
Scripture, so as to bind others to rely upon his Authority in expounding
Scripture. We own the Authority of Guides in the Church, and a due submission
to them, but we do not allow them to be as competent Judges of Scripture as the
very Apostles.

And it is no wonder it should be so, since that part of the Nation, which looks
most like a Church, dares not bring the true Arguments against the other Sects,
for fear they should be turned against themselves, and confuted by their own
Arguments.

This is directly levelled against the Church of England, which is hereby
charged with Insincerity or Weakness in dealing with the Dissenters. But we
must consider the meaning of this charge. It is no wonder it should be so, i.
e. That every Man should think himself as competent a Judge of Scripture, as
the very Apostles, because the Church of England dares not use the true
Arguments against the Sects. Whence it appears that this true Argument is the
Churches infallible Authority, and the Obligation of all Members of the Church
to submit their judgments entirely thereto. I confess that if the Church of
England did pretend to this against the Sectaries, they might justly turn it
against her; because in our Articles, though the Churches Authority be
asserted, yet Infallibility is denied. If there can be no Authority in a
Church, without Infallibility; or there can be no obligation to submit to
Authority, without it, then the Church of England does not use the best
Arguments against Sectaries. But if there be no ground for Infallibility, if
the Church which has most pretended to it, has been most grossly deceived; if
the Heads of that Church have been not barely suspected of Heresy, but one of
them stands condemned for it in Three General Councils, owned by that Church;
then for all that I can see, the Church of England has wisely disowned the
pretense of Infallibility, and made use of the best Arguments against Sectaries
from a just Authority, and the sinfulness and folly of the Sectaries refusing
to submit to it.

The Church of England (as it is called) would fain have it thought, That they
are the Judges in matters Spiritual, yet dare not say positively, there is no
Appeal from them.

Is not the Church of England really what it is called? I would fain know what
it wants to make it as good a Church, as any in the Christian World? It wants
neither Faith (if the Creed contain it) nor Sacraments, (and those entire) nor
Succession of Bishops, (as certain as Rome it self) nor a Liturgy, (more
agreeing to Primitive Worship, then is any where else to be found.) Why then
the Church of England, as it is called? Well! But what is this Church now blamed
for? They pretend to be Judges in matters Spiritual, and yet dare not say there
is no appeal from them. How then? Are there no true Judges, but such as there
lies no Appeal from? There lies an Appeal from any Judges in the Kings Courts
to the Court of Parliament; are They not therefore true Judges in
Westminster Hall? There lay an Appeal from Bishops to Metropolitans, from them
to Patriarchs, from Patriarchs to General Councils, according to the Ancient
Polity of the Church. Were there therefore no true Judges, but General Councils?

What follows relating to the Churches Authority, and every Man's following his
own judgment, has been answered already. I proceed therefore, to what further
concerns this matter of Appeal.

What Country can subsist in Quiet, where there is not a Supreme Judge, from
whence there can be no Appeal?

The natural consequence from hence appears to be, that every National Church
ought to have the Supreme Power within it self. But how come Appeals to a
foreign Jurisdiction to tend to the Peace and Quiet of a Church? They have been
always complained of in the best Ages of the Church, and by the best Men; such
as S. Cyprian, and S. Augustine, and the whole African Churches. The worst Men
began them, and the worst Church encouraged them, without regard to the Peace
of the Christian Church, so it increased its own Grandeur by them.

We have had these hundred Years past, the sad effects of denying to the
Church, that Power in matters Spiritual, without an Appeal.

And our Ancestors for many hundred Years last past, found the intolerable
Inconveniences of an Appeal to foreign Jurisdiction. Whereby the Nation was
exhausted, Justice obstructed, the Clergy oppressed, and the Kings Prerogative
greatly diminished. But these were slight things in Comparison to what we have
felt these hundred Years past for want of it.

Have not the Kings Courts been open for matters of Law and Justice, which have
been filled with Men of as great Abilities and Integrity, since the
Reformation, as ever they were before? Has not the Appeal to the King in his
High Court of Chancery been as much for the King and People, as ever the Appeal
was to the Court of Rome? Have not all the Neighbor Princes been forced for
the preserving their own Dignity to set Bounds and Limits to Appeals to Rome,
and to Orders or Bulls that come from thence? How then comes the want of such
an Appeal to be thought to produce such sad effects here? All Christendom
groans under the sad effects of them; and it is a very self-denying humor for
those to be most sensible of the want of them, who would really suffer the most
by them.

Can there be any Justice done, where the Offenders are their own Judges, and
equal Interpreters of the Law, with those that are appointed to Admister
Justice?

And is there any likelihood, Justice should be better done in another Country,
by another Authority, and proceeding by such Rules, which in the last resort,
are but the Arbitrary will of a Stranger. And must such a one, pretending to a
Power he has no right to, be Judge in his own Cause, when he is the greatest
Offender himself? But how is this applied to the Protestants in England?

This is our Case, here in England, in matters Spiritual; for the Protestants
are not of the Church of England, as it is the true Church, from whence there
can be no Appeal; but because the Discipline of that Church is conformable at
present to their fancies; which, as soon as it shall contradict or vary from,
they are ready to embrace or join with the next Congregation of People, whose
Discipline or Worship agrees with the Opinion of that Time.

The sense of this Period is not so clear, but that one may easily mistake
about it. That which is aimed at, is, that we of the Church of England, have no
tie upon us, but that of our own judgments; and when that changes, we may join
with Independents or Presbyterians, as we do now with the Church of England.
And what security can be greater, than that of our Judgments? If it be said to
be nothing, but fancy and no true Judgment, we must beg leave to say, that we
dare Appeal to the World, whether we have not made it appear, that it is not
fancy, but Judgment which has made us firm to the Church of England. Might it
not as well have been said, that the Protestants of the Church of England,
adhered to the Crown in the Times of Rebellion out of Fancy, and not out of
Judgment? And that if their Fancy changed, they might as well have joined with
the Rebels? Will not this way of Reasoning hold as strongly against those of
the Church of Rome? For why do any adhere to that, but because it is agreeable
to their Judgment so to do? What evidence can they give, that it is Judgment in
them, and only Fancy in us? If Reason must be that which puts the difference,
we do not question, but to make ours appear to be Judgment, and theirs Fancy?
For what is an infallible Judge, which Christ never appointed, but Fancy? What
is their unwritten Word, as a Rule of Faith to be equally received with the
Scriptures, but Fancy? What is giving honor to God by the Worship of Images,
but Fancy? What is making Mediators of Intercession, besides the Mediator of
Redemption, but Fancy? What is the Doctrine of Concomitancy, to make amends for
half the Sacrament, but Fancy? What is the substantial Change of the Elements
into the Body of Christ, but Fancy? for both Senses and Reason are against it.
What is the deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory, by Masses for the Dead, but
mere Fancy? But I forbear giving any more Instances.

So that according to this Doctrine, there is no other Church nor Interpreter
of Scripture, but that which lies in every Man's giddy Brain.

Let Men's Brains be as giddy, as they are said to be, for all that I can see,
they are the best faculties they can make use of, for the understanding of
Scripture, or any thing else. And is there any Infallible Church upon Earth,
which must not be beholding to Men's giddy Brains for believing it? And it may
be, never the less giddy for doing it? For God-sake why do any Men take the
Church of Rome to be Infallible? Is it not, because their Understandings tell
them they ought so to do? So that by this consequence, there is no Infallible
Church, but what lies in every Man's giddy Brain.

I desire to know therefore of every serious Considerer of these things,
whether the great Work of our Salvation ought to depend on such a Sandy
Foundation as this?

I thank God I have seriously considered this matter, and must declare that I
find no Christian Church built on a more sandy Foundation, than that, which
pretends to be settled upon a Rock; I mean, so far as it imposes the new Faith
of Trent, as a necessary Condition of Salvation. Had we no other reason to
embrace Christianity, than such as they offer for these New Doctrines, I am
much afraid Christianity it self, to all inquisitive Men, would be thought to
have but a Sandy Foundation. But what is this Sandy Foundation we build upon?
Every Man's private judgment in Religion? No understanding Man builds upon his
own Judgment, but no Man of understanding can believe without it. For I appeal
to any ingenious Man, whether he does not as much build upon his own Judgment,
who chooses the Church, as he that chooses Scripture for his Rule? And he that
chooses the Church, has many more Difficulties to conquer than the other has.
For the Church can never be a Rule without the Scriptures, but the Scriptures
may without the Church. And it is no such easy matter to find the Churches
Infallibility in the Scripture. But suppose that be found, he has yet a harder
Point to get over, viz. How the Promises relating to the Church in general,
came to be appropriated to the Church of Rome. Which a Man must have an
admirable Faculty at discerning, who can find it out, either in Scripture, or
the Records of the Ancient Church.

The places of Scripture which are brought about Christ's being with his Church
to the end of the World, about the Power to forgive Sins; about the Clergy
being God's Laborers, Husbandry, Building, having the Mind of Christ; do as
effectually prove Infallibility of the Church of England, as the Church of
Rome; for I cannot discern the least inclination in any of them to favor one
against the other.

And pray consider on the other side, that those who resist the Truth, and will
not submit to his Church, draw their Arguments from Implications, and
far-fetched Interpretations, at the same time that they deny plain and positive
Words: which is so great a Disingenuity, that it is not almost to be thought
that they can believe themselves.

This is a very heavy Charge; To resist the Truth, to deny plain and positive
Words of Scripture; to be guilty of great Disingenuity, so as not to believe
our selves, are faults of so high a nature, as must argue not only a bad Cause,
but a very bad Mind. And God forbid, that those of the Church of England,
should ever be found guilty of these things. But to come to Particulars; Is it
resisting Truth, or arguing from Implications, and denying plain and positive
Words of Scripture, to say, We must not worship Images; We must make God alone
the Object of Holy Worship; We must give the Eucharist in both kinds according
to Christ's express Institution; We must understand our Prayers, when St.
Paul's words are so clear about it? So far at least we have plain and positive
Words of Scripture on our side. And for Implications, and far fetched
Interpretations, commend me to the Pope's Bulls, especially when they have a
mind to prove their Authority from Scripture; which they can do from In the
beginning, to the end of the Apocalypse. But that which seems to be aimed at
here, is, This is my Body; wherein the words seem to be plain and positive on
their side, and our sense to be from Implications, or far-fetched
Interpretations. To which I Answer, That there are Expressions in Scripture as
plain and positive as this, which none think themselves bound to understand in
their literal sense. For then we must all believe, that God has Eyes and Ears,
a Face, Hands and Feet, as firmly, as that the Bread was then turned into
Christ's Body, when he spoke those words. And I would know, whether the
Christian Church rejecting the Doctrine of Those who made God to be like to
Man, was not chargeable with the same resisting the Truth, and denying plain
and positive Words of Scripture, as we are? And yet I hope the Christian Church
did then believe it self. Suppose any should assert, That the Rock in the
Wilderness, was really changed into Christ's Body; would not he have the very
same Things to say against those who denied it? For are not the Words as plain
and as positive, That Rock was Christ? But Sacramental Expressions, by the
consent of the Christian Church, and the very Neture of the Things, are of a
different sense from Logical Propositions. And if this had been intended in the
plain and literal sense, St. Paul would never have as plainly and positively
called it Bread after Consecration; nor the Cup be said to be the New Testament
in his Blood.

The Conclusion is:
Is there any other Foundation of the Protestant Church, but that if the Civil
Magistrate pleases, he may call such of the Clergy as he thinks fit for his
turn at that time, and turn the Church either to Presbytery, or Independency,
or indeed what he pleases? This was the way of our pretended Reformation here
in England. And by the same Rule and Authority, it may be altered into as many
Shapes and Forms as there are Fancies in Men's Heads.

This looks like a very unkind Requital to the Church of England, for her Zeal
in asserting the Magistrate's Power against a Foreign Jurisdiction; to infer
from thence, that the Magistrate may change the Religion here which way he
pleases. But although we attribute the Supreme Jurisdiction to the King; yet we
do not question, but there are inviolable Rights of the Church, which ought to
be preserved against the Fancies of some, and the Usurpations of others. We do
by no means make our Religion mutable, according to the Magistrate's pleasure.
For the Rule of our Religion is unalterable, being the Holy Scripture; but the
Exercise of it, is under the regulation of the Laws of the Land. And as we have
cause to be thankful to God, when Kings are Nursing Fathers to our Church; so
we shall never cease to pray for their continuing so; and that in all things we
may behave our selves toward them, as becomes good Christians, and Loyal
Subjects.

AN ANSWER TO THE Third Paper.
THE Third Paper is said to be written by a Great Lady, for the satisfaction of
her Friends, as to the Reasons of Her leaving the Communion of the Church of
England, and making her self a Member of the Roman Catholic Church. If she had
written nothing concerning it, none could have been a competent Judge of those
Reasons or Motives she had for it, but her self: but since she was pleased to
write this Paper to satisfy her Friends; and it is thought fit to be published
for general Satisfaction, all Readers have a right to judge of the strength of
them; and those of the Church of England, an Obligation to vindicate the Honor
of it, so far as it may be thought to suffer by them.

I am sensible how nice and tender a thing it is, to meddle in a Matter wherein
the Memory of so Great a Lady is so nearly concerned; and wherein such
Circumstances are mentioned, which cannot fully be cleared, the Parties
themselves having been many Years dead: But I shall endeavor to keep within
due bounds, and consider this Paper with respect to the main Design of it, and
take notice of other Particulars so far as they are subservient to it.

The way of her Satisfaction must needs appear very extraordinary; for toward
the Conclusion she confesses, She was not able, nor would she enter into
Disputes with any Body. Now where the Difference between the two Churches lies
wholly in Matters of Dispute, how any one could be truly satisfied, as to the
Grounds of leaving one Church, and going to the other, without entering into
matter of Dispute with any body, is hard to understand. If Persons be resolved
beforehand what to do, and therefore will hear nothing said against it, there
is no such way, as to declare they will enter into no Dispute about it. But
what Satisfaction is to be had in this manner of proceeding? How could one bred
up in the Church of England, and so well instructed in the Doctrines of it,
ever satisfy her self in forsaking the Communion of it, without enquiring into,
and comparing the Doctrines and Practices of both Churches? It is possible for
Persons of Learning, who will take the pains of examining things themselves, to
do that, without entering into Disputes with any Body; but this was not to be
presumed of a Person of her Condition. For many things must fall in her way,
which she could neither have the leisure to examine, nor the Capacity to judge
of, without the Assistance of such who have made it their business to search
into them. Had she no Divines of the Church of England about her, to have
proposed her Scruples to? None able and willing to give her their utmost
Assistance in a Matter of such Importance, before she took up a Resolution of
forsaking our Church? This cannot be imagined; considering not only her great
Quality, but that just esteem they had for her whilst she continued so zealous
and devout in the Communion of our Church.

But we have more than this to say. One of the Morley Bp of Winchester.
Bishops who had nearest Relation to her for many Years, and who owns in Print,
Preface to his Treatise. P. 5.
That he bred her up in the Principles of the Church of England, was both able
and willing to have removed any Doubts and Scruples with respect to our Church,
if she would have been pleased to have communicated them to him. And however
she endeavored to conceal her Scruples; he tells her, in his Letter to her
Royal Highness from the Bp of Winton. P. 3, 4.
Letter to her (which he since printed for his own vindication) That he had
heard much Discourse concerning her wavering in Religion, and that he had
acquainted her Highness with it, the Lent before the Date of this Paper; and
was so much concerned at it, that he obtained a Promise from her, That if any
Writing were put into her Hands by those of the the Church of Rome, that she
would send it either to him, or to the then Bishop of Oxford, Blandford,
whom he left in Attendance upon her. After which, he says, She was many Days
with him at Farnham; in all which time she spoke not one word to him of any
Doubt she had about her Religion. Page 14.
And yet this Paper bears Date, Aug. 20. that Year, wherein she declares her
self changed in her Religion: So that it is evident she did not make use of the
ordinary Means for her own Satisfaction, at least as to those Bishops who had
known her longest.

But she says, Sheldon A. B. of Canterb.
That she spoke severally to two of the best Bishops we have in England, who
both told her, Blanford Bp of Worcester.
there were many things in the Roman Church, which it were much to be wished we
had kept; As Confession, which was no doubt commanded of God; that Praying for
the Dead, was one of the Ancient Things in Christianity; that for their parts
they did it daily, though they would not own it. And afterward, Blandford
Bishop of Worcester.
pressing one of them very much upon the other Points; he told her, That if he
had been bred a Catholic, he would not change his Religion; but that being of
another Church, wherein he was sure were all things necessary to Salvation, he
thought it very ill to give that Scandal, as to leave that Church wherein he
received his Baptism. Which Discourses, she said, did but add more to the
desire she had to be a Catholic.

This, I confess, seems to be to the purpose; if there were not some
Circumstances and Expressions very much mistaken in the Representation of it:
But yet suppose the utmost to be allowed, there could be no Argument from hence
drawn for leaving the Communion of our Church, if this Bishop's Authority or
Example did signify any thing with her. For supposing he did say, That if he
had been bred in the Communion of the Church of Rome, he would not change his
Religion: Yet he added, That being of another Church, wherein were all things
necessary to Salvation, he thought it very ill to give that Scandal, as to
leave that Church wherein he had received his Baptism. Now why should not the
last words have greater force to have kept her in the Communion of our Church,
than the former to have drawn her from it? For why should any Person forsake
the Communion of our Church, unless it appears necessary to Salvation so to do?
And yet this yielding Bishop did affirm, that all things necessary to Salvation
were certainly in our Church; and that it was an ill thing to leave it. How
could this add to her desire of leaving our Church? unless there were some
other Motive to draw her thither, and then such small Inducements would serve
to inflame such a Desire. But it is evident from her own words afterward, that
these Concessions of the Bishop could have no Influence upon her: for she
declares, and calls God to witness, that she would never have changed her
Religion, if she had thought it possible to save her Soul otherwise. Now what
could the Bishop's words signify toward her Turning, when he declares just
contrary, viz. not only that it was possible for her to be saved without
turning, but that he was sure we had all things necessary to Salvation; and
that it was a very ill thing to leave our Church? There must therefore have
been some more secret Reason, which increased her Desire to be a Catholic
after these Discourses: unless the Advantage were taken from the Bishop's
calling the Church of Rome the Catholic Religion; If he had been bred a
Catholic, he would not have changed his Religion. But if we take these words
so strictly, he must have contradicted himself; for how could he he sure we had
all things necessary to Salvation, if we were out of the Catholic Church? Was
a Bishop of our Church, and one of the best Bishops of our Church, as she said,
so weak as to yield, That he was sure all things necessary to Salvation were to
be had out of the Communion of the Catholic Church?

But again; there is an inconsistency in his saying, That he thought it very
ill to leave our Church; which no Man of common sense would have said, if he
had believed the Roman Church to be the Catholic, exclusive of all others that
do not join in Communion with it.

The utmost then that can be made of all this, is, That there was a certain
Bishop of this Church, who held both Churches to be so far Parts of the
Catholic Church, that there was no necessity of going from one Church to
another. But if he asserted that, he must overthrow the necessity of the
Reformation, and consequently not believe our Articles and Homiles, and so
could not be any true Member of the Church of England.

But the late Bishop of Winchester has made a shorter Answer to all this; For
he first doubts, Whether there ever were any such Bishops who made such
Answers; Preface, p. 2. p. 4.
And afterward he affirms, That he believes there never was, in Rerum Natura,
such a Discourse as is pretended to have been between this Great Person, and
two of the most Learned Bishops of England. But, God be thanked, the Cause of
our Church does not depend upon the singular Opinion of one or two Bishops in
it, wherein they appareently recede from the established Doctrine of it. And I
am sure those of the Church of Rome take it ill from us, to be charged with the
Opinion of Particular Divines, against the known Sentiments of their Church.
Therefore supposing the Matter of Fact true, it ought not to have moved her to
any Inclination to leave the Church of England.

But after all, She protests, in the Presence of Almighty God, that no Person,
Man or Woman, directly or indirectly, ever said any thing to her (since she
came into England) or used the least Endeavor to make her change her Religion;
and that it is a Blessing she wholly ows to Almighty God. So that the Bishops
are acquitted from having any hand in it, by her own words; and as far as we
can understand her meaning, she thought her self converted by immediate Divine
Illumination. We had thought the pretense to a private Spirit had not been at
this time allowed in the Church of Rome. But I observe, that many things are
allowed to bring Persons to the Church of Rome, which they will not permit in
those who go from it. As the use of Reason in the Choice of a Church; the
Judgment of Sense; and here, that which they would severely condemn in others
as a Private Spirit, or Enthusiasm, will pass well enough if it does but lead
one to their Communion. Any Motive or Method is good enough which tends to that
end; and none can be sufficient against it. But why may not others set up for
the Change as to other Opinions upon the same Grounds, as well as this Great
Person does, as to the Change from our Church to the Church of Rome? And we
have no Pretenders to Enthusiasm among us, but do as solemnly ascribe the
Blessing wholly to Almighty God; and look on it as the Effect of such Prayers
as she made to him in France and Flanders.

But I wonder a Person, who owed her Change so wholly to Almighty God, should
need the Direction of an Infallible Church; since the utmost they can pretend
to, is no more than to have such an Immediate Conduct; and the least that can be
meant by it, is, that she had no Assistance from any other Persons. Which may
not exclude her own Endeavors: but supposing them to be employed, and an
Account to be here given of them; yet there is no Connection between any of the
Premises, and the Conclusion she drew from them; and therefore it must be
Immediate Impulse, or some concealed Motive which determined her Choice.

The Conclusion was, That she would never have changed, if she could have saved
her Soul otherwise. If this were true, she had good Reason for her Change; if
it were not true, she had none; as it is most certain it was not. Now let us
examine how she came to this Conclusion; and I will suppose it to have been
just in the Method she sets it down in.

First, she says, She never had any Scruples till the November before; and
then they began upon reading Dr. Heylin's History of the Reformation; which was
commended to her as a Book to settle her; and there she found such abominable
Sacriledg upon Henry the 8th's Divorce, King Edward's Minority, and Queen
Elizabeth's Succession, that she could not believe the Holy Ghost could ever be
in such Counsels.

This was none of the best Advices given to such a Person, to read Dr. Heylin's
History for her Satisfaction. For there are two distinct Parts in the History
of our Reformation; the one Ecclesiastical, the other Political: the former was
built on Scripture and Antiquity, and the Rights of particular Churches; the
other on such Maxims which are common to Statesmen at all Times, and in all
Churches, who labor to turn all Revolutions and Changes to their own
Advantage. And it is strange to me that a Person of so great Understanding,
should not distinguish these two. Whether Hen. 8. were a good Man or not;
Whether the D. of Somerset raised his Estate out of the Church Lands, does not
concern our present Enquiry; which is, Whether there was not sufficient Cause
for a Reformation in the Church? And if there was, Whether our Church had not
sufficient Authority to reform it self? And if so, Whether the Proceedings of
our Reformation were not Justifiable by the Rules of Scripture and the Ancient
Church? These were the proper Points for her to have considered, and not the
particular Faults of Princes, or the Miscarriages of Ministers of State. Were
not the Vices of Alexander the 6th, and many other Heads of the Church of Rome
for a whole Age together, by the Confession of their own greatest Writers, as
great at least as those of Henry the 8th? And were these not thought sufficient
to keep her from the Church of Rome; and yet the others were sufficient to make
her think of leaving our Church? But Henry the Eighth's Church was in Truth the
Church of Rome under a Political Head, much as the Church of Sicily is under
the King of Spain. All the difference is, Henry the 8th took it as his own
Right; the King of Spain pretends to have it from the Pope, by such
Concessions, which the Popes deny. And suppose the King of Spain's Pretense
were unlawful to that Jurisdiction which he challenges in the Kingdom of
Sicily; were this a sufficient Ground to justify the thoughts of Separation
from the Church of Rome?

But the Duke of Somerset raised his Estate out of Church Lands, and so did
many Courtiers in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Are there not Miscarriages of the like nature in the Church of Rome? What is
the Popes making great Estates out of the Church Lands, for their Nephews to be
Princes and Dukes? a thing not unheard of in our Age. And is it not so much
worse to be done by the Head of the Church?

These she confesses were but Scruples; but such as occasioned her examining
the Points in difference by the Holy Scripture. Now she was in the right way
for Satisfaction, provided she made use of the best Helps and Means for
understanding it; and took in the Assistance of her Spiritual Guides. But it
seems, contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, she found some things so
easy there, that she wondered she had been so long without finding them out.
And what were these? No less than the Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament;
the Infallibility of the Church, Confession, and Praying for the Dead.

These were great Discoveries to be made so easily, considering how those of
the Church of Rome, who have been most versed in these Matters, have found it
so difficult to make them out from thence.

(1.) As to the Real Presence; as it is in the Dispute between us and the
Church of Rome, it implies the Real and Substantial Change of the Elements into
the Body and Blood of Christ. But where do our Savior's words, in calling the
Sacrament his Body and Blood, imply any such thing? The wisest Persons of the
Church of Rome have confessed, that the bare words of our Savior can never
prove it; but there needs the Authority of the Church to interpret them in that
sense. How then could she so easily find out that, which their most Learned Men
could not? But there is nothing goes so far in such Discoveries as a willing
Mind.

(2.) As to Confession. No doubt the Word is often used in Scripture, and
therefore easily found. But the Question between us, is not about the
Usefulness or Advantage of Confession in particular Cases, but the Necessity of
it in all Cases, in order to Remission of Sins. And I can hardly believe any
Bishop of our Church would ever say to her, that Confession in this sense was
ever commanded by God. For then he must be damned himself if he did not confess
every known Sin to a Priest. But some general Expressions might be used, that
Confession of Sin was commanded by God; Confess your Sins one to another: But
here is nothing of a particular Confession to a Priest, necessary in order to
Forgiveness of Sin.

(3.) As to praying for the Dead; It is hard to find any place of Scripture
which seems to have any tendency that way, unless it be with respect to the Day
of Judgment, and that very doubtfully. But how came this Great Person to think
it not possible to be saved in our Church, unless we prayed for the Dead? How
did this come to be a Point of Salvation? And for the Practice of it, she
says, the Bishops told her they did it daily. Whether they did it or not, or
in what sense they did it, we cannot now be better informed: But we are sure
this could be no Argument for her to leave the Communion of our Church, because
she was told by these Bishops they did it, and continued in the Communion of it.

(4.) Lastly; As to the Infallibility of the Church. If this, as applied to the
Roman Church, could be any where found in Scripture, we should then indeed be
to blame not to submit to all the Definitions of it. But where is this to be
found? Yes, Christ has promised to be with his Church to the end of the World.
Not with his Church, but with his Apostles: And if it be restrained to them,
then the end of the World is no more than always. But suppose it be understood
of the Successors of the Apostles; were there none but at Rome? How comes this
Promise to be limited to the Church of Rome; and the Bishops of Antioch and
Alexandria, and all the other Eastern Churches (where the Bishops as certainly
succeeded the Apostles, as at Rome it self) not to enjoy the equal Benefit of
this Promise? But they who can find the Infallibility of the Church of Rome in
Scripture, need not despair of finding whatever they have a Mind to there.

But from this Promise she concludes, That our Savior would not permit the
Church to give the Laity the Communion in One kind, if it were not lawful so to
do. Now in my Opinion, the Argument is stronger the other way; The Church of
Rome forbids the doing of that, which Christ enjoined; therefore it cannot be
Infallible, since the Command of Christ is so much plainer than the Promise of
Infallibility to the Church of Rome.

But, from all these things laid together, I can see no imaginable Reason of
any force to conclude, that she could not think it possible to save her Soul
otherwise, than by embracing the Communion of the Church of Rome. And the
Public will receive this Advantage by these Papers, that thereby it appears,
how very little is to be said by Persons of the greatest Capacity, as well as
Place, either against the Church of England, or for the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
An Advertisement Of Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THe History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By GILBERT BVRNET, D.
D. in two Volumes, Folio.

The Moderation of the Church of England, in her Reformation, in Avoiding all
undue Compliances with Popery and other sorts of Phanaticisms, etc. By TIMOTHY
PVLLER, D. D. Octavo.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Sergeants [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 40.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

The History of the Gunpowder Treason, collected from Approved Authors, as well
Popish as Protestant. With a Vindication of the said History, and of the
Proceedings and Matters relating thereunto, from the Exceptions which have been
made against it, And more especially of late Years, by the Author of the
Catholic Apology, and others. 40.

A Relation of the Barbarous and Bloody Massacre of about an hundred thousand
Protestants, begun at Paris, and carried on over all France, in the Year 1572.
Collected out of Mezcray, Thuanus, and other Approved Authors. 40.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Sarisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and Written by the same Hand, Octavo.

A LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined, by GILB. BVRNET, D. D. 80.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. 40.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First Part.

-- The Second Part of the same Discourse; showing the Vanity of the Pretended
Reformation of the Council of Trent, and of R. H's Vindication of it; [in his
Fifth Discourse concerning the Guide to Controversies.] 40. In the Press, and
will be published in few days.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A PAPIST not Misrepresented by PROTESTANTS. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. Octavo. In the
Press.


