A LETTER To Mr. G. Giving a True Account of a Late Conference At the D. of P.

Imprimatur,

Martii 12. 1686/7. Guil. Needham.



LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1687.

A LETTER To Mr. G. Giving a True Account of a Late CONFERENCE At the D. of P.
SIR,
I Was very much surprised at the sight of several Copies you have given out of
the Conference between us at my House in January last. For although you took
great care in the Conference it self to keep me from expecting any great
Ingenuity from you after it; yet I could hardly believe you would have ventured
so far as to have given out such false and imperfect Copies of what past as all
those have been which came to my hands, and were all said to be dispersed by
you. You know very well that the Gentleman who wrote for you never read his
Papers in the Conclusion, that we might judge how fairly he had represented
both sides: and when they were neither Read, nor Compared, nor Signed as they
ought to have been, with what Ingenuity can these be dispersed through so many
hands for true and Authentic Copies? At least you ought to have sent them to
me and to have answered my Objections against them before you had read them in
Coffee-houses, and made such Descants upon them in places where you were sure I
would not be present to contradict you. But when nothing was done to make your
Copy appear to be good, they must be of very easy faith and understanding who
would take your word in this matter, without so much as any Motives of
Credibility.

I hear you made great boasts of your Victory after the Conference, which I
only smiled at, and thought you hoped to make your self considerable by your
Vanity. If you gain no greater Victories, you will very little increase the
Number of your Converts: For the Gentleman for whose sake the Conference was,
declared immediately after it, that he was much more confirmed in the Communion
of our Church by it, and resolved to continue in it; which he has since
repeated several times to me. But of all the Persons of your Church, I have yet
met with, you had least Reason to go away with the boast of a Victory.

For I pray call but to mind how the Conference ended, and I think you will be
ashamed of your boasting. When you came to your Demonstration of Infallibility
in the Church of Rome, which came to this in short, That all Traditionary
Christians believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so up to the
time of our Blessed Savior and if they follow this Rule they can never err in
faith, therefore are infallible; And you proved they could not innovate in
Faith unless they did forget what they held the day before, or out of malice
alter it; I thought the best way to show the Vanity of this rare Demonstration
was to produce an Instance of such as followed Tradition and yet you could not
deny to have erred, and that was of the Greek Church, which went upon Tradition
from Father to Son, as much as ever the Roman did: And I desired to know of you
whether the Greek Church notwithstanding did not err in matters of Faith; And
if it did, then a Church holding to Tradition was not infallible. Your answer
was, That the Greek Church followed Tradition, till the Arians left that Rule
and took up a new one, i. e. Scripture privately interpreted. I told you I did
not mean the Arians, but the present Greek Church (which you charge with
Heresy) and yet they follow Tradition from Father to Son. This I was forced to
repeat over and over, but no answer could I get from you, but you still ran
back to the Arians, and compared them and the Calvinists, which I told you was
not at all to the purpose; for I insisted upon the present Greek Church, and so
you rose up in a heat, and endeavored to keep those who wrote from setting
down this last part as it ought to have been.

In the Papers dispersed by you, you make me barely put the question, Whether
the Greek Church did follow Tradition from Father to Son in matters of Faith,
or no? But do not mention the Inference I drew from it, and which is set down
in the Original Paper that was read aloud and approved by both parties, That if
the Greek Church followed Tradition, which is undeniably true, and is granted
by your self in your Answer, then a Church holding to Tradition as its Rule may
err in matters of Faith, which unavoidably overthrows your pretended
Demonstration. For you cannot make an evasion, by saying, That though the Greek
Church once adhered to Tradition, yet in the Time of Arianism it left that Rule
and took up another, and so ever since fell into error as the Calvinists did;
for that is apparently false as to the present Greek Church (of which I spoke)
as is known to every one that knows any thing of the Greek Church, which in all
its differences with the Roman Church as to the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
the Pope's Supremacy, Purgatory, etc. still pleaded Tradition and adhered to
it. Neither is so much of your Answer true, as that even the Arians went off
from the Rule of Tradition, for they insisted on it, and Petavius thinks they
had good Reason for it. But however I said my Instance was not about them, but
the present Greek Church, and this I do affirm, you gave no Answer at all to.

I know what Arts have been used to get Mr. T. to approve your Copy: I have not
seen what he wrote, and I desired him to bring the Gentleman to me who wrote
for you, that we might compare ours together, but word was left with my
Servant, that he was not well. But suppose he should now correct his Copy, this
will be too late for my Vindication, since so many imperfect ones have been
given out and dispersed, not only here in Town, but over several parts of the
Nation. And therefore I am (...) to take this way to put a stop to such
dis(...)ceeding. I hear Mr. M. pretends that I gave but false Copies, which is
so far from being true, that I was often solicited on the account of your
Papers, before I let one be seen, and then it was only to correct the Errors
of yours. And mine was taken by a Person of Learning as well as Integrity, who
was present at the whole Conference and very well understood the whole matter.
But because your Writer's Copy was not then read, and none signed, I desire you
now to make good these two things, which the whole Conference depended upon.

(1.) That we have no absolute Certainty as to the Rule of our Faith, viz. the
Scripture; although we have a larger and firmer Tradition for it, viz. the
Consent of all Christian Churches, than you can have for the Points of Faith in
difference between us.

(2.) That the Tradition from Father to Son is an infallible conveyance of
matters of Faith, notwithstanding the Greek Church is charged by you with
Error, which adhered to Tradition.

If you give a satisfactory Account of these two things, you will acquit your
self much better than by boasting in Coffee-houses, and dispersing such Copies
of Conferences. If you decline giving an Answer to this just and necessary
Vindication of my self, the World will easily see on whose side the Victory
lay; but I confess I did not think it worth boasting of.

If you are really such a man at Controversy, as I hear you would be taken
for, I offer you a fair opportunity to show your self: and I do promise by
God's Assistance to return an Answer to you in such a manner, as will be least
liable to the Injury of False Copies.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, E. S.
March 7. 1686/7.
THE END.

