PROPOSALS Tendered to the Consideration of Both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, For
Uniting the Protestant Interest for the Present; And preventing Divisions for
the Future.

Together with the DECLARATION OF K. CHARLES II. Concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs.

And some Proposals of TERMS of UNION BETWEEN THE Church of England AND
DISSENTERS, Long since published By the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Clark, and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, M DC LXXX IX.

Humble and Modest PROPOSALS For Uniting the Protestant Interest.
I Doubt not but every Pious and Sober Protestant of this Nation, cannot but be
heartily troubled to observe those passionate Differences and unchristian
Dissentions which daily increase among Brethren, who are united in one and the
same Doctrine of their Religion, and reformed from the Errors and Superstitions
of the Church of Rome: Upon the due Consideration of which, every one who
wishes Peace and Prosperity to the Kingdom he lives in, ought to consider what
should be the Occasion of those unhappy and ruinous Divisions we have so long
suffered under, and to offer probable means for composing them.

As to their first Rise, Hooker's Preface to his Ecclesiastical Polity, printed
anno 1676. p. 44, 45.
I doubt not but they ow their Original to the different manner of the
Reformation, and the establishing of the Orders which each Church did think fit
and convenient for it self, (as the Reverend and Pious Mr. Hooker acquaints us)
which were so peremptorily established under that high commanding Form, which
rendered them to the People as things everlastingly required by the Law of that
Lord of Lords, against whose Statutes there is no Exception to be taken; by
which means it came to pass, that one Church could not but accuse and condemn
another of Disobedience to the Will of Christ, in those things where manifest
Difference was between them: Whereas the self-same Orders allowed, but yet
established in more wary and suspense manner, as being to stand in Force till
God should give the Opportunity of some General Conference what might be best
for them afterward to do; This, I say, had both prevented all occasion of just
dislike which others might take, and reserved a greater Liberty unto the
Authors themselves of entering into farther Consultation afterward; which,
though never so necessary, they could easily now admit, without some fear of
Derogation from their Credit: And therefore that which once they had done, they
became for ever after resolute to maintain.

Now if we consider the shortness of that time wherein our first Reformation
continued under Edward the Sixth; and the Persecution in Queen Mary's reign,
which forced many Pious and Learned Clergymen of the Church of England, to flee
into Foreign Countries (as Zurick, Embden, Basil, Strasburg, Frankford, Geneva,
etc.) for the Preservation of their Religion and Lives, where they frequently
conversed with those Eminent Divines, who were the great Reformers there; it is
no Wonder that some of them should return better pleased with their Discipline
than their own, especially considering that several of them had intimate
Acquaintance and Conversation with one of the Reformers, whom the Reverend Mr.
Hooker thought incomparably the wisest Man Man that ever the French Church did
enjoy since the Hour it enjoyed him. Hooker's Preface to his Ecclesiastical
Polity, p. 44.
In Queen Elizabeth's, King James, and K. Charles the First's Reigns, it is well
known how our Differences increased, until that unhappy War broke out; by which
the Nonconforming Interest prevailed; so that the Presbyterian Discipline was
endeavored to be fixed as the established Form of Government in this Nation;
our Universities, Preachers, Writings, Education, etc. were generally modelled
thereto; by which means, the greatest number of the trading part of the
Kingdom, several of the Gentry, and some few of the Nobility (observing the
Precepts and Practices, Life's and Deaths of many of that Clergy to be Pious and
Exemplary (joined with them of this, or the like Persuasion.

Since which time, it pleasing God to restore King Charles II. the Parliament
thought it convenient to establish the same Discipline which our first
Reformers judged prudential, and that (as the Dissenters do complain) upon
stricter Subscriptions than formerly, not abating or laying aside any of those
Ceremonies which have been matters of dispute and contention betwixt them and
the Church of England ever since our blessed Reformation from Popery and
Superstition: Upon which account, many of the Nonconforming Divines laid down
their Livings, and the old Controversies began afresh to be revived; and so are
like to be continued, until we be either ruined by Popery, or healed by
Moderation, which is the only Salve to cure the Churches Wounds, and that
admirable Remedy formerly proposed to the wisdom of Superiors by the Reverend
Dr. Stillingfleet; Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicu^ p. 122.123.
who having highly commended the prudence and temper of the French Churches in
composing their public Forms of Prayer, that they were so far from inserting
any thing controversial into them, that Papists themselves would use them. And
says he, the same temper was used by our Reformers in the composing our
Liturgy in reference to the Papists, to whom they had an especial Eye, as being
the only Party then appearing; whom they desired to draw into their Communion,
by coming as near them as they well and safely could. And certainly those holy
Men who did seek by any means to draw in others at such a distance from their
Principles as the Papists were, did never intend by what they did for that end,
to exclude any truly tender Consciences from their Communion. That which they
laid as a Bait for them, was never intended by them as a Hook for those of
their own Profession. But the same or greater Reason which made them at that
time yield so far to them then, would now have persuaded them to alter and lay
aside those things which yield matter of offense to any of the same Profession
with themselves now: For surely none will be so uncharitable toward those; of
his own Profession, as not to think there is as much reason to yield in
compliance with them, as with the Papists. And it cannot but be looked upon as
a Token of God's severe displeasure against us, if any, though unreasonable
Proposals of Peace between us and the Papists, should meet with such
entertainment among many, and yet any fair offers of Union and Accommodation
among our selves be so coldly embraced and entertained. Thus far our Reverend
and Learned Dean of Paul's delivered his Opinion as to these matters of Dispute
near thirty Years a-gone, before the Laws were established against Dissenters.
And in his Book, Entitled, The unreasonableness of Separation, (wrote twenty
years after the former) He has given the World such a Testimony of his real
Kindness to Dissenters, (notwithstanding his hard usuage from them) and of his
sincere and hearty desire to heal our unhappy Breaches, and unite our
unchristian Divisions, as will for ever consecrate his Memory to posterity.
Upon these and some other like Considerations, I should humbly propose to the
Wisdom of this present Parliament, some probable means to put an end to our
present Differences, and to Unite us for the future; that so we may become a
flourishing Nation, free from the Factions and Divisions of former Ages.

Proposals for our present Uniting.
1. I Humbly propose, that the Ceremonies at present enjoined by Law, might be
left to the liberty of the Clergy to use or lay aside, and that, because the
Dissenters on the one hand are persuaded that their conformity to them would be
sinful; and the Church of England on the other hand has declared at several
times that they are things indifferent, and may be changed. Upon our first
Reformation in the account she has given of Ceremonies, why some be abolished,
and some retained, She says thus, That as those Ceremonies were taken away
which were most abused, and did burden Men's Consciences without any cause; so
the other that remain are retained for Discipline and Order, which (upon just
causes may be altered, and changed. Again, since his Majesty's Restoration, in
her Preface to the Common Prayer, Preface to the Common Prayer.
are these Words, That the particular Forms of Divine Worship, and the Rites
and Ceremonies appointed to be used, being things in their own Nature
indifferent and alterable, and so acknowledged; it is but reasonable that upon
weighty and important Considerations, according to the various exigency of
times and occasions, such changes should be made therein, as to those that are
in place of Authority, should from time to time seem either necessary or
expedient. Accordingly we find that in the Reigns of several Princes of Blessed
Memory since the Reformation, the Church upon just and weighty Considerations
her thereunto moving, has yielded to make such Alterations in some some
particulars, as in their respective times were thought convenient. Thus far the
Church of England. And of late I find that a very eminent Member thereof, the
Reverend Dean of Canterbury, has aequainted us in a public Sermon Preached by
him at the Yorkshire-Feast, That though it was not for private Persons to
undertake in matters of public concernment, yet he thought he had no cause to
doubt but the Governors of our Church (notwithstanding all the advantages of
Authority and Reason too, as they thought, Dr. Tillotson's Sermon, Preached at
the Yorkshire-Feast. An. 1679. p. 28.
on their side) were Persons of that Piety and Prudence, that for Peace sake,
and in order to a firm Union amongst Protestants, they would be content, if
that would do it, not to insist upon little things, but to yield them up,
whether to the infirmity or importunity, or, perhaps, in some very few things,
to the plausible exceptions of those who differed from them.

The Reverend Dr. Sherlock, in a Sermon lately preached before the Lord Mayor,
has likewise most charitably and piously declared his Thoughts about these
matters of difference in the following Words.

We have reason to hope, that the Church of England, Dr. Sherlock's Sermon,
Preached before the Lord Mayor. Nov. 1688.
which at the beginning of the Reformation took such prudent Care not to offend
the Papists going farther from them, than was necessary; will, whenever it is
likely to do good, condescend a great deal farther than it is necessary to
reform, to meet the Dissenter; for while the external decency, gravity, and
solemnity of Worship is secured; no wise and good Man will think much to change
a changeable Ceremony, when it will heal the Breaches and Divisions of the
Church. And let us all heartily pray to God that there may be this good and
peaceable disposition of Mind in all Conformists, and Non-conformists toward a
happy reunion; and all considering Men will think it time to lay aside such
little Disputes, when it is not merely the Church of England, nor any
particular Sect of Protestants, whose Ruin is aimed at, but the whole
Protestant Faith.

And as a farther Confirmation of the readiness, not only of our Divines, but
of the Fathers of our Church to encourage so glorious a Work, His Grace of
Canterbury, and the rest of the petitioning Bishops, did in their famous
Petition (for which they were sent Prisoners to the Tower) assure his Majesty,
That they did not refuse to distribute and publish his Declaration for Liberty
of Conscience, from any want of due Tenderness to Dissenters; in relation to
whom they were willing to come to such a Temper, as should be thought fit, when
that Matter should be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation.

And not long after another company of Bishops who were sent for by the late
King James, to give him their Advice, (in (in several important Affairs of the
Nation) among other things, proposed, That a Free Parliament should establish a
due Liberty of Conscience.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was to earnest to promote this so Christian
Design, that among those admirable Articles recommended by his Grace to all the
Bishops within his Province, (which were to be more fully insisted upon in
their Addresses to the Clergy and People of their respective Diocesses) this
was one:

That they also walk in Wisdom toward those that are not of our Communion: And
if there be in their Parishes any such, that they neglect not frequently to
confer with them in the Spirit of Meekness, seeking by all good Ways and Means
to gain and win them over to our Communion: More especially that they have a
very tender Regard to our Brethren the Protestant Dissenters; that upon
occasion offered, they visit them at their Houses, and receive them kindly at
their own, and treat them fairly wherever they meet them; persuading them (if
it may be) to a full compliance with our Church, or at least, that whereunto we
have already attained, we may all walk by the same Rule and mind the same
thing. And in order hereunto, that they take all Opportunities of Assuring and
Convincing them, that the Bishops of this Church are really and sincerely
irreconcilable to the Errors, Superstitions, Idolatries and Tyrannies of the
Church of Rome.

And that they warmly and most affectionately exhort them, to join with us in
Daily Fervent Prayer to the God of Peace, for an Universal Blessed Union of all
the Reformed Churches both at home and abroad, against our common Enemies, and
that all they who do confess the Holy Name of our Dear Lord, and do agree in
the Truth of his Holy Word, may also meet in one Holy Communion, and live in
perfect Unity and Godly Love.

Now seeing the Church of England once and again declared her excellent temper
and moderation for the preservation of Peace and Unity (the great end and
design of all Church Government) we have little reason to question her
readiness ( at such a time as this is) to comply with so modest a Proposal, as
a liberty of using or refusing those Ceremonies, which she says, In their own
nature are indifferent and alterable, and upon weighty and important
considerations, may be changed, etc. or to grant her consent to such a
Subscription, in relation to those Articles which concern the Government and
Discipline of the Church, as are proposed by the Learned Dean of S. Paul's, in
the Appendix; especially considering that by this condescension of hers, she
will certainly bring into her Communion a great number of pious, moderate, and
more considerative Non-conformists: Which will not only add strength to her
self, but give a great joy and content to all those who have wished well to the
Peace, Unity, and prosperity of this our Church and Nation; To which end it
would not be amiss that a strict Injunction should be laid on the Clergy and
People to forbear all harsh and unchristian Language one toward another, and
to observe the Apostles Rule, of not judging one another.

2. I would likewise humbly propose, That the rest of the Protestant Dissenters
might be indulged by Act of Parliament; provided they neither Preached, wrote,
nor discoursed against the Doctrine or Government of the Church as by Law
established; and that, because Charity, which is kind, and thinks no evil,
would oblige a sober and indifferent person to believe that the reason of their
Separation from our Church, did chiefly proceed from a tenderness of Conscience
(impressed upon them by the force of their Education, Study, Conversation,
etc.) lest in complying with the present established Form of Worship, they
should sin against God, and wound the peace of their own Souls: for otherwise,
their own present quiet and interest must necessarily have obliged* them to a
Compliance, they having been under a continual danger and hazard of the
execution of the Laws established against them; whereby they have been not only
deprived of that Maintenance which by the countenance of Authority they might
otherwise have expected and publicly enjoyed, but exposed to many wants,
difficulties, and sufferings.

Proposals for preventing future Divisions.
I humbly propose to the Wisdom of this present Parliament, That an ACT might
be passed, whereby every person (after a limited term of years) intending to
take holy Orders should be incapacitated for any Church-preferment, or for a
License to preach in private Congregations; who could not give a satisfactory
account to the Bishop of the Diocese where he intended to settle, of his
proficiency and ability in Church History and Primitive Learning, whereby he
might be able to give a clear and plain account of what Discipline and Order
were used in the Church of God nearest our Savior's and the Apostles days;
when Differences and Errors in Doctrine or Church Government began first to
arise; with the Authors, Occasion, and Effects thereof. The Advantages which
must necessarily attend the making of such a Law, would be very great both to
our interest in Church and State; amongst which I beg leave to name the
following.

1. We might hereby (for the future) more assuredly hope for, and expect Peace
and Union amongst our Churchmen, who having been all well acquainted with
Primitive Learning and practice, with the rise and growth of all Heresies,
Schisms, and Divisions in the Church, and with the fatal consequences which
have attended them; they would not more rationally than unanimously make choice
of one and the same Form of worship and Discipline, but most heartily unite in
their affections to one another, endeavoring with all their strength and power
to maintain the Church in Peace and Unity.

2. By this means we might be assured to enjoy the most Learned Clergy that
ever this Nation brought forth, who would not only prove a great Bulwark
against Popery on the one hand, but Schism and Faction on the other; and being
to well accomplished for the Ministerial Function (before they enter into it)
might much more assuredly engage the affection and hearts of their people, by
spending (in private) the greatest part of the Week in instructing them in the
Principles, and encouraging them in the Practice of the Christian Religion; a
Duty, alas, too much neglected in our days!

3. We may then hope for Preferments to answer every man's Merit; One of the
principal Reasons why we have more Clergymen than Livings, seeming to be this,
That a great number of ordinary Tradesmen and Farmers do send their Children to
the Universities (being ambitious to make them Gentlemen) though they are
unable to maintain them there above three or four Years; in which time such
Accomplishments are not to be attained as are required by this Proposal; If
therefore such a Law (as this) were once established, they would be willing to
bring them up to honest Professions and Trades, much more suitable for them;
and Persons of better Estate and Quality would be encouraged to bring up their
Children in the Universities, and continue them there until they arrived to
that pitch of Learning, which would not only render them the Honor of their
own, but the Envy of Foreign Nations, and also capacitate them for the
enjoyment of a Preferment suitable to their Parents Charge, and their own Pains
and Industry; especially if the King would appropriate the First Fruits and
Tenths of all Ecclesiastical Preferments; or the Parliament should think fit to
raise a sum of Money for the purchasing Impropriations, and endowing Livings
with such a competency as might enable the Incumbents to provide comfortably
for themselves and Families, and to keep up decent Hospitality in their
Neighborhood, and would annex those Impropriations (when purchased) to the
Bishops and Chapters of each Diocese, who are to be presumed to be the most
competent Judges of the Abilities of all Persons to be entrusted with the care
of Souls: And for the more effectual Success of this important Affair, let the
Bishops be obliged every Year to call upon the Universities for the Names of
the most Pious, Learned and Industrious Persons in their several Colleges.

In short, I heartily wish that we might often and seriously remember our
blessed Saviors Prediction, that a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot
stand; and likewise consider that fate which attended the Faction and Division
of the Jews; which grew to that height, that they could not forbear destroying
each other, even when their declared Enemies the Romans were coming to besiege
their City. From which, good Lord deliver us.

APPENDIX.
His Majesty's Declaration to all His loving Subjects of His Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.
CHARLES R.

HOW much the Peace of the State is concerned in the Peace of the Church, and
how difficult a thing it is to preserve Order and Government in Civil, whilst
there is no Order or Government in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is evident to the
World; and this little part of the World, Our own Dominions, has had so late
experience of it, that we may very well acquiesce in the Conclusion, without
enlarging Our self in Discourse upon it, it being a Subject We have had
frequent occasion to contemplate upon, and to lament, abroad as well as at Home.

In Our Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons from Breda, We declared
how much We desired the Advancement and Propagation of the Protestant Religion;
That neither the unkindness of those of the same Faith toward Us, nor the
Civilities and Obligations from those of a contrary Profession (of both which
We have had abundant evidence) could in the least degree startle Us, or make Us
swerve from it, and that nothing can be proposed to manifest Our Zeal and
Affection for it, to which we will not readily consent, And We said then, that
We did hope in due time, Our self to propose somewhat for the Propagation of
it, that will satisfy the World, that We have always made it both Our Care and
Our Study, and have enough observed what is most like to bring Disadvantage to
it. And the truth is, We do think Our Self the more competent to propose, and
with God's Assistance to determine many things now in difference, from the time
We have spent, and the experience We have had in most of the Reformed Churches
abroad, in France, in the Low Countries, and in Germany, where We have had
frequent Conferences, with the most learned Men, who have unanimously lamented
the great Reproach the Protestant Religion undergoes from the distempers and
too notorious Schisms in matters of Religion in England: And as the most
learned among them have always with great Submission and Reverence acknowledged
and magnified the established Government of the Church of England, and the
great Countenance and Shelter the Protestant Religion received from it, before
these unhappy times; So many of them have with great Ingenuity and Sorrow
confessed, that they were too easily misled by misinformation and prejudice
into some dis-esteem of it, as if it had too much complied with the Church of
Rome; whereas they now acknowledge it to be the best Fence God has yet raised
against Popery in the World; And We are persuaded they do with great Zeal wish
it restored to its old Dignity and Veneration.

When We were in Holland, We were attended by many grave and learned Ministers
from hence, who were looked upon as the most able and principal Assertors of
the Presbyterian Opinions, with whom We had as much Conference as the multitude
of Affairs which were then upon Us would permit Us to have; and to Our great
Satisfaction and Comfort found them Persons full of Affection to Us, of Zeal
for the Peace of the Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they have been
given out to be) to Episcopacy or Liturgy, but modestly to desire such
Alterations in either, as without shaking Foundations, might best allay the
present Distempers, which the Indisposition of the time, and the tenderness of
some men's Consciences had contracted; For the better doing whereof, We did
intend, upon Our first arrival in this Kingdom to call a Synod of Divines, as
the most proper expedient to provide a proper Remedy for all those Differences
and dis-satisfactions which had or should arise in matters of Religion; and in
the mean time, We published in Our Declaration from Breda a Liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no Man should be disquieted or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matter of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of
the Kingdom, and that We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament
as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us, for the full granting that
Indulgence.

Whilst We continued in this temper of mind and Resolution, and have so far
complied with the persuasion of particular Persons, and the distemper of the
time, as to be contented with the exercise of Our Religion in Our own Chapel,
according to the constant practice and Laws established, without enjoining that
practice, and the observation of those Laws in the Churches of the Kingdom; in
which We have undergone the Censure of many, as if we were without that Zeal
for the Church which We ought to have, and which by God's grace, We shall
always retain; We have found Our Self not so heartily dealt with as We have
deserved, and that there are unquiet and restless Spirits, who without abating
any of their own distemper in recompense of the Moderation they find in Us,
continue their bitterness against the Church, and endeavor to raise Jealousies
of Us, and to lessen Our Reputation by their Reproaches, as if We were not true
to the Professions We have made: And in ^^der thereunto, they have very
unseasonably caused to be Printed, Published, and Dispersed throughout the
Kingdom a Declaration heretofore Printed in Our Name during the time of Our
being in Scotland, of which We shall say no more than that the Circumstances by
which We were enforced to sign that Declaration, are enough known to the World;
And that the worthiest and greatest part of that Nation did even then detest
and abhor the ill usage of Us in that Particular, when the same Tyranny was
exercised there by the Power of a few ill Men, which at that time had spread it
self over this Kingdom, and therefore We had no reason to expect that We should
at this Season, when We are doing all We can to wipe out the Memory of all that
has been done amiss by other Men, and, We thank God, have wiped it out of Our
own remembrance, have been Our Self assaulted with those Reproaches; which We
will likewise forget.

Since the Printing this Declaration, several seditious Pamphlets and Quaeries
have been published and scattered abroad, to infuse Dislike and Jealousies into
the Hearts of the People, and of the Army, and some who ought rather to have
repented the former Mischief they have wrought, than to have endeavored to
improve it, have had the hardiness to publish, that the Doctrine of the Church,
against which, no Man with whom We have conferred has excepted, ought to be
reformed as well as the Discipline.

This over-passionate and turbulent way of proceeding, and the Impatience We
find in many for some speedy determination in these matters, whereby the Minds
of Men may be Composed, and the Peace of the Church established, has prevailed
with Us to invert the method We had proposed to Our Self, and even in order to
the better calling and composing of a Synod (which the present Jealousies will
hardly agree upon) by the assistance of God's blessed Spirit, which We daily
invoke and supplicate, to give some determination Our Self to the matters in
difference, until such a Synod may be called, as may without Passion or
Prejudice, give us such farther assistance toward a perfect union of
Affections, as well as submission to Authority, as is necessary: And We are the
rather induced to take this upon Us, by finding upon the full Conference We
have had with the learned Men of several Persuasions, that the Mischiefs, under
which both the Church and State do at present suffer, do not result from any
formed Doctrine or Conclusion which either Party mainta^^ (...) avows, but from
the Passion and Appetite, and Interest of particular Persons, who contract
greater prejudice to each other, from those Affections, than would naturally
rise from their Opinions; and those distempers must be in some degree allayed,
before the meeting in a Synod can be attended with better success, than their
meeting in other places, and their discourses in Pulpits have hitherto been;
and till all thoughts of Victory are laid aside, the humble and necessary
thoughts for the Vindication of Truth cannot be enough entertained.

We must for the honor of all those of either persuasion with whom We have
conferred, declare That the Professions and Desires of all for the advancement
of Piety and true Godliness, are the same; their professions of Zeal for the
Peace of the Church, the same; of Affection and Duty to Us, the same; They all
approve Episcopacy; They all approve a set form of Liturgy; and they all
disprove and dislike the sin of Sacrilege, and the alienation of the Revenue
of the Church; And if upon these excellent Foundations, in submission to which
there is such a harmony of Affections, any Superstructures should be raised, to
the shaking those Foundations, and to the contracting and lessening the blessed
gift of Charity, which is a vital part of Christian Religion, We shall think
Our Self very unfortunate, and even suspect that We are defective in that
administration of Government, with which God has entrusted Us.

We need not profess the high Affection and Esteem we have for the Church of
England as it is established by Law; the Reverence to which has supported us
with Gods Blessing, against many temptations; nor do We think that Reverence in
the least degree diminished by Our Condescentions, not peremptorily to insist
on some particulars of Ceremony, which, however introduced by the Piety and
Devotion; and Order of former times, may not be so agreeable to the present,
but may even lessen that Piety and Devotion, for the improvement whereof they
might happily be first introduced, and consequently may well be dispensed with;
and We hope this charitable compliance of Ours will dispose the Minds of all
Men to a cheerful submission to that Authority, the preservation whereof is so
necessary for the Unity and Peace of the Church; and that they will acknowledge
the support of the Episcopal Authority, to be the best support of Religion, by
being the best means to contain the Minds of Men within the Rules of
Government: And they who would restrain the exercise of that holy Function
within the Rules which were observed in the Primitive times, must remember and
consider, that the Ecclesiastical Power being in those blessed times always
subordinate and subject to the Civil; it was likewise proportioned to such an
extent of Jurisdiction as was most agreeable to that; And as the Sanctity and
Simplicity, and Resignation of that Age, did then refer many things to the
Bishops, which the policy of succeeding Ages would not admit, at least did
otherwise provide for; so it can be no reproach to Primitive Episcopacy, if
where there have been great alterations in the Civil Government, from what was
then, there have been likewise some difference and alteration in the
Ecclesiastical, the Essence and Foundation being still preserved. And upon this
ground, without taking upon Us to censure the Government of the Church in other
Countries, where the Government of the State is different from what it is here,
or enlarging Our Self upon the Reasons why, whilst there was an Imagination of
erecting a Democratical Government here in the State, they should be willing to
continue an Aristocratical Government in the Church; It shall suffice to say,
that since by the wonderful Blessing of God, the Hearts of this whole Nation
are returned to an obedience to Monarchick Government in the State, it must be
very reasonable to support that Government in the Church which is established
by Law, and with which the Monarchy has flourished through so many Ages, and
which is in truth as ancient in this Island as the Christian Monarchy thereof;
and which has always in some respects or degrees been enlarged or restrained,
as has been thought most conducing to the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom;
and therefore We have not the least doubt but that the present Bishops will
think the present Concessions now made by Us to allay the present Distempers,
very just and reasonable, and will very cheerfully conform themselves thereunto.

1. We do in the first place Declare Our purpose and Resolution is and shall
be, to promote the Power of Godliness, to encourage the exercises of Religion,
both public and private, and to take care that the Lord's Day be applied to
holy Exercises, without unnecessary divertisments; and that insufficient,
negligent, and scandalous Ministers be not permitted in the Church; And that as
the present Bishops are known to be Men of great and exemplar Piety in their
Lives, which they have manifested in their notorious and unexampled Sufferings
during these late Distempers; and of great and known sufficiency of Learning;
so We shall take special Care, by the assistance of God, to prefer no Men to
that Office and Charge, but Men of Learning, Virtue, and Piety, who may be
themselves the best examples to those who are to be Governed by them; And We
shall expect, and provide the best We can, that the Bishops be frequent
Preachers, and that they do very often Preach themselves in some Church of
their Diocese, except they be hindered by Sickness, or other bodily Infirmities,
or some other justifiable occasion, which shall not be thought justifiable if
it be requent.

2. Because the Diocesses, especially some of them, are thought to be of too
large extent: We will appoint such a Number of Suffragan Bishops in every
Diocese as shall be sufficient for the due performance of their work.

3. No Bishop shall Ordain, or exercise any part of Jurisdiction which
appertains to the Censures of the Church, without the advice and assistance of
the Presbyters; And no Chancellors, Commissaries, or Officials, as such, shall
exercise any Act of Spiritual Jurisdiction in these cases ( viz.)
Excommunication, Absolution, or wherein any of the Ministry are concerned, with
reference to their Pastoral charge. However Our intent and meaning is to uphold
and maintein the Profession of the Civil Law so far and in such matters as it
has been of use and practice within Our Kingdoms and Dominions; Albeit as to
Excommunication, Our Will and Pleasure is, that no Chancellor, Commissary, or
Official shall Decree any Sentence of Excommunication or Absolution, or be
Judges in those things wherein any of the Ministry are concerned, as is
aforesaid. Nor shall the Archdeacon exercise any Jurisdiction without the
advice and assistance of six Ministers of his Arch-Deaconcy, whereof three to
be nominated by the Bishop, and three by the election of the major part of the
Presbyters within the Arch-Deaconry.

4. To the end that the Deans and Chapters may be the better fitted to afford
Counsel and Assistance to the Bishops, both in Ordination and the other Offices
mentioned before; We will take care that those Preferments be given to the most
Learned and Pious Presbyters of the Diocese; And moreover that an equal number
(to those of the Chapter) of the most learned, pious, and discreet Presbyters
of the same Diocese, annually chosen by the major vote of all the Presbyters of
that Diocese present at such Elections, shall be always advising and assisting,
together with those of the Chapter, in all Ordinations, and in every part of
Jurisdiction which appertains to the Censures of the Church, and at all other
solemn and important Actions in the exercise of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, wherein any of the Ministry are concerned: Provided that at all
such Meetings, the number of the Ministers so elected, and those present of the
Chapter shall be equal, and not exceed one the other, and that to make the
numbers equal, the Juniors of the exceeding number be withdrawn that the most
ancient may take place: nor shall any Suffragan Bishop ordain or exercise the
forementioned Offices and acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction, but with the advice
and assistance of a sufficient number of the most judicious and pious
Presbyters annually chosen as aforesaid within his Precincts: And Our Will is
that the great work of Ordination be constantly and solemnly performed by the
Bishop and his aforesaid Presbytery, at the four set times and seasons
appointed by the Church for that purpose.

5. We will take care that Confirmation be rightly and solemnly performed, by
the Information, and with the Consent of the Minister of the place; who shall
admit none to the Lord's Supper, till they have made a credible Profession of
their Faith, and promised Obedience to the Will of God; according as is
expressed in the Considerations of the Rubric before the Catechism; And that
all possible diligence be used for the Instruction and Reformation of
scandalous Offenders, whom the Minister shall not suffer to partake of the
Lord's Table, until they have openly declared themselves to have truly repented
and amended their former naughty Lives, as is partly expressed in the Rubric,
and more fully in the Canons; Provided there be place for due Appeals to
Superior Powers. But besides the Suffragans and their Presbytery, every Rural
Dean (those Deans, as heretofore, to be nominated by the Bishop of the Diocese)
together with three or four Ministers of that Deanery, chosen by the major part
of all the Ministers within the same, shall meet once in every Month, to
receive such Complaints as shall be presented to them by the Ministers or
Churchwardens of the respective Parishes; and also to compose all such
differences betwixt Party and Party, as shall be referred unto them by way of
Arbitration, and to convince Offenders, and reform all such things as they find
amiss by their Pastoral Reproofs and Admonitions, if they may be so Reformed:
And such Matters as they cannot by this Pastoral and Persuasive way compose and
reform, are by them to be prepared for, and presented to the Bishop; at which
Meeting any other Ministers of that Deanery, may, if they please, be present
and assist. Moreover, the Rural Dean and his Assistants are in their respective
Divisions to see that the Children and younger sort be carefully instructed by
the respective Ministers of every Parish, in the Grounds of Christian Religon,
and be able to give a good account of their Faith and Knowledge, and also of
their Christian Conversation conformable thereunto, before they be confirmed by
the Bishop, or admitted to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

6. No Bishop shall exercise any Arbitrary Power, or do or impose any thing
upon the Clergy or the People, but what is according to the known Law of the
Land.

7. We are very glad to find, that all with whom we have conferred, do in their
Judgments approve a Liturgy, or set Form of Public Worship, to be Lawful;
which in Our Judgment, for the preservation of Unity and Uniformity, We
conceive to be very necessary: And though we do esteem the Liturgy of the
Church of England, contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and by Law
established, to be the best We have seen; And We believe that We have seen all
that are extant and used in this part of the World, and well know what
Reverence most of the Reformed Churches, or at least the most Learned Men in
those Churches have for it; Yet since We find some exceptions made against
several things therein. We will appoint an equal number of Learned Divines of
both Persuasions, to re-view the same, and to make such alterations as shall be
thought most necessary; and some additional Forms (in the Scripture phrase, as
near as may be) suited unto the nature of the several parts of Worship, and
that it be left to the Ministers choice to use one or other at his discretion.
In the mean time, and till this be done, although We do heartily wish and
desire, that the Ministers in their several Churches, because they dislike some
Clauses and Expressions, would not totally lay aside the use of the Book of
Common Prayer, but read those parts against which there can be no exception;
which would be the best instance of declining those marks of Distinction, which
We so much labor and desire to remove; Yet in Compassion to diverse of Our good
Subjects, who scruple the use of it, as now it is. Our Will and Pleasure is,
that none be punished or troubled for not using it, until it be reviewed, and
effectually Reformed, as aforesaid.

8. Lastly, Concerning Ceremonies, which have administered so much matter of
difference and contention, and which have been introduced by the Wisdom and
Authority of the Church, for edification, and the improvement of Piety: We
shall say no more, but that We have the more esteem of all, and Reverence for
many of them, by having been present in many of those Churches where they are
most abolished, or discountenanced; And it cannot be doubted, but that, as the
Universal Church cannot introduce one Ceremony in the Worship of God, that is
contrary to God's Word expressed in the Scripture; so every National Church,
with the Approbation and Consent of the Sovereign Power, may, and has always
introduced such particular Ceremonies, as in that conjuncture of time are
thought most proper for edification and the necessary improvement of Piety and
Devotion in the People, though the necessary practice thereof cannot be deduced
from Scripture; and that which before was, and in it self is indifferent,
ceases to be indifferent, after it is once established by Law: And therefore
Our present Consideration and Work is, to gratify the private Consciences of
those who are grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and
dispensing with their omitting those Ceremonies; not utterly to abolish any
which are Established by Law, (if any are practiced contrary to Law, the same
shall cease) which would be unjust, and of ill example; and to impose upon the
Conscience of some, for the satisfaction of the Conscience of others, which is
otherwise provided for. As it could not be reasonable that men should expect,
that We should Our Self decline, or enjoin others to do so, to receive the
Blessed Sacrament upon Our Knees, which in Our Conscience is the most humble,
most devout, and most agreeable Posture for that Holy Duty, because some other
men, upon reasons best, if not only known to themselves, choose rather to do it
fitting or standing: We shall leave all decisions and determinations of that
kind, if they shall be thought necessary for a perfect and entire Unity and
Uniformity throughout the Nation, to the advice of a National Synod, which
shall be duly called, after a little time, and a mutual Conversation between
persons of different persuasions, has mollified those distempers, abated those
sharpnesses, and extinguished those jealousies which make men unfit for those
Consultations; And upon such advice, We shall use Our best endeavor that such
Laws may be established, as may best provide for the Peace of the Church and
State. Provided that none shall be denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
though they do not use the gesture of kneeling in the Act of receiving.

In the mean time, out of Compassion and Compliance toward those who would
forbear the Cross in Baptism, We are content that no Man shall be compelled to
use the same, or suffer for not doing it: But if any Parent desire to have his
Child Christened according to the Form used, and the Minister will not use the
Sign, it shall be lawful for that Parent to procure another Minister to do it:
And if the proper Minister shall refuse to omit that Ceremony of the Cross, it
shall be lawful for the Parent, who would not have his Child so Baptized, to
procure another Minister to do it, who will do it according to his desire.

No Man shall be compelled to bow at the Name of JESUS, or suffer in any degree
for not doing it, without reproaching those who out of their Devotion continue
that ancient Ceremony of the Church.

For the use of the Surplice, we are contented that all Men be left to their
Liberty to do as they shall think fit, without suffering in the least degree
for wearing, or not wearing it; Provided, that this liberty do not extend to
Our own Chapel, Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, or to any College in
either of Our Universities; but that the several Statutes and Customs for the
use thereof in the said places, be there observed as formerly.

And because some Men, otherwise pious and learned, say, They cannot conform
unto the Subscription required by the Canon, nor take the Oath of Canonical
Obedience; We are content, and it is Our Will and Pleasure, (so they take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) that they shall receive Ordination,
Institution, and Induction, and shall be permitted to exercise their Function,
and to enjoy the Profits of their Livings, without the said Subscription or
Oath of Canonical Obedience: And moreover, That no Persons in the Universities
shall for the want of such Subscription be hindered in the taking of their
Degrees. Lastly, That none be judged to forfeit his Presentation or Benefice,
or be deprived of it, upon the Statute of the Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth,
Chapter the twelth, so he read and declare his assent to all the Articles of
Religion, which only concern the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments comprised in the Book of Articles in the said
Statute mentioned. In a word, We do again renew what we have formerly said in
Our Declaration from Breda, for the liberty of tender Consciences, that no Man
shall be disquieted or called in question for differences of Opinion in matters
of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; and if any have
been disturbed in that kind since our arrival here, it has not proceeded from
any direction of Ours.

To conclude, and in this place to explain what We mentioned before, and said
in Our Letter to the House of Commons from Breda, That We hoped in due time,
Our Self to propose somewhat for the Propagation of the Protestant Religion,
that will satisfy the World, that We have always made it both Our Care and Our
Study, and have enough observed what is most like to bring disadvantage to it:
We do conjure all Our Loving Subjects to acquiesce in, and submit this Our
Declaration concerning those differences which have so much disquieted the
Nation at home, and given such offense to the Protestant Churches abroad, and
brought such reproach upon the Protestant Religion in general, from the Enemies
thereof; as if upon obscure notions of Faith and Fancy, it did admit the
practice of Christian Duties and Obedience to be discountenanced and suspended,
and introduce a License in Opinions and Manners, to the prejudice of the
Christian Faith. And let Us all endeavor, and emulate each other in those
endeavors, to countenance and advance the Protestant Religion abroad, which
will be best done by supporting the Dignity and Reverence due to the best
Reformed Protestant Church at home; and which being once freed from the
Calumnies and Reproaches it has undergone from these late ill times, will be
the best shelter for those abroad, which will by that Countenance both be the
better Protected against their Enemies, and be the more easily induced to
compose the differences amongst themselves, which give their Enemies more
advantage against them: And We hope and expect that all Men will henceforward
forbear to vent any such Doctrine in the Pulpit, or to endeavor to work in
such manner upon the Affections of the People, as may dispose them to an ill
Opinion of Us and the Government, and to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.
Which if all Men will in their several Vocations endeavor to preserve with the
same Affection and Zeal We Our Self will do; all Our good Subjects will by Gods
Blessing upon Us enjoy as great a measure of Felicity, as this Nation has ever
done, and which We shall constantly Labor to procure for them, as the greatest
Blessing God can bestow upon Us in this World.

Given at our Court at Whitehall this Twenty fifth day of October. 1660.
The Reverend Dean of Paul's his Proposals or Terms of Union, betwixt the Church
of England and the Dissenters: Taken out of his Preface to the Unreasonableness
of Separation, Page 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94.
IS there nothing to be done for Dissenting Protestants, who agree with us in
all Doctrinal Articles of our Church, and only scruple the use of a few
Ceremonies, and some late Impositions? Shall these Differences still be
continued, when they may be so easily removed? and so many Useful Men be
Encouraged, and taken into the Constitution? Do we value a few indifferent
Ceremonies, and some late Declarations, and doubtful Expressions, beyond the
satisfaction of Men's Consciences, and the Peace and Stability of this Church?

As to this material Question, I shall crave leave to deliver my Opinion freely
and impartially; and that,

I. With respect to the Case of the People; the Terms of whose Union with us,
is acknowledged by our Brethren to be so much easier than their own. But these
are of two sorts:

1. Some allow the use of the Liturgy, but say they cannot join in Communion
with us, because the participation of the Sacraments has such Rites and
Ceremonies annexed to it, which they think unlawful; and therefore till these
be removed, or left indifferent, they dare not join with us in Baptism or the
Lord's Supper; because in the one the Cross is used, and in the other Kneeling
is required. As to these I answer,

(1.) Upon the most diligent Search I could make into these things, I find no
good ground for any scruple of Conscience, as to to the use of these
Ceremonies; and as little as any as to the Sign of the Cross, as it is used in
our Church; notwithstanding all the noise that has been made about its being a
New Sacrament, and I knew not what; but of this at large in the following
Treatise.

(2.) I see no ground for the Peoples Separation from other Acts of Communion,
on the account of some Rites they suspect to be unlawful: And especially when
the use of such Rites is none of their own Act, as the Cross in Baptism is not;
and when such an Explication is annexed concerning the intention of Kneeling at
the Lord's Supper, as is in the Rubric after the Communion.

(3.) Notwithstanding, because the use of Sacraments in a Christian Church,
ought to be the most free from all Exceptions, and they ought to be so
Administered, as rather to invite than discourage scrupulous Persons from
joining in them: I do think it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and
Condescension in the Governors of our Church, to remove those Bars from a
freedom in joining in full Communion with us. Which may be done, either by
wholly taking away the Sign of the Cross; or if that may give offense to
others, by confining the use of it to the public Administration of Baptism; or
by leaving it indifferent, as the Parents desire it. As to Kneeling at the
Lord's Supper, since some Posture is necessary, and many Devout People scruple
any other, and the Primitive Church did in Ancient times receive it in the
Posture of Adoration, there is no reason to take this away, even in Parochial
Churches; provided that those who scruple Kneelling, do receive it with the
least Offense to others, and rather Standing than Sitting, because the former
is most agreeable to the practice of Antiquity, and of our Neighbour-Reformed
Churches. As to the Surplice in Parochial Churches, it is not of that
consequ^nce as to bear a Dispute one way or other; and as to Cathedr^l
Churches, there is no necessity of alteration. But there is another thing which
seems to be of late much scrupled in Baptism, viz. The Use of God fathers and
Godmothers Exc^^^ing the Parents. Although I do not question, but the Practice
of our Church may be justified, (as I have done it toward the end of the
following Treatise,) yet I see no necessity of adhering (...) strictly to the
Canon herein, but that a little alteration may ^revent these Scruples, either
by permitting the Parents to join with the Sponsors; or by the Parents
publicly desiring the Sponsors to represent them in offering the Child to
Baptism; or which seems most agreeable to Reason, that the Parents offer the
Child to Baptism, and then the Sponsors perform the Covenanting part;
representing the Child; and the Charge after Baptism be given in common to the
Parents and Sponsors.

These things being allowed, I see no obstruction remaining as to a full Union
of the Body of such Dissenters with us, in all Acts of Divine Worship, and
Christian Communion, as do not reject all Communion with us as unlawful.

2. But because there are many of those, who are become zealous Protestants,
and plead much their Communion with us in Faith and Doctrine, although they
cannot join with us in Worship, because they deny the Lawfulness of Liturgies,
and the right Constitution of our Churches; their case deserves some
consideration, whether and how far they are capable of being made serviceable
to the common Interest, and to the support of the Protestant Religion among us.

To their Case I answer,

First, That a general unlimited Toleration to Dissenting Protestants, will
soon bring Confusion among us, and in the end Popery, as I have showed already;
and a Suspension of all the Penal Laws that relate to Dissenters is the same
thing with a boundless Toleration.

Secondly, If any present Favors be granted to such, in consideration of our
Circumstances, and to prevent their Conjunction with the Papists, for a general
Toleration, (for if ever the Papists obtain it, it must be under their Name:)
If, I say, such Favor be thought fit to be showed them, it ought to be with
such Restrictions and Limitations as may prevent the Mischief which may easily
follow upon it: For all such Meetings are a perpetual Reproach to our Churches,
by their declaring, That our Churches are no true Churches; that our manner of
Worship is unlawful; and that our Church Government is Antichristian; and that
on these accounts they separate from us, and Worship God by themselves. But if
such an Indulgence be thought fit to be granted, I humbly offer these things to
Consideration.

1. That none be permitted to enjoy the privilege of it, who do not declare,
That they do hold Communion with our Churches to be Unlawful. For it seems
unreasonable to allow it to others, and will give Countenance to endless and
causeless Separations.

2. That all who enjoy it, besides taking the Test against Popery, do subscribe
the Thirty Six Articles of our faith, because the pretense of this Liberty, is
joining with us in Points of Faith; and this may more probably prevent Papists
getting in amongst them.

3. That all such as enjoy it, must declare the particular Congregations they
are of and enter their Names before such Commissioners as shall be Authorized
for that purpose; that so this may be no pretense for Idle, Loose, and Profane
Persons, never going to any Church at all.

4. That both Preachers and Congregations be liable to severe Penalties, if
they use any bitter or reproachful words, either in Sermons or Writings,
against the Established Constitution of our Churches; because they desire only
the freedom of their own Consciences; and the using this Liberty, will discover
it is not Conscience, but a turbulent, factious Humor, which makes them
separate from our Communion.

5. That all Indulged Persons be particularly obliged to pay all legal Duties
to the Parochial Churches, (lest mere Covetousness tempt Men to run among them)
and no Persons so Indulged, be capable of any Public Office. It not being
reasonable that such should be trusted with Government, who look upon the
Worship established by Law as Unlawful.

6. That no other Penalty be laid on such indulged Persons, but that of Twelve
Pence a Sunday for their absence from their Parochial Churches, which ought to
be duly Collected for the Use of the Poor, and cannot be complained of as any
heavy Burden, considering the Liberty they do enjoy by it.

7. That the Bishops, as Visitors appointed by Law, have an exact Account given
to them, of the Rule of their Worship and Discipline, and of all the Persons
belonging to the indulged Congregations, with their Qualities and Places of
Abode; and that none be admitted a Member of any such Congregation without
acquainting their Visitor with it, that so means may be used to prevent their
leaving our Communion, by giving satisfaction to their scruples. This Power of
the Bishops cannot be scrupled by them, since herein they are considered as
Commissioners appointed by Law.

8. That no indulged Persons presume under severe Penalties to breed up
Scholars, or to teach Gentlemen's Sons University-Learning; because this may be
justly looked on as a design to propagate Schism to Posterity, and to lay a
Foundation for the disturbance of future Generations.

II. As to the Case of the ejected Ministers, I have these things to offer:

1. That bare Subscription of the Thirty six Articles concerning Doctrinal
Points, be not allowed as sufficient to qualify any Man for a Living, or any
Church-preferment, for these Reasons.

First, Any Layman upon these Terms may not only be capable of a Living, but
may take upon him to Administer the Sacraments; which was never allowed in any
well-constituted Church in the Christian World. And such an allowance among us,
instead of settling and uniting us, will immediately bring things into great
confusion, and give mighty advantage to the Papists against our Church. And we
have reason to fear, a Design of this Nature, under a pretense of Union of
Protestants, tends to the Subversion of this Church, and throwing all things
into confusion, which at last will end in Popery.

Secondly, This will bring a Faction into the Church, which will more endanger
it than External Opposition. For such Men will come in Triumphantly, having
beaten down Three of the Thirty Nine Articles; and being in Legal Possession of
their Places, will be ready to defy and contemn those who submitted to the
rest, and to glory in their Conquests, and draw followers after them, as the
Victorious Confessors against Prelacy and Ceremonies. And can they imagine
those of the Church of England will see the Reputation of the Church, or their
own, to suffer so much, and not appear in their own Vindication? Things are not
come to that pass, nor will they suddenly be, that the Friends, of the Church
of England will be either afraid, or ashamed to own her Cause, We do heartily
and sincerely desire Union with our Brethren, if it may be had on just and
reasonable Terms; but they must not think, that we will give up the Cause of
the Church for it, so as to condemn its Constitution, or make the Ceremonies
unlawful, which have been hitherto observed and practiced in it. If any
Expedient can be found out for the ease of other Men's Consciences, without
reflecting on our own; if they can be taken in, without reproach or dishonor
to the Reformation of the Church; I hope no true Son of the Church of England
will oppose it. But if the Design be to bring them in as a Faction to bridle
and control the Episcopal Power, by setting up forty Bishops in a Diocese
against one; if it be for them to trample upon the Church of England, and not
to submit to its Order and Government upon fair and moderate terms, let them
not call this a Design of Union, but the giving Law to a Party to oppose the
Church of England. And what the success of this will be, let wise Men judge.

Thirdly, if a Subscription to Thirty Six Articles were sufficient by the
Statute 13 Eliz. c. 12. I do not understand how by virtue of that Statute a Man
is bound publicly to read the Thirty nine Articles in the Church, and the
Testimonial of his Subscription, on pain of being deprived ipso facto, if he do
not. For the L. Chapter I. Coke says, Co. Inst. 4. Part. 323, 324
That Subscription to the 39 Articles is required by force of the Act of
Parliament, 13 Eliz: c. 12. And he adds, That the Delinquent is disabled and
deprived ipso facto; and that a conditional Subscription to them was not
sufficient, was resolved by all the Judges in England. But how a Man should be
deprived ipso facto for not Subscribing, and Reading the 39 Articles, as
appears by the Cases mentioned in Coke, and yet be required only to subscribe
to 36, by the same Statute, is a thing too hard for me to conceive.

2. But notwithstanding this, if any temper can be found out, as to the manner
of Subscription, that may give ease to the scruples of our Brethren, and secure
the Peace of the Church, the desired Union may be attained without that
apparent danger of increasing the Factions among us.

And this I suppose may be done, by an absolute Subscription to all those
Articles which concern the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith, and the Use of
the Sacraments; and a solemn Promise under their hand, or Subscription of
Peaceable Submission, as to the rest, so as not to oppose or contradict them,
either in Preaching or Writing; upon the same Penalty as if they had not
subscribed to the 36. Which may be a more probable means to keep the Church in
quiet, than forcing a more rigorous Subscription upon them, or leaving them at
their full liberty.

3. As to the other Subscription required, 1 Jac. to the 3 Articles. The first
is provided for by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. The Third is the same
with the Subscription to the 39 Articles. And as to the second, about the Book
of Common Prayer, etc. It ought to be considered,

(1.) Whether, for the satisfaction of the scrupulous, some more doubtful and
obscure passages may not yet be explained or amended? Whether the New
Translation of the Psalms were not fitter to be used, at least in Parochial
Churches? Whether portions of Canonical Scripture were not better put in stead
of Apocrypha Lessons? Whether the Rubric about Salvation of Infants, might not
be restored to its former place, in the Office of Confirmation, and so the
present exceptions against it be removed? Whether those expressions which
suppose the strict exercise of Discipline, in Burying the Dead, were not better
left at liberty in our present Case? Such a Review made by Wise and Peaceable
Men, not given to Wrath and Disputing, may be so far from being a dishonor to
this Church, that it may add to the Glory of it.

(2.) Upon such a Review, whether it be not great reason that all Persons who
Officiate in the Church, be not only tied to a constant Use of it in all
public Offices, (as often as they administer them) which they ought in Person
frequently to do; but to declare at their first entrance upon a Parochial
Charge, their approbation of the Use of it, after their own Reading of it, that
so the People may not suspect them to carry on a factious Design, under an
outward pretense of Conformity to the Rules of the Church they live in.

(3.) Whether, such a solemn Using the Liturgy, and approbation and promise of
the Use of it, may not be sufficient, in stead of the late Form of declaring
their Assent and Consent, which has been so much scrupled by our Brethren?

These are all the things which appear to me reasonable to be allowed in order
to an Union, and which I suppose may be granted without detriment or dishonor
to our Church. There are other things very desirable toward the happiness and
flourishing of this Church; as the exercise of Discipline in Parochial
Churches, in a due subordination to the Bishop; the Reforming the
Ecclesiastical Courts as to Excommunication, without prejudice to the excellent
Profession of the Civil Law; the Building of more Churches in great Parishes,
especially about the City of London; the retrenching Pluralities; the
strictness and solemnity of Ordinations; the making a Book of Canons suitable
to this Age, for the better Regulating the Conversations of the Clergy. Such
things as these, might facilitate our Union, and make our Church in spite of
all its Enemies become a Praise in the whole Earth.

A Specimen of a Bill, for Uniting Protestants; being a rough Draught of such
Terms, as seem equal for the Conformist to grant, and the Nonconformist to
yield to, for Peace sake, Provided a good while, and Published on purpose only
for the farther, better, and more easy Consideration of the Parliament.
WHereas, there are many Jealousies risen about: Popery, which makes it even
necessary to the peace of the Nation, that the Protestant Interest be united
and strengthened by all Good and Lawful Means: And to this end, there being
this one proper Expedient; to wit; The removing the Occasion of Divisions,
which several persons do find to themselves in those late Injunctions, which
yet were intended to the same purpose of Concord in the Nation: Be it Enacted
-- That an Explanation of these Impositions, and such Alleviations, be allowed
to the tenderly Considerate, and peaceably Scrupulous, as follow.

In the Act of Uniformity, By the Declaration of Assent and Consent to all
things, and every Thing contained in, and prescribed by the two Books of Common
Prayer, and of Ordering Priests and Deacons, we understand not, that these
Books are in every Minute particular, infallible, or free from that Defect,
which is incident to all Human Composure: But that they are in the main
Contents, to be sincerely approved and used. And we do therefore allow this
Declaration to be sufficient, if it be made to the use of the Book, in the
Ordinary Constant Lords-Days-Service, notwithstanding any Exceptions some may
have against some Things in the By-Offices, and Occasional Service, the
Rubric, and otherwise. And for the Ceremonies which are made, and have been
always, and on all hands, held to be only indifferent Things, we think fit that
they be left to the Consciences and prudence of Ministers, and People, every
where (excepting the Cathedrals) to use them, or forbear them, as they judge it
most meet for their own and others Edification, provided that if any person
will have his Child Baptized with the Sign of the Cross, or stands upon any
thing else, hitherto required by the Service Book, if the Minister himself
scruple the performance, he shall permit another to do it.

In the same Act, By those Words in the Subscription, that It is not lawful to
take Arms against the King, upon any Pretense whatsoever; we intend no new or
strange Thing, but the Rightful Maintenance only of the King's Authority
against Rebellion, according to the common determination of Learned Writers, in
the Case of Subjection to Princes. By the Words, I abhor the Position of taking
Arms by the Authority of the King, against any Commissionated by Him, we never
thought of advancing the Arbitrary Commissions of the King above Law; but by
those Commissionated by Him, we understand such as are Legally Commissionated,
and in the Legal pursuit of such Commissions. By the Clause which follows, that
requires a Renunciation of all Endeavor of any Alteration of Government in the
Church or State, we never meant to deny any Freeborn Subject his Right, of
Choosing Parliament Men, or Acting in in his place for the Common Good any way,
according to Law; but that he shall Renounce all such Endeavor, as is
Seditious, or not warranted by the Constitution of the Nation; and
particularly, such an Endeavor as was Assumed in the late Times, without, and
against the Consent of the King: And for the rest of the Subscription, which is
enjoined but to the Year 1682. Be it Enacted, that it cease presently, and be
no longer enjoined.

And forasmuch as there is an Oath prescribed and required of all
Non-conformists Preachers, that reside in any Corporate Town, by a certain Act
of the former Parliament, made at Oxford in the 17 th. Year of His now
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for restraining Non-conformists, from
inhabiting Corporations: We do further declare, That it shall suffice any Man,
for the Enjoyment of his Free born Liberty, of Inhabiting where he thinks best;
and serve him also instead of the forementioned Subscription; to take that
Oath in this form of Words following. I A. B. do swear, That I hold it unlawful
upon any pretense, to take Arms against the King, His Government or Laws: And
that I disclaim that dangerous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority,
against his Person, or any Legally Commissionated by him, in the Legal pursuit
of such Commissions: And that I will not endeavor any Alteration of Government
in the Church or State, in any way or manner, not warrantted by the
Constitution of the Kingdom, or any otherwise than by Act of Parliament: And as
soon as any Man has taken the Oath thus, he shall be discharged of all penalty
for his omission before.

We do Declare moreover, That whereas it is required also in the Act of
Uniformity, that every Minister who injoys any Living or Ecclesiastical
preferment, shall be Ordained by a Bishop; and there are several persons of
late, who in case of Necessity, for want of Bishops took Presbyterian-Orders:
Our meaning is not in any wise to disgust the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, and make it necessary for such to be Re-ordained to the Office; but that
they receive this Second imposition of Hands to the Exercise of their Office in
the new charge, unto which they are, or shall be called; and that the Bishop
shall frame his words accordingly.

And whereas there is a Subscription also in the Canons, and the Canonical-Oath
of Obedience, imposed on most Ministers by the Bishops, that have given some of
the greatest Occasion to Nonconformity heretofore; which yet never passed into
Law by any Act of Parliament: We do further Declare, That nothing more of that
kind shall be required of Ministers hence forward, than was made and held
necessary by the Act of the Thirteenth of Elizabeth.

And in regard there has been great Offense taken by Conscientious Ministers,
at the Bishops, (or their Courts) commanding them to read the Sentence of
Excommunication against some or other of their Parish, for such faults as they
think not at all worthy of so great a Censure: We declare it but a just Thing,
that every Minister be first satisfied in the Cause, or else be exempted from
the Execution of that Charge; and that the Bishop (or his Court) provide some
other person that is satisfied about it, to do it.

And to the intent that a free search after Truth may not be discouraged in the
pursuit of Concord, and many other Scruples avoided upon that Account: We
declare, that though an Authentic Interpretation be required, as to the
Substance of all Laws, yet in the Articles of the Church, (which are Theses for
Agreement, and not Laws) and the Homilies, a Doctrinal Interpretation shall be
held sufficient for an Assent or Subscription to them.

And because the very Superintendency of Bishops, and that Subjection to them
which is required by the Constitution of the Realm, is, or may be an hindrance
to many sober Ministers, and other Protestants, of coming into the Church, who
are ready to consent to the Doctrine, but not to the Discipline or Government
of it: We do declare, That so long as any Person or Party do acknowledge the
King's Supremacy, as Head of the Church in this Nation, and obey their
Ordinary, or the Bishops, in Licitis and Honestis, upon the account of his
Authority, (committed to them for the Exercise of that External Regiment, Circa
Sacra, which is granted by all our Divines to the Higher Powers in every
Nation) it is enough for the owning Episcopal Jurisdiction (so far as they do
own it, in the Declaration of Assent and Consent, or in any other part of
Conformity;) and shall serve them to all intents and purposes in Law, no lets
than a professed belief and acknowledgment of the immediate Divine Right of it.

Be it therefore Enacted by this present Parliament, That if any Person be
willing to Conform to the present Establishment of the Church of England, and
her Service appointed according to these Explanations, Alleviations,
Declarations, Lenitives, or Cautions, he shall be admitted to any
Ecclesiastical preferment, and enjoy the use of his Ministry without any
molestation: All Statutes, Canons, or Laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the making this Act of better Signification to the Concerned, and the
prevention of that Scandal which is raised on the Clergy, through the
Covetousness of some, in heaping up to themselves all the Preferments they can
get, when others have scarce Subsistence for their Families, and the Souls of
many People are thereby neglected: Be it farther Enacted, that no Clergymen
for the three next years ensuing, be suffered to enjoy any more than one Living
or Cure of Souls, and one Dignity, (or other Ecclesiastical Preferment) at one
time; and that every Man (without Exception) that has more than One of Either,
shall immediately give up the Rest to be distributed among those who shall be
brought off from their Nonconformity, upon the Terms of this Act, into the
Established Order. Which that they may also be obtained, and possessed with a
clean Conscience, and that grievous Curruption of Simony may be Extirpate out
of the Land: Be it Enacted moreover, that every Patron that shall hence forward
present his Clerk to any Living, shall have the Oath, called The Simonical
Oath, imposed on him, no less than on the Incumbent: And if he refuses to take
it, that then the Bishop shall have immediate Power (taking only the same Oath)
of Presentation in his Room.

And forasmuch, as there are some Ministers of a good Life, that cannot
(according to their Judgments) allow of our Parochial Churches, nor a Book of
Liturgy: But do choose to Worship God, and Jesus Christ in the way of their
gathered or separate Congregations, and crave the Protection and Clemency of
the King, upon their Allegiance, as other Subjects: Be it finally Enacted, for
the happiness and quiet of the Realm, and the Reduction of these Men by other
means than those which have hitherto proved unsuccessful; That every Christian
Subject throughout the Land, that profess the Reformed Religion, and be not
Convict of Popery, be Pardoned all Faults and Penalties, incurred upon the
account of any Fore-passed Nonconformity; and that they shall not, during
these Seven Years next ensuing, be Prosecuted upon any Penal Law, for their
Consciences, in the matter of Religion; They carrying themselves Innocently and
Peaceably, with submission to the Civil, and without disturbance to the
Ecclesiastical Government, now settled in the Nation: All Statutes to the
contrary notwithstanding.

In Short,
A Repeal of our Laws about Conformity unto the 13 th of Elizabeth; Or, a New
Act of Uniformity; Or, The King's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs, at his first coming in, turned into a Law, were Comprehension.

His latter Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, (some few things in both,
yet a little considered) made so, were Indulgence.

A Bill of Comprehension with Indulgence, both together, will do our Business.
An Addition, or Clause in it against Pluralities, will do it with
Supererogation.

Deo Gloria.

