ORIGINES SACRAE, OR A Rational Account of the Grounds OF Christian Faith, AS
TO THE TRUTH AND Divine Authority OF THE SCRIPTURES, And the matters therein
contained.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET Rector of Sutton in Bedfordshire.

2 Pet. 1. 16. For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made
known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his Majesty.

Neque religio ulla sine sapientia suscipienda est, nec ulla sine religione
probanda sapientia. Lactant. de falls. relig. cap. 1.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Henry Mortlock at the sign of the Phoen^^ in St.
Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door. 1662.

To his most Honored Friend and Patron, Sr. ROGER BURGOINE, Knight and Baronet.
Sir,
IT was the early felicity of Moses, when exposed in an Ark of Nilotick
papyre, to be adopted into the favor of so great a personage as the Daughter
of Pharaoh: Such another Ark is this vindication of the writings of that Divine
and excellent Person exposed to the world in; and the greatest ambition of the
Author of it, is, to have it received into your Patronage and Protection. But
although the contexture and frame of this Treatise be far below the excellency
and worth of the subject (as you know the Ark in which Moses was put, was of
bulrushes daubed with slime and pitch) yet when You please to cast your eye on
the matter contained in it, you will not think it beneath your Favor, and
unworthy your Protection. For if Truth be the greatest Present which God could
bestow, or man receive (according to that of Plurarch) (...)) then certainly
those De Isid. and O^^^.
Truths deserve our most ready acceptance, which are in themselves of greatest
importance, and have the greatest evidence that they come from God. And
although I have had the happiness of so near relation to You, and acquaintance
with You, as to know how little You need such discourses which tend to settle
the Foundations of Religion, which you have raised so happy a Superstructure
upon; yet withal I consider what particular Kindness the souls of all good men
bear to such Designs, whose end is to assert and vindicate the Truth and
Excellency of Religion. For those who are enriched themselves with the
inestimable Treasure of true Goodness and Piety are far from that envious
temper, to think nothing valuable but what they are the sole Possessors of; but
such are the most satisfied themselves, when they see others not only admire
but enjoy what they have the highest estimation of. Were all who make a show of
Religion in the World really such as they pretend to be, discourses of this
nature would be no more seasonable then the commendations of a great Beauty to
one who is already a passionate admirer of it; but on the contrary we see how
common it is for men first to throw dirt in the face of Religion, and then
persuade themselves it is its natural Complexion; they represent it to
themselves in a shape least pleasing to them, and then bring that as a Plea why
they give it no better entertainment.

It may justly seem strange, that true Religion, which contains nothing in it
but what is truly Noble and Generous, most rational and pleasing to the spirits
of all good men, should yet suffer so much in its esteem in the world, through
those strange and uncouth vizards it is represented under. Some accouting the
life and practice of it, as it speaks subduing our wills to the will of God
(which is the substance of all Religion) a thing too low and mean for their
rank and condition in the World, while others pretend a quarrel against the
principles of it as unsatisfactory to Humane reason. Thus Religion suffers with
the Author of it between two Thieves, and it is hard to define which is more
injurious to it, that which questions the Principles, or that which despises
the Practice of it. And nothing certainly will more incline men to believe that
we live in an Age of Prodigies, then that there should be any such in the
Christian World who should account it a piece of Gentility to despise Religion,
and a piece of Reason to be Atheists. For if there be any such things in the
World as a true height and magnanimity of spirit, if there be any solid reason
and depth of judgment, they are not only consistent with, but only attainable
by a true generous spirit of Religion. But if we look at that which the loose
and profane World is apt to account the greatest gallantry, we shall find it
made up of such pitiful Ingredients, which any skilful and rational mind will
be ashamed to plead for, much less to mention them in competition with true
goodness and unfeigned piety. For how easy is it to observe such who would be
accounted the most high and gallant spirits, to quarry on such mean preys which
only tend to satisfy their brutish appetites, or flesh revenge with the blood
of such who have stood in the way of that ayery title, Honor! Or else they are
so little apprehensive of the in ward worth and excellency of humane nature,
that they seem to envy the gallantry of Peacocks, and strive to outvy them in
the gayety of their Plumes; such who are, as seneca says, ad similitudinem
parietum extrinsecus culti, who imitate the walls of their houses in the
fairness of the outsides, but matter not what rubbish there lies within. The
utmost of their ambition is to attain enervatam felicitatem qua permadescunt
animi, such a felicity as evigorates the soul by too long steeping, it being
the nature of all terrestrial pleasures that they do (...), by degrees consume
reason by effeminating and softening the Intellectuals. Must we appeal then to
the judgment of Sardanapalus concerning the nature of Felicity, or enquire of
Apicius what temperance is? or desire that Sybarite to define Magnanimity, who
fainted to see a man at hard labor?

Or does now the conquest of passions, forgiving injuries, doing good,
self-denial, humility, patience under crosses, which are the real expressions
of piety, speak nothing more noble and generous then a luxurious, malicious,
proud, and impatient spirit? Is there nothing more becoming and agreeable to
the soul of man, in exemplary Piety, and a Holy well-orderd Conversation, then
in the lightness and vanity (not to say rudeness and debaucheries) of those
whom the world accounts the greatest gallants? Is there nothing more graceful
and pleasing in the sweetness, candor, and ingenuity of a truly Christian
temper and disposition, then in the revengeful, implacable spirit of such whose
Honor lives and is fed by the Blood of their enemies? Is it not more truly
honorable and glorious to serve that God who commands the World, then to be a
slave to those passions and lusts which put men upon continual hard service,
and torment them for it when they have done it? Were there nothing else to
commend Religion to the minds of men, besides that tranquillity and calmness of
spirit, that serene and peaceable temper which follows a good conscience
wherever it dwells, it were enough to make men welcome that guest which brings
such good entertainment with it. Whereas the amazements, horrors, and
anxieties of mind, which at one time or other haunt such who prostitute their
Consciences to a violation of the Laws of God, and the rules of rectified
reason, may be enough to persuade any rational person, that impiety is the
greatest folly, and irreligion, madness. It cannot be then but matter of great
pity to consider that any persons whose birth and education has raised them
above the common people of the World, should be so far their own enemies, as to
observe the Fashion more then the rules of Religion, and to study complements
more then themselves, and read Romances more then the sacred Scriptures, which
alone are able to make them wise to salvation.

But Sir, I need not mention these things to You, unless it be to let You see
the excellency of your choice, in preferring true Virtue and Piety above the
Ceremony and Grandeur of the World. Go on, Sir, to value and measure true
Religion not by the uncertain measures of the World, but by the infallible
dictates of God himself in his sacred Oracles. Were it not for these, what
certain foundation could there be for our Faith to stand on? and who durst
venture his soul, as to its future condition, upon any authority less then the
infallible veracity of God himself? What certain directions for practice should
we have, what rule to judge of opinions by, had not God out of his infinite
goodness provided and preserved this authentic instrument of his Will to the
World? What a strange Religion would Christianity seem, should we frame the
Model of it from any other thing then the Word of God? Without all controversy
the disesteem of the Scriptures upon any pretense whatsoever, is the decay of
Religion, and through many windings and turnings leads men at last into the
very depth of Atheism. Whereas the frequent and serious conversing with the
mind of God in his Word, is incomparably useful, not only for keeping up in us
a true Notion of Religion (which is easily mistaken, when men look upon the
face of it in any other glass then that of the Scriptures) but likewise for
maintaining a powerful sense of Religion in the souls of men, and a due
valuation of it, whatever its esteem or entertainment be in the World. For
though the true genuine spirit of Christianity (which is known by the purity
and peaceableness of it) should grow never so much out of credit with the
World, yet none who heartily believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
that the matters revealed therein are infallibly true, will ever have the less
estimation of it. It must be confessed that the credit of Religion has much
sufferd in the Age we live in through the vain pretenses of many to it, who
have only acted a part in it for the sake of some p^ivate interests of their
own. And it is the usual Logic of Atheists, crimine ab uno Disce omnes; if
there be any hypocrites, all who make show of Religion, are such, on which
account the Hypocrisy of one Age makes way for the Atheism of the next. But
how unreasonable and unjust that imputation is, there needs not much to
discover, unless it be an argument there are no true men in the World, because
there are so many Apes which imitate them; or that there are no Jewels, because
there are so many Counterfeits. And blessed be God, our Age is not barren of
Instances of real goodness and unaffected piety; there being some such generous
spirits as dare love Religion without the dowry of Interest, and manifest their
affection to it in the plain dress of the Scriptures, without the paint and
setoffs which are added to it by the several contending parties of the
Christian World. Were there more such noble spirits of Religion in our Age,
Atheism would want one of the greatest Pleas which it now makes against the
Truth of Religion; for nothing enlarges more the Gulf of Atheism, then that
(...), that wide passage which lies between the Faith and Lives of men
pretending to be Christians. I must needs say there is nothing seems more
strange and unaccountable to me, then that the Practice of the unquestionable
duties of Christianity should be put out of Countenance, or slighted by any who
own, profess, and contend for the Principles of it. Can the profession of that
be honorable, whose practice is not? If the principles be true, why are they
not practiced? If they be not true, why are they professed?

You see, Sir, to what an unexpected length my desire to vindicate the Honor
as well as Truth of Religion, has drawn out this present address. But I may
sooner hope for your pardon in it, then if I had spent so much paper after the
usual manner of Dedications, in representing You to your self or the World.
Sir, I know You have too much of that I have been commending, to delight in
Your own deserved praises, much less in flatteries, which so benign a subject
might easily make ones pen run over in. And therein I might not much have
digressed from my design, since I know few more exemplary for that rare mixture
of true piety, and the highest civility together, in whom that inestimable
jewel of religion is placed in a most sweet, affable, and obliging temper. But
although none will be more ready on any occasion with all gratitude to
acknowledge the great obligations You have laid upon me; yet I am so far
sensible of the common vanity of Epistles Dedicatory, that I cannot so heartily
comply with them in any thing, as in my hearty prayers to Almighty for your
good and welfare, and in subscribing my self

Sir, Your most humble and affectionate servant, June 5. 1662. ED.
STILLINGFLEET.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is neither to satisfy the importunity of friends, nor to prevent false
copies (which and such like excuses I know are expected in usual Prefaces) that
I have adventured abroad this following Treatise: but it is out of a just
resentment of the affronts and indignities which have been cast on Religion; by
such, who account it a matter of judgment to disbelieve the Scriptures, and a
piece of wit to dispute themselves out of the possibility of being happy in
another world: When yet the more acute and subtle their arguments are, the
greater their strength is against themselves, it being impossible there should
be so much wit and subtilty in the souls of men, were they not of a more
excellent nature then they imagine them to be. And how contradictious is it for
such persons to be ambitious of being cried up for wit and reason, whose design
is to degrade the rational soul so far below her self, as to make her become
like the beasts that perish! If now the weight and consequence of the subject,
and the too great seasonableness of it (if the common fame of the large spread
of Atheism among us be true) be not sufficient Apology for the publishing this
Book, I am resolved rather to undergo thy censure, tben be beholding to any
other. The intendment therefore of this Preface is only to give a brief account
of the scope, design, and method of the following Books, although the view of
the Contents of the Chapters might sufficiently acquains thee with it. How far
I have been either from transeribing, or a design to excusse out of the hands
of their admirers, the several writings on the behalf of Religion in general,
or Christianity in particular (especially Mornay, Gro^ius, Amyraldus, etc.) may
easily appear by comparing what is contained in their Books and this together.
Had I not thought something might be said, if not more fully and rationally,
yet more suitably to the present temper of this Age then what is already
written by them, ^thou had not been troubled with this Preface, much less
with the whole Book. But as the tempers and Genius 's of Ages and Times alier,
so do the arms and w^npons which ^^theists employ against Religion; the most
papular pretenses of the Atheists of our Age, have been the irreconcileableness
of the account of Times in Scripture, with that of the learned and ancient
Heathen Nations; the inconsistency of the belief of the Scriptures with the
principles of reason; and the account which may be given of the Origin of
things from principles of Philosophy without the Scriptures; These three
therefore I have particularly set my self against, and directed against each of
them a several Book. In the first I have manifested that there is no ground of
credibility in the account of ancient times given by any Heathen Nations
different from the Scriptures, which I have with so much care and diligence
enquired into, that from thence we may hope to hear no more of men before Adam
to salve the Authority of the Scriptures by, which yet was intended only as a
design to undermine them; but I have not thought the frivolous pretenses of the
Author of that Hypothesis worth particular mentioning, supposing it sufficient
to give a clear account of things without particular citation of Authors, where
it was not of great concernment for understanding the thing its self. In the
second Book I have undertaken to give a rational account of the grounds, why we
are to believe those several persons, who in several ages were employed to
reveal the mind of God to the world, and with greater particularity then has
yet been used, I have insisted on the persons of Moses, and the Prophets, our
Savior and his Apostles, and in every of them manifested the rational
evidences on which they were to be believed, not only by the men of their own
Age, but by those of succeeding Generations. In the third Book I have insisted
on the matters themselves which are either supposed by or revealed in the
Scriptures; and have therein not only manifested the certainty of the
foundations of all Religion which lie in the Being of God and Immortality of
the soul, but the undoubted truth of those particular accounts concerning the
Origin of the Universe, of Evil, and of Nations, which were most liable to the
Atheists exceptions, and have therein considered all the pretenses of
Philosophy ancient or modern, which have seemed to contradict any of them; to
which (mant ssae loco) I have added the evidence of Scripture History in the
remainders of it in Heathen Mythology, and concluded all with a discourse of
the excellency of the Scriptures. Thus having given a brief view of the design
and method of the whole, I submit it to every free and unprejudiced judgment.
All the favor then I shall request of thee, is, to read seriously, and judge
impartially; and then I doubt not but thou will see as much reason for Religion
as I do.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The obscurity and defect of Ancient History.

THE knowledge of truth proved to be the most natural perfection of the
rational soul; yet error often mistaken for truth, the accounts of it. Want of
diligence in its search, the mixture of truth and f^lshood: Thence comes either
rejecting truth for the errors sake, or embracing the error for the truths
sake; the first instanced in Heathen Philosophers, the second in vulgar
Heathen. Of Philosophical Atheism, and the grounds of it. The History of
Antiquity very obscure. The question stated where the true History of ancient
times to be found, in Heathen Histories, or only in Scripture? The want of
credibility in Heathen Histories asserted and proved by the general defect for
want of timely records among Heathen Nations; the reason of it showed from the
first Plantations of the World. The manner of them discovered. The Original of
Civil Government. Of Hicroglyphicks. The use of letters among the Greeks no
elder then Cadmus, his time enquired into, no elder then Joshua, the learning
brought into Greece by him. page 1

CHAP. II. Of the Phoenician and Egyptian History.

The particular defect in the History of the most learned Heathen Nations.
First the Phoenicians. Of Sanchoniathon, his Antiquity, and Fidelity. Of
Jerom-baal, Baal-Berith. The Antiquity of Tire. Scaliger vindicated against
B^chartus Abibalus. The vanity of Phoenician Theology. The imitation of it by
the Gnostics. Of the Egyptian History. The Antiquity and Authority of Hermes
Trismegistus. Of his Inscriptions on Pillars, transcribed by Manetho. His
Fabulousness thence discovered. Terra Seriadica. Of Seths Pillars in Josephus,
and an account whence they are taken. page 25

CHAP. III. Of the Chaldean History.

The contest of Antiquity among Heathen Nations, and the ways of deciding it.
Of the Chaldean Astrology, and the foundation of Judicial Astrology. Of the
Zabi^, their Founder, who they were, no other then the old Chaldees. Of Berosus
and his History. An account of the fabulous Dynastyes of Berosus and Manetho.
From the Translation of the Scripture history into Greek in the time of
Prolomy. Of that translation and the time of it. Of Demetrius Phalereus.
Scaligers arguments answered. Manetho writ after the Septuagint, proved against
Kircher; his arguments answered. Of Rabbinical and Arabic Authors, and their
little credit in matter of history. The time of Berosus enquired into, his
writing co-temporary with Philadelphus. page 40

CHAP. IV. The defect of the Grecian History.

That manifested by three evident arguments of it. 1. The fabulousness of the
Poetical age of Greece. The Antiquity of Poetry. Of Orpheus and the ancient
Poets. Whence the Poetical Fables borrowed. The advancement of Poetry and
Idolatry together in Greece. The different censures of Strabo and Eratosthenes
concerning the Poetical age of Greece, and the reasons of them. 2. The eldest
historians of Greece are of suspected credit. Of Damastes, Aristeus, and
others; of most of their eldest Historians we have nothing left but their
names, of others only the subjects they treated of, and some fragments. 3.
Those that are extant, either confess their Ignorance of eldest times, or
plainly discover it. Of the first sort are Thucydides and Plutarch; several
evidences of the Graecians Ignorance of the true original of Nations. Of
Herodotus and his mistakes, the Greeks ignorance in Geography discovered, and
thence their insufficiency as to an account of ancient history. page 56

CHAP. V. The general uncertainty of Heathen Chronology.

The want of credibility in Heathen History further proved from the uncertainty
and confusion in their accounts of ancient times; that discovered by the
uncertain form of their years. An enquiry into the different forms of the
Egyptian years; the first of thirty days, the second of four Months; of both
instances given in the Egyptian history. Of the Chaldaean accounts, and the
first Dynastyes mentioned by Berosus, how they may be reduced to probability.
Of the Egyptian Dynastyes. Of Manetho. Reasons of accounting them fabulous,
because not attested by any credible authority, and rejected by the best
Historians. The opinion of Scaliger and Vossius, concerning their being
cotemporary, propounded and rejected with reasons against it. Of the ancient
division of Egypt into Nomi or Provinces, and the number of them against
Vossius and Kircher. Page 73

CHAP. VI. The uncertain Epocha's of Heathen Chronology.

An account given of the defect of Chronology in the ^ldest times. Of the Solar
year among the Egyptians, the original of the Epacts, the antiquity of
Intercalation among them. Of the several Canicular years; the difference
between Scaliger and Petavius considered. The certain Epocha's of the Egyptian
history no elder then Nabonasser. Of the Grecian accounts. The fabulousness of
the Heroical age of Greece. Of the ancient Grecian Kingdoms. The beginning of
the Olympiads. The uncertain Origines of the Western Nations. Of the Latin
Dynastyes. The different Palilia of Rome. The uncertain reckoning Ab. V. C. Of
impostures as to ancient histories. Of Annius, Inghiramius, and others. Of the
characters used by Heathen Priests. No sacred characters among the fews. The
partiality and inconsistency of Heathen bistories with each other. From all
which the want of credibility in them as to an account of ancient times is
clearly demonstrated. page 89

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. The certainty of the Writings of Moses.

In order to the proving the truth of Scripture-history, several Hypotheses
laid down. The first concerns the reasonableness of preserving the ancient
History of the world in some certain Records, from the importance of the
things, and the inconveniences of mere tradition or constant Revelation^ The
second concerns the certainty that the Records under Moses his name, were
undoubtedly his. The certainty of a matter of fact enquired into in general,
and proved as to this particular by universal consent, and settling a
Commonwealth upon his Laws. The impossibility of an Imposture as to the
writings of Moses demonstrated. The plea's to the contrary largely answered.
page 107

CHAP. II. Moses his certain knowledge of what he writ.

The third Hypothesis concerns the certainty of the matter of Moses his
history; that gradually proved: First, Moses his knowledge cleared, by his
education, and experience, and certain information. His education in the wisdom
of Egypt; what that was. The old Egyptian learning enquired into, the
conveniences for it of the Egyptian Priests. Moses reckoned among them for his
knowledge. The Mathematical, Natural, Divine, and Moral learning of Egypt:
their Political wisdom most considerable. The advantage of Moses above the
Greek Philosophers, as to wisdom and reason. Moses himself an eye witness of
most of his history: the certain uninterrupted tradition of the other part
among the fews, manifested by rational evidence. p. 119

CHAP. III. Moses his fidelity and integrity proved.

Moses considered as an Historian, and as a Lawgiver; his fidelity in both
proved: clear evidences that he had no intent to deceive in his History,
freedom from private interest, impartiality in his relations, plainness and
^erspicuity of style. As a Lawgiver, be came armed with Divine authority, which
being the main thing, is fixed on to be fully proved from his actions and
writings. The power of miracles the great evidence of Divine revelation. Two
grand questions propounded. In what cases miracles may be expected, and how
known to be true. No necessity of a constant power of miracles in a Church: Two
Cases alone wherein they may be expected. When any thing comes as a Law from
God, and when a Divine Law is to be repealed. The necessity of miracles in
those cases as an evidence of Divine revelation asserted. Objections answered.
No use of miracles when the doctrine is settled and owned by miracles in the
first revelation. No need of miracles in reformation of a Church. page 134

CHAP. IV. The fidelity of the Prophets succeeding Moses.

In order of Prophets to succeed Moses, by Gods own appointment in the Law of
Moses. The Schools of the Prophets, the original and institution of them. The
Cities of the Levites. The occasion of their first institution. The places of
the Schools of the Prophets, and the tendency of the institution there to a
Prophetical office. Of the Music used in the Schools of the Prophets. The
Roman Assam^nta, and the Greek Hymns in their solemn worship. The two sorts of
Prophets among the jews, Lieger and extraordinary. Ordinary Prophets taken out
of the Schools, proved by Amos and Saul. page 149

CHAP. V. The trial of Prophetical Doctrine.

Rules of trying Prophets established in the Law of Moses. The punishment of
pretenders. The several sorts of false Prophets. The case of the Prophet at
Bethel discussed. The trial of false Prophets belonging to the great Sanhedrin.
The particular rules whereby the Doctrine of Prophets was judged. The proper
notion of a Prophet, not foretelling future contingencies, but having immediate
Divine revelation. Several principles laid down for clearing the doctrine of
the Prophets. 1. That immediate dictates of natural light are not to be the
measure of Divine revelation. Several grounds for Divine revelation from
natural light. 2. What ever is directly repugnant to the dictates of nature,
cannot be of Divine revelation. 3. No Divine revelation does contradict a
Divine positive Law without sufficient evidence of Gods intention to repeal
that Law. 4. Divine revelation in the Prophets was not to be measured by the
words of the Law, but by the intention and reason of it. The Prophetical office
a kind of Chancery to the Law of Moses. page 165

CHAP. VI. The trial of Prophetical Predictions and Miracles.

The great difficulty of the trying the truth of Prophetical predictions from
Jerem. 18. 7, 8, etc. Some general Hypothe^es premised for the clearing of it.
The first concerns the grounds why predictions are accounted an evidence of
divine revelation. Three Consectaries drawn thence. The second, the manner of
Gods revelation of his will to the minds of the Prophets. Of the several
degrees of Prophecy. The third is, that God did not always reveal the internal
purposes of his will unto the true Prophets. The grand question propounded how
it may be known when predictions express Gods decrees, and when only the series
of causes. For the first, several rules laid down. 1. When the prediction is
confirmed by a present miracle. 2. When the things foretold exceed the
probability of second causes. 3. When confirmed by Gods oath. 4. When the
bl^ssings foretold are purely spiritual. Three rules for interpreting the
Proph^cyes which respect the state of things under the G^spel. 5. When all
circumstances are foretold. 6. When many Prophets in several ages agree in the
same predictions. Predictions do not express Gods unalterable purposes, when
they only contain comminations of judgments, or are predictions of temporal
bl^ssings. The case of the Ninivites. Hezekiah and others opened. Of repentance
in God, what it implies. The jewish obj^ctions about predictions of temporal
bl^ssings answered. In what cases miracles were expected from the Prophets,
when they were to confirm the truth of their religion. Instanced in the Prophet
at Bethel, Elijah, Elishah, and of Moses himself; Whose divine authority that
it was proved by miracles, is demonstrated against the modern Jews, and their
pretenses answered. p. 177

CHAP. VII. The eternity of the Law of Moses discussed.

The second case wherein miracles may be expected, when a Divine positive Law
is to be repealed, and another way of worship established in stead of it. The
possibility in general of a repeal of a Divine Law asserted; the particular
case of the Law of Moses disputed against the Jews: the matter of that Law
proved not to be immutably obligatory; because the ceremonial precepts were
required not for themselves, but for some further end; that proved from
Maimonides his confession: the precepts of the Ceremonial Law frequently
dispensed with while the Law was in force. Of the Passover of Hezekiah, and
several other instances. It is not inconsistent with the wisdom of God to
repeal such an established Law. Abravanels arguments answered. Of the
perfection of the Law of Moses, compared with the Gospel. Whether God has ever
declared he would never repeal the Law of Moses. Of adding to the precepts. Of
the expressions seeming to imply the perpetuity of the Law of Moses. Reasons
assigned why those expressions are used, though perpetuity be not employed. The
Law of Moses not built upon immutable reason, because many particular precepts
were founded upon particular occasions, as the customs of the Zabii; many
ceremonial precepts thence deduced out of Maimonides; and because such a state
of things was foretold, with which the observation of the Ceremonial Law would
be inconsistent. That largely discovered from the Prophecies of the old
Testament.

CHAP. VIII. General Hypotheses concerning the Truth of the Doctrine of Christ.

The great prejudice against our Savior among Jews and Heathens, was the
meaness of his appearance. The difference of the miracles at the delivery of
the Law and Gospel. Some general Hypotheses to clear the subserviency of
miracles to the Doctrine of Christ. 1. That where the truth of a doctrine
depends not on evidence, but authority, the only way to prove the truth of the
Doctrine, is to prove the Testimony of the revealer to be infallible. Things
may be true which depend not on evidence of the things. What that is, and on
what it depends. The uncertainty of natural knowledge. The existence of God,
the foundation of all certainty. The certainty of matters of faith proved from
the same principle. Our knowledge of any thing supposes something
incomprehensible. The certainty of faith as great as that of knowledge; the
grounds of it stronger. The consistency of rational evidence with faith. Yet
objects of faith exceed reason; the absurdities following the contrary opinion.
The uncertainty of that which is called reason. Philosophical dictates no
standard of reason. Of transubstantiation and ubiquity etc. why rejected as
contrary to reason. The foundation of faith in matters above reason. Which is
infallible Testimony; that there are ways to know which is infallible, proved:
2. Hypoth. A Divine Testimony the most infallible. The resolution of faith into
Gods veracity as its formal object. 3. Hypoth. A Divine Testimony may be known,
though God speak not immediately. Of inspiration among the Jews, and Divination
among the Heathens. 4. Hyp. The evidences of a Divine Testimony must be clear
and certain. Of the common motives of faith, and the obligation to faith
arising from them. The original of Infidelity.

CHAP. IX. The rational evidence of the Truth of Christian Religion from
Miracles.

The possibility of miracles appears from God and providence; the evidence of a
Divine Testimony by them. God alone can really alter the course of nature. The
Devils power of working miracles considered. Of Simon Magus, Apollonius. The
cures in the Temple of Aeseulapius at Rome, etc. God never works miracles, but
for some particular end. The particular reasons of the miracles of Christ. The
repealing the Law of Moses, which had been settled by miracles. Why Christ
checked the Pharisees for demanding a sign, when himself appeals to his
miracles. The power of Christ's miracles on many who did not thoroughly believ^.
Christ's miracles made it evident that he was the Messiah, because the
predictions were fulfilled in him. Why John Baptist wrought no miracles.
Christ's miracles necessary for the everthrow of the Devils Kingdom. Of the
Daemoniaeks and Lunaticks in the Gospel, and in the Primitive Church. The power
of the name of Christ over them largely proved by several Testimonies. The
evidence thence of a Divine power in Christ. Of counterfeit dispossessions. Of
miracles wrought among Infidels. Of the future state of the Church. The
necessity of the miracles of Christ, as to the propagation of Christian
Religion: that proved from the condition of the publishers, and the success of
the Doctrine. The Apostles knew the hazard of their employment, before they
entered on it. The boldness and resolution of the Apostles notwithstanding this,
compared with heathen Philosophers. No motive could carry the Apostles through
their employment, but the truth of their Doctrine* not seeking the honor,
profit or pleasure of the world. The Apostles evidence of the truth of their
doctrine lay in being eyewitnesses of our Saviors miracles and resurr^ction.
That attested by themselves; their sufficiency thence for preaching the Gospel.
Of the nature of the doctrine of the Gospel; contrariety of it to natural
inclinations. Strange success of it, notwithstanding it came not with humane
power: No Christian Emperor, till the Gospel universally preached. The
weakness and simplicity of the instruments which preached the Gospel. From all
which the great evidence of the power of miracles is proved. page 252

CHAP. X. The difference of true miracles from false.

The unreasonableness of rejecting the evidence from miracles* because of
impostures. That there are certain rules of distinguishing true miracles from
false, and Divine from diabolical, proved from Gods intention in giving a power
of miracles, and the providence of God in the world. The inconvenience of
taking away the rational grounds of faith and placing it on self-evidence. Of
the self-evidence of the Scriptures, and the insufficiency of that for
resolving the question about the authority of the Scriptures. Of the pretended
miracles of Impostors and false Christ's, as Barchochebas David el -David and
others. The rules whereby to judge true miracles from false. 1. True Divine
miracles are wrought to confirm a Divine testimony. No miracles nec^ssary for
the certain conveyance of a Divine testimony: proved from the evidences that
the Scriptures could not be corrupted. 2. No miracles Divine which contradict
Divine revelation. Of Popish miracles. 3. Divine miracles leave Divine effects
on those who believe them. Of the miracles of Simon Magus. 4. Divine miracles
tend to the overthrow of the devils power in the world: the antipathy of the
doctrine of Christ to the devils designs in the world. 5. The distinction of
true miracles from others, from the circumstances and manner of their
operation. The miracles of Christ compared with those of the H^athen Gods. 6.
God makes it evident to all impartial judgments that Divine miracles exceed
created power. This manifested from the unparalleld miracles of Moses and our
Savior. From all which the rational evidence of Divine revelation is
manifested, as to the persons whom God imployes to teach the world. page 334

BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the Being of God.

The Principles of all Religion lie in the Being of God and immortality of the
soul: from them the necessity of a particular Divine revelation rationally
deduced; the method laid down for proving the Divine authority of the
Scriptures. Why Moses does not prove the Being of God, but suppose it. The
notion of a Deity very consonant to reason. Of the nature of Idea's, and
particularly of the Idea of God. How we can form an Idea of an infinite Being.
How far such an Idea argues existence. The great unreasonableness of Atheism
demonstrated. Of the Hypotheses of the Aristotelian and Epicurean Atheists. The
Atheists pretenses examined and refuted. Of the nature of the arguments whereby
we prove there is a God. Of universal consent and the evidence of that to prove
a Deity and immortality of souls. Of necessity of existence employed in the
notion of God, and how far that proves the Being of God. The order of the world
and usefulness of the parts of it, and especially of man's body, an argument of
a Deity. Some higher principle proved to be in the world then matter and
motion. The nature of the soul, and possibility of its subsisting after death.
Strange appearances in nature not solvable by the power of imagination. page 360

CHAP. II. Of the Origin of the Universe.

The necessity of the belief of the creation of the world in order to the truth
of Religion. Of the several Hypotheses of the Philosophers who contradict
Moses: with a particular examination of them. The ancient tradition of the
world consonant to Moses: proved from the fonick Philosophy of Thales, and the
Italick of Pythagoras. The Pythagorick Cabbala rather Egyptian then Mosaic.
Of the fluid matter which was the material principle of the universe. Of the
Hypothesis of the eternity of the world asserted by Ocellus Lucanus, and
Aristotle. The weakness of the foundations on which that opinion is built. Of
the manner of forming principles of Philosophy. The possibility of creation
proved. No arguing from the present state of the world against its beginning
showed from Maimonides. The Platonists arguments from the goodness of God for
the eternity of the world answered. Of the Stoical Hypothesis of the eternity
of matter; whether reconcilable with the text of Moses. Of the opinions of
Plato and Pythagoras concerning the praeexistence of matter to the formation of
the world. The contradiction of the eternity of matter to the nature and
attributes of God, Of the Atomical Hypothesis of the Origin of the Universe.
The World could not be produced by a casual concourse of Atoms proved from the
nature and motion of Epicurus his Atoms, and the Phenomenon of the Universe,
especially the production and nature of Animals. Of the Cartesian Hypothesis,
that it cannot salve the Origin of the Universe without a Deity giving motion
to matter. page 421

CHAP. III. Of the Origin of Evil.

Of the Being of Providence. Epicurus his arguments against it refuted. The
necessity of the belief of Providence in order to Religion. Providence proved
from a consideration of the nature of God and the things of the world. Of the
Spirit of nature. The great objections against Providence propounded. The first
concerns the Origin of evil. God cannot be the author of sin if the Scriptures
be true. The account which the Scriptures give of the fall of man, does not
charge God with man's fault. Gods power to govern man by Laws, though he gives
no particular reason of every Positive precept. The reason of Gods creating man
with freedom of will, largely showed from Simplicius; and the true account of
the Origin of evil. Gods permitting the fall makes him not the author of it.
The account which the Scriptures give of the Origin of evil, compared with
that of heathen Philosophers. The antiquity of the opinion of ascribing the
Origin of evil to an evil principle. Of the judgment of the Persians,
Egyptians and others about it. Of Manichaism. The opinion of the ancient Greek
Philosophers; of Pythagoras, Plato, the Stoics; the Origin of evil not from
the necessity of matter. The remainders of the history of the fall among the
Heathens. Of the malignity of Demons. Providence vindicated as to the
sufferings of the good, and impunity of bad men. An account of both from
natural light, manifested by Seneca, Plutarch; and others. page 470

CHAP. IV. Of the Origin of Nations.

All mankind derived from Adam, if the Scriptures be true. The contrary
supposition an introduction to Atheism. The truth of the history of the flood.
The possibility of an universal deluge proved. The flood universal as to
mankind, whether universal as to the earth and animals; no necessity of
asserting either. Yet supposing the possibility of it demonstrated without
creation of new waters. Of the fountains of the deep. The proportion which the
height of mountains bears to the Diameter of the earth. No mountains much above
three mile perpendicular. Of the Origin of fountains. The opinion of Aristotle
and others concerning it discussed. The true account of them from the vapors
arising from the mass of subterraneous waters. Of the capacity of the Ark for
receiving the Animals from Buteo and others. The truth of the deluge from the
Testimony of Heathen Nations. Of the propagation of Nations from Noah's
posterity. Of the beginning of the Assyrian Empire. The multiplication of
mankind after the flood. Of the Chronology of the LXX. Of the time between the
flood and Abraham, and the advantages of it. Of the pretense of such Nations,
who called themselves Aborigines. A discourse concerning the first plantation
of Greece, the common opinion propounded and rejected. The Hellens not the
first inhabitants of Greece, but the Pelasgi. The large spread of them over the
parts of Greece; Of their language different from the Greeks. Whence these
Pelasgi came; that Phaleg was the Pelasgus of Greece, and the leader of that
Colony proved from Epiphanius: the language of the Pelasgi in Greece Oriental:
thence an account given of the many Hebrew words in the Greek language, and the
remainders of the Eastern languages in the Islands of Greece, both which not
from the Phaenicians as Bochartus thinks, but from the old Pelasgi. Of the
ground of the affinity between the Jews and Lacedaemonians. Of the peopling of
America. page 533

CHAP. V. Of the Origin of the Heathen Mythology.

That there were some remainders of the ancient history of the world preserved
in the several Nations after the dispersion. How it came to be corrupted: by
decay of knowledge, increase of Idolatry, confusion of languages. An enquiry
into the cause of that. Difficulties against the common opinion that languages
were confounded at Babel. Those difficulties cleared. Of the fabulousness of
Poets. The particular ways whereby the Heathen Mythology arose. Attributing the
general history of the World to their own Nation. The corruption of Hebraisms.
Alteration of names. Ambiguity of sense in the Oriental languages. Attributing
the actions of many to one person, as in Jupiter, Bacchus, etc. The remainders
of Scripture history among the Heathens. The names of God, Chaos, formation of
man among the Phaenicians. Of Adam among the Germans, Egyptians, Cilicians.
Adam under Saturn. Cain among the Phaenicians. Tubalcain and Jubal under Vulcan
and Apollo. Naamah under Minerva. Noah under Saturn, Janus, Prometheus and
Bacchus. Noah's three sons under Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto. Canaan under
Mercury, Nimrod under Bacchus, Magog under Prometheus. Of Abraham and Isaac
among the Phaenicians. Jacobs service under Apollo's. The (...) from Bethel.
Joseph under Apis. Moses under Bacchus. Joshua under Hercules. Balaam under the
old Silenus. page 577

CHAP. VI. Of the Excellency of the Scriptures.

Concerning matters of pure divine revelation in Scripture: the terms of
Salvation only contained therein. The ground of the disesteem of the Scriptures
is tacit unbelief. The Excellency of the Scriptures manifested as to the
matters which God has revealed therein. The excellency of the discoveries of
Gods nature which are in Scripture. Of the goodness and love of God in Christ.
The suitableness of those discoveryes of God to our natural notions of a Deity.
The necessity of Gods making known himself to us in order to the regulating our
conceptions of him. The Scriptures give the fullest account of the state of
men's souls, and the corruptions which are in them. The only way of pleasing God
discovered in Scriptures. The Scriptures contain matters of greatest
mysteriousness, and most universal satisfaction to men's minds. The excellency
of the manner wherein things are revealed in Scriptures, in regard of
clearness, authority, purity, uniformity, and perswasiveness. The excellency of
the Scriptures as a rule of life. The nature of the duties of Religion and the
reasonableness of them. The greatness of the encouragements to Religion
contained in the Scriptures. The great excellency of the Scriptures, as
containing in them the Covenant of Grace in order to man's Salvation. page 599

ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 15. r. existence. p. 17. l. 28. r. (...). p. 21. l. 19. r. (...).
p. 22. l. 21. r. (...). p. 27. l. 14. r. (...). p. 31. l. 2. r. (...). p. 35.
l. 16. r. Anebo. p. 36. l. 1. r. Sebennyta. p. 37. l. 9. r. (...) p. 52. l. 28.
r. accederent. And Causaubon. p. 57. l. 26. r. others. p. 61. l. 14. r.
Pisistratidae. p. 63. l. 35. r. Hierocles -- Apollonius. p. 64. l. 11. r.
Acusilaus. p 83. l. 29, 30. r. the Patriarch Tarasius. p. 91. l. 3. r. (...).
p. 94 l. 23. for but r. by. p. 96. l. 26. for to r. and. p. 104. l. 22. r.
Hecataeus. p. 105. l. 33. r. Panchotis. p. 112. l. 15. r. as to. p. 120. l. 14
r. he for we. p. 125. l. 4. r. provided. l. 20. r. (...). p. 126. l. 15. r.
Peteseph. p. 132. r. deceived. p. 140. l. 19 r. continued. p. 150. l. 16. r.
Deuteronomy. 18. p. 149. l. 12. r. An order. p. 156. l 5. r. (...). p 167. l. 21. r.
(...) p. 171. r. (...) p. 180 l. 11. r. are. p 182. l. 3^. r. ordinat (...) p.
184. l. 39. before those insert though. p. 201. l 18. r. employ l. 35. r. (...)
p. 202. l 14. r. Vorstius. p. 209. l. 9. r (...) p. 226. l 5. r. meanness. p.
254. l. 26. r. Table. p. 267. l. 17. r. (...). p. 293. l. 17. r. (...). p. 302.
l. 28. r. (...). p. 323. l. 19. for it. r. they. p. 328. l. 9. r. (...). p. 334
l. 11. r. Barchochebas. p. 346. between us and in insert a. p 348. l. 21. r.
(...). p. 349. l. 29. r. incredibilia. p. 364. l. 17. blot out the comma
between Euhemerus and Messenius. l 29 and elsewhere r. salve for solve. p. 365.
l. 20. r. Elastical. p. 395. l. 3. r. Toupinamboults. p. 409. l. 21. r.
Peristaltic. p. 424. l. 15. for it r. them p. 425. l. 7. r. (...). p. 427. l.
r. insert (^^) between (...) and (...). l. 32. r fluidane p. 443. l. 10. r.
(...). l. 32. for Col r. (l. nomine appellasse.) p. 464. l. 26. r. whose
surface is supposed to be. p. 488. l. 36. r. (...). p. 493. l. 5. r. (...). l.
28. r. coaeterna. p. 502. l. 29. r. (...) p 518. l. 35. r. (...). p. 520. l.
10. r. (...). l. 13. r. (...).

ORIGINES SACRAE: The Truth of Scripture-History asserted.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The obscurity and defect of Ancient History.
The knowledge of truth proved to be the most natural perfection of the
rational soul; yet error often mistaken for truth, the accounts of it. Want of
diligence in its search, the mixture of truth and falsehood: Thence comes either
rejecting truth for the errors sake, or embracing the error for the truths
sake; the first instanced in Heathen Philosophers, the second in vulgar
Heathen. Of Philosophical Atheism, and the grounds of it. The History of
Antiquity very obscure. The question stated where the true History of ancient
times to be found, in Heathen Histories, or only in Scripture? The want of
credibility in Heathen Histories asserted and proved by the general defect for
want of timely records among Heathen Nations; the reason of it showed from the
first Plantations of the World. The manner of them discovered. The Original of
Civil Government. Of Hieroglyphics. The use of letters among the Greeks no
elder then Cadmus, his time enquired into, no elder then Joshua, the learning
brought into Greece by him.

ENquiries after truth have that peculiar commendation Sect. 1.
above all other designs, that they come on purpose to gratify the most noble
faculty of our souls, and do most immediately tend to re-advance the highest
perfection of our rational beings. For all our most laudable endeavors after
knowledge now, are only the gathering up some scattered fragments of what was
once an entire Fabric, and the recovery of some precious Jewels which were
lost out of sight, and sunk in the shipwreck of humane nature. That saying of
Plato, that all knowledge is remembrance, and all ignorance forgetfulness, is a
certain and undoubted truth, if by forgetfulness be meant the loss, and by
remembrance the recovery of those notions and conceptions of things which the
mind of man once had in its pure and primitive state, wherein the understanding
was the truest Microcosm, in which all the beings of the inferior world were
faithfully represented according to their true, native, and genuine
perfections. God created the soul of man not only capable of finding out the
truth of things, but furnished him with a sufficient (...) or touchstone to
discover truth from falsehood, by a light set up in his understanding, which if
he had attended to, he might have secured himself from all impostures and
deceits. As all other beings were created in the full possession of the
agreeable perfections of their several natures, so was man too, else God would
have never closed the work of Creation with those words, And God saw all that
he had made, and behold it was very good; that is, endued with all those
perfections which were suitable Genesis 1. 31
to their several beings. Which man had been most defective in, if his
understanding had not been endowed with a large stock of intellectual
knowledge, which is the most natural and genuine perfection belonging to his
rational being. For reason being the most raised faculty of humane nature, if
that had been defective in its discoveries of truth, which is its proper
object, it would have argued the greatest maim and imperfection in the being it
self. For if it belongs to the perfection of the sensitive faculties to discern
what is pleasant from what is hurtful, it must needs be the perfection of the
rational to find out the difference of truth from falsehood. Not as though the
soul could then have had any more then now, an actual notion of all the beings
in the world ocexisting at the same time, but that it would have been free from
all deceits in its conceptions of things, which were not caused through
inadvertency.

Which will appear from the several aspects man's knowledge Sect. 2.
ledge has, which are either upwards toward his Maker, or abroad on his
fellow creatures. If we consider that contemplation of the soul which fixes its
self on that infinite being which was the cause of it, and is properly (...);
it will be found necessary for the soul to be created in a clear and distinct
knowledge of him, because of man's immediate obligation to obedience unto him.
Which must necessarily suppose the knowledge of him whose will must be his
rule; for if man were not fully convinced in the first moment after his
creation of the being of him, whom he was to obey, his first work and duty
would not have been actual obedience, but a search whether there was any
supreme, infinite, and eternal being or no; and whereon his duty to him was
founded, and what might be sufficient declaration of his Will and Laws,
according to which he must regulate his obedience. The taking off all which
doubts and scruples from the soul of man, must suppose him fully satisfied upon
the first free use of reason, that there was an Infinite Power and Being which
produced him, and on that account had a right to command him in whatsoever he
pleased, and that those commands of his were declared to him in so certain a
way that he could not be deceived in the judging of them. The clear knowledge
of God will further appear most necessary to man in his first creation, if we
consider that God created him for this end and purpose, to enjoy converse, and
an humble familiarity with himself, he had then (...) in the language of
Clemens Alexandrinus, Converse with God was as natural Protrept. p. 63.
to him as his being was. For man, as he came first out of Gods hands, was the
reflection of God himself on a dark Cloud, the Iris of the Deity, the
Similitude was the same, but the substance different: Thence he is said to be
created after the Image of God. His knowledge then had been more Genesis 1. 26.
intellectual then discursive; not so much employing his faculties in the
operose deductions of reason (the pleasant toil of the rational faculties since
the Fall) but had immediately employed them about the sublimest objects, not
about quiddities and formalities, but about him who was the fountain of his
being, and the center of his happiness. There was not then so vast a difference
between the Angelical and humane life: The Angels and men both fed on the same
dainties, all the difference was, they were in the (...), the upper room in
heaven, and man in the Summer Parlour in Paradise.

If we take a view of man's knowledge as it respects his fellowcreatures, we
shall find these were so fully known to him on Sect. 3.
his first creation, that he needed not to go to School to the wide world to
gather up his conceptions of them. For the right exercise of that Dominion
which he was instated in over the inferior world, does imply a particular
knowledge of the nature, being, and properties of those things which he was to
make use of, without which he could not have improved them for their peculiar
ends. And from this knowledge did proceed the giving the creatures those proper
and peculiar names which were expressive of their several natures. For as Plato
tells us, (...): The imposition In Cratylo.
of names on things belongs not to every one, but only to him that has a full
prospect into their several natures. For it is most agreeable to reason, that
names should carry in them a suitableness to the things they express; for words
being for no other end but to express our conceptions of things, and our
conceptions being but (...), as the same Philosopher speaks, the resemblances
and representations of the things, it must needs follow, that where there was a
true knowledge, the conceptions must agree with the things; and words being to
express our conceptions, none are so fit to do it, as those which are
expressive of the several natures of the things they are used to represent. For
otherwise all the use of words is to be a mere vocabulary to the understanding,
and an Index to memory, and of no further use in the pursuit of knowledge, then
to let us know what words men are agreed to call things by. But something
further seems to be intended in their first imposition, whence the Jews call it
(...) as Mercer tells us, a separation and distinction In Genesis 2. 19.
of the several kinds of things: and Kircher thus paraphraseth the words of
Moses. And whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof. i. e. says Oedip. Egyp. Tom. 2. Class. 2. cap. 1.
he, Fuerunt illis vera and germane nomina and rerum naturis proprie
accommodata. But however this be, we have this further evidence of that height
of knowledge which must be supposed in the first man, that as he was the first
in his kind, so he was to be the standard and measure of all that followed, and
therefore could not want any thing of the due perfections of humane nature. And
as the shekel of the Sanctuary was, if not double to others, (as men ordinarily
mistake) yet of a full and exact weight, because it was to be the standard for
all other weights (which was the cause of its being kept in the Temple.) So if
the first man had not double the proportion and measure of knowledge which his
posterity has, if it was not running over in regard of abundance, yet it must
be pressed down and shaken together in regard of weight, else he would be a
very unfit standard for us to judge by, concerning the due and suitable
perfections of humane nature.

But we need not have run so far back as the first man to Sect. 4.
evince the knowledge of truth to be the most natural perfection of the soul of
man; for even among the present ruins of humane nature we may find some such
noble and generous spirits, that discern so much beauty in the face of truth,
that to such as should enquire what they find so attractive in it, their answer
would be the same with Aristotle's in a like case, it was (...), the Question of
those who never saw it. For so pleasing is the enquiry, and so satisfactory the
finding of truth after the search, that the relish of it does far exceed the
greatest Epicurism of Apicius, or the most costly entertainments of Cleopatra;
there being no Gust so exquisite as that of the mind, nor any Jewels to be
compared with Truth. Nor do any persons certainly better deserve the name of
men, then such who allow their reason a full employment, and think not the
erectness of man's stature a sufficient distinction of him from Brutes. Of which
those may be accounted only a higher species who can patiently suffer the
imprisonment of their Intellectuals in a Dungeon of Ignorance, and know
themselves to be men, only by those Characters by which Alexander knew himself
not to be a God, by their proneness to intemperance and sleep. So strange a
Metempsychosis may there be without any change of bodies, and Euphorbus his
soul might become a Brute, without ever removing its lodging into the body of
an Ass. So much will the soul degenerate from its self, if not improved, and in
a kind of sullenness scarce appear to be what it is, because it is not improved
to what it may be.

But if this knowledge of truth be so great, so natural, so Sect. 5. Object.
valuable a perfection of humane nature, whence comes so much of the world to
be overrun with Ignorance and Barbarism, whence come so many pretenders to
knowledge, to court a cloud instead of Juno, to pretend a Love to truth, and
yet to fall down and worship error? If there were so great a sympathy between
the soul and truth, there would be an impatient desire after it, and a most
ready embracing and closing with it. We see the Magnet does not draw the iron
with greater force then it seems to run with impatience into its closest
embraces. If there had been formerly so intimate an acquaintance between the
soul and truth, as Socrates fancied of friends in the other world, there would
be an harmonious closure upon the first appearance, and no divorce to be after
made between them?

True, but then we must consider there is an intermediate state between the
former acquaintance, and the renewal of Answ.
it, wherein all those remaining characters of mutual knowledge are sunk so
deep, and lie so hid, that there needs a new fire to be kindled to bring forth
those latent figures, and make them again appear legible. And when once those
tokens are produced of the former friendship, there are not more impatient
longings* nor more close embraces between the touched needle and the Magnet,
then there are between the understanding and discovered truth. But then
withal, we are to consider that they are but few whose souls are awakened out
of that Lethargy they are fallen into in this degenerate condition, the most
are so pleased with their sleep, that they are loath to disturb their rest, and
set a higher price upon a lazy Ignorance, then upon a restless knowledge. And
even of those whose souls are as it were between sleeping and waking, what by
reason of the remaining confusion of the species in their brains, what by the
present dimness of their sight, and the hovering uncertain light they are to
judge by, there are few that can put a difference between a mere phantasm and a
real truth. Of which these rational accounts may be given, viz. Why so few
pretenders to knowledge do light on truth.

First, Want of an impartial diligence in the search of it. Sect. 6.
Truth now must be sought, and that with care and dilgence, before we find it;
jewels do not use to lie upon the surface of the earth: Highways are seldom
paved with gold; what is most worth our Finding, calls for the greatest search.
If one that walks the streets should find some inestimable jewel, or one that
travels the road meet with a bag of gold, it would be but a silly design of any
to walk the street, or travel the road in hopes to meet with such a purchase to
make them rich. If some have happily light on some valuable truths when they
minded nothing less then them, must this render a diligence useless in
inquiries after such? No: Truth though she be so fair and pleasing as to draw
our affections, is yet so modest as to admit of being courted, and it may be
deny the first suit, to heighten our importunity. And certainly nothing has
oftener forbid the banes between the understanding and Truth inquired after,
then partiality and preoccupation of Judgment: which makes men enquire more
diligently after the dowry then the beauty of Truth, its correspondency to
their Interests, then its evidence to their understandings. An useful error,
has often kept the Keys of the mind for free admission, when important truths
but contrary to their pre-conceptions or interests have been forbidden
entrance. Prejudice is the wrong bias of the soul, that effectually keeps it
from coming near the mark of truth, nay, sets it at the greatest distance from
it. There are few in the world that look after truth with their own eyes, most
make use of spectacles of others making, which makes them so seldom behold the
proper lineaments in the face of Truth; which the several tinctures from
education, authority, custom, and predisposition do exceedingly hinder men from
discerning of.

Another reason why there are so few who find truth, when so many pretend to
seek it, is, that near resemblance, which Sect. 7.
Error often bears to Truth. It has been well observed that Error seldom walks
abroad the world in her own raiments, she always borrows something of truth, to
make her more acceptable to the world. It has been always the subtilty of
grand deceivers to graft their greatest errors on some material truths, to make
them pass more undiscernable to all such who look more at the root on which
they stand, then on the fruits which they bring forth. It will hereafter appear
how most of the grossest of the heathen errors have, as Plutarch says of the
Egyptian Fables, (...), some faint and obscure resemblances of truth; nay more
then so, as most pernicious weeds are bred in the fattest soyls; their most
destructive principles have been founded on some necessary and important
truths. Thus Idolatry does suppose the belief of the existence of a Deity; and
superstition the Immortality of the souls of men. The Devil could never have
built his Chapels, but on the same ground whereon Gods Temples stood; which
makes me far less wonder then many do, at the meeting with many expressions
concerning these two grand truths in the writings of ancient Heathens, knowing
how willing the devil might be to have such principles still owned in the
world, which by his depraving of them might be the nourishers of Idolatry and
Superstition. For the general knowledge of a Divine nature, supposing men
Ignorant of the true God, did only lay a foundation to erect his Idolatrous
Temples upon; and the belief of the souls surviving the body after death,
without knowledge of the true way of attaining happiness, did make men more
eager of embracing those Rites and Ceremonies, which canie with a pretense of
showing the way to a blessed immortality.

Which may be a most probable reason why Philosophy and Idolatry did increase
so much together as they did; for Sect. 8.
though right reason fully improved would have overthrown all those cursed and
Idolatrous practices among the Heathens, yet reason only discerning some
general notions without their particular application and improvement, did only
dispose the most ordinary sort of people to a more ready entertainment of the
most gross Idolatry. For hereby they discerned the necessity of some kind of
worship, but could not find out the right way of it, and therefore they
greedily followed that which was commended to them, by such who did withal
agree with them in the common sentiments of humane nature: Nay, and those
persons themselves who were the great maintainers of these sublimer notions
concerning God and the soul of man, were either the great instruments of
advancing that horrid superstition among them, as Orpheus and Apollonius, or
very forward Complyers with it, as many of the Philosophers were. Although
withal it cannot be denied to have been a wonderful discovery of Divine
providence, by these general notions to keep waking the inward senses of men's
souls, that thereby it might appear when Divine Revelation should be manifested
to them, that it brought nothing contrary to the common principles of humane
nature, but did only rectify the depravations of it, and clearly show men that
way, which they had long been ignorantly seeking after. Which was the excellent
advantage the Apostle made of the Inscription on the Altar at Athens to the
unknown God; Whom, says he, ye ignorantly serve, him I declare Act. 17. 23.
unto you. And which was the happy use the Primitive learned Christians made of
all those passages concerning the divine nature and the Immortality of the
souls of men, which they found in the Heathen Writers, thereby to evidence to
the world that the main postulata or suppositions of Christian Religion were
granted by their own most admired men: and that Christianity did not race out
but only build upon those common foundations, which were entertained by all who
had any name for reason.

Though this, I say, were the happy effect of this building Sect 9.
errors on common truths to all that had the advantage of Divine revelation to
discern the one from the other; yet as to others who were destitute of it, they
were liable to this twofold great inconvenience by it. First, for the sake of
the apparent rottenness of the Superstructures to question the soundness of the
foundations on which they stood. And this I doubt not was the case of many
considerative heathens, who observing that monstrous and unreasonable way of
worship obtaining among the heathen, and not being able by the strength of
their own reason, through the want of divine revelation to deduce any certain
instituted worship, they were shrewdly tempted to renounce those principles,
when they could not but abhor the conclusions drawn from them; for there is
nothing more usual then for men who exceedingly detest some absurd consequence
they see may be drawn from a principle supposed, to reject the principle its
self for the sake of that consequence, which it may be does not necessarily
follow from it, but through the shortness of their own reason does appear to
them to do so. Thus when the Intelligent heathen did apparently see that from
the principles of the Being of God, and the Immortality of souls, did flow all
those unnatural, and inhumane Sacrifices, all those absurd and ridiculous
Rites, all those execrable and profane mysteries, out of a loathing the
Immoralities and impieties which attended these, they were brought to question
the very truth, and certainty of those principles which were capable of being
thus abused.

And therefore I am very prone to suspect the Apology usually made for
Protagoras, Diagoras, and such others of them Sect. 10.
who were accounted Atheists, to be more favorable then true, viz. that they
only rejected those heathen Deities, and not the belief of the Divine nature. I
should think this account of their reputed Atheism rational, were it any ways
evident that they did build their belief of a Divine nature, upon any other
grounds then such as were common to them with those whose worship they so much
derided. And therefore when the Heathens accused the Christians of Atheism, I
have full and clear evidence that no more could be meant thereby then the
rejection of their way of worship, because I have sufficient Assurance from
them that they did believe in a Divine nature, and an instituted Religion most
suitable to the most common received notions of God, which they owned in
opposition to all heathen worship. Which I find not in the least pretended to
by any of the forementioned persons, nor any thing of any different way of
Religion asserted, but only a destruction of that in use among them.

And although the case of Anaxagoras, Clazomenius, and the rest of the Ionicke
Philosophers might seem very different Sect. 11.
from Diagoras, Theodorus, and those beforementioned, because although they
denied the Gods in vulgar repute to be such as they were thought to be (as
Anaxagor as called the Sun (...), a mere globe of fire, for which he was
condemned at Athens to banishment, and sined five talents, De (...). c. 1.
yet the learned Vossius puts in this plea in his behalf, that he was one that
asserted the creation of the world to flow from an eternal mind) although
therefore, I say, the case of the Ionick Philosophers may seem far different
from the others, because of their asserting the production of the world (which
from Thales Milesius was conveyed by Anaeximander and Anaximenes to Anoxagoras)
yet to one that thoroughly considers what they understood by their eternal mind,
they may be sooner cleared from the imputation of Atheism, then irreligion.
Which two certainly ought in this case to be distinguished; for it is very
possible for men meeting with such insuperable difficulties, about the casual
concourse of Atoms for the production of the world, or the eternal existences
of matter, to assert some eternal mind, as the first cause of these things,
which yet they may embrace only as an hypothesis in Philosophy to solve the
phoenomena of nature with, but yet not to make this eternal mind the object of
adoration. And so their asserting a Deity, was only on the same account as the
Tragedians used to bring in their (...), when their Fables were brought to such
an issue, and perplexed with so many difficulties that they saw no way to clear
them again, but to make some God come down upon the Stage to selve the
difficulties they were engaged in; or as Seneca says of many great Families
when they had run up their Genealogies so high that they could go no further,
they then fetched their pedigree from the Gods: So when these Philosophers saw
such incongruities in asserting an infinite and eternal series of matter, they
might by this be brought to acknowledge some active principle which produced
the world, though they were far enough from giving any religious worship to
that eternal mind.

Thus even Epicurus and his followers would not stick to Sect. 12.
assert the being of a God; so they might but circumscribe him within the
heavens, and let him have nothing to do with things that were done on earth.
And how uncertain the most dogmatical of them all were, as to their opinions
concerning the being and nature of their geds, does fully appear from the large
discourses of Tully upon that subject: where is fully manifested their variety
of opinions, and mutual repugnancies, their self contradictions and inconstancy
in their own assertions; which has made me somewhat inclinable to think that
the reason why many of them did to the world own a Deity, was, that they might
not be Martyrs ^or Atheism: Which Tully likewise seems to acknowledge, when
speaking of the punishment of Protagoras, for that speech of his, De diis neque
ut sint, neque ut non sint, habeo dicere. Ex quo equidem existimo tardiores ad
hanc sententiam profitendam De not. Deor. l. 1 c. 63.
multos esse factos, quippe cum poenam ne dubitatio quidem effugere potuisset.
So that for all the verbal asserting of a Deity among them, we have no certain
evidence of their firm belief of it, and much less of any worship and service
they owed unto it. And though, it may be they could not totally excuss the
notions of a Deity out of their minds, partly through that natural sense which
is engraven on the souls of men, partly, as being unable to solve the
difficulties of nature, without a Deity; yet the observing the notorious
vanities of Heathen Worship might make them look upon it as a mere
Philosophical speculation, and not any thing that had an influence upon the
government of men's lives: For as in nature the observing the great mixture of
falsehood and truth made the Academicks deny any certain (...), or rule of
judging truth; and the Scepticks take away all certain assent; so the same
consequence was nnavoidable here, upon the same principle; and that made even
Plato himself so ambiguous and uncertain in his discourses of a Deity,
sometimes making him an eternal mind, sometimes asserting the whole world, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Earth, Souls, and all to be Gods, and even those that were
worshipped among the heathens as Tully tells us out of his Timaeus and de
Legibus; which as Velleius the Epicurean there speaks, Et per se sunt falsa and
sibi invicem repugnantia. This is the first inconvenience following the mixture
of truth and falsehood, for the sake of the falsehood to question the truth its
self it was joined with.

The other is as great which follows, when truth and falsehood are mixed, for
the sake of the truth to embrace the falsehood. Sect. 13.
Which is a mistake as common as the other, because men are apt to think that
things so vastly different as truth and falsehood, could never blend, or be
incorporate together; therefore when they are certain they have some truth,
they conclude no falsehood to be joined with it. And this I suppose to have been
the case of the more credulous and vulgar Heathen, as the other was of the
Philosphers; for they finding mankind to agree in this, not only that there is
a God, but that he must be worshipped, did without scruple make use of the way
of worship among them, as knowing there must be some, and they were ignorant of
any else. And from hence they grew to be as confident believers of all those
fables and traditions on which their Idolatry was founded, as of those first
principles and notions from which the necessity of divine worship did arise.
And being thus habituated to the belief of these things, when truth it self was
divulged among them, they suspected it to be only a corruption of some of their
Fables. This Celsus the Epicurean on all occasions in his Books against the
Christians did fly to. Thus he says the building of the Tower of Babel, and
the confusion Apad Orig. c. Cells. l. 4. p. 174, 179
of Tongues, was taken from the fable of the Aloadae in Homers Odysses; the
story of the Flood from Deucalion, Paradise from Alcinous his gardens, the
burning of Sodom and Gomorrah from the story of Phaeton. Which Origin well
resutes from the far greater antiquity of those relations among the Jews, then
any among the Greeks; and therefore the corruption of the tradition was in
them, and not the Jews. Which must be our only way for finding out which was
the Original, and which the corruption, by demonstrating the undoubted
antiquity of one beyond the other, whereby we must do as Archimedes did by the
crown of Hiero, find out the exact proportions of truth and falsehood which lay
in all those Heathen Fables.

And this now leads to the third account, why truth is so Sect. 14.
hardly discerned from error, even by those who search after it, which is the
great obscurity of the History of Ancient Times, which should decide the
Controversy. For there being an universal agreement in some common principles,
and a frequent resemblance in particular traditions, we must of necessity, for
the clearing the truth from its corruption, have recourse to ancient history,
to see if thereby we can find out where the Original tradition was best
preserved, by what means it came to be corrupted, and whereby we may
distinguish those corruptions from the Truths to which they are annexed: Which
is the design and subject of our future discourse, viz. to demonstrate that
there was a certain original and general tradition preserved in the world
concerning the oldest Ages of the world; that this tradition was gradually
corrupted among the Heathens; that not withstanding this corruption there were
sufficient remainders of it to evidence its true original; that the sull
account of this tradition is alone preserved in those books we call the
Scriptures: That where any other histery seems to cross the report contained in
them, we have sufficient ground to question their credibility; and that there
is sufficient evidence to clear the undoubted certainty of that histery which
is contained in the sacred Records of Scripture. Wherein we shall observe the
same method which Thales took in taking the height of the Pyramids, by
measuring the length of their shadow; so shall we the height and antiquity of
truth from the extent of the fabulous corruptions of it. Which will be a work
of so much the greater difficulty, because the truth we pursue after takes
covert in so great antiquity, and we must be forced to follow its most flying
footsteps through the dark and shady paths of ancient history. For though
history be frequently called the Light of Truth, and the Herald of Times, yet
that light is so faint and dim, especially in Heathen Nations, as not to serve
to discover the face of Truth from her counterseit Error; and that Herald so
little skilled, as not to be able to tell us which is of the Elder house. The
reason is, though Truth be always of greater Antiquity, yet Error may have the
more wrinkled face, by which it often imposes on such who guess antiquity by
deformity, and think nothing so old as that which can give the least account of
its own age. This is evidently the case of those who make the pretense of
ancient history a plea for Insidelity, and think no argument more plausible to
impugn the certainty of Divine Rev^lation with, then the seeming repugnancy of
some pretended histories with the account of ancient time reported in the
Bible. Which being a pretext so unworthy, and designed for solill an end, and
so frequently made use of, by such who account Infidelity a piece of antiquity
as well as reason, it may be worth our while to show, that it is not more
liable to be baffled with reason, then to be confuted by Antiquity.

In order therefore to the removing of this stumbling block in our way, I shall
first evince that there is no certain credibility Sect. 15.
in any of those ancient histories which seem to contradict the Scriptures, nor
any ground of reason why we should assent to them, when they differ from the
Bible: and then prove that all those undoubted characters of a most certain and
authentic history are legible in those records contained in Scripture.
Whereby we shall not only show the unreasonableness of Infidelity, but the
rational evidence which our faith does stand on as to these things. I shall
demonstrate the first of these, viz that there is no ground of assent to any
ancient histories which give an account of things different from the
Scriptures, from these arguments; the apparent desect, weakness, and
insufficiency of them as to the giving an account of elder times; The monstrous
confusion, ambiguity, and uncertainty of them in the account which they give;
the evident partiality of them to themselves, and inconsistency with each
other. I begin with the first of these, the defect and insufficiency of them to
give in such an account of elder times as may amount to certain credibility;
which if cleared, will of its self be sufficient to manifest the incompetency
of those records, as to the laying any foundation for any firm assent to be
given to them. Now this defect and insufficiency of those histories is either
more general, which lies in common to them all, or such as may be observed in a
particular consideration of the histories of those several Nations which have
pretended highest to Antiquity.

The General defect is the want of timely records to preserve their histories
in. For it is most evident, that the truest Sect. 16.
history in the world is liable to various corruptions through length of time,
if there be no certain way of preserving it entire. And that, through the
frailty of memory in those who had integrity to preserve it, through the
gradual increase of Barbarism and Ignorance, where there are no ways of
instruction, and through the subtilty of such whose interest it may be to
corrupt and alter that tradition. If we find such infinite variety and
difference of men, as to the histories of their own times, when they have all
possible means to be acquainted with the truth of them; what account can we
imagine can be given by those who had no certain way of preserving to posterity
the most authentic relation of former Ages? Especially, it being most evident,
that where any certain way of preserving tradition is wanting, a people must
soon degenerate into the greatest stupidity and Barbarism, because all will be
taken up in minding their own petty concerns, and no encouragement at all given
to such public spirits, who would mind the credit of the whole Nation. For
what was there for such to employ themselves upon, or spend their time in, when
they had no other kind of Learning among them, but some general traditions
conveyed from Father to Son, which might be learned by such who followed
nothing but domestic employments? So that the sons of Noah, after their
several dispersions and plantations of several Countries, did gradually
degenerate into Ignorance and Barbarism: for upon their first settling in any
Country, they found it employment sufficient to cultivate the Land, and fit
themselves habitations to live in, and to provide themselves of necessities for
their mutual comfort and subsistence. Besides this, they were often put to
removes from one place to another, where they could not conveniently reside
(which Thucydides speaks much of as to the ancient state of Greece) and it was
a great while before they came to imbody themselves together in Towns and
Cities, and from thence to spread into Provinces, and to settle the bounds and
extents of their Territories. The first age after the plantation of a Country
being thus spent, the next saw it necessary to fall close to the work of
husbandry, not only to get something out of the earth for their subsistence;
but when by their diligence they had so far improved the ground, that they had
no^ only enough for themselves, but ^o spare to others, they then found out a
way for commerce one with ano her by Exchange. This way of traffic made them
begin to raise their hopes higher of enriching themselves; which when some of
them had done, they bring the poorer under their power and reign as Lords over
them; these rich with their dependants strive to outvy each other, whence came
wars and mutual contentions, till they who got the better over their
adversaries, took still greater authority into their hands (thence at first
every City almost, and adjacent Territory, had a King over it) which by
conflicting with each other, at last brought several Cities and Territories
under the power of one particular person, who thereby came to reign as sole
Monarch over all within his dominions.

For although there be some reason to think that the Leaders of several
Colonies had at first superiority over all that Sect. 17.
went with them; yet there being evidence in few Nations of any continued
succession of Monarchs from the posterity of Noah, and so great evidence of so
many petty royalties almost in every City (as we read of such multitudes of
Kings in the small territory of Canaan, when Joshua conquered it) this makes it
at least probable to me, that after the death of the first Leader, by reason of
their poverty and dispersedness of habitations, they did not incorporate
generally into any civil government under one head, but did rise by degrees in
the manner before set down; but yet so that in the petty divisions some
prerogative might be given to him who derived his pedigree the nearest from the
first Founder of that plantation; which in all probability is the meaning of
Thucydides, who tells us when the riches of Greece began to increase, and Lib.
1. b^st. p. 10. Ed. Port.
their power improved, Tyrannies were erected in most Cities ((...)) for before
that time Kingdoms with honors limited were hereditary) for so the Scholiast
explains it, (...). This then being the state and case of most Nations in the
first ages after their plantation, there was no likelihood at all of any great
improvement in knowledge among them; nay so far from it, that for the first
ages, wherein they conflicted with poverty and necessity, there was a necessary
decay among them, of what knowledge had been conveyed to them; because their
necessities kept them in continual employment; and after that they conquered
them, they began to conquer each other, that till such time as they were settled
in peace under established Commonwealths, there was no leisure, nor
opportunity for any Arts and Sciences to flourish, without which all certain
histories of their own former state must vanish and dwindle into some fabulous
stories. And so we find they did in most nations, which thence are able to give
no other account of themselves, but that they sprung out of the earth where
they lived; from which opinion the Athenians used to wear of old their golden
grasshoppers, as Thucydides relates. What account can we then expect of ancient
times from such Nations which were so defective in preserving their own
Originals?

Now this defectiveness of giving testimony of ancient times Sect. 18.
by these Nations, will further appear by these two considerations: First, what
ways there are for communicating knowledge to posterity. Secondly, how long it
was ere these Nations came to be Masters of any way of certain communicating
their conceptions to their Successors. Three general ways there are whereby
knowledge may be propagated from one to another, by representative symbols, by
speech, and by letters. The first of these was most common in those elder
times, for which purpose Clemens Alexandrinus produces the testimony of Strom.
1. 5.
an ancient Grammarian Dionysius Thrax in his Exposition of the symbol of the
wheels: (...): That some persons made a representation of their actions to
others, not only by speech, but by symbols too. Which any one who is any ways
conversant in the Learning of those ancient times, will find to have been the
chief way of propagating it (such as it was) from one to another, as is evident
in the Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, and the custom of symbols from thence
derived among the Grecian Philosophers, especially the Pythagoreans. It was
the solemn custom of the Egyptians to wrap up all the little knowledge they
had under such mystical representations, which were unavoidably clogged with
two inconveniences very unsuitable to the propagation of knowledge, which were
obscurity and ambiguity: for it not only cost them a great deal of time to
gather up such symbolical things which might represent their conceptions; but
when they had pitched upon them, they were liable to a great variety of
interpretations, as is evident in all those remainders of them, preserved by
the Industry of some ancient Writers, as in their (...), or golden Images of
their Gods, they had ingraved two dogs, an hawk, and an Ibis. By the dogs some
understood the two Hemisphaeres, others the two Tropicks; by the hawk some
understood the Sun, others the Aequinoctial; by the Ibis some the Moon, others
the Zodiac, as is evident in Clemens, who reports it. This way then is a most
unfit way to convey any ancient tradition, by being both obscure, ambiguous,
and unable to express so much as to give any certain light to future ages of
the passages of the precedent.

The other ways of conveying knowledge, are either by speech, or by letters.
The first must be by some vocal Cabala Sect. 19.
delivered down from Father to Son; but words being of so perishing a nature,
and man's memory so weak and frail in retaining them, it is necessary for a
certain communication of knowledge, that some way should be found out more
lasting then words, more firm then memory, more faithful then tradition: which
could not otherwise be imagined, then that the Author of his own conceptions
should himself leave them to the view of all posterity; in order to which, some
way must be contrived whereby men's voices might be seen, and men's fingers
speak. But how to express all kind of sounds, with the several draughts of a
pen, and to confine them within the compass of 24 letters, is deservedly called
by Galileo, admirandarum omnium inventionum humanarum signaculum, the choicest
of all humane inventions. And had we no other evidence of the great obscurity
of ancient history, the great difference as to the first inventer of letters,
would be a sufficient demonstration of it. For almost every Nation has had a
several Author of them: The Jews derive them from Adam or Moses; the Egyptians
attribute their invention to Thoyt or Mercury; the Grecians, to Cadmus, the
Phoenicians to Taautus, the Latins to Saturn, others to the Aethiopians: And
lest the Pygmies should be without their enemies, some think they were found
out a gruum volatu, from the manner of the flying of cranes. Thus it has
happened with most Nations; what was first among themselves, they thought to be
the first in the world.

But by whomsever they were first invented, we are certain they were but lately
in use in that Nation, which has most Sect. 19.
vainly arrogated the most to its self in point of Antiquity, and yet had the
least reason (I mean the Graecians.) Thence the Egyptian Priest Patenit truly
told Solon the Greeks were Procl. in Tim. c. App. l. 1.
always children, because they had nothing of the antiquities of former ages.
If we may believe Josephus, they had no writings earlier then Homer; but herein
he is conceived to have served his cause too much, because of the Inscription
of Amphytrio at Thebes in the Temple of Apollo Ismenius in the old Ionick
letters, and two others of the same Hist. l. 5.
age to be seen in Herodotus, and because of the writings of Lynus, Orpheus,
Musaeus, Oroebantius, Traezenius, Thaletas, v. Boch. Geogr. p. 2. l. 1. c. 26.
Melesander, and others. This we are certain of, the Grecians had not the use
of letters among them till the time of Cadmus, the Phoenicians coming into
Greece, whither he came to plant a Colony of Phoenicians there, whence arose
Apud P^ot Biblioth. l. 37.
the story of his pursuit of Europa, as Conon in Photius tells us.

And it is very probable which learned men have long since observed, that the
name Cadmus comes from the Hebrew (...) and may relate as an appellative either
to his dignity, as Iunius in his Academia conjectures, or more probably to his
Country, the East, which is frequently called (...) in Scripture. Some have
conjectured further, that his proper name was (...), upon what reason I know
not, unless from hence, that thence by a duplication of the word, came the
Greek (...), who seems to have been no other then Cadmus, as will appear by
comparing their stories together. Only one was the name his memory was
preserved by at Athens, where the Cadmeans inhabited, as appears by the
Gephyraei whom Herodotus tells us were Phoenicians that came with Cadmus, (and
others fancy the Academia there Hist. l. 5.
was originally called Cadmea) and the name Cadmus was preserved chiefly among
the Baeotians in memory of the Country whence he came: It being likely to be
imposed by them upon his first landing in the Country, as many learned persons
conceive the name of an Hebrew was given to Abraham by the Canaanites upon his
passing over the river Euphrates. On this account then it stands to reason,
that the name which was given him as a stranger, should be longest preserved in
the place where it was first imposed. Or if we take (...) in the other sense,
as it imports antiquity; so there is still a higher probability of the assinity
of the names of Cadmus and Ogyges; for this is certain that the Greeks had no
higher name for a matter of Antiquity then to call it (...), as the Scholiast
on Hesiod, Hesychius, Suidas, Eustathius on Dionysius, and many others observe.
And which yet advances the probability higher, Lutatius or Lactantius the
Scholiast on Statius, tells us, the other Greeks In Theb. l. 1
had this from the Thebans; for says he, Thebani res antiquas Ogygias
nominabant. But that which puts it almost beyond mere probability is, that
Varro, Festus, Pausanias, Apollonius, Aeschylus, and others make Ogyges the
founder of the Baeotian Thebes, which were thence called Ogygiae; and Strabo
and Stephanus (...) further say, that the whole Country of Baeotia was called
Ogygia; now all that mention the Story of Cadmus, attribute to him the founding
of the Baeotian Thebes. And withal it is observable that in the Vatican
Appendix of the Greek, Proverbs, we Cent. 4. Prove. 52.
read Cadmus called Ogyges; (...). Meursius indeed would have it corrected,
(...), as it is read in Suidas; but by the favor of so learned a man, De Regno
A^t. lib. 1. cap. 5.
it seems more probable that Suidas should be corrected by that, he bringing no
other evidence of any such person as Cadmus a son of Ogyges, but only that
reading in Suidas, whereas we have discovered many probable grounds to make
them both the same. That which I would now infer from hence is, the utter
impossibility of the Greeks giving us any certain account of ancient times,
when a thing so modern in comparison as Cadmus his coming into Greece, is
thought by them a matter of so great antiquity, that when they would describe a
thing very ancient, they described it by the name of Ogyges, who was the same
with Cadmus. Now Cadmus his coming into Greece, is generally, by Historians,
placed about the time of Joshua, whence some (I will not say how happily) have
conjectured, that Cadmus and his company were some of the Canaanites who fled
from Joshua, as others are supposed to have done into Africa, if Procopius his
pillar has strength enough to bear such a conjecture. But there is too great a
confusion about the time of Cadmus his arrival in Greece, to affirm any thing
with any great certainty about it.

Yet those who disagree to that former Computation, place it yet lower. Vossius
makes Agenor, Cadmus his Father, cotemporary D^ Idol. l. 1. ^. 13.
with the latter end of Moses, or the beginning of Joshua; and so Cadmus his
time must fall somewhat after. Iac. Capellus places Cadmus in the third year
of Othoniel. Parius the Author of the Greek Chronicle, in the Marmora
Arundelliana makes his coming to Greece to be in the time of Hellen the son of
Deucalion; which Capellus fixes on the 73. of Moses, A. M. 2995. But Mr.
Seldom conceives it somewhat lower: and so it must be, if we follow Clemens
Alexandrinus, who places it in the time of Lynceus King of the Argives, which
he says was (...), in the 11. Generation after Moses, which Strom. 1.
will fall about the time of Samuel: But though it should be so late, it would
be no wonder it should be reckoned a matter of so great antiquity among the
Grecians; for the eldest Records they have of any King at Athens, begins at the
time of Moses, whose co-temporary Cecrops is generally thought to be; for at
his time it is the Parian Chronicle begins. Now that the Grecians did receive
their very letters from the Phoenicians by Cadmus, is commonly acknowledged by
the most learned of the Greeks themselves, as appears by the ingenuous
confession of Herodotus, Philostratus, Critius in Athenaeus, Zenodotus in
Laertius, Timon Philiasius in Sixtus Empiricus, and many others: so that it
were to no purpose to offer to prove that, which they who arrogate so much to
themselves, do so freely acknowledge. Which yet has been done to very good
purpose by Joseph Scaliger and Not. in Eusebius. Chron. n. 1617. Geogr. p. 2. l.
1. cap. 20.
Bochartus, and many others from the form of the Letters, the order and the
names of them. It seems probable that at first they might use the form of the
Phoenician Letters, in which Herodotus tells us the three old Inscriptions were
extant; and Diodorus tells us, that the brass pot which Cadmus offered to
Minerva Lyndia, had an Inscription on it in the Phoenician Letters, but
afterward the form of the Letters came by degrees to be changed, when for
their greater expedition in writing they left the old way of writing toward
the left hand, for the more natural and expedite way of writing toward the
right, by which they exchanged the site of the strekes in several Letters, as
is observed by the forecited Learned Authors.

Not that the old Ionick Letters were nearer the Phoenician, and distinct from
the modern, as Ios. Scaliger in his learned Discourse on the original of the
Greek Letters conceives; b. in Eusebius. n. 1617
for the Ionick Letters were nothing else but the full Alphabet of 24. with the
additions of Palamedes, and Simonides Cous, as Pliny tells us, that all the
Greeks consented in the use of the Ionick Letters; but the old Attick Hist. l
7. cap. 57.
Letters came nearer the Phoenician, because the Athenians, long after the
Alphabet was increased to 24. continued still in the use of the old 16. which
were brought in by Cadmus, which must needs much alter the way of writing; for
in the old Letters, they writ THEO^ for (...), which made Pliny, with a great
deal of learning and truth, say, that the old Greek Letters were the same with
the Roman. Thence the Greeks called their ancient Letters (...), as v.
Ma^ssacu^ in Harpocr. Salmas. in Consecrat. Templ. p. 30.
appears by Harpocration and Hesychius, not that they were so much distinct
from others, but because they did not admit of the addition of the other eight
Letters, which difference of writing is in a great measure the cause of the
different dialect between the Athenians and Ionians properly so called.

We see then the very Letters of the Greeks were no elder Sect. 21.
then Cadmus; and for any considerable learning among them, it was not near so
old. Some assert indeed that History began from the time of Cadmus; but it is
by a mistake of him for a younger Cadmus, which was Cadmus Milesius, whom Pliny
makes to be the first Writer in Prose; but that he after attributes to
Pherecydes Syrius, and History to Cadmus Not. hist. l. 5. c. 29. l. 7. c. 56.
Milesius: and therefore I think it far more probable, that it was some writing
of this latter Cadmus, which was transcribed and epitomized by Bion
Proconesius, although Clemens Alexandrinus seems to attribute it to the Elder.
Strom. l. 6.
We see how unable then the Grecians were to give an account of elder times,
that were guilty of so much infancy and nonage, as to begin to learn their
Letters almost in the noontide of the World, and yet long after this to the
time of the first Olympiad all their relations are accounted fabulous. A fair
account then we are like to have from them of the first antiquities of the
world, who could not speak plain truth till the world was above 3000. years
old; for so it was when the Olympiads began.

So true is the observation of Justin Martyr, (...)): the Greeks had no exact
history of themselves before the Olympiads; but of that more afterward.

This is now the first defect which does infringe the credibility of these
Histories, which is the want of timely and early records to digest their own
history in.

CHAP. II. Of the Phoenician and Egyptian History.
The particular defect in the Historys of the most learned Heathen Nations.
First the Phoenicians. Of Sanchoniathon, his Antiquity, and Fidelity. Of
Jerom-baal, Baal-Berith. The Antiquity of Tire. Scaliger vindicated against
Bochartus Abibalus. The vanity of Phoenician Theology. The imitation of it by
the Gnostics. Of the Egyptian History. The Antiquity and Authority of Hermes
Trismegistus. Of his Inscriptions on Pillars, transcribed by Manetho. His
Fabulousness thence discovered. Terra Seriadica. Of Seths Pillars in Josephus,
and an account whence they were taken.

HAving already showed a general defect in the Ancient Sect. 1.
Heathen Histories, as to an account of ancient times; we now come to a closer,
and more particular consideration of the Histories of those several Nations
which have born the greatest name in the world for learning and antiquity.
There are four Nations chiefly which have pretended the most to antiquity in
the learned world, and whose Historians have been thought to deliver any thing
contrary to holy Writ in their account of ancient times, whom on that account
we are obliged more particularly to consider; and those are the Phoenicians,
Chaldeans, Egyptians, and Graecians; we shall therefore see what evidence of
credibility there can be in any of these, as to the matter of antiquity of
their Records, or the Histories taken from them. And the credibility of an
Historian depending much upon the certainty and authority of the Records he
makes use of: we shall both consider of what value and antiquity the pretended
Records are, and particularly look into the age of the several Historians. As
to the Graecians, we have seen already an utter impossibility of having any
ancient Records among them, because they wanted the means of preserving them,
having so lately borrowed their Letters from other Nations. Unless as to their
account of times they had been as careful as the old Romans were to number
their years by the several clavi, or nails, which they fixed on the Temple
doors: which yet they were not in any capacity to do, not growing up in an
entire body, as the Roman Empire did, but lying so much seattered and divided
into so many pet^y Republics, that they minded very little of concernment to
the whole Nation. The other three Nations have dese^vedly a name of far greater
antiquity then any the Graecians could ever pretend to; who yet were
unmeasurably guilty of an impotent affectation of antiquity; and arrogating to
themselves, as growing on their own ground, what was with a great deal of pains
and industry gathered but as the gleanings from the fuller harvest of those
nations they resorted to. Which is not only true as to the greatest part of
their Learning, but as to the account likewise they give of ancient times; the
chief and most ancient Histories among them being only a corruption of the
History of the elder Nations; especially Phoenicia and Egypt: for of these two
Philo Biblius the Translator of the ancient Phoenician Historian Sanchoniathon,
says, they were (...), Apud Eusebius. praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 8. p. 23: Ed. R. St.
The most ancient of all the Barbarians, from whom the others derived their
Theology; which he there particularly instanceth in.

We begin therefore with the Phoenician History, whose most ancient and famous
Historian is Sanchoniathon, so much Sect. 2.
admired and made use of by the shrewdest antagonist ever Christianity met
with, the Philosopher Porphyrius. But therein was seen the wonderful providence
of God, that out of this eater came forth meat, and out of that Lion honey;
that the most considerable testimonies by him produced against our Religion,
were of the greatest strength to refute his own. For he being of too great
Learning to be satisfied with the vain pretenses of the Graecians, he made it
his business to search after the most ancient Records, to find out somewhat in
them to confront with the antiquity of the Scriptures; but upon his search
could find none of greater veneration then the Phoenician History, nor any
Author contending for age with this Sanchoniathon. Yet when he had made the
most of his Testimony, he was fain to yield him younger then Moses^, though he
supposes him elder then the Trojan Wars. And yet herein was he guilty of a
most gross (...), not much exceeding the Graecians in his skill in Chronology,
when he makes Semiramis coexistent with the Siege of Troy: as is evident in his
testimony produced at large by Eusebius out of his fourth Book against the
Christians; nay, Praep. Evang. l. 10. c. 8. p. 285.
he goes to prove the truth of Sanchoniathons History by the agreement of it
with that of Moses concerning the Jews, both as to their names and places,
(...): whereby he does evidently assert the greater Truth and Antiquity of
Moses his History, when he proves the truth of Sanchoniathons from his
consonancy with that.

Two things more Porphyrie insists on to manifest his credibility; Sect. 3.
the one I suppose relates to what he reports concerning the Jews, the other
concerning the Phoenicians themselves. For the first, that he made use of the
Records of Ierombaal the Priest of the God Ieuo, or rather Iao; for the other,
that he used all the records of the several Cities, and the sacred inscriptions
in the Temples. Who that Ierombaal was, is much discussed among learned men,
the finding out of which, has been thought to be the most certain way to
determine the age of Sanchoniathon. The learned Bochartus conceives him to be
Gideon, who in Scripture Geogr. Sacr. p. 2. l. 2. c. 17.
is called Ierub-baal, which is of the same sense in the Phoenician language,
only after their custom changing one b into m, as in Ambubajae Sambuca, etc.
But admitting the conjecture of this learned person concerning Ierub-baal, yet
I see no necessity of making Sanchoniathon and him co-temporary; for I no where
find any thing mentioned in Porphyrie implying that, but only that he made use
of the records of Ierub-baal, which he might very probably do at a considerable
distance of time from him, whether by those (...), we mean the Annals written
by him, or the records concerning his actions; either of which might give
Sanchoniathon considerable light into the history either of the Isralites or
Phoenicians. And it is so much the more probable, because presently after the
death of Gideon, the Israelites worshipped Baal-berith; by which most probably
is meant Jud. 8. 33.
the Idol of Berith or Berytus, the place where Sanchoniathen lived; by which
means the Berytians might come easily acquainted with all the remarkable
passages of Ierubbaal.

But I cannot conceive how Sanchoniathon could be cotemporary Sect. 4.
with Gideon (which yet if he were, he falls 182 years short of Moses)
especially because the building of Tire, which that Author mentions as an
ancient thing (as has been observed by Scaliger) is by our best Chronologers
placed about the time of Gideon, and about 65 years before Not. in fragm.
Graec. p. 40.
the destruction of Troy. I know Bochartus, to avoid this argument, has
brought some evidence of several places called Tyrus in Phoenicia, from Scylax
his Periplus; but none, that there was any more then one Tyrus of any great
repute for antiquity. Now this Tyrus Josephus makes but 240 years elder then
Solomon's Temple, and Justin but one year elder then the destruction of Troy.
Neither can any A^tiq. l. 8.
account be given why Sidon should be so much celebrated by ancient Poets, as
Strabo tells us, when Tire is not so much as mentioned by Homer, if the famous
Tire were of so Geogr. l. 16.
great antiquity and repute as is pretended. It cannot be denied but that there
is mention in Scripture of attire elder then this we speak of, which we read of
Joshua 19. 29. which some think to be that which was called Palaetyrus, which
Strabo makes to be 30 furlongs distant from the great Tire; but Pliny includes
Palaetyrus within the circumference of Tire, and so makes the whole circuit of
the City to be 19 Hist. Not. l. 5. c. 19.
miles. It is not to me so certain to what place the name of Palaetyrus refers,
whether to any Tyrus before the first building of the great Tire, or to the
ruins of the great Tire after its destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, compared with
the new Tire, which was built more inward to the Sea, and was after besieged by
Alexander the great. It may seem probable that Palaetyrus may relate to the
ruins of the great Tire, in that it was after included in its circuit, and
chiefly because of the prediction in Ezekiel 26. 4. Thou shall be built no
more; for the Tire erected after, was built not on the Continent, but almost in
the Sea. If so, then Palaetyrus, or the old famous Tyrus might stand upon a
rock upon the brink-of the Continent, and so the great argument of Bo-chartus
is easily answered, which is, that after it is mentioned in Sanchoniathons
history, that Hypsouranius dwelt in Tire upon the falling out between him and
his brother Usous, Usous first adventured (...), to go to sea, which, says he,
evidently manifests that the Tire mentioned by Sanchoniathon was not the famous
Insular Tyrus, but some other Tire. This argument, I say, is now easily
answered, if the famous Tire before its destruction by Nebuchadnezzar did stand
upon the Continent; for then it might be the old famous Tire still,
notwithstanding what Sanchoniathon speaks of the first venturing to sea after
Tire was built. So then I conceive these several ages agreeable to the same
Tire; the first was when it was a high strong rock on the seaside without many
inhabitants; so I suppose it was when mentioned by Joshua as the bound of the
tribe of Asher. The second Age was, when it was built a great City by the
Sidonians upon the former place, and grew very populous and famous, which
lasted till Nebuchadnezzars time; after this, though it were never built up in
the Continent again, yet a little further into the Sea, a new and goodly City
was erected, which was called new Tire, and the remains on the Continent side
Palaetyrus. Thus far then we have made good Scaligers opinion against
Bochartus, that the famous Sanchoniathon is not so old as he is pretended to be.

Which will be further manifest, if that Abibalus, to whom Sanchoniathon is
supposed to dedicate his History, were the Sect. 5.
Father to Hiram, co-temporary with Solomon, as Ios. Scaliger supposes, who
was 154 years after the destruction of Troy. Not. in Eusebius. Chr. p. 1^.
In the Tyrian Dynasties produced by Scaliger out of the Phoenician Annals,
this Abibalus is the first who occurs, and is co-temporary with David:
Sanchoniathon then is of no Canon. 1. sag. l. 2
great antiquity, if this were the time he lived in. But Bochartus well
observes, that it is not spoken of Abibalus King of Tire, but of Abibalus King
of Berytus, whom we may allow to be somewhat nearer the time of Moses then the
other Abibalus, as the Phoenician Annals make it appear, as Porphyry tells us;
but yet we find his antiquity is not so great as to be able to contest with
Moses, as Porphyry himself confesses, although we may freely acknowledge him
to be far older then any of the Greek Historians; which is all Vossius contends
for, and sufficiently proves; but we are De hist. Graec. l. 1. c. 1.
far from yielding him co-temporary with Semiramis, as Porphyry would have him,
and yet makes him junior to Moses, and to live about the time of the Trojan
war, which is to reconcile the distance of near 800 years: such miserable
confusion was there in the best learned Heathens in their computation of
ancient times.

Having thus cleared the antiquity of Sanchoniathon, and the Phoenician
History, we are next to consider the fidelity Sect. 6.
of it. This Sanchoniathon is highly commended for, both by Porphyry, and his
Translator into Greek, Philo Byblius, who lived in Adrians time; and Theodoret
thinks his name in the Phoenician language signifies (...), which Bochartus
endeavors to fetch from thence, and conceives the name to be given him when he
set himself to write his History; and he wishes, and so do we, that he had
been then vir sui nominis, and made it appear by his writing that he had been a
Lover of truth. Philo says he was (...), a very learned and inquisitive man;
but either he was not so diligent to enquire after, or not so happy to light on
any certain records; or if he did, he was not overmuch a Lover of truth, in
delivering them to the world. How faithful he was in transcribing his history
from his records, we cannot be sufficient Judges of, unless we had those books
of Taautus, and the sacred Inscriptions, and the records of Cities, which he
pretends to take his history from, to compare them together. But by what
remains of his history, which is only the first book concerning the Phoenician
Theology extant in Eusebius, we have little reason to believe his history of
the world and eldest times, without further proof then he gives of it, there
being so much obscurity and confusion in it, when he makes a Chaos to be the
first beginning of all things, and the Gods to come after, makes the (...) and
(...), the son of Chryser or Vulcan, and again the man born of earth to be
several generations after (...) and (...), who were the first mortal men; and
yet from the two brethren (...) and (...) came two Gods, whereof one was called
(...), and the other (...), and this latter was worshipped with as much
veneration as any of their Gods. Yet from these things, as foolish and
ridiculous as they are, it is very probable the Gnostics and the several
subdivisions of them might take the rise of their several Aeones and (...): for
here we find (...) and (...) made two of the number of the Gods, but the rest
of the names, they according to their several Sects took a liberty of altering,
according to their several fancies. This is far more probable to me, then that
either Hesiods (...) should be the ground of them; or the opinion of a late
German Divine, who conceives that Philo Byblius did in imitation of the
Gnostics, form this whole story of the Phoenician Theology. For although I am
far from believing what Kircher somewhere tells us, that he had once got a
sight of Sanchoniathons Original History (it being not the first thing that
learned man has been deceived in) yet I see no ground of so much Peevishness,
as because this history pretends to so much antiquity, we should therefore
presently condemn it as a figment of the Translator of it. For had it been so,
the Antagonists of Porphyry, Methodius, Apollinaris, but especially Eusebius,
so well versed in antiquities, would have found out so great a cheat: Although
I must confess they were oft-times deceived with piae frauds; but then it was
when they made for the Christians, and not against them, as this did. But
besides a fabulous confusion of things together, we have some things delivered
concerning their Gods, which are both contrary to all natural notions of a
Deity, and to those very common principles of humanity, which all acknowledge.
As when (...), or Saturn, suspecting his son Sadidus, destroyed him with his
own hands, and warred against his Father Uranus, and after destroyed him
likewise, and buried his brother Atlas alive in the earth; which being taken,
as Philo Byblius contends they ought to be, in the literal sense, are such
incongruities to all notions of a divine nature, that it is the greatest wonder
there should be any that should believe there was any God, and believe these
were Gods together.

But although there be so many gross fables and inconsistencies in this
Phoenician Theology, that are so far from meriting Sect. 7.
belief in themselves, that it were a sufficient forfeiture of reason to say
they were credible; yet when we have a greater light in our hands of divine
revelation, we may in this dung^on find out many excellent remainders of the
ancient tradition, though miserably corrupted, as concerning the Creation, the
Original of Idolatry, the invention of Arts, the foundation of Cities, the
story of Abraham, of which in their due place. That which of all seems the
clearest in this Theology, is the open owning the original of Idolatry to have
been from the consecration of some eminent persons after their death, who have
found out some useful things for the world while they were living: Which the
subtiller Greeks would not admit of, viz. that the persons they worshipped were
once men, which made them turn all into Allegories and Mystical senses to blind
that Idolatry they were guilty of the better among the ignorant: which makes
Philo Byblius so very angry with the Neoterick Graecians, as he calls them,
(...): That with Apud Eusebius. Praep. l. 1. c. 6. p. 23.
a great deal of force and straining they turned all the stories of the Gods
into Allegories and Physical discourses. Which is all the Ingenuity that I know
is to be found in this Phoenician Theology, that therein we find a free
acknowledgement of the beginning of the Heathen Idolatry; and therefore
Sanchoniathon was as far from advancing Porphyries Religion, as he was in the
least from overthrowing the credibility of Christianity.

The next we come to then, are the Egyptians; a people so unreasonably given
to fables, that the wisest action they did, Sect. 8.
was to conceal their Religion; and the best office their Gods had, was to hold
their fingers in their mouths, to command silence to all that came to worship
them. But we design not here any set discourse concerning the vanity of the
Egyptian Theology, which yet was so monstrously ridiculous, that even those
who were overrun with the height of Idolatry themselves, did make it the
object of their scorn and laughter. And certainly had we no other demonstration
of the greatness of man's Apostasy and degeneracy, the Egyptian Theology would
be an irrefragable evidence of it: For who could but imagine a strange lowness
of spirit in those who could fall down and worship the basest and most
contemptible of creatures. Their Temples were the best Hieroglyphics of
themselves, fair and goodly structures without, but within some deformed
creature enshrined for veneration. But though the Egyptians had lost their
credit so much as to matters of Religion; yet it may be supposed, that they who
were so famed for wisdom and antiquity, should be able to give a full and exact
account of themselves through all the ages of the world. And this they are so
far from being defective in, that if you will believe them, they will give you
an account of themselves many thousands of years before ever the world was
made; but the peculiar vanity of their Chronology will be handled afterward:
That we now enquire into, is, what certain records they had of their own
antiquity, which might call for assent from any unprejudiced mind; whether
there be any thing really answering that loud and unparalleld cry of antiquity
among the Egyptians, whereby they will make all other Nations in comparison of
them to be but of yesterday, and to know nothing. We question not now their
pretense to wisdom and learning, but are the more in hopes to meet with some
certain way of satisfaction concerning ancient times, where learning is
supposed to have flourished so much, when even Greece it self was accounted
Barbarous.

The great Basis of all the Egyptian History depends on the credit of their
ancient Hermes, whom out of their veneration Sect. 9.
they called Trismegistus; for to him they ascribe the first invention of their
learning, and all excellent Arts, from him they derive their history; their
famous Historian Man^tho, professing to transcribe his Dynastyes from the
pillars of Hermes. We shall therefore first see of what credit and antiquity
Hermes himself was, and of what account particularly those pillars were which
hold up all the Fabric of Manetho his Dynastyes. For Hermes himself, the story
concerning him is so various and uncertain, that some have from thence
questioned whether ever there were such a person or no, because of the
strangely different account that is given of him. Cotta in Tully, in order to
the establishing his Academical doctrine of withholding assent, mentions no De
not. Deor. l. 3.
fewer then five Mercuries; of which, two he makes Egyptian, one of them the
Hermes we now speak of, whom the Egyptians call Thoyth, and was the Author both
of their Laws and Letters. The Egyptians, as appears by Diodorus, make him to
be a sacred Scribe to Osiris, and to have instructed Isis; and when Osiris went
upon any warlike Expedition, he committed the management of affairs to him for
his great wisdom. The Phoenicians preserve his memory among them too: for Philo
Byblius says, that Sanchoniathon described his Theology from the books of
Taautus, whom the Egyptians call Thoyth, who was the first inventer of Letters,
and was a Counselor to Saturn, whose advice he much relied on. What now must
we pitch upon in so great uncertainties? how come the Phoenician and Egyptian
Theology to come both from the same person, which are conceived so much to
differ from each other? If we make the stories of Osiris and Isis to be
fabulous, and merely Allegorical, as Plutarch does, then Mercury himself must
become an Allegory, and the Father of Letters must be an Hieroglyphick. If we
admit the Egyptians narrations to be real, and seek to reduce them to truth,
and thereby make Osiris to be Mitsraim the son of Cham, who first ruled in
Egypt, all that we can then affirm of Hermes, is, that he might be some useful
person, who had a great influence both upon the King and State, and did first
settle the Nation in a politic way of government, whose memory on that accout
the Egyptians might preserve with the greatest veneration; and when they were
once fallen into that Idolatry of consecrating the memories of the first
contributers to the good of mankind, they thought they had the greatest reason
to adore his memory, and so by degrees attributed the invention of all useful
things to him. For so it is apparent they did, when Iamblichus tells us the
Egyptians attributed all their books to De Mist. l. 1.
Mercury, as the Father of them; because he was reputed the Father of wit and
learning, they made all the offsprings of their brains to bear their Fathers
name. And this has been the great reason the world has been so long time
imposed upon with varieties of books going under the name of Hermes
Tresmegistus. For he was not the first of his kind, who in the early days of
the Christian world obtruded upon the world that Cento or confused mixture of
the Christian, Platonic, and Egyptian doctrine, which is extant still under
the name of Hermes Trismegistus; whose vanity and falsehood has been
sufficiently detected by learned men. There were long before his time extant
several Mercurial books, as they were called, which none of the wiser Heathen
did ever look on as any other then Fables and Impostures, as appears by
Porphyries letter to Arebo the Egyptian Priest, and Iamblichus his answer to it
in his Book of the Egyptian Mysteries.

We have then no certainty at all, notwithstanding the Sect. 10.
great fame of Hermes, of any certain records of ancient times, unless they be
contained in those sacred inscriptions from whence Manetho took his history. It
must be acknowledged that the most ancient way of preserving any monuments of
learning in those elder times was by these inscriptions on pillars, especially
among the Egyptians, as is evident from the several testimonies of Galen,
Proclus, Iamblichus, Gal. l. 1. c. Jal. c. 1.

Procl. in Tim. p. 31. Iamb. demyst. c. 2. s. 1.

Sap. c. 2. s. 1.


and the author of the Book called Sapientia secundum Egytios, adjoined to
Aristotle, who all concur in this, that what ever laudable invention they had
among them, it was inscribed on some pillars, and those preserved in their
Temples, which were instead of Libraries to them. Manetho therefore to make his
story the more probable pretends to take all his relations from these sacred
inscriptions; and as Eusebius tells us, translated the whole Egyptian History
into Greek, beginning from their Gods, and continuing his History down near the
time of Darius Codomannus, whom Alexander conquered: for in Eusebius his
Chronica mention is made of Manetho his History, ending 16. year of Artaxerxes
Ochus, which, says Vossius, was in the second year of 107. Olympiad. This
Manetho Gebenyta was High Priest of Heliopolis in the time of Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus, at whose Do hist. Graec. l 1. c. 14.
request he writ his History, which he digested into three Tomes, the first
containing the 11. Dynastyes of the Gods and Heroes, the 2d. 8. Dynasties, the
3 d. 12. all containing, according to his fabulous computation, the sum of
53535. years. These Dynasties are yet preserved, being first epitomized by
Julius Africanus, from him transcribed by Eusebius in his Chronica, from
Eusebius by Georgius Syncellus, out of whom they are produced by Ios. Scaliger,
and may be seen both in Eusebius, and his Canones Isagogici.

Now Manetho, as appears by Eusebius, voucheth this as the main testimony of
his credibility, that he took his History, Sect. 11.
(...). From some pillars in the Land of Seriad, in which they were inscribed
in the sacred dialect by the first Mercury Tyth, and after the stood were
translated out of the sacred dialect into the Greek tongue in Hieroglyphick
Characters, and are laid up in books among the Revestryes of the Egyptian
Temples, by Agathodaemon, the second Mercury, the Father of Tat. Certainly this
fabulous author could not in fewer words have more fully manifested his own
Impostures, nor blasted his own credit more then he has done in these; which
it is a wonder so many Learned men have taken so little notice of, which have
found frequent occasion to speak of Manetho and his Dynastyes. This I shall
make appear by some great improbabilities, and other plain impossibilities
which are couched in them. The improbabilities are, first such pillars, being
in such a place as Seriad, and that place no more spoken of either by himself,
or by any other Egyptians, nor any use made of these ins^riptions by any other
but himself. As to this terra Seriadica where it should be, the very learned
and inquisitive Joseph Scaliger plainly gives out, and ingenuously professes
his ignorance. For in his notes on the fragments of Manetho in Eusebius, when
he comes to that (...), he only says, Quae nobis ignota, quaerant Studiosi.
But Isaac Vossius in his late discourses de aetate mundi, Not. in gr. Eusebius. p.
408.

De at. muad. cap. 10.


cries (...), and confidently persuades himself that it is the same with
Seirath, mentioned Judge. 3. 16. Indeed were there nothing else to be considered
but affinity of names, it might well be the same, but that (...) which we
render the stone-quarries, should signify these pillars of Mercury, is
somewhat hard to conceive. The Seventy render it, as himself observes, (...),
by which they understand graven Images: So the word is used 2 Chronicles. 33. 19.
Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Isai. 10. 19. The vulgar Latin renders it ad locum Idolorum, which
were the certain interpretation if Chytraeus his conjecture were true, that
Eglon had lately set up Idols there; but if it be meant of pillars, I cannot
but approve of Iunius his interpretation, which I conceive bids fairest to be
the genuine sense of the place, viz. that these stones here, were the 12 stones
pitched by Joshua in Gilgal after the Israelites passed over Jordan; and these
stones are said Josh. 4. 19, 20, 21.
to be by Gilgal, Judge. 3. 19. So that notwithstanding this handsome conjecture,
we are as far to seek for the pillars of Mercury as ever we were, and may be so
to the worlds end. Secondly, the standing of these pillars during the stood,
which must be supposed certainly to have some singular virtue in them to resist
such a torrent of waters, which overthrew the strongest built houses, and most
compacted Cities; the plain impossibilities are first, that Manetho should
transcribe his Dynastyes from the beginning of the History of Egypt, to almost
the time of Alexander, out of sacred Inscriptions of Thoyth, who lived in the
beginning of the very first Dynasty according to his own Computation. Sure this
Thoyth was an excellent Prophet, to write an History for above, 0000 years to
come, as Manetho reckons it. Secondly, it is as well still, that this History
after the flood should be translated into Hieroglyphick Characters; what kind
of translation is that? we had thought Hieroglyphics had been representations
of things, and not of sounds and letters, or words: How could this History have
at first been written in any tongue, when it was in Hieroglyphics? Do
Hieroglyphics speak in several Languages, and are they capable of changing
their tongues? But thirdly, it is as good still, that the second Mercury or
Agathodaemon did translate this History so soon after the Flood into Greek: Was
the Greek tongue so much in request so soon after the Flood? that the Egyptian
History for the sake of the Greeks must be translated into their language? Nay,
is it not evident from Herodotus and Diodorus, that the Graecians were not
permitted so much He^odd 2. Diod. l. c. 67.
as any commerce with the Egyptians, till the time of Psammet hicus, which
sell out in the 26. Dynesty of Manetho, and about a Century after the beginning
of the Olympiads. We see then how credible an Author Manetho is, and what truth
there is like to be in the account of ancient times given by the Egyptian
Historians, when the chief of them so lamentably and ominously stumbles in his
very entrance into it.

And yet as fabulous as this account is, which Manetho gives of his taking his
history from these pillars before the Sect. 12.
Flood, I cannot but think that Josephus, an Author otherwise of good credit,
took his famous story of Seths pillars concerning Astronomical observations
before the flood, from this story of Manetho; and therefore I cannot but look
upon them with as jealous an eye as on the other, although I know how fond the
world has been upon that most ancient monument, as is pretended, of learning
in the world. Du Bartas has writ a whole Poem on these pillars, and the truth
is, they are fitter subjects for Poets then any else, as will appear on these
considerations. First, how strangely improbable is it, that the posterity of
Seth, who, as is pretended, did foreknow a destruction of the world to be by a
flood, should busy themselves to write Astronomical observations on pillars,
for the benefit of those who should live after it. Could they think their
pillars should have some peculiar exemption above stronger structures, from the
violence of the rough and furious waters? If they believed the flood absolutely
universal, for whom did they intend their observations? if not, to what end did
they make them, when the persons surviving might communicate their inventions
to them? But secondly, if either one or both these pillars remained, whence
comes it to pass that neither the Chaldeans, nor any of the eldest pretenders
to Astronomy, should neither mention them, nor make any use of them? Nay
thirdly, whence came the study of Astronomy to be so lamentably defective in
those ancient times, if they had such certain observations of the heavenly
bodies gathered by so much experience of the persons who lived before the
Flood? Fourthly, how comes Josephus himself to neglect this remarkable
testimony of the truth of Scripture-history in his books against Appion, if he
had thought it were such as might be relied on? Fifthly, how comes Josephus so
carelessly to set down the place in Syria where these pillars stood, that
inquisitive persons might have satisfied themselves with the sight of the
pillar at least, and what kind of Characters those observations were preserved
in? But now, if we compare this of Josephus with Manetho his story, we shall
find them so exactly resemble each other, that we may well judge all those
pillars to have been taken out of the same quarry. Two things make it yet more
probable: First, the name of the place wherein they stood, which Eustathius in
Hexaemeron takes out of Josephus, and calls (...), the very same place with
that in Manetho. The other is the common use of the name of Seth among the
Egyptians, as not only appears by Plutarch de ^ side and Osiride, but by this
very place of Manctho; where it follows (...), a book of his bearing the title
which Vettius Valens Antiochenus tells us is not called Apud Scaliger. pot. Gr.
p. 438.
(...) but (...). Now therefore Josephus, who frequently uses the Testimony of
Heathen Writers, and frequently of this Manetho, endeavored to bring this
fabulous relation of Manetho as near the truth as he could; therefore in stead
of Thoyth he puts Seth, and the fabulous history of Egypt, the inventions of
the Patriarchs, and Syria in stead of Seriadica, a Country too large to find
these pillars in.

CHAP. III. Of the Chaldean History.
The contest of Antiquity among Heathen Nations, and the ways of deciding it.
Of the Chaldean Astrology, and the foundation of Judicial Astrology. Of the
Zabii, their Founder, who they were, no other then the old Chaldees. Of Berosus
and his History. An account of the fabulous Dynastyes of Berosus and Manetho.
From the Translation of the Scripture history into Greek in the time of
Ptolomy. Of that translation and the time of it. Of Demetrius Phalereus.
Scaligers arguments answered. Manetho writ after the Septuagint, proved against
Kircher; his arguments answered. Of Rabbinical and Arabic Authors, and their
little credit in matter of history. The time of Berosus enquired into, his
writing co-temporary with Philadelphus.

THe next whom our Enquiry leads us to, are the Chaldeans, a Nation of great
and undoubted Antiquity, Sect. 1.
being in probability the first formed into a National Government after the
Flood, and therefore the more capable of having these Arts and Sciences
flourish among them, which might preserve the memory of eldest times to the
view of posterity. And yet even among these who enjoyed all the advantages of
ease, quiet, and a flourishing Empire, we find no undoubted or credible records
preserved, but the same vanity as among the Egyptians, in arrogating antiquity
to themselves beyond all proportion of reason or satisfaction from their own
history, to fill up that vast measure of time with, which makes it most
probable what Diodorus observes of them, that in things pertaining to their
arts they (...). l. 3.
made use of Lunar years of 30 days; so they had need, when Tully tells us that
they boasted of observations of the Stars for 470000 years, which after
Diodorus his computation, and (...) (...).
the vulgar account of years from the beginning of the world, will fall near
upon, if not before the Creation. It had been impossible for them to have been
so extravagant in their accounts of themselves, had they but preserved the
history of their Nation in any certain records. For want of which, the
tradition of the eldest times, varying in the several families after their
dispersion, and being gradually corrupted by the policy of their Leaders, and
those corruptions readily embraced by the predominancy of self-love in the
several Nations, thence arose those vain and eager contests between the
Chaldaeans, Scythians, Egyptians, and Aethiopians, concerning the antiquity of
their several Nations: which may be seen in Diodorus, and others: by which it
most evidently appears that they had no certain history of their own Nations:
for none of them insist upon any records, but only upon several probabilities
from the nature of their Country, and the Climates they lived under. Neither
need Psammeticus have been put to that ridiculous way of deciding the
controversy by his two infants bred up without any converse with men,
concluding the language they spoke would manifest the great antiquity of the
Nation it belonged to: Whereas it is more then probable they had spoken none at
all, had they not learned the inarticulate voice of the goats they had more
converse with then men. The making use of such ways to decide this controversy
does not only argue the great weakness of those times as to natural knowledge;
but the absolute defect and insufficiency of them, as to the giving any certain
account of the state of ancient times.

Of which the Chaldaeans had advantages above all other Sect. 2.
Heathen Nations, not only living in a settled Country, but in or near that very
place where the grand Ancestors of the world had their chief abode and
residence. Whereby we see how unfaithful a thing tradition is, and how soon it
is corrupted or fails, where it has no sure records to bottom its self upon.
But indeed it is the less wonder that there should be a confusion of histories,
where there had been before of tongues; and that such whose design and memory
God had blasted before, should afterward forget their own original. But as if
the Chaldaeans had retained something still of their old aspiring mind to reach
up to heaven, the only thing they were eminent for, and which they were careful
in preserving of, was some Astronomical observations, which Tully tells us they
had a great convenience for, by the reason of the plain and even situation of
their Country; whereby they might have a larger prospect of the heavenly
bodies, then those who lived in mountainous Countries could have. And yet even
for this (which they were so famous for, that the name Chaldaeans passed for
Astrologers in the Roman Empire) we have no very great reason to admire their
excellency in it, considering how soon their skill in Astronomy dwindled into
that which by a great Catachresis is called judicial Astrology. The original of
which is most evident among them, as all other Heathen Nations, to have been
from the Divinity which they attributed to the Stars; in which yet they were
far more rational then those who now admire that Art: For, granting their
hypothesis, that the Stars were Gods, it was but reasonable they should
determine contingent effects; but it is far from being so with them who take
away the foundation of all those celestial houses, and yet attribute the same
effects to them, which they did, who believed a Divinity in them. The
Chaldaeans, as Diodorus relates, set 30 Stars under the Planets; these they
called (...); others they had as Princes over these, i: 2. Bibliosh.
which they called (...); the former were as the privy Counselors, and these
the Princes over them, by whom in their courses they supposed the course of the
year to be regulated. We see then what a near affinity there was between
Astrology and the Divinity of the Stars, which makes Ptolomy call them Atheists
who condemned Astrology, because thereby they destroyed the main of their
Religion, setrab. l. 2.
which was the worshipping the Stars for Gods. But it seems by Strabo, that one
of the Sects of the Chaldaeans did so hold to Astronomy still, that they wholly
rejected Genethlialogy, Geogr. l. 16
which caused a great division among the Orchoeni and the Borsippeni, two Sects
among them, so called from the places of their habitations.

And if we reckon the Zabii among the Chaldeans as Sect. 3.
Maimonides seems to do, we have a further evidence of the Planetary Deities so
much in request among the Chaldeans; More Nevoch. p. 3. c. 29.
for, the description he gives of them is to this purpose, that they had no
other gods but the Stars to whom they made statues and images, to the Sun
golden, to the Moon silver, and so to the rest of the Planets of the metals
dedicated to them. Those images derived an influence from the Stars to which
they were erected, which had thence a faculty of foretelling future things;
which is an exact description of the (...) or Talismans V. Scaliger. cp. ad
Casaub and cp. Gallic. Seldom. de Diis Syris. l. 1. c. 2.

Salmas. de An. Climac. p. 578.


so much in request among the heathens; such as the Palladium of Troy is
supposed by learned men to have been. These Talismans are by the Jews called
David's bucklers, and are much of the same nature with the ancient Teraphi^,
both being accurately made according to the positions of the heavens; only the
one were to foretell future things, the other for the driving away some
calamity. Concerning these Zabii Maimonides tells us, that the understanding
their rites would give a great deal of light to several passages of Scripture
which now lie in obscurity: but little is supposed to be yet further known of
them then what Scaliger has said, that they were the more Eastern Chaldeans,
which he fetches from the signification of the word; several of their books
are extant says Scaliger, among the Arabians, but none of them are yet
discovered to the European world. Salmasius thinks these Zabii were the
Chaldeans inhabiting Mesopotamia, to which it is very consonant which
Maimonides says, that Abraham had his education among them. Said Batricides
cited by Mr. Seldom, attributes the original of their De jure not. and gent. l.
2. c. 7
religion to the time of Nahor, and to Zaradchath the Persian as the Author of
it, who is conceived to be the same with Zoroaster, who in all probability is
the same with the Zertoost of the Persecs, a Sect of the ancient Persians
living now among the Banyans in the Indyes. These give a more full and exact
account concerning the original, birth, education, and Enthusiasmes, or
Revelations of their Zertoost then any we meet with in any Greek historians;
three books they tell us of which Zertoost received by Revelation, or rather
one book, consisting of three several tracts, whereof the first was concerning
judicial Astrology, which they call Astoodeger; the second concerning Physic
or the knowledge of natural things; the third was called Zertoost from the
bringer of it containing their religious rites; the first was committed to the
Iesopps or Magies, the second to Physicians, the third to the Darooes or
Churchmen, wherein are contained the several precepts of their Law; we have
likewise the rites and customs of these Persees in their worship of fire, with
many other particular rites of theirs published sometime since by one Mr. Lord,
who was a long time resident among them at Surrat; by which we may not only
understand much of the religion of the ancient Persians, but if I mistake not,
somewhat of the Zabii too. My reasons are, because the ancient Zaradcha or
Zoroaster is by Said Batricides made the Author of the Zabii as we have seen
already, who was undoubtedly the founder of the Persian worship, or rather a
promoter of it among the Persians; For Ammianus Marcellinus tells us that he
was instructed in the rites of the Hist. l. 23.
Chaldeans which he added to the Persian rites; besides, their agreement in the
chief point of Idolatry, the worship of the Sun, and consequently the (...) or
Symbol of the Sun, the eternal fire, is evident; which as far as we can learn,
was the great and most early Idolatry of the Eastern Countries; and further we
find God in Leviticus 26. 30. threatening to destroy their (...) their Images
of the Sun, some render it; but most probably by that word is meant the (...)
the hearths where they kept their perpetual fire, for those are (...) from
(...) which is used both for the Sun and Fire. V. Voss. ^dol l. 2 c. 9.
Now hence it appears that this Idolatry was in use among the Nations about
Palaestine; else there had been no need of so severe a threatening against it,
and therefore most probably the rites of the Zabii (which must help us to
explain the reasons of some particular positive precepts in the Levitical Law
relating to Idolatry) are the same with the rites of the Chaldeans and
Persians, who all agreed in this worship of the Sun and Fire; which may be yet
more probable from what Maimonides says of them, that Gens Zabaea erat gens
quae implevit totum orbem; it could not be then any obscure Nation, but such as
had the largest spread in the Eastern Countries, which could be no other then
the ancient Chaldeans from whom the Persians derived their worship. It may not
seen altogether improbable that Balaam the famous Southsayer was one of these
Zabii, especially if according to Salmasius his judgment they inhabited
Mesopotamia; for Balaams Country seems to be there: for it is said, Numb. 22.
5. that he dwelt in Pethor by the river, i. e. says the Chal^ee Paraphrast, in
Peor of Syria by Euphrates, which in Scripture is called the river, Esaias 8. 7.
But from this great obscurity as to the history of so ancient and so large a
people as these Zabii are supposed to be, we have a further evidence to our
purpose of the defectiveness and insufficiency of the Eastern histories as to
the giving any full account of themselves and their own original.

We are to^d indeed by some, that Nabonasser did burn Sect. 4.
and destroy all the ancient records of the Chaldeans which they had diligently
preserved amongst them before, on purpose to raise the greater reputation to
himself, and blot out the memory of his usurpation, by burning the records of
all their own ancient Kings. Which is a conceit I suppose has no other ground
then that the famous Era so much celebrated by Astronomers and others, did
bear the name of Nabonasser. Which (if we should be so greedy of all empty
conjectures which tend to our purpose as to take them for truths) would be a
very strong evidence of the falsehood and vanity of the Chaldeans in their great
pretenses to antiquity. But as the case stands in reference to their history we
find more evidence from Scripture to assert their just antiquity, then ever
they are able to produce out of any undoubted records of their own. Which yet
has been endeavored by an Author both of some credit and antiquity, the true
Berosus, not the counterfeit of Annius, whose vizard we shall have occasion to
pull off afterward. This Berosus was as Josephus and Tatianus assure us, a
Priest of Belus and a Babylonian C. App. l. ^. c. Graecor.
born, but afterward flourished in the isle of Co, and was the first who
brought the Chaldean Astrology in request among the Greeks; in honor to whose
name and memory, the Athenians (who were never backward in applauding those who
brought them the greatest news, especially i suitable to their former
superstition) erected a statue for him with a gilded tongue. A good emblem of
his history which made a fair and specious show, but was not that within, which
it pretended to be: especially where he pretends to give an account of the most
ancient times, and reckons up his two Dynastyes before the time of Belus: but
of them afterward. It cannot be denied but some fragments of his history which
have been preserved from ruin by the care and industry of Josephus, Tatianus,
Eusebius and others, have been very useful, not only for proving the truth of
the history of Scripture to the heathens; but also for illustrating some
passages concerning the Babylonian Empire: as making Nabopolasser the Father of
Nebucadonosor, of which Scaliger has fully Append. ad l. de Emend. Temp.
spoken in his notes upon his fragments.

Far be it from me to derogate any thing even from profane histories, where
they do not enterfere with the Sacred Sect. 5.
history of Scripture; and it is certainly the best improvement of these to
make them draw water to the Sanctuary, and to serve as smaller Stars to conduct
us in our way, when we cannot enjoy the benefit of that greater light of Sacred
history. But that which I impeach these profane histories of, is only an
insufficiency as to that account of ancient times, wherein they are so far from
giving light to Sacred records, that the design of setting of them up seems to
be for casting a cloud upon them. Which may seem somewhat the more probable in
that those monstrous accounts of the Egyptian and Chaldean Dynastyes did never
publicly appear in the world in the Greek tongue, till the time that our
Sacred records were translated into Greek at Alexandria. For till that time
when this authentic history of the world was drawn forth from its privacy and
retirement, (being as it were looked up before among the Israelites at Judea)
into the public notice of the world about the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus,
these vain pretenders to antiquity thought not themselves so much concerned to
stand up for the credit of their own Nations. For till that time the onedulous
world not being acquainted with any certain report of the creation and
propagation of the world, was apt to swallow any thing that was given forth by
those who were had in so great esteem as the Chaldean and Egyptian Priests
were: Because it was supposed that those persons who were freed from other
avocations, had more leisure to inquire into these things, and because of their
mysterious hiding what they had from the vulgar, were presumed to have a great
deal more then they had. But now when the Sun of righteousness was approaching
this Horizon of the world, and in order to that the Sacred history like the
day star was to give the world notice of it, by which the former shadows and
mists began to fly away, it concerned all those whose interest lay in the
former ignorance of mankind, as much as they could to raise all their ignes
fatui and whatever might tend to obscure that approaching light by invalidating
the credit of that which came to bespeak its acceptance.

It is very observable to consider what gradations and steps there were in the
world to the appearance of that grand light Sect. 6.
which came down from heaven to direct us in our way thither; how the world not
long before was awakened into a greater inquisitiveness then ever before, how
knowledge grew into repute, and what methods divine providence used to give the
inquisitive world a taste of Truth at present to stay their stomachs, and
prepare them for that further discovery of it afterward. In order to this that
Nation of the Jews which was an enclosed garden before, was now thrown open,
and many of the plants removed and set in foreign Countries, not only in
Babylon (where even after their return were left three famous Schools of
learning, Sora, Pombeditha, and Neharda) but in Egypt too, where multitudes of
them by Alexanders favor were settled at Alexandria, where they had opportunity
to season those two great fountains, whence the current of knowledge ran into
the rest of the world. And now it was not in Iewry only that God was known, but
he whose name was great in Israel, did make way for the knowledge of himself
among all the Nations of the earth. And that allwise God who directed the Magi
by a star to Christ making use of their former skill in Astronomy to take
notice of that star which came now on a peculiar errand to them to lead them to
their Savior (The great God condescending so far to mankind, as to take
advantage of particular inclinations, and to accommodate himself to them, for
which purpose it is very observable that he appeared in another way to the
Wisemen then to the poor Shepherds) the same God made use of the curiosity and
inquisitiveness after knowledge which was in Ptolomaeus Philadelphus ^^^
(which he is so much applauded for by Athenaeus and others) to bring to light
the most advantageous knowleage which the world ever had before the coming of
Christ in the slesh. And that great Library of his erecting at Alexandria did
never deserve that title till it had lodged those Sacred records, and then it
did far better then the old one of Osymanduas, of which Historians tells us
this was the Inscription (...). The shop of the souls Physic.

But this being a matter of so much concernment in order to our better
understanding the original of these vast accounts Sect. 7.
of time among the Chaldaeans and Egyptians, and a subject not yet touched by
any, we shall a little further improve the probability of it, by taking a more
particular account of the time when the Scriptures were first translated, and
the occasion might thereby be given to these Egyptians and Chaldaeans to
produce their fabulous account into the view of the world. Whether the
Scriptures had been ever before translated into the Greek language, (though it
be asserted by some ancient writers of the Church,) is very questionable,
chiefly upon this account, that a sufficient reason cannot be assigned of
undertaking a new translation at Alexandria if there had been any extant
before. Especially if all those circumstances of that translation be true which
are commonly received and delivered down to us with almost an unanimous consent
of the persons who had greater advantages of knowing the certainty of such
things, then we can have at this great distance of time. And therefore
certainly every petty conjecture of some modern though learned men, ought not
to bear sway against so unanimous a tradition in a matter of fact, which cannot
be capable of being proved but by the testimony of former ages. And it is
somewhat strange that the single testimony of one Hermippus in Diogenes
Laertius (whose age and authority is somewhat Vit. Demetrii.
doubtful) concerning only one particular referring to Demetrius Phalcrous,
should be thought of force enough among persons of judgment as well as
learning, to infringe the credibility of the whole story delivered with so much
consent, not only by Christian, but Jewish writers; the testimony of one of
which (every whit as considerable as Apud E^seb. praep. Evangcl^ l. 13.
Hermippus) viz. Aristobulus Iudaeus a Peripatetical Philosopher in an Epistle
to Ptolomy Philometor does plainly assert that which was so much questioned,
concerning Demetrius Phalereus.

But whatever the truth of all the particular circumstances Sect. 8.
be, which I here enquire not after, nor the authority of that Aristeus from
whom the story is received, nor whether this translation was made by Jews sent
out of Judea, or by Jews residing at Alexandria, it suffices for our purpose
that this translation was made before either the Chaldaean Dynasties of
B^rosus, or the Egyptian of Manetho were published to the World. In order to
which it is necessary to show in what time this translation was effected; and
herein that channel of tradition which conveyes the truth of the thing in one
certain course, runs not with so even a stream concerning the exact time of it;
all indeed agree that it was about the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, but in
what years of his reign, is very dubious. Joseph Scaliger who has troubled
Animad. ad Number. Eusebius. 1734. 5
the waters so much concerning the particular circumstances of this
translation, yet fully agrees that it was done in the time of Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus; only he contends with Africanus that it should be done in the
132. Olympiad which is in the 33. year of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; but Eusebius
and Ierom place it in the very beginning of his reign, which I think is far
more probable, and that in the time when Ptolomaeus Philadelphus reigned with
his Father Ptolomaeus Lagi: for so it is most certain he did for two years
before his Fathers death. By which means the great difficulty of Scaliger
concerning Demetrius Phalereus is quite taken off; for Hermippus speaks nothing
of Demetrius his being out of favor with Philadelphus, during his Fathers V.
Scaliger. ib. Theo-crit. Scho^ ad Idyll. 17 Justin. l. 16 Eusch. ^hr.
life, but that upon his fathers death, he was banished by him, and dyed in his
banishment; so that Demetrius might have the oversight of the Library at
Alexandria and be the main instrument of promoting this translation, and yet
those things be after true which Hermippus speaks, viz. when Ptolomaeus Lagi or
Soter was now dead. For it stands not to reason that during his Fathers life
Philadelphus should discover his displeasure against Demetrius, it being
conceived upon the advice given to his Father for preserring the sons of
Arsinoe to the Crown before the son of Berenice. Most likely therefore it is
that this translation might be begun by the means of Demetrius Phalereus in the
time of Philadelphus his reigning with his Father, but it may be not finished
till after the death of Soter when Philadelphus reigned alone. And by this now
we can perfectly reconcile that difference which is among the Fathers
concerning the time when this translation was made. For Irenaeus attributes it
to the time of Ptolomaeus Lagi. Clemens Alexandrinus questions whether in the
time of Lagi or Philadelphus; the rest of the Chorus carry it for Philadelphus;
but the words of Anatolius in Eusebius cast it fully for both; for there
speaking of Aristobulus, he says he was one of the seventy who interpreted the
Scriptures Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 26.
to Ptolomaeus Philadelphus and his Father, and dedicated his Commentaries upon
the Law to both those Kings. Haec sane omnem scrupulum eximunt, says Vossius
upon producing this testimony, this puts it out of all doubt; and to the same
De hist. G^cc. l. 1. cap 12. Page 380. Sect. 9.
purpose speaks the learned Jesuit Petavius in his notes on Epiphanius.

Having thus far cleared the time when the Translation of the Scriptures into
Greck was made, we shall find our conjecture much strengthened, by comparing
this with the age of the forementioned Historians, Manetho and Berosus.
Manetho we have already made appear to have lived in the time of Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus, and that, says Vossius, after the death of Soter. It is evident
from what remains of him in Eusebius his Chronica, that he not only flourished
in the time of Philadelphus, but writ his history at the special command of
Philadelphus, as manifestly appears by the remaining Epistle of Manetho to him,
still extant in Eusebius. This command of Philadelphus might very Chr. Gr. p. 6
probably be occasioned upon the view of that account, which the Holy
Scriptures, being then translated into Greek, did give of the world, and the
propagation of mankind; upon which, we cannot imagine but so inquisitive a
person as Philadelphus was, would be very earnest to have his curiosity
satisfied, as to what the Egyptian Priests (who had boasted so much of
antiquity) could produce to confront with the Scriptures. Whereupon the task
was undertaken by this Manetho, High Priest of Heliopolis, whereby those things
which the Egyptian Priests had to that time kept secret in their Cloisters,
were now divulged and exposed to the judgment of the learned world; but what
satisfaction they were able to give inquisitive minds, as to the main (...), or
matter enquired after, may partly appear by what has been said of Manetho
already, and by what shall be spoken of his Dynastyes afterward.

But all this will not persuade Kircher; for, whatever Scaliger, nay, what
Manetho himself says to the coutrary, he, with the confidence and learning of a
Jesuit, affirms, that this Manetho is elder then Alexander the great. For
these are his words, Frequens apud priscos historicos Dynaestiarum
Aegyptiacarum fit mentio, quarum tamen alium Oedip. Egypt. To. 1. Synag. 1. 6.
9.
authorem non habemus nisi Manethonem Sebennytam, Sacerdotem Aegyptium, quem
ante tempor a Alexandri, quicquid dicat Scaliger, in Aegypto floruisse
comperio. Certainly some more then ordinary evidence may be expected after so
confident an affirmation; but whatever that person be in other undertakings, he
is as unhappy a person in Philology, as any that have pretended so much
acquaintance with it. One would think, he that had been twenty years, as he
tells us himself, courting the Egyptian Mysteries for compassing his Oedipus,
should have found some better arguments to prove an assertion of this nature,
then merely the testimony of Josephus, the Hebrew book Iuchasin, and some
Arabic Writers, not one of all which do mention the thing they are brought
for, viz. that Manetho was elder then Alexander. All the business is, they
quote him as an ancient Writer; but what then? The Author of the Book Iuchasim
was Abraham Zacuth a Jew of Salamancha, who writ in the year of our Lord 1502.
and this book was first printed at Constantinople, 1556. Might not this man
then well mention Manetho as an ancient Writer, if he flourished above 1600
years before him, in the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus? And what if some
Arabic Writers mention him? are they of so great antiquity and credit
themselves, that it is an evidence Manetho lived in Alexanders time to be
praised by them? It would be well if Kircber, and other learned men, who think
the world is grown to so great stupidity, as to believe every thing to be a
Jewel which is far fetched, would first assert and vindicate the antiquity and
fidelity of their Arabic Authors, such as Gelaldinus, Abenephi, and many
others, before they expect we should part with our more authentic Records of
History for those fabulous relations which they are so full fraught withal.
Were it here any part of my present business, it were an easy matter so to lay
open the ignorance, falsity, and fabulousness of those Arabians whom that
Author relies so much upon, that he could not be freed from a design to impose
upon the world, who makes use of their Testimony in matters of ancient times
without a Caveat. I know none fit to believe these Arabic Writers as to these
things, but those who have faith enough to concoct the Rabbis in matter of
History. Of whom Origin says, (...). Who are, as Grotius truly ^. Celsum l. 2.
A^^not. in Mat. 24 24
says, pessimi historiae Magistri; nam ex quo patria expulsi sunt, omnis apud
illos historia crassis erroribus and fabulis est inquinata, quibus and proinde
nihil credendum est, nisi aliunde testes accederunt. And as Is. Caubason
passes this sharp, but due censure upon them, Rabbinis ubi de Lingna Exercit.
ad. ^aron. 16. ^. 8.
Hebraica agitur and vocis alicujus proprietate, vel aliquo Talmudico
instituto, merito a Christianis tribui non parum; nbi vero a verbis venitur ad
res, aut ad historiam, vel rerum antiquarum veteris populi explicationem, nisi
falli and decipi volumus, nihil admodum esse illis fidei habendum. Sexcentis
argumentis hoc facile probarem si id nunc agerem. And in reference to their
ancient rites as well as history, Joseph Scaliger has given this verdict of
them, Manifesta est Iudaeorum inscitia, qui cum usu veterum rituum, etiam little
De Emend. Temp. l. 6.
cognitionem amiserunt, and multa quae ad eorum sacra and historiam pertinent,
long melius nos teneamus quam ipsi. The same which these very learned persons
say of Rabbinical, may with as much truth be said of these Arabic Writers, in
matters of ancient history, which I have here inserted, to show the reason why
I have thought the testimony of either of these two sorts of persons so
inconsiderable in the matter of our future discourse; which being historical,
and that of the greatest antiquity, little relief is to be expected from either
of them in order thereto. But to return to Kircher. It is freely granted that
Josephus, an Author of credit and age, sufficient to give his opinion in this
case, does very frequently cite Manetho in his Egyptian History; particularly
in his learned Books against Appion; but where he does give the least
intimation of Manetho being elder then Alexander, I am yet to seek. But Kircher
will not yet leave the matter so, but undertakes to give an account of the
mistake; which is, that there were two Manetho's besides, and both Egyptians,
mentioned by Suidas; one a Mendesian, who writ of the Preparation of the
Egyptian (...), a kind of perfume used by the Egyptian Priests. The other a
Diospolitan, who writ some Physiological and Astronomical Treatises, whose
works he hears are preserved in the Duke of Florenee his Library; and this was
he (says he) who lived in the times of Augustus, whom many by the
aequivocation of the name have confounded with the ancient Writer of the
Egyptian Dynastyes. Is it possible so learned a Jesuit should discover so
little judgment in so few words? For first, who ever asserted the Writer of
the Dynastyes to have lived in the time of Augustus? Yet secondly, if that
Manetho whom Suidas there speaks of, lived in Augustus his time, according to
Kircher, then it must necessarily follow, that the Compiler of the Dynastyes
did: for it is evident to any one that looks into Suidas, that he there speaks
of the same Manetho; for these are his words: (...), etc. Can any thing be more
plain then that he here speaks of Manetho Sebennyta, who was the Author of the
Dynastyes, though he might write other things besides, of which Suidas there
speaks? But Kircher very wisely, in translating Suidas his words, leaves out
(...), which decides the controversy, and makes it clear that he speaks of the
same Manetho, of whom we have been discoursing. Thus it still appears that this
Manetho is no elder then the time of Ptolomy Philadelphus, which was the thing
to be proved.

Now for Berosus, although the Chaldeans had occasion Sect. 10.
enough given them before this time, to produce their antiquities by the Jews
converse with them in Babylon; yet we find this Author the first who durst
adventure them abroad, such as they were, in Greek. Now that this Berosus
published his history after the time mentioned, I thus prove. Tatianus Assyrius
tells us that he writ the Chaldaick history in three books, and dedicated them
to Antiochus, (...), as it is read in the fragment of Tatianus preserved in
Eusebius; but it must be acknowledged that in the Paris Praep. Evang. l. 10. p.
289. ed. Rob. Steph.
edition of Tatianus, as well as the Basil, it is thus read, (...), here it
relates to the third from Alexander, in the other to the third from Seleucus;
Now if we reckon the third so as to take the person from whom we reckon in, for
the first, according to the reading in Eusebius, it falls to be Antiochus
called (...) according to the other reading it falls to be Antiochus Soter; for
Seleucus succeeded Alexander in the Kingdom of Syria; Antiochus Soter,
Seleucus; Antiochus (...), Antiochus Soter. But according to either of these
readings, ^. ^caliger the Emendat. Temp l. 5. p. 392.
our purpose is sufficiently proved. For Antiochus Soter began to reign in
Syria in the sixth year of Ptol. Philadelphus in Egypt; Antiochus (...)
succeeded him, in the 22. year of Philadelphus; now the soonest that the
history of Berosus could come forth, must be in the reign of Antiochus Soter,
which according to our accounts is some competent time after the translation of
the Scripture into Greek; but if it were not till the time of Antiochus (...),
we cannot but imagine that the report of the account of ancient times in the
Scriptures was sufficiently divulged before the publishing of this history of
Berosus; and it may be Berosus might somewhat sooner then others understand all
transactions at Alexandria, because the place of his chief residence, was where
Ptolomy Philadelphus was born, which was in the Isle of Co. De hist. Graec. l.
1. c. 13.

Plin. hist. not. l. 7. c. 56.


But Vossius goes another way to work to prove the time of Berosus, which is
this. He quotes it out of Pliny that Berosus recorded the history of 480.
years, which, says he, must be reckoned from the era of Nabonasser. Now this
began in the second year of the 8. Olympiad, from which time if we reckon 480.
years, it falls upon the latter end of Antiochus Soter; and so his history
could not come out before the 22. of Ptol. Philadelphus, or very little before.
Thus we have made it evident, that these two great historians are younger even
then the translation of the Bible into Greck, by which it appears probable that
they were provoked to publish their fabulous Dynasties to the world. And so
much to show the insufficiency of the Chaldean history, as to the account of
ancient times: Which we shall conclude with the censure of Strabo a grave and
judicious Author concerning the antiquities of the Persians, Medes, and
Syrians, which, says he, have not obtained any great credit in the world,
Geogr. l. 11.
(...), because of the simplicity and fabulousness of their historians. From
hence we see then that there is no great credibility in those histories which
are impeached of falsehood by the most grave and judicious of heathen writers.

CHAP. IV. The defect of the Grecian History.
That manifested by three evident arguments of it. 1. The fabulousness of the
Poetical age of Greece. The Antiquity of Poetry. Of Orpheus and the ancient
Poets. Whence the Poetical Fables borrowed. The advancement of Poetry and
Idolatry together in Greece. The different censures of Strabo and Eratosthenes
concerning the Poetical age of Greece, and the reasons of them. 2. The eldest
historians of Greece are of suspected credit. Of Damastes, Aristeus, and
others; of most of their eldest Historians we have nothing left but their
names, of others only the subjects they treated of, and some fragments. 3 Those
that are extant either confess their Ignorance of eldest times, or plainly
discover it. Of the first sort are Thucydides and Plutarch: several evidences
of the Graecians Ignorance of the true original of Nations. Of Herodotus and
his mistakes, the Greeks ignorance in Geography discovered, and thence their
insufficiency as to an account of ancient history.

DEscend we now to the History of Greece; to see whether the Metropolis of Arts
and Learning can afford Sect. 1.
us any account of ancient times, that may be able to make us in the least
question the account given of them in sacred Scriptures. We have already
manifested the defect of Greece as to letters and ancient records, but yet it
may be pretended that her Historians by the excellency of their wits and
searching abroad into other Nations, might find a more certain account of
ancient times, then other Nations could obtain. There is no body, who is any
thing acquainted with the Grecian humor, but will say they were beholding to
their wits for most of their Histories; they being some of the earlyest writers
of Romances in the world, if all fabulous narrations may bear that name. But
laying aside at present all their Poetic Mythology, as it concerns their gods,
(which we may have occasion to enquire into afterward) we now examine only
their credibility, where they pretend to be most historical. Yet how far they
are from meriting belief even in these things, will appear to any that shall
consider; First, That their most ancient writers were Poetical and apparently
fabulous. Secondly, That their eldest Historians are of suspected credit even
among themselves. Thirdly, That their best Historians either discover or
confess abundance of ignorance as to the history of ancient times. First, That
their first writers were Poetical, and apparetnly fabulous: Strabo undertakes
to prove that Prose is only an imitation of Poetry, and so Poetry must needs be
first written. For, says he, at first Poetry was only in request, afterward
in imitation of that, Cadmus, Pherecydes and Hecataeus writ their histories,
observing all other laws of Poetry, but only the measures of it; but by degrees
writers began to take greater liberty, and so Geogr. l. 1.
brought it down from that lofty strain it was then in, to the form now in use:
as the Comical strain is nothing else but a depressing the sublimer style of
Tragidies. This he proves because (...) did anciently signify the same with
(...); for Poems were only (...), Lessons fit to be sung among them; thence,
says he, is the original of the (...), etc. For these were those Poems which
were sung (...) when they held a branch of laurel in their hands, as Plutarch
tells us they were wont to do Homers Iliads, there were sung to the Harp as
Hesiods (...): besides, says Sympos.
Strabo, that Prose is called (...) argues that it is only a bringing down of
the higher strain in use before. But however this were in general, as to the
Graecians, it is evident that Poetry was first in use among them; for in their
elder times when they first began to creep out of Barbarism, all the
Philosophy and instruction they had, was from their Poets, and was all couched
in verse; which Plutarch not only confirms, but particularly instanceth in
Orpheus, He siod, De Pyth. Orac.
Parmenides, Xenophanes, Empedocles and Thales; and hence Horace de art
Poetica of the ancient Poets before Homer, -- fuit haec sapientia quondam
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis:
Concubitu prohibere vago: dare jura marit is:
Oppida moliri: leges incidere ligno.
Sic honor and nomen divinis vatibus at que
Carminibus venit.
From hence as Heinsius observes, the Poets were anciently called (...); and
the ancient speeches of the Philosophers Dissert. in Hes. ap 6.
containing matters of morality were called (...), of which many are mentioned
in their lives by Diogenes Laertius; in the same sense were Carmena anciently
used among the Latins for precepts of morality, as in that collection of them,
which goes under the name of Cato, (which some think to be an ancient piece,
but with a false Quaest. Romans cap. 14.
inscription, but Boxhornius thinks it to be of some Christians doing in the
decay of the Roman Empire) Si Deus est ^nimus, nobis ut Carmina dicunt.
Carmina, says Heinsius, i. e. dicta Philosophorum; causa est, quia dictailla
brevia, quibus sententias suas de Deo deque reliquis includebant, (...)
dieebant, i. e. Carmina.

When Poetry came first into request among the Graecians, Sect. 2.
is somewhat uncertain; but this is plain and evident that the intention of it
was not merely for instruction, but as Strabo expresses it, (...), the more
gently to draw the people on to Idolatry. For as he says, it is impossible to
persuade women and the promiscuous multitude to religion by mere dry reason or
Philosophy, (...); but for Geogr. l. 1. ^. 13
this, says he, there is need of superstition, and this cannot be advanced
without some fables and wonders. For, says he, the Thunderbolt, Shields,
Tridents, Serpents, Spears attributed to the gods are mere fables, and so is
all the ancient Theology; but the Governors of the Commonwealth made use of
these things, the better to awe the silly multitude and to bring them into
better order. I cannot tell how far this might be their end, since these things
were not brought in so much by the several Magistrates, as by the endeavors of
particular men, who thought to raise up their own esteem among the vulgar by
such things, and were employed by the great deceiver of the world as his grand
instruments to advance Idolatry in it. For which we are to consider, that
although there were gross Ignorance, and consequently Superstition enough in
Greece before the Poetic age of it, yet their Superstitions and Idolatrous
worship was not so licked and brought into form, as about the time of Orpheus,
from whom the Poetic age commenceth: who was as great an instrument of setting
up Idolatry, as Apollonius was afterward of restoring it, being both persons
of the highest esteem and veneration among the heathen. Much about the same
time did those live in the world who were the first great promoters of
Superstition and Poetry, as Melampus, Musaeus, Arion, Methymnaeus, Amphion of
Thebes, and Eumolpus Thrax, none of whom were very far distant from the time of
Orpheus. Of whom Clemens Alexandrinus thus speaks, (...). Protreptic. p. 3.
These under a pretense of Music and Poetry corrupting the lives of men, did
by a kind of artificial Magic draw them on to the practice of Idolatry. For
the novelty and pleasingness of Music and Poetry did presently insinuate its
self into the minds of men, and thereby drew them to a venerable esteem both of
the persons and practices of those who were the Authors of them. So Conon in
Photius tells us that Orpheus was exceedingly Thot. Biblioth. Cod. 186. sect.
45.
acceptable to the people for his skill in Music, which the Thracians and
Macedonians were much delighted with: From which arose the Fable of his drawing
trees and wild beasts after him, because his Music had so great an influence
upon the civilizing that people, who were almost grown rude through Ignorance
and Barbarism: and so Horace explains it, Sylvestres homines sacer,
interpresque D^orum,
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit O^pheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres rapidosque Leones. Ep. ad Piso^.

This Orpheus by Mythologists is usually called the son of Calliope, but may
with better reason be called the father of the whole Chorus of the Muses, then
the son of one of them, since Pindar calls him (...), and John Tz^^zes tells us
he was called the Son of Calliope (...), as the inventer of Poetical Schol in
Hesiod. p. 8.
elegancy, and the sacred hymns which were made to the gods. (Which the old
Romans called Assamenta); and Justin Martyr calls him (...), the first
Paraenes. 1.
teacher of Polytheism and Idolatry.

For this Orpheus having been in Egypt, as Pausanias, Diodorus, and Artapanus
in Eusebius all confess, he Sect 3. Paus. Eliac. 2.

Diod. bibl. lib. 1. Eusebius. Praep. l. 10.


brought from thence most of the Magical rites and superstitious customs in use
there, and set them up among the Graecians; so Diodorus acknowledges in the
same place; and is likewise evident by what Aristophanes says in his (...),
(...) Act. 4. sc. 2.

(...).
Orpheus first instructed them in the sacred mysteries, and to abstain from
slaughter: which is to be understood of the (...), the killing of beasts in
sacrifice, which probably was in use among them before as a remainder of
ancient tradition, till Orpheus brought his Egyptian doctrine into request
among them. The mysteries of Osiris, says Diodorus, were transplanted into
Greece under the name of Dionyfius or Bacchus, and Isis under Ceres or Magna
Matter, and the punishment and pleasures after this life from the rites of
sepulture among them; Charons wasting of souls from the lake Acherusia in
Egypt, over which they were wont to send the dead bodies. Pausanias tells us
that the Spartans derived the worship of Ceres Cthonia from Orpheus, and the
Aeginatae the worship of Hecate. Besides which he instituted Laton. p. 95.
Corinth. (...).

V. C. Rhod. An^ Lect. l. ^5. p. 9


new rites and mysteries of his own, in which the initiated were called (...),
and required a most solemn oath from all of them never to divulge them, which
was after observed in all those profane mysteries which in imitation of these
were set up among the Greeks. Strabo thinks the mysteries of Orpheus were in
imitation of the old Cotyttian and Benedidian mysteries among the Thracians;
Geogr. lib. 10.
but Herodotus with more probability parallels them and the Dionysian with the
Egyptian, from which we have already seen that Orpheus derived his; who is
conceived by Enterp. p. 134. Ed. H. St.
Georgius Cedrenus and Timothaeus in Eusebius, to have lived about the time of
Gideon the judge of Israel; but there is too great confusion concerning his
age, to define any thing certainly about it. Which arises most from the
several persons V. Suidam in Orphe.
going under his name, of which besides this were in all probability two more;
the one an Heroic Poet, called by Suidas Ciconaeus, or Arcas, who lived two
Ages before Homer, and he that goes under the name of Orpheus, whose Hymns are
still extant, but are truly ascribed to Onomacritus the Athenian, by Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tatianus, Assyrius, Suidas, and others, who flourished in the
times of the Pisistradidae at Athens. We are like then to have little relief
for finding out of truth in the Poetic Age of Greece, when the main design of
the Learning then used was only to insinuate the belief of Fables into the
people, and by that to awe them into Idolatry.

If we come lower down to the succeeding Poets, we Sect. 4.
may find Fables increasing still in the times of Homer, Hesiod, and the rest,
which made Eratosthenes, a person of great Judgment and Learning (whence he
was called alter Plato, and (...), and (...), because he carried, if not the
first, yet the second place in all kind of Literature) condemn the ancient
Poetry as (...), a company of old wives tales, which were invented for nothing
but to please silly people, and had no real learning or truth at all in them.
For this, though he be sharply censured by Strabo in his first Book, who
undertakes to vindicate the Geography of Homer from the exceptions of
Eratosthenes; yet himself cannot but confess that there is a ^very great
mixture of Fables in all their Poets, which is, says he, partly to delight the
people, and partly to awe them. For the minds of men being always desirous of
novelties, such things do hugely please the natural humors of weak people,
especially if there be something in them that is (...), very strange and
wonderful, it increases the delight in hearing it; (...), which draws them on
to a desire of hearing more of it. And by this means, says he. are children
first brought on to learning, and all ignorant persons are kept in awe; nay,
and the more learned themselves (partly for want of reason and judgment, and
partly from the remainder of those impressions which these things made upon
them when they were children) cannot shake off that former credulity which they
had as to these things. By which discourse of Strabo, though intended wholly by
him in vindication of Poetic Fables, it is plain and evident what great
disservice has been done to truth by them, by reason they had no other Records
to preserve their ancient history but these fabulous Writers, and therefore
supposing a mixture of truth and falsehood together, which Strabo contends for;
yet what way should be taken to distinguish the true from the false, when they
had no other certain Records? and besides, he himself acknowledges how hard a
matter it is even for wise men to excuss those fabulous narrations out of their
minds, which were insinuated into them by all the advantages which prejudice,
custom, and education could work upon them. Granting then there may be some
truth at the bottom of their fabulous narrations; (...). Which may be gilded
over with some pleasing tales, as himself Odyss. 3.
compares it; yet how shall those come to know that it is only gilded, that
never saw any pure metal, and did always believe that it was what it seemed to
be. Had there been any (...), or touchstone to have differenced between the one
and the other, there might have been some way for a separation of them; but
there being none such, we must conclude, that the fabulous Narrations of Poets
in stead of making Truth more pleasant by their fictions, have so adulterated
it, that we cannot find any credibility at all in their narrations of elder
times, where the truth of the story has had no other way of conveyance but
through their fictions.

But though Poets may be allowed their liberty for representing things with the
greatest advantage to the palats Sect. 5
of their Readers, yet we may justly expect, when men profess to be historical,
they should deliver us nothing but what upon strictest examination may prove
undoubted truth. Yet even this were the Greeks far from; for Strabo himself
confesses of their eldest Historians, (...), their first Historians both of
persens Geogr. l. 1.
and things were fabulous. Diodorus particularly instanceth in their eldest
Historians, as Cadmus, Milesius, Hecataeus, and Hellanicus, and condemns them
for fabulousness. Strabo condemns Damastes Sigeensis for vanity and falsehood,
and wonders at Eratosthenes for making use of him; yet this man is of great
antiquity among them, and his testimony used by Authors of good credit, as
Dionys. V. Casaub. in Strab. l. 1.

Voss. de hist. Graec. l. 4. c. 5.


Halycarnassius, Plutarch, and others. Nay Pliny professes to follow him, and
so he does Aristeus Procennesius, in his Arimaspia, which may render the credit
of his History very suspicious; with whom it was a sufficient ground of
credibility to any story, that he found it in some Greek Authors. Strabo
reckons Damastes with Euemerus Messenius and Antiphanes Bergeus; which latter
was so noted a liar, that from him, as Stephanus tells us, (...) was used as a
proverb for to speak never a word of truth. Aristeus Proconnesius lived (...).
in the time of Cyrus, and writ a History of the Arimaspi in three Books, who
seems to have been the Sir John Maridevil of Greece, from his Stories of the
Arimaspi, with one eye in their foreheads, and their continual fighting with
the Gryphens for gold; yet the story was taken upon trust by Herodotus, Pliny,
and many others, though the experience of all who have visited those Northern
Climats, do sufficiently refute these follies. Strabo says of this Aristeus,
that he was (...), one inferior to none for juggling, which cenfure was
probably occasioned by Geogr. l. ^3.
the common story of him, that he could let his soul out of his body when he
pleased, and bring it again; yet this Juggler did Celsus pitch on to confront
with our blessed Savior, as Herocles did on Apollinus; so much have those been
to seek for reason, who have fought to oppose the doctrine of faith.

But further, what credit can we give to those Historians who have striven to
confute each other, and lay open Sect. 6.
one another falsehood to the world. Where was there ever any such dissonancy
in the sacred History of Scripture? does the Writer of one Book discover the
weakness of another? do not all the parts so exactly agree, that the most
probable suspicion could ever fall into the heart of an Infidel is, that they
were all written by the same person, which yet the series of times manifests to
have been impossible. But now if we look into the ancient Greek Historians, we
need no other testimony then themselves to take away their credibility. The
Genealogies of Hesiod are corrected by Acusiddus, Acusiddus is condemned by
Hellanicus, Hellanicus accused of falsehood by Ephorus, Ephorus by Timaeus,
Timaeus by such who followed him, as Josephus fully shows. Where must we then
fix our belief? upon all in Appion. l. 1.
common? that is the ready way to believe contradictions; for they condemn one
another of falsehood. Must we believe one, and reject the rest? but what
evidence does that one give why he should be credited more then the rest? And,
which is a most irrefragable argument against the Grecian history, their
eldest historians are ackowledged to be the most fabulous; for our only
recourse for deciding the controversies among the younger historians, must be
to the elder: And here we are further to seek then ever; for the first ages are
confessed to be Poetical, and to have no certainty of truth in them. So that it
is impossible to find out any undoubted certainty of ancient times among the
Greek Historians; which will be yet more evident when we add this, that there
are very few extant of those Historians, who did carry the greatest name for
Antiquity.

The highest antiquity of the Greek Historians does not much exceed the time of
Cyrus and Cambyses, as Vossius has Sect. 7.
fully demonstrated in his learned book De Histori^is Graecis, and therefore I
shall spare particular enquiries into their several ages. Only these two things
will further clear the insufficiency of the Greek History, as to an account of
ancient times: first, that of many of these old historians we have nothing left
but their mere names without any certainty of what they treated. Such are
Sisyphus Cous, Corinnus, Eugeon Samius, Deiochus Proconnesius, Eudemus Parius,
Democles Phygaleus, Amelesagoras Chalcedonius, Xenomedes Chius, and several
others whose names are recorded by several writers, and listed by Vossius among
the Historians, but no evidence what subject of history was handled by them.
Secondly, that of those whose not only memories are preserved, but some
evidence of what they writ, we have nothing extant till the time of the Persian
war. For all that was writ before, is now consumed by time, and swallowed up in
that vast and all-devouring Gulf; in which yet their heads still appear above
the waters, to tell us what once they informed the world of. It cannot be
denied, but if many of those ancient histories were yet remaining, we might
probably have some greater light into some matters of fact in the elder times
of Greece, which now we are wholly to seek for, unless we think to quench our
thirst in the muddy waters of some fabulous Poets. For what is now become of
the antiquities of Ionia and the City Miletus written by Cadmus Miletius,
supposed to be the first writer of History? where lie the Genealogies of
Acusilaus Argivus? where is now extant the History of the Gods writter by
Pherecydes Scyrus Pythagoras his Master? or the Chronica of Archilochus who
flourished about the 20. Olympiad? or those of Theagenes Rheginus? Where may we
hope to meet with Pherecydes Lerius his Attick antiquities, or his Catalogue of
Cities and Nations? or Hecataeus his description of Asia, and some suppose of
Libya and Europe too? or the Originals of Nations and founders of Cities
written by Hellanicus? How may we come by the Persick, Greek and Egyptian
History of Charon Lampsacenus, the Lydian History of Xanthus Lydius; the Samian
antiquities of Simmias Rhodius; the Corinthian History of Eumelus Corinthius;
Panyasis his Antiquities of Greece; the Scythian History of Anacharsis; the
Phrygian of Diagoras; the Chaldaick and Persian of Democritus; the Sicilian and
Italian of Hippys Rh^ginus; the Telchiniack History of Teleclides? All these
are now buried with many more in the rubbish of time, and we have nothing but
the mere sceletons of them left, to tell us that once such persons were, and
thought themselves concerned to give the world some account of their being in
it. Whereby may be likewise seen the remarkable providence of God concerning
the sacred history, which though of far greater antiquity then any of these,
has survived them all, and is still preserved with as much purity and
incorruption as a book passing through so many hands was capable of. But of
that in its due place.

But yet if the Greek historians that are yet extant, were of Sect. 8.
more undoubted credit then those that are lost, we might easily bear with our
losing some old stories, if we gained some authentic history by it
accomplished in all its parts: but even this we are far from in the Greek
history; for the historians themselves do either confess their own ignorance of
ancient times, or do most palpably discover it, which was the third and last
consideration touching the credibility of the Grecian history. That most grave
and accurate historian Thucydides, then whom scarce ever any Grecian discovered
more an inpartial love to the truth in what he writ, does not only confess but
largely prove the impossibility of an exact account to be given of the times
preceding the Pelopponesian war, in the very entrance into his history: For
says he, the matter preceding that time, cannot now through the length of time
be accurately discovered or sound out by us. All that he could find in the
ancient state of Greece was a great deal of Confusion, unquiet stations,
frequent removals, continual pyracyes and no settled form of Commonwealth. What
certain account can be then expected of those times, when a most judicious
writer, even of Athens its self, acknowledges such a Chaos in their ancient
history! And Plutarch a later author indeed, but scarce behind any of them, if
we believe Taurus in A. Gellius for learning and prudence, dares not we see
venture any further back then the time of Theseus; for before that time, as he
compares it, as Geographers in their maps when they have gone as far as they
can, fill up the empty space with some unpassable mountains, or frozen seas, or
devouring sands; so those who give an account of elder times are fain to insert
(...), some wonderful and Tragical stories which as he says, have neither any
truth nor certainty in them. Thus we see those who were best able to judge of
the Greek antiquities, can find no sure footing to stand on in them; and what
basis can we find for our faith where they could find so little for their
knowledge? And those who have been more daring and venturous then these persons
mentioned, what a Labyrinth have they run themselves into, how many confusions
and contradictions have they involved themselves in? sometimes writing the
passages of other Countries for those of Greece, and at other times so
confounding times, persons and places, that one might think they had only a
design upon the understandings of their readers, to make them play at
Blind-mans-buff in searching for the Kings of Greece.

But as they are so confused in their own history, so they Sect. 9.
are as Ignorant and fabulous when they dare venture over their own thresholds
and look abroad into other Countries; we certainly owe a great part of the
lamentable ignorance of the true original of most Nations to the pitiful
account the Greek authors have given of them; which have had the fortune to be
entertained in the world with so much esteem and veneration, that it has been
thought learning enough to be acquainted with the account which they give of
Nations. Which I doubt not has been the great reason so many fabulous
relations not only of Nations but persons and several animals never existing in
the world, have met with so much entertainment from the less inquisitive world.
The Greek writers it is evident, took up things upon trust as much as any
people in the world did, being a very weak and inconsiderable Nation at first,
and afterward the knowledge they had was generally borrowed from other Nations
which the wise men only suited to the temper of the Greeks, and so made it more
fabulous then it was before. As it was certainly the great defect of the
natural philosophy of the Greeks, (as it has been ever since in the world)
that they were so ready to form Theoryes upon some principles or hypotheses
which they only received by Tradition from others, without fetching their
knowledge from the experiments of nature; and to these they suited all the
phenomena of nature; and what was not suitable was rejected as monstrous and
Anomalous: so it was in their history wherein they had some fabulous hypotheses
they took for granted without enquiring into the truth and certainty of them,
and to these they suit whatever light they gained in after times of the state
of foreign Nations, which has made Truth and Antiquity wrestle so much with
the corruptions which eat into them through the pride and ignorance of the
Greeks. Hence they have always suited the History of other Nations with the
account they give of their own; and where nothing could serve out of their own
History to give an account of the original of other Nations, they (who were
never backward at fictions) have made a founder of them suitable to their own
language. The truth is, there is nothing in the world useful or beneficial to
mankind, but they have made shift to find the Author of it among themselves.
If we enquire after the original of agriculture, we are told of Ceres and
Triptolemus; if of pasturage, we are told of an Arcadian Pan; if of wine, we
presently hear of a Liber Pater; if of Iron instruments, then who but Vulcan?
if of Music, none like to Apollo. If we press them then with the History of
other Nations, they are as well provided here: if we enquire an account of
Europe, Asia or Lybia; for the first we are told a fine story of Cadmus his
sister, for the second of Prometh^us his Mother of that name, and for the third
of a daughter of Epaphus. If we are yet so curious as to know the original of
particular Countries; then Italia must find its name from a Calfe of Hercules,
because (...) in Greek will signify some such thing; Sardinia and Africa must
be from Sardos and Afer two sons of Hercules; but yet if these will not serve,
Hercules shall not want for children to people the world; for we hear of
Scythes, Galatas, Lydus, some other sons of his, that gave names to Scythia,
Lydia, Galatia; with the same probability that Media had its name from Medea,
and Spain and Lusitania from Pan and Lusus two companione of Bacchus. If Persia
want a founder, they have one Perseus an Argive ready for it; if Syria,
Babylonia and Arabia want reasons of their names, the prodigal Greeks will give
Apollo three sons, Syrus, Babylon and Arabs rather then they shall be heretical
Acephalists. This vanity of theirs was universal, not confined to any place or
age, but as any Nation or people came into their knowledge, their Gods were not
so decrepit, but they might Father one son more upon them rather then any
Nation should be filia populi, and want a Father. Only the grave Athenians
thought scorn to have any Father assigned them; their only ambition was to be
accounted Aborigines and genuini terrae to be the eldest sons of their Teeming
mother the earth, and to have been born by the same aequivocal generation that
mice and frogs are from the impregnated slime of the earth. Are we not like to
have a wonderful account of ancient times from those who could arrogate to
themselves so much knowledge from such slender and thin accounts of the
originals of people which they gave, and would have the world to entertain with
the greatest veneration upon their naked words? Have we not indeed great reason
to hearken to those who did so frequently discover their affection to Fables,
and manifest their ignorance when ever they venture upon the History of other
Nations.

The truth is, Herodotus himself (whom Tully calls the Father of History, which
title he deserves at least in regard of Sect. 10.
antiquity, being the eldest of the extant Greek Historians) has stood in need
of his Compurgators, who yet have not been able to acquit him of fabulousness,
but have sought to make good his credit by recrimination, or by making it
appear that Herodotus did not fully believe the stories he tells, but took them
upon trust himself and so delivers them to the world. Some impute it to the
ingenuity of Herodotus, that he calls his books of History by the name of the
Muses on purpose to tell his readers they must not look for mere History in
him, but a mixture of such relations which though not true, might yet please
and entertain his readers. Though others think they were not so inscribed by
himself, but the names were given to them by the Greeks from the admiration his
History had among them. However this were, this we are certain, that Herodotus
was not first suspected of falsehood in these latter ages of the world, but even
among the Greeks themselves there have been found some that would undertake to
make good that charge against him. For so Suidas tells us of one Harpocration
Aelius, who writ a book on purpose to discover the falsehood of Herodotus (...).
Plutarch his books are well known of the spite or malignity of Herodotus, but
the occasion of that is sufficiently known likewise, because Herodotus had
given no very favorable character of Plutarchs Country. Strabo likewise seems
to accuse Herodotus much of nugacity and mixing prodigious fables with his
G^og. l. 17.
History, but I confess observing the grounds on which Plutarch insists against
Herodotus, I am very prone to think that the ground of the great pique in some
of the Greek writers against Herodotus, was, that he told too many tales out of
School, and had discovered too much of the Infancy of Greece, and how much the
Grecians borrowed of the Egyptian superstitions: which Plutarch expressly
speaks of, that Herodotus was too much led aside, (...). Although therefore
Herodotus may not be much De Herod. Mal. p. 857.
too blame in the things which the Graecians most charge him with, yet those
who favor him most cannot excuse his palpable mistakes in some things, and
ignorance in others. Josephus thinks he was deceived by the Egyptian Priests
in things relating to the state of their affairs; of which Ios. ^. Appion. l. 1.

Cano ^. Isagog. l 3.


Scaliger gives many accounts; either, says he, the persons who gave him his
intelligence were ignorant themselves; or else like true Egyptians they were
cunning enough, but imposed upon Herodotus being a stranger and unacquainted
with their artifices; or else he did not understand his Interpreter, or was
deceived by him; or lastly, Herodotus might have so much of a Grecian in him,
as to adulterate the true History with some fables of his own; wherefore he
rather adheres to Manetho then Herodotus as to the Egyptian History: who yet
elsewhere (I will not say with what constancy to himself) vouchsafes him this
high elogium, that he is Scrinium originum Graecarum and Barbararum, auctor a
doctis nunquam deponendus. Nol. ad number. Eusebius. 157^.


It cannot be denied but a great deal of very useful history may be fetched out
of him; yet who can excuse his Sect. 11.
Ignorance, when he not only denies there is an Ocean compassing the Land, but
condemns the Geographers for asserting Hist l. 2. c. 4
it? Unless this might be any plea for his ignorance in Geography, that he had
so many great names after him guilty of the same: Witness Aristotle's suspicion
that the Indies should be joined to Europe about the Straights, where they
fained Hercules his pillars to be. And the Tberaeans ignorance where any such
place as Libya was, when the Oracle bid them plant a Colony there. Would it not
have been worth ones while to have heard the great noise the Sun used to make
every night when he doused his head in the Ocean, as none of the most ignorant
Greeks imagined? And to have seen the Sun about Hercules his pillars to be a
hundred times bigger then he appeared to them, as they commonly fancyed. Was
not Alexander, think we, well tutored in Cosmography by his Master Aristotle,
when he writ word to his mother he had found out the head of Nilus in the East
Indies? as Arrian relates the story. No wonder then his Hist. Alexand. l. 6.
Soldiers should mistake the Mountain Paropamisus in the Indies, for Caucasus
near Colchis, when even their learned men thought Colchis the utmost boundary
of the world on that side, as Hercules his pillars on this. What a lamentable
account then were they able to give of the most ancient times, who were so
ignorant of the state of the world in their own time, when Learning was in its
height in Greece, and frequent discoveries daily made of the world, by the wars
which were made abroad! Eratosthencs confesses the Graecians were ignorant of
a great part of Asia and the Northern parts of Europe before Alexanders
expedition; and Strabo confesses as much of the Western parts of Europe till
the Roman expeditions thither. Palus Meot is and Colchis, Geog^. l. 1.
faith he, were not fully known till the time of Mithridates, nor Hyrcania,
Bactriana, and Scythia, till the Parthian wars. Eratosthenes mentions some who
thought the Arabian Sea to be only a Lake, and it further argues their
ignorance in Geography, that the later Geographers always correct the errors
of the elder, as Ptolomy does Marinus, Eratosthenes those before him,
Hipparchus Eratosthenes, and Strabo not only both them, but Eudoxus, Ephorus,
Dicaearchus, Polybius, Posidonius, and almost all that had writ before him. I
insist on these things, not that I would destroy the credibility of any humane
history, where the Authors are guilty of any mistakes (for that were to take
away the credit of all humane history) but to show how insufficient those
histories are to give us a certain account of the original of Nations, who were
so unacquainted with the state of those Nations which they pretended to give an
account of. For where there is wanting divine revelation (which was not
pretended by any Greek historians; and if it had, had been easily refuted)
there must be supposed a full and exact knowledge of all things pertaining to
that which they pretend to give an account of; and if they discover apparent
defect and insufficiency (which has been largely manifested as to them, in the
precedent discourse) we have ground to deny the credibility of those histories
upon the account of such defect and insufficiency. So much then will abundantly
suffice for the making good the first argument against the credibility of
profane histories, as to the account which they give of ancient times,
different from the Word of God.

CHAP. V. The general uncertainty of Heathen Chronology.
The want of credibility in Heathen History further proved from the uncertainty
and confusion in their acco^^ts of ancient times; that discovered by the
uncertain form of their years. An enquiry into the different forms of the
Egyptian years; the first of thirty days, the second of four Months; of both
instances given in the Egyptian history. Of the Chaldaean accounts, and the
first Dynastyes mentioned by Berosus, how they may be reduced to probability.
Of the Egyptian Dynastyes. Of Manetho. Reasons of accounting them fabulous,
because not attested by any credible authority, and rejected by the best
Historians. The opinion of Scaliger and Vossius, concerning their being
cotemporary, propounded and rejected with reasons against it. Of the ancient
division of Egypt into Nomi or Provinces, and the number of them against
Vossius and Kircher.

THe next thing to manifest how little there is of credibility in the account
of ancient times, reported by the Sect. 1.
histories of heathen Nations, is, the uncertainty, confusion and ambiguity in
the account which they give of those times. If we suppose them not at all
defective as to their records, if yet we find the account given so perplexed,
ambiguous, and confused, that we can find no certainty at all of the meaning of
it, we have very little reason to entertain it with any certain assent unto it.
Now this will be made evident by these things. 1. The uncertainty of their
Chronology, whereon their whole account depends. 2. The multitude of impostures
taken for ancient histories. 3. The uncertain meaning of those characters
wherein their ancient histories were preserved. I begin with the great
uncertainty of the Heathen Chronology, which will be manifested by two things;
first the uncertain form of their years: secondly the want or uncertainty of
their (...), or certain fixed Epocha's from which to derive their account of
ancient times. First, the uncertain form of their years; this of its self is
sufficient to destroy the credibility of their accounts of antiquity, if it be
manifested that they had different forms of years in use among them; and it be
uncertain to which to referr their accounts they give; for if years be
sometimes Lunar, sometimes Solar, and sometimes but of thirty days, sometimes
of four Months, sometimes of three hundred and sixty days, sometimes three
hundred sixty five, sometimes four times three hundred sixty five in their
tetraeteris, sometimes eight times in their octacteris, sometimes more, what
certainty can we possibly have which of them to fix their accounts to.
Especially when they only give them in general, and never tell us which of them
they mean, which may make it shrewdly suspicious that their intent is only to
impose on our understandings, and not to deal fairly and truly with us. We
shall therefore so much explain the different form of their years, as thereby
to show what uncertainties we are left to by them: Where we meddle not with
their Tropical and Astronomical years, but chiefly those which were in civil
use among the several Nations we speak to. A year is nothing else but a System
of days, and is therefore capable of as great variety, as days are in being
joined together; but usually there were some other lesser Systems of days then
those which are called years, out of which the other does result. Such is the
(...), or the week which as Joseph Scaliger says, was Do Emendat. Temp. 1.
(...).
res omnibus Orient is populis ab ultima usque antiquitate usitata; a thing in
continual use among the Eastern Nations, though it be but of late reception
into the parts of Europe, and no elder then Christianity among them. Among the
Romans was used an (...), which was for the sake of the Nundinae returning
every ninth day. The Mexicans as Scaliger tells us, reckon all by a (...), a
System of thirteen days. Next to these were their Months which were either
Lunar or Solar. The Lunar were either from the Moons return to the same point
of the Zodiac again, called (...), which was less then twenty eight days; but
this was of no use in civil computations; or else from one conjunction of the
Moon with the Sun to another, which was called (...); or else from the first
phasis of the Moon, the second day after its coitus, called (...) and (...);
some as the Graecians reckoned their Lunar months from the coitus, as Scaliger
proves out of Vitruvius; others from the phasis, as some Eastern Nations did;
as the Jews began their observation of the New Moons from the first phasis or
appearance of her after the coitus. The Solar months were either natural, such
as were defined by the Suns passage from one sign of the Zodiac to another; or
civil, whereby the months were equally divided into 30 days apiece, as in the
Grecian and Egyptian year.

Having thus far seen of what the year consists, we now Sect. 2.
proceed to show that the ancient Nations did not observe one constant certain
form of year among them, but had several in use, to which their accounts may be
referred. And because the Egyptians are supposed to have been best skilled as
to the form of the year, according to that of Macrobius, Anni certus modus apud
solos semper Aegyptios fuit. We shall particularly demonstrate the variety of
Saturn. l. 1. c. 12.
years in use among them; By which we shall see what great uncertainty there is
in their accounts of their Dynastyes. For first it is evident that the time of
30 days was among the ancient Egyptians accounted a year, for which we have
the testimony of Plutarch in Numa. (...); The Egyptians at first had a year
consisting of one month, and after of four: And this, if we believe Alexander
ab Alexandro, was the year most Genesis Die^. l 2. c^p (...)
frequently in use among them. So Varro in Lactantius gives an account of the
great age of some men in ancient times, who are supposed to have lived 1000
years; Ait enim apud Aegyptios pro annis menses haberi, ut non Solis per 12
signa De Origin. error. i, ^. c. (...)
circaitus faciat annum, sed Luna quae orbem illum signiferum 30 dierum spatio
illustrat. It is then evident that this year of thirty days was in use among
the Egyptians; the only scruple is whether it was used in their sacred
accounts or no; and that it was, we have a pregnant testimony in Plutarch, in
the forecited place; speaking of the Egyptians great pretense to antiquity,
he gives this account of it; (...). They reckon an infinite number of years in
their accounts, because they reckon their months in stead of years.

According to this computation, it will be no difficult matter to reduce the
vast accounts of the Egyptian antiquity to some proportion, and to reconcile
their exorbitant Dynastyes with sobriety and truth, especially as to the
account given of them by Diodorus Siculus; for so Diodorus gives in their
accounts, that the Gods and Heroes reigned in Egypt for Biblioth. l, 1.
the space of near 18000 years, and the last of them was Orus the Son of Isis:
From the reign of men in Egypt he reckons about 9500 years to the time (if we
admit of Jacob. Capellus his correction of (...) for (...) in Diodorus) with
his entrance into Egypt, which was in the 180 Olympiad. Now as the foresaid
learned Author observes, Diodorus came into Egypt A. M. 3940. V. C. 694. the
mortal men then had reigned in Egypt 9500 Hist. sacr. et Exot. A. M. 1682.
years, which taking it for these Lunar years of 30 days, makes of Julian
years 780. the Heroes and Gods 18000 months, that is of Julian years 1478;
from these two sums together are gathered 2258 years, which being deducted
from the year of the world 3940 falls in the year of the world 1682. about
which time Misraim, who was the great historical O siris of Egypt (so called
by a light variation of his former name) might be well supposed to be born; for
that was in the year of Noah 630. and so Orus might be born, who was the Son of
Osiris, about the year of the world 1778. Between whose time and Alexander the
great his Conquest of Egypt, the Egyptians, as the same Diodorus tells us,
reckon little less then 23000 years: Now according to this computation of 30
days for a year, we may reconcile this to truth too; for from 1778 to 3667 of
the world, which falls upon the 417 year of Nabonassar, there is an interval of
1889 years, which makes of these Lunar years of 30 days, says Cappellus,
22996. and 15 days, which comes very near, if not altogether, up to the
Egyptian Computation: So when the Egyptians according to Diodorus, make no
less then 10000 years distance between their Hercules and Hercules Baeotius,
the Son of Alcmena, it must be understood of these Lunar years; for granting
what the Egyptians say, that Hercules Baeotius lived but one generation before
the Trojan war, and so his time to fall out about 2783. reckoning now backward
from thence, and deducting from that year of the world 10000 months of 30
days, or Julian years 831. and 130 days, the time of the Egyptian Hercules
will fall about the first year of the world, 1962. about which time we may well
suppose him to live or die. And according to this computation we are to
understand what the Egyptians told Herodotus, that from their first King or
Priest of Vulcan, till the time of Sethoes (in whose time Sennacherib attempted
the Conquest of Egypt) that there had been passed 341 Generations, and as many
Kings and Highpriests, and 11340 years, reckoning three Generations to make up
a Century. But now, if we understand this prodigious computation according to
this form of years, we may suspect the Egyptians of an intention to deceive
Herodotus and the credulous Greeks, but yet not impeach them of direct
falsehood, it being thus reconcilable to truth. For according to this account
100 years makes 3000 days, and a Generation 1000. so many days the Kings or
Priests of Vulcan may be allowed to reign; so 340 Generations of a 8000 days
apiece, make up 340000 days, to which, if we add the 200 days which Sethos had
now reigned upon Sennacheribs invasion, we have 340200 days, which makes up of
these years of 30 days apeece 11340, which is the number assigned by Herodotus:
Iacobus Cappellus thinks the Epoch from whence these years are to be reckoned,
is from A. M. 2350. when Mephres began Hist. sac^. (...) Exotic. p. 198.
to reign in Egypt, from whence, if we number these 340200 days, or 11340
monthly years, which makes up of Julian years 931. and 152 days, the number
falls A. M. 3282. about which time in probability Sennacherib invaded Egypt.
Thus we see by making use of those Lunar years, that it is possible to
reconcile some of the Egyptian extravagant accounts to some probability and
consistency with truth; but however we owe very little thanks to the Egyptians
for it, who deliver these things in gross, without telling us which years they
mean, and thereby evidence their intent to deceive all who have so little wit
as to be deceived by them.

The next kind and form of the Egyptian year, was that which consisted of four
equal months, amounting to Sect 3.
120 days; the use of this kind of year among them is attested by Plutarch in
the forecited place, and by Diodorus, L. 1.
who gives an account of this kind of year among the Egyptians. Solinus seems
to mention this as the only year Polyhist. c. 3.

De Civit. Dei. l. 12. c. 10.


in request among the Egyptians: and so S. Austin. Perhibentur Aegyptii
quondam tam breves annos habuisse ut quaternis mensibus finirentur. This
renders then the Egyptians accounts yet more uncertain, and only leaves us to
guess with the greatest probability of reason what form of year was meant by
them in their Computations. So when Diodorus speaks so much in favor of the
old Egyptian Kings and Laws, and produces this from the Egyptian Priests, as
the best evidence of the excellent temper of L. 1. Biblioth.
their Government, that they had Kings of their own Nation for the space of
4700 years, till the time of Cambyses his inroad into Egypt, which was in the
third year of the 63 Olympiad. Now besides the apparent contradiction of these
accounts to the other already explained, if we take them in gross, as the
Egyptians give them, it is evident this can be no otherwise true, then by
taking these accounts in that form of years now mentioned by us. For these 4700
years, taking them for 120 days apiece, make up of Julian years 1544. which
being deducted from the year of the world 3475. which was the time when
Cambyses invaded Egypt, the remainder is A. M. 1931. about which time we may
fix the death of Orus, from whom their proper Kings commenced. And of these
years Vossius tells us we are to understand what they report of the long lives
of De Idolat. l. 1. c. 28.
their ancient Kings, when they attribute to each of them the space of 300
years, as when they attribute a 1000 and more to their eldest Kings, we are to
understand them of simple Lunar years of 30 days, by which these Gigantick
measures of the term of their lives, may without the help of Procrustes be cut
short according to the proportion of men's ordinary age in those eldest times.
So when Diodorus reckons from the death of Proteus to his own time A. M. 3940.
3400 years, it must be understood of these years of four equal months; for so
those 3400 years make up of Julian years 1117. which being deduced from 3940.
the remainder is 2823. about which year of the world Proteus may be supposed to
live, which was about the time of the Judges in Israel.

Neither was this only the Egyptians way, but in probability Sect. 4.
the ancient Chaldeans observed the same, which may be a ground likewise of
those unmeasurable accounts among them in their first Dynastyes, as is evident
in the fragments of Abydenus and Apollodorus out of Berosus, where the times of
their first Kings are reckoned not by years but (...), and (...); now according
to them every (...) contained 3600. years, (...) 600. (...) 60. Now who can
imagine that Alorus and the ten Kings from him to Xisuthrus should reign 120.
Sari as their computation is, which reckoning for every Saros 3600. years makes
up 432000. years? A very fair sum for the Chaldean Dynastyes before the time of
Xisuthrus by whom in probability Noah was by them understood. There have been
only two ways thought on of dealing with these computations; either rejecting
them as wholly fabulous, and founded on no evidence or records of history, as
we have seen already; only they might retain (being so near the place of the
settlement of Noah and his posterity after the flood) the memory not only of
the flood (of which it is evident they had several remainders preserved in
their traditions) but likewise of the ages of men preceding the flood, wherein
they were right reckoning from Alorus the first to Xisuthrus, i. e. from Adam
to Noah ten Generations; but as to the names of those ten persons and the times
they lived in, being wholly ignorant through the unfaithfulness of tradition,
they took their liberty not only of coining names, but of setting what age to
them they pleased themselves. And to this purpose Scaliger observes that some
of their first Kings are reckoned Not. in Gr. Eusebius. p. 406.
before the flood, which says he, is denied by Georgius Syncellus without any
show of reason: Thus far then we may admit of the Chaldeans Dynastyes as to
some part of the tradition, but rejecting their names and computations as
fabulous. The other way of explaining these Dynastyes, is by the several ways
of computation among them; For the learned Monks, Panodorus, and Anianus,
understand those vast sums, not of years, but days, and so make a Saros to
contain 120. months of 30. days a piece, which says Scaliger, make ten
Chaldee years, and a Nirus 20. equal months, and a Sosos two: according to
which computation, the 100 Sari make but 1200. years. But this computation of
theirs is rejected by Georgius Syncellus, because he supposes Eusebius so well
versed in these things, that he would never have set them down for years, if
the Chaldaeans had not understood them so, and therefore he would not trouble
himself in reducing Fables to true History, as he expresses it, whose words
are at large produced by Scaliger in the forecited place; and it will appear
more necessary to reject those Chaldaean computations, if we take the sums of
their years in the sense which Salmasius gives of them in the preface to his
book De annis Climactericis (from whom Pyrerius the Author of the Praeadamites)
has borrowed most of his arguments as to these things.) According to him then,
every (...) contained no less then 6000. years, as the Toman among the Persians
contained 10000. but because that learned man has only given us his reperi
Scriptum, without any certain foundation for so large an account of those sums,
we shall take them in as favorable a sense as we can. In order to which a very
learned man of our own has found a third interpretation of the (...) in the
Chaldee accounts, from a correction of Suidas by the M. S. in the Vatican
Library, according to which he thus D. Pearson on the Creed. p. 115. 1. ^dit.
reads the words. (...). and so the sense, says he, is clear (...) according
to the Chaldee account comprehends 222. months, which come to ^ighteen years
and sixth months; therefore 120. (...) make 2220. years, and therefore, (he
adds) for (...). I read, leaving out the last (...). Now according to this
sense of 120. Sari to comprehend the sum of 2220. years, it will be no
difficult matter to reduce the fragment of Berosus concerning the ten Kings
before the flood reigning 120. Sari, to some degree of probability, As to which
I shall only suppose these two things. First, that the ancient Chaldeans had
preserved among them some tradition of the number of the chief persons before
the flood; for we find them exactly agreeing with the Scriptures as to the
number, though differing as to the names of them, which may be seen in the
fragments of Africanus preserved in Eusebius his Greek Chronica. Secondly, that
Berosus from Page 5.
whom Apollodorus and Alexander Polyhistor deliver these computations, might as
to the account of the times of those persons follow the translation of the
Septuagint. For I have already made it evident that Berosus did not publish his
History till after the Septuagint was abroad; now according to the computation
of the Septuagint of the ages before the flood, these 120. Sari of the ten
Kings will not much disagtee from it. For these make 2220. years of these ten
persons, and the Septuagint in all make 2242. so that if in stead of (...) in
Suidas, we only read it (...) we have the exact computation of the Septuagint
in these 120. Sari; but of this let the learned judge.

We now to come to the Egyptian Dynastyes of Manetho, Sect. 5.
as to which I doubt we must be fain to take the same course that Eusebius did
with the Chaldean, (...), not to trouble our selves overmuch in seeking to
reconcile Fables to truth. Great pains is taken by some very learned men to
reduce the disorderly Dynastyes of Manetho to some probable account; but I must
confess upon an impartial examination of them, that I think they have striven
if not to make an Ethiopian white, yet an Egyptian to speak truth concerning
his own Country, which are almost of an equal impossibility. Joseph Scaliger
who first in this latter age of the world p^oduced them into the light out of
Georgius Syncellus, has a more favorable opinion of them, then of the
Egyptian History, of Herodotus, Diodorus and others, but upon what account I
cannot imagine. Is it because four Dynastyes according to his own computation
exceed the creation of the world according to the true account? for which he is
fain to make use of his Tempus prolepticum and Julian period, which reaches
764. years beyond the age of the world, and was invented by him from the
multiplication of the great Cycle into the indiction, i. e. of 532. into 15. Or
is it because for sooth Man^tho has digested all into better order and
reckoned up the several Dynastyes which lay consused in other authors? but this
only shows him a more cunning impostor who saw the former accounts given by
others would not serve the turn, and therefore pretends to more exactness and
diligence, that he might more easily deceive his readers. But setting aside
those things which have been said already concerning Manetho, I have these
things which make me reject his Dynastyes as fabulous: first, the vast
difference between Manetho his accounts and all others who have written the
Egyptian History in the order and names of his Dynastyes. Where do we ever
read of the several Dynastyes of the Thinites, Memphites, Suites, Diospolitans
and many others but in himself? It is very strange that neither Herodotus, nor
Eratosthenes, nor Diodorus, who have all written a succession of the Egyptian
Kings, should neither by their own industry, nor by all the interest they had
in Egypt, get any knowledge of these methodically digested Dynastyes. Besides,
had there been any historical certainty in these Dynastyes of Manetho, whence
comes it to pass that they should be so silently passed over by those who were
Egyptian Priests themselves and undertook to write the History of Egypt? Such
were Chaeremon who was an (...) a sacred scribe, and Ptolomaeus Mendesius who
was an Egyptian Priest, as Eusebius tells us, and comprehended the history of
Egypt in three books. Now had this History been so authentical as is pretended,
whence come so many and great contradictions between them, in so much that
Josephus says, If that which they report were true, it were impossible they
should so much differ; but they ^. App. l. 1.
labor in the invention of lies, and write neither agreeably to the truth nor
to one another. So that it is next to a miracle almost to see how prodigiously
fond of these Dynastyes Kircher is, and what pains he has taken to no purpose
about them; scio multos esse, ^aith he, qui hujusmodi Dynastias meras nugas and
commenta putant; very true; but why Ocdip. Egy. To. 1. Syn^. 1. c 9.
is not he of the same mind too? he confesses himself to have been so once;
but since he had conversed more with the Oriental traditions, he has found
them not to be so fabulous as many make them. It seems then the Basis of the
Egyptian Dynastyes as well before the flood as after, must lie in this
Oriental tradition; a thing, which some, to show their great skill in those
Eastern languages, are grown very fond of. But as far as I can yet see, they
sail to Ophir not for gold, but Peacocks; and the next Legend the world has
should be called Legenda Orientalis. For can any thing be more irrational,
absurd and fabulous, then those Arabic traditions which that author scrapes as
much for, as Aesops Cock did on the Dunghill? but there is no jewel to be
found among them: Unless we should take those 15. hard names of men for such
which by the Arabic writers are said to have succeeded each other in Egypt
before the flood, viz. Nacraus, Nathras, Mesram, Henoah, Arjak, Hasilim, Husal,
Tatrasan, Sarkak, Schaluk, Surith, (who they say built the Pyramids) Hugith,
Manaus, Aphrus, Malinus, Abn Ama Pharaun, in whose time they say the flood
came. But should we be so little befriended by reason as to grant all this,
what advantage will this be to Manetho who speaks not of Kings but whole
Dynastyes? so that it still appears these Dynastyes are fabulous not being
attested by any credible witnesses. Secondly, All those who profess to follow
Manetho, differ strangely from one another, as Josephus, Africanus, Eusebius,
George the Syncellus of the patriarchs of Tarasius; and Scaliger who has taken
so much pains in digesting of them, yet he is condemned by others since; and
Isaac Vossius gives a particular caution to his reader, In his De aetat. M^^di.
cap. 10.
Dynastiis compingendis nequaquam esse sequendum ordinem and calculum
Scaligeri. What should be the reason of this diversity, but that they thought
them not so authentic* but they might cut off, alter and transpose as they saw
occasion? which is most plain and evident in Eusebius, who makes no difficulty
of ^utting of one whole Dynasty, and dividing another into two, only to
reconcile the distance between Thuoris the Egyptian King, and Tentamus the
Assyrian Emperor, and the destruction of Troy, and therefore leaves out 4.
Assyrian Kings and a whole Dynasty of the Egyptians to make a Synchronisme
between those three.

But yet there has been something very fairly offered to the world to clear
the truth, if not Manetho, in order to his Sect 6.
Dynastyes, viz. that the subtle Egyptian to inhance the antiquity of his own
Country, did take implicit years for solid, and place those in a succession
which were cotemporary one with another; This indeed is a very compendious way
to advance a great sum of years with a very little charge: Wherein he has done
says Cappellus, as if a Spaniard in the Indies should glory of the antiquity
of the Dynastyes of Hist. Sacr. et exot. A. M. 3308.
Spain, and should attribute to the Earls of Barcinona 337. years, to the King
of Arragon 498. to the King of Portugal 418. to the King of Leo 545. of Castile
800. years, and yet all these Dynastyes rise from the years of our Lord 717.
when the Saracens first entered Spain. There are very few Nations, but will go
near to vie antiquity with the Egyptians, if they may thus be allowed to reckon
successively all those petty royalties which anciently were in most Nations; as
might be particularly instanced in most great Empires, that they gradually rise
from the subduing and incorporating of those petty royalties into which the
several Nations were cantonized before. And there seems to be very strong
ground of suspicion that some such thing was designed by Manetho from the 32.
Dynasty which is of the Diospolitan Thebans; for this Dynasty is said to begin
from the tenth year of the 15. Dynasty of the Phaenician Pastors in the time
of Saites; now which is most observable, he that begins this Dynasty, is of the
very same name with him who begins the very first Dynasty of Manetho, who is
Menes, and so likewise his son Athothis is the same in both: Which has made
many think because Menes is reckoned first, not only in both these, but in
Diodorus, Eratosthenes and others, that this Menes was he who first began the
Kingdom of Egypt, after whose time it was divided into several Dynastyes. Which
makes Scaliger say, illa vet ustissima regna fuerunt instar latrociniorum, ubi
vis non lex aut successio aut suffragia Canon. ^sag. l. 3.
populi reges in solio regni collocabant. This opinion of the coexistence of
these Dynastyes is much embraced by Vossius Gerard. Vos. Idol. l. 1. c. 28. Is.
Vos. de aet. Mundi. c. 10.
both Father and Son, and by the Father made use of to justify Scaliger from
calumniatours, who made as though Scaliger did in effect overthrow the
authority of the Scriptures by mentioning with some applause the Dynastyes of
Manetho.

But to this opinion how plausible soever it seems, I offer these exceptions.
First, As to that Menes who is supposed Sect. 7.
to be the first founder of the Egyptian Kingdom, after whose death it is
supposed that Egypt was divided into all these Dynastyes, I demand therefore
who this Menes was; was he the same with him whom the Scripture calls Misraim
who was the first Planter of Egypt? this is not probable, for in all
probability his name must be sought among the Gods and not the mortals that
reigned. If we suppose him to be any other after him, it will be hard giving an
account how he came to have the whole power of Egypt in his hands, and so soon
after him it should be divided. For Kingdoms are ofttimes made up of those
petty royalties before; but it will be very hard finding instances of one
persons enjoying the whole power, and so many Dynastyes to arise after his
decease, and to continue coexistent in peace and full power so long as these
several Dynastyes are supposed to do. Besides, is it not very strange that no
Historian should mention such a former distribution of several principalities
so anciently in Egypt? But that which to me utterly overthrows the coexistence
of these Dynastyes in Egypt, is, by comparing with them what we find in
Scripture of greatest antiquity concerning the Kingdom of Egypt; which I cannot
but wonder that none of these learned men should take notice of. When the
Egyptian Kingdom was first founded, is not here a place to enquire; but it is
evident that in Abraham's time, there was a Pharaoh King of Egypt (whom Genesis 12.
^.
Archbishop Usher thinks to have been Apophis) not Abimelech the first King of
Egypt, as Constantinus Manasses reports in his Annals (by a ridiculous mistake
of the King of Gerar for the King of Egypt.) This Pharaoh was then certainly
King of all the Land of Egypt, which still in Scripture is called the Land of
Misraim from the first planter of it; and this was of very great antiquity; and
therefore Funccius (though improbably) thinks this Pharaoh to have been Osiris,
and Rivet thinks Misraim might have been alive till that time; here then we
find no Dynastyes coexisting, but one Kingdom under one King. If we descend
somewhat lower, to the times of Jacob and Joseph, the evidence is so undoubted
of Aegypts being an entire Kingdom under one King, that he may have just cause
to suspect the ^yes either of his body or his mind that distrusts it. For what
more evident then that Pharaoh who preferred Joseph, was King of all the Land
of Egypt? Were not the seven years of famine over all the Land of Egypt? Genesis
41. 55. Was not Joseph set by Pharaoh over all the Land of Egypt? Genesis 41. 41,
43, 45. And did not Joseph go over all the Land of Egypt to gather corn? Genesis
41. 46. Nay did not he buy all the Land of Egypt for Pharaoh? Genesis 47. 20. Can
there possibly be given any fuller evidence of an entire Kingdom, then these
are that Egypt was such then? Afterward we read of one King after another in
Egypt for the space of nigh two hundred years, during the children of Isreal's
slavery in Egypt; and was not he think we, King over all Egypt, in whose time
the children of Israel went out thence? And in all the following history of
Scripture, is there not mention made of Egypt still as an entire Kingdom, and
of one King over it? Where then is there any place for these co-temporary
Dynastyes in Egypt? Nowhere that I know of, but in the sancies of some learned
men.

Indeed there is one place that seems to give some countenance Sect. 8.
to this opinion; but it is in far later times then the first Dynastyes of
Manetho are supposed to be in, which is in Isai. 19. 2. Where God, says he,
would set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every one
against his brother, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom. Where it
seems that there were several Kingdoms then existent among the Egyptians; but
the Septuagint very well renders it (...) now (...) among the Egyptians, as
Epiphanius and others tell us, notes (...), the precincts of every great City,
such as our Counties are, and therefore Pliny renders (...) by praefecturae;
these were the several Provinces of Egypt, of which there were thirty six in
Egypt, ten in Thebais, ten in Delta, the other sixteen in the midland parts;
so that by Kingdom against Kingdom, no more is meant then one Province being
set against another. Isaac Vossius thinks the number of the ancient Nomi was
twelve, and that over every one of these was a peculiar King; and that this
number may be gathered from the Dynastyes of Manetho, setting aside the
Dynastyes of the Persians, Aethiopians, and Phaenicians: viz. the Thinites,
Memphites, Elephantines, Heracleopolitans, Diospolitan Thebans, the lesser
Diospolitans, Xoites, Tanites, Bubastites, Saites, Mendesians and Sebennytes:
and so that Egypt was anciently a Dodecarchy, as England in the Saxons times
was a Heptarchy. But as it already appears, there could be anciently no such
Dodecarchy in Egypt; so it is likewise evident that this distribution of
Egypt into Nomi is a later thing, and by most writers is attributed to
Sesoosis or Sesostris, whom Josephus supposes to be Sesac King of Egypt,
cotemporary with Rhehoboam. Vid. Boch. Geogr. p. 1. l. 4. c. 24.

Oedip. Egypt. To. 1. Syntag. 1. c. ^.


Indeed if we believe Gelaldinus the Arabic Historian cited by Kircher, the
most ancient distribution of Egypt was into four parts. Misraim held one part
to himself, and gave his son Copt another, Esmun a third, and Atrib a fourth
part; which division the same Author affirms to have continued till the time of
Joseph, who made a new distribution of the whole Land: After him Sesestris
divided the whole into thirty several Nomi; so Kircher will needs have it, that
of the three several parts of Egypt, each might have for some mystical
signification its ten Nomi, of which every one had its distinct and peculiar
God it worshipped, and a particular Palace in the Labyrinth, and a peculiar
Sanhedrim or Court of Justice belonging to it. But it evidently appears by that
vainglorious Oedipus, that it is a far easier matter to make new mysteries,
then to interpret old ones, which as it might be easily discovered in the main
foundations whereon that structure stands, so we have some evidence of it in
our first entrance into it, in this part of Chorography of Egypt. For from
whence had he this exact division of Egypt into thirty Nomi, t^n of which
belonged to the upper Egypt or Th^bais, ten to Delta or the lower Egypt, and
the ten remaining to the midland Country? Has he this from Ptolomy, whose
Scheme of the several Nomi he publishes? Syntag. 1. c. 2. p. 7.
No. Ptolomy and Pliny by his own confession afterward add many other to
these, as Omphile, Phanturites, Tinites, Phatnites, Ne^t, Heptanomos, etc. Has
he it from Strabo whose authority he cites for it? No such matter. For Strabo
says expressly that Thebais had ten Nomi, Delta ten, and the Geogr. l. 17.
midland sixteen; only some are of opinion, says he, that there were as many
Nomi as Palaces in the Labyrinth, which were toward thirty; but yet the number
is uncertain still. We see by this how ominous it is for an Oedipus to stumble
at the threshold, and how easy a matter it is to interpret mysteries, if we
may have the making of them. We see then no evidence at all for these
cotemporary Dynastyes of Manetho; which yet if we should grant, would be a
further argument of the uncertainly of Heathen Chronology, when among them
implicit years are given out to the world for solid; so that which way soever
Manetho his Dynastyes be taken, they will prove the thing in hand, whether we
suppose them at least most part fabulous, or should grant he had taken those in
succession to each other, which were co-existent with one another.

CHAP. VI. The uncertain epocha's of Heathen Chronology.
An account given of the defect of Chronology in the eldest times. Of the Solar
year among the Egyptians, the original of the Epacts, the antiquity of
Intercalation among them. Of the several Canicular years; the difference
between Scaliger and Petavius considered. The certain Epocha's of the Egyptian
History no elder then Nabonasser. Of the Grecian accounts. The fabulousness of
the Heroical age of Greece. Of the ancient Grecian Kingdoms. The beginning of
the Olympiads. The uncertain Origines of the Western Nations. Of the Latin
Dynastyes. The different Palilia of Rome. The uncertain reckoning Ab V. C. Of
impostures as to ancient Histories. Of Annius, Inghiramius, and others. Of the
characters used by Heathen Priests. No sacred characters among the Jews. The
partiality and inconsistency of Heathen Histories with each other. From all
which the want of credibility in them as to an account of ancient times is
clearly demonstrated.

THe next thing to evidence the uncertainty of the Heathen Chronology, is, the
want of certain parapegmata, or Sect. 1.
some fixed periods of time, according to which the account of times must be
made. For if there be no certain Epocha's by which to reckon the succession of
ages, the distance of intervalls, and all intervening accidents, we must of
necessity fluctuate in continual uncertainties, and have no sure foundation to
bottom any account of ancient times upon. The great reason of this defect, is
the little care which those who lived in the eldest times had to preserve the
memory of any ancient tradition among themselves, or to convey it to posterity
in such a way as might be least liable to imposture. Of all kinds of Learning,
Chronology was the most rude in eldest times; and yet that is well called by
Scaliger, the life and soul of History, without which, History is but a
confused lump, a mere Mola, an indigested piece of flesh, without life or form.
The ancient accounts of the world were merely from year to year, and that with
abundance of obscurity, uncertainty and variety: sometimes going by the course
of the Moon, and therein they were as mutable as the Moon her self, how to
conform the year regularly to her motion; and it was yet greater difficulty to
regul^te it by the course of the Sun, and to make the accounts of the Sun and
Moon meet. There was so much perplexity and confusion about the ordering of a
single year, and so long in most Nations before they could bring it in^o any
order, that we are not to expect any fixed periods by which to find out the
succession of ages among them. Among the Egyptians who are supposed most
skilful in the account of the year, it was a long time before they found out
any certain course of it. It is agreed by most, that when the Egyptian Priests
had found out the form of the year by the course of the Sun, (which is
attributed by Diodorus to the Heliopolitan Priests) L. 1. c. 50.
yet the year in common use was only of 360. days, which in any great period
of years must needs cause a monstrous confusion by reason that their Months
must of necessity by degrees change their place, so that in the great Canicular
year of 730. Thoyth which was the beginning of the Summer Solstice in the
entrance into that period, would be removed into the midst of Winter, from
whence arose that Egyptian Fable in Herodotus, that in the time of their
eldest Kings, ^nterpe. Vide Scaliger. de Emend. Temp. l. 3. p. 195.
the Sun had twice changed his rising and setting; which was only caused by the
variation of their Months, and not by any alteration in the course of the Sun.
Which defect the Egyptian Priests at last observing, saw a necessity of adding
five days to the end of the year, which thence were called (...), which
implies they were not anciently in use among them, being afterward added to
make up the course of the year. Which the Egyptians give an account of, as
Plutarch tells us under this Fable: Mercury being once De I side et Osiri.
at Dice with the Moon, he got from her the 72. part of the year, which he
after added to the 360. days which were anciently the days of the year, which
they called (...), and therein celebrated the Festivals of their gods, thence
the names of the several (...) were taken from the Gods; the first was called
(...), it being celebrated in honor of him; the second (...), by which
Scaliger understands Anubis, but Vossius more probably the Senior Orus; the
third to Typho, the fourth to Isis, the fifth to Nephtha the De Idol. l. 1. c.
28.
wife of Typho and sister to Isis. This course of the year Scaliger thinks that
the Egyptians represented by the Serpent called (...) being described in a
round circle biting some part of his tail in his mouth, whereby, says he, they
would have it understood, that the form of the year was not perfect without
that adjection of five days to the end of the year: For to this day, says he,
the Coptites and ancient Egyptians call the end of the year (...). It seems
that afterward they understood likewise the necessity of intercalation of a
day every fourth year for the sake of the redundant quadrant each year above
365. days; which course of four years they called their Canicular year,
because they observed its defect in that time one whole day from the rising of
the Dog Star; and besides, that they called it (...) and (...); and lustrum
Sothiacum from (...) the Dog Star; but Censorinus denies any use of
intercalation among the Egyptians in their civil year, although their De die
Natali c. 18.
Sacred and Hieroglyphical years might admit of it. And upon this ground, I
suppose the controversy between those two learned persons Scaliger and
Petavius concerning the antiquity of Intercalation among the Egyptians may be
reconciled. For on the one side it is apparent, that the ordinary V. Petav. de
doctr. temp. l. 3. c. 2.
or civil year did want intercalation, by this testimony of Censorinus; Eorum
annus civilis solos habet dies 365. sine ullo intercalari; itaque quadriennium
apud cos uno circiter die minus est quam natural quadriennum; and thence says
he, it comes to pass, that in 1461. years which was the great Heliacal year, it
returns to the same beginning; for then the Dog Star arises again upon the
first day of the month Thoyth, as it did at the beginning of this great
Canicular year; and that this kind of civil year did continue among them in the
time of Censorinus (which was of the Dionysian account 238.) appears by this,
that he says in the year wherein he wrote his book, the New Mood of Thoyth was
before the seventh day of the Calends of July, whereas 100. years before, it
was before the 12. of the Calends of August; whence it is evident, that the
Julian year whatever some learned men pretend to the contrary, was not in
ordinary use among the Egyptians in that time; and that Sosigenes when he
corrected the Roman account and brought in the form of the Julian year, did not
take his pattern from the Kircher. Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 3. Class. 7. cap. 2.
Egyptian year, but from the Graecians of Alexandria, who did make use of the
quadrant added to the 365. years, which the Egyptians did not, as appear
further by the golden circle in the monument of Osymanduas (which Diodorus
speaks of out of Hecataeus Milesius) which was of 365. cubits compass, and
divided into so many segments for every Biblioth. ^ l. 1. c. 49.
day with the observations of the rising and setting of the several stars, and
the effects portended by them. And the reason why this year continued in civil
use among the Egyptians, De sphaera cap. 6.
is well assigned by Geminus, that the Egyptians according to a superstitious
observation they had, would needs have their Festivals run through every day in
the year. But now on the other side, it is as evident that by continual
observation the wisest of the Egyptian Priests did discern the necessity of
intercalation, and that there wanted six hours in every year to make it
complete, which every four years would make the intercalation of a day
necessary; so much by Diodorus is affirmed of the Theban Priests who were the
best Astronomers, and by Strabo both of the Theban Bibl. l. 1. cap. 50. Geog.
l. 17.
and Heliopolitan; and so likewise Horapollo, whose work was to interpret the
more abstruse Learning of the Egyptian Priests; when, (says he) the Egyptians
would express a year, they name a quadrant, because from one rising of the star
Sothis to another, the fourth part of a day is added, so that the year consists
of 365. days (and a quadrant must be added, because of the antecedents and
consequents) therefore every Hicroglyph. l. 1. c. 5.
fourth year they reckon a supernumerary day. How unjustly Petavius has
charged Scaliger with falsehood in reference to this testimony of Horapollo,
merely because the citation did not appear in that chapter mentioned by
Scaliger in the book which Petavius used, has been already observed by learned
men; whereupon Vossius condemns. Petavius of strange incogitancy, because in
three editions mentioned by him, Scaligers citation was right; but Conringius
has since pleaded in behalf of Petavius, that he De Idol. l. 1. c. 28. De
Hermet. Med. c. 12.
might make use of the edition of Causinus distinct from the other three;
whereby we see how small a matter will beget a send between learned men,
especially where prejudice has lodged before, as is too evident in Petavius
his rough dealing on all occasions with that very deserving person Joseph
Scaliger. But to return, from hence by degrees the Egyptians proceeded to make
greater periods of years (as Eudoxus carried his octaeter is into Greece from
the Canicular year of the Egyptians) they framed from this a greater Canicular
year, which had as many years as a Julian has days; and lastly, the greatest
Canicular year which comprehended four of the greater, and consisted of a
period of 1461. years. But thus we see, that the great periods of years among
them rise gradually as they grow more skillfull in the understanding the nature
of the year; and that they had anciently no certain periods to govern
themselves by in their computation of ancient times. Nay the Egyptians have not
as appears, any certain Epoch to go by elder then the Egyptian years of
Nabonassar, and afterward from the death of Alexander, and Ptolomy
Philadelphus, and Augustus his victory at Actium.

If from the Egyptians we remove our discourse unto Sect. 2.
the Grecians, we are still plunged into greater uncertainties, it being
acknowledged by themselves that they had no certain succession of time before
the Olympiads. To which purpose the Testimony of Varro in Censorinus is
generally taken notice of, distributing time into three parts, reckoning two of
them to be unknown and fabulous, and the historical part of time to begin with
the first Olympiad. Indeed Scaliger and some others are loath to reject all that
Not. in Can. Isogog. l. 3.
second part of time as fabulous, which was in the interval between Deucalions
flood and the Olympiads; therefore they had rather call it Heroical, though
much corrupted with Fables, and think that it was historical as to persons, but
fabulous as to the actions of those persons. But granting this, yet we are
wholly to seek for any certain account of the succession of time and persons,
for want of some certain Epocha's, which like the Pole Star should guide ut in
our passage through that boundless Ocean of the Grecian history. It must be
confessed that some of the learned Heathens have taken a great deal of pains
this way to find out some certain periods to fix on in the time before the
Olympiads, as Philocorus, Apollodorus, and Dionysius Halycarnassensis, and
others, who out of their skill in Astronomy sought to bring down some certain
intervals between the destruction of Troy, and the first Olympic game of
Pelops, restored by Hercules and Atreus. But granting that their Epocha's were
fixed and certain, that the destruction of Troy was upon the 23 of Thargelion,
the 11 month of the Attick account, and that the Olympic game fell out
answerably to the ninth of our July, and these things were evidently proved
from Astronomical observations; yet how vast an account of time is lost quite
beyond the siege of Troy! and besides that, as to all other accidents in the
In-tervals between these two Epocha's, which could not be proved by Celestial
observations concurrent with them, they were left at a very great uncertainty
still; only they might guess whether they approached nearer to one Epoch then
the other; but the series of Families and their Generations (three of which
made a Century of years) whereby they might come to some conjectures, but could
never arrive at any certainty at all.

But that which is most to our purpose, is, that all the history of the
Original of Greece, the foundations of their Sect. 3.
several Kingdoms, the succestion of their first Kings, and all that comes
under the name of the history of their ancient times, is clearly given over by
their own most skilful Chronologers, as matters out of the reach of any clear
evidence. Thence come such great differences concerning the antiquity of their
ancient Kingdoms; the Argolick Kingdom by Dionysius Halycarnass. is supposed to
be the eldest, and the Attick younger then it by 40 Generations, which
according to their computation comes to a 1000 years, which is impossible; and
yet the Arcadians, who gave themselves out to be elder then the Moon, are
supposed to be younger by him then the Grasshoppers of Athens by nine
Generations; and the Pthiotica under Deucalion, younger thenthe Arcadica by 42
Generations, which Scaliger might well say were impossible and inconsistent.
The Sycyonian Kingdom is by most supposed to be of greatest antiquity among the
Graecians, from which Varro began his history, De Civit. Dei l. 16. c. 2.
as S. Austin tells us, and yet as to this, Pausanias only re^kons the names of
some Kings there, without any succession of time among them; and yet as to
those names, Africanus (and Eusebius from him) dissent from Pausanias; and
which is most observable, Homer reckons Adrastus, who is the 23 in the account
of Africanus, to be the first that reigned in Secyon, whose time was after the
institution of the Olympic game by Pelops: of him thus Homer, (...) Il. 3.
Whereby he expresses Adrastus to be the first King of Sicyon; and not as
Scaliger would interpret it, that Adrastus was first King of the Sicyonians
before he was of the Argives; for in the time of Adrastus at Sicyon, either
Atreus, or Thyestes was King of the Argives; for in the second year of Phaestus
and Adrastus his supposed Predecessor in Sicyon, Atreus restored the Olympic
game of Pelops, in the 41 year of their reign, and they reigned at Argi 65
years: Now that Phaestus at Sicyon is supposed to reign but eight years; and
therefore the reign of Adrastus at Sicyon falls in with that of Atreus and
Thyestes at Argi or Mycenae. Thus we see now how uncertain the account of times
was before the beginning of the Olympiads among the Graecians, which is fully
acknowledged by Diodorus, and the very reason given which we here insist on,
(...), that there was no certainty in the ancient Grecian history, because
they had no certain term (which he calls parapegma, as others Epoch, and
Censorinus titulus) from whence to deduce their accounts. But now from the time
of the Olympiads (i. e. from the first of them after their restoration by
Iphitus, wherein the names of the Conquerors were engraven in brass tablets for
the purpose) the succession of time is most certain and historical among the
Graecians; by which account we have from thence a certain way of commensurating
the sacred and profane history. All the difficulty is in what year of sacred
history the Olympiads began, which Scaliger thus finds out. Censorinus writes
(in the year of Christ 238. which was of the Julian period De emend. temp. l. 5.
4951.) that, that year was from the first Olympiad of Iphitus 1014. the first
Olympiad was of the Julian period 3938. which was according to our learned
Primate A. M. 3228. and the 35 of Uzziah King of Judah, or the 34. as Capellus
thinks: So that from henceforward we have a clear account of times, which we
have demonstrated to have been so uncertain before.

If we come from the Greeks further into these European parts, we shall find as
much darkness and obscurity as Sect. 4.
to ancient times, if not more, then in those already discoursed of. For the
truth is, the account of times before the Romans in Italy, Germany, old Gallia
or Britain, are scarce fit to be discoursed of under any head then that of
impostures. Not that I think those Nations had lain in a perpetual sleep till
the Romans waked them into some kind of civility, but that they had no certain
way of conveying down the transactions of their own and former times to the
view of posterity. On which account we may justly reject all those pretended
successions of Kings h^re in Britain from Gomer to Brute as fabulous: And it
will be the less wonder it should be so in those then accounted barbarous
Nations, when even among those who were the Planters of knowledge and civility
among others, the account of their ancient times is so dark, confused, and
uncertain: As it would sufficiently appear to any that would take the pains to
examine the succession of the two first Dynastyes among the Latins; the first
before Aeneas his coming into Italy, and the second of the Aeneadae after; and
certainly it will be sufficient ground to question the account of times before,
if in the third Dynasty, when the succession seems so clear, and so certain an
Epoch as the building of Rome, to deduce their accounts from their Chronology
be uncertain, which I shall briefly speak to. For although Porcius Cato have in
Dionysius the honor of finding out the first Palilia of the City of Rome
(which was the Feast observed to the honor of the God Pales, in the time of
which, the foundations of Rome were laid) yet there appears no great certainty
in his undertaking; for therein he was after contradicted by the learned Roman
Varro. Dionysius tells us that Cato found by the Censors tables the exact time
from the expulsion of the Kings, to the time of the Cities being taken by the
Gauls; from which time to his own, he could not miss of it from the Fasti
Consulares; so that it cannot be denied but that Cato might have a certain
account of times from the Regifugium to the time he writ his Origines. But what
certainty Cato could have from the first Palilia of the City to the expulsion
of Tarquin, we cannot understand. For the succession of Kings must needs be
very uncertain, unless it be demonstrated from some public monuments, or
certain records, or some public actions certainly known to have fallen out
precisely in such a year of their several Reigns. Now none of these do occur in
the Roman history in all that Interval from the Palilia to the Regifugium; so
that not only the whole interval, but the time of every particular Kings Reign,
are very uncertain. And therefore Varro being destitute of any demonstration of
that time, had recourse to L. Tarrutius Firmanus, to see if by his skill in
Astronomy he could certainly find out the first Palilia of Rome: His answer
was, that he found that the City was built in the time of an Eclipse of the
Sun, which was in the third year of the sixth Olympiad, according to which
account Varro proceeded, and thence arose the difference between the Palilia
Catoniana and Varroniana; the latter falling out in the 23 of Iphitus, the
other in the 24. But if we believe Joseph Scaliger, there could not be an
Eclipse of the Sun at the time affirmed by Tarrutius: But yet V. de Emend.
^cmp. l. 5. p. 388.
granting an Eclipse of the Sun then, what certainty can we have of the
succession of the several Kings afterward, without which there can be no
certain computation ab Urbe Condita? If then the Romans, who had so great
advantage of knowing times, and were withal so inquisitive concerning the
building of their City (which was a thing of no very remote distacne) could
attain to no absolute certainty without it, what certainty can we expect as to
an account of far ancienter times, either from them or others, when they had no
Censors tables, nor Fasti Consulares to be guided by? And thus much may serve
to show the great uncertainty of Heathen Chronology, as to the giving an
account of ancient times.

And yet were it only an uncertainty as to Chronology, we might better bear
with it; for the mistake merely in Sect. 5.
computation of times were not so dangerous (any further then the credibility
of the history depends on the computation, as in point of antiquity) if we were
but certain that the persons and actions related of them were such as they are
reported to be. But that which adds much to the confusion and uncertainty of
Heathen history, is, the frequency of Impostures, which are more hard to be
discovered, in that there are no authentic histories of those times extant,
which has both given occasion to variety of imposture, and much hindered their
discovery. For the curiosity of men leading them back into a search after
ancient times, it makes them exceeding credulous in embracing whatever pretends
to give them any conduct through those dark and obscure paths of ancient
history: And the world has never been wanting of such as would be ready to
abuse the simple credulity of well-meaning, but less wary men; but those ages
have been most feracious in the production of such persons, which have
pretended to more Learning then they had. The pretense of learning made such
persons appear, and the want of it made them not be discovered. Thus it was not
only of old among the Chaldean and Egyptian Priests, and the Grecian Poets
and Historians, of whom we have spoken already; but even among those who might
have learned more truth from the Religion they professed, then to think it
stood in need of their lies. For there can be no greater disparagement offered
to truth, then to defend it with any thing but it self, nothing laying truth so
open to suspicion, as when falsehood comes to be its advocate: And a false
testimony discovered, does more prejudice to a good cause, then it could any
ways advantage it, were it not discovered; and therefore their labors have
been as serviceable to the world who have discovered Impostors, as those who
have directly maintained truth against its open opposers, those being so much
more dangerous, in that they appear in the disguise of truth, and therefore are
with more difficulty discovered. Such a one was that ignis fatuus that appeared
in a kind of twilight in the Christian world between the former darkness of
Barbarism, and the approaching light of knowledge; I mean Annius Viterbiensis,
who like Hannibal in passing the Alps, not finding a way ready to his mind,
sets himself to burning the woods, and firing the rocks, and dissolving them
with vinegar to make a passage through them: So Annius being beset in those
snowy and gray headed Alps of ancient history, and finding no way clear for him
according to his fancy, he labors to burn down all certain Records, to eat
through the credit of undoubted Authors, to make a more free passage for his
own history, which he deduceth suitably to Scripture from the concurrent
testimony of the eldest Historians. To which purpose, a New Berosus, Manetho,
Philo, Metasthenes (as he mistook for Megasthenes) and Xenophon must put on a
grave disguise, and walk abroad the world with a mantle of Antiquity about
their shoulders, although they were nothing else but aerie Phantasms, covered
over with the Cowl of the Monk of Viterbo. For being himself somewhat more
versed in the history of those elder times then generally persons were in the
age he lived in, he made that unhappy use of his skill, to play the Mountebank
with his learning; and to abuse the credulity of those who have better stomachs
then palats, and can sooner swallow down the compositions that are given them,
then find out the Ingredients of them. Thus Annius puts a good face on his
new-old Authors, bids them be bold and confident, and they would fare the
better: And the truth is they tell their story so punctually in all
circumstances, in those things which had no certain conveyance to posterity,
that that were sufficient ground to any intelligent person to question their
authority. But lest his Authors should at any time want an Interpreter to make
out their full meaning, he sets himself a large Commentary upon them: And
certainly he was the fittest person in the world to do it; for cujus ^st
condere, ejus ^st interpretari; none so fit to explain Annius, as Annius
himself. The whole story of this Imposture, how he made the Inscriptions
himself, and hid them under ground, how they were dug thence and brought to
Annius; how Annius caused them to be sent to the Magistrates, and after
published them in the equipage they are in, are at large related by that
learned Bishop Antonius Augustinus, from Latinus Latinius. Dialog. 11.


From a like quarry to this, came out those other famous Inscriptions, walking
under the specious title of Antiquitatum Sect. 6.
Ethruscarum fragmenta, wherein, besides many palpable incongruities to the
customs of those eldest times, discovered partly by Leo Allatius in his
discourse concerning them, there are so many particular stories and
circumstances related concerning Noah's being in Italy, and other things, so
far beyond any probability of reason, that it is a wonder there are yet any
persons pretending to learning, who should build their discourses upon such
rotten and sandy foundations as these Inscriptions are. But though Ixion might,
Jupiter would never have been deceived with a Cloud instead of Juno; so, though
persons unacquainted with the lineaments of truth, may be easily imposed on
with appearances instead of her: yet such persons who have sagacity enough to
discern the air of her countenance from the paint of forgeries, will never
suffer themselves to be overreached by such vain pretenders. But these
Impostors are like the Astrologers at Rome, ever banished, and yet ever there;
and so these are ever exploded by all lovers of truth, yet always find some to
applaud and entertain them: Although it be more difficult to do so now in the
present light of knowledge, and all advantages for learning, then it was in
those elder times, when the Heathen Priests pretended to the Monopoly of
Learning among themselves, and made it one of their great designs to keep all
others in dependence on themselves, thereby to keep up their veneration the
better among the people. And therefore all the Records they had of Learning or
History, were carefully locked up, and preserved among the Priests; and lest at
any time others might get a view of them, they were sure to preserve them in a
peculiar Character distinct from that in civil and common use. By which means
the Heathen Priests had all imaginable opportunities and conveniences for
deceiving the silly people, and thereby keeping them in an obsequious
Ignorance, which is never the Mother of any true Devotion, but of the greatest
Superstition.

It is well known of the Egyptian Priests, that the sacred Sect. 7.
Characters of their Temples were seldom made known to any but such as were of
their own number and family, Diod. l. 3.
(the Priesthood being there hereditary) or such others as by long converse had
insinuated themselves into their society, as some of the Greek Philosophers and
Historians had done: And yet we have some reason to think they were not
overfree and communicative to some of them, by the slender account they give of
several things, which are supposed to be well known among the Egyptians. That
the Phoenician Priests had their peculiar and sacred Characters too, is evident
from the words of Philo Byblius concerning Sanchoniathon, if we take Bochartus
his Exposition of them: Eusebius. Praep. E^. vang. l. c. 10.
He tells us that his History was compared (...), with the Inscriptions in the
Temples written in the Ammunean letters, which are known to few: Literae
Ammuneorum (says Bochartus) sunt literae Templorum, literae in sacr is
exceptae. For (...) is the Sun, thence (...) the Temple of the Geogr. sacr. p.
2. l. 2. c 17
Sun, whom the Phoenicians worshipped as their principal Deity, under the name
of Beel-samen, the Lord of Heaven. The same Author tells us out of Diogenes
Laertius, of a Book of Democritus, (...); by which it is evident that the
Babylonian Priests had their sacred Characters too: And of a Testimony of
Theodoret Quest. in Genesis 61.
of all the Grecian Temples, (...), that they had some peculiar Characters
which were called sacred. But that leraned Author thinks there is no necessity
of understanding it peculiarly of the Graecians, because the Greek Fathers
called all Heathens by the name of Greeks; but if so, the Testimony is the
larger, and amounts to an universal Testimony of the Heathen Temples.

Neither was this only peculiar to them, if we believe Sect. 8.
some persons of greater Learning then Judgment, who attribute this distinction
of sacred and vulgar Characters to the Jews as well as others, but without any
probability of reason. For these learned men being strongly possessed with the
opinion of the modern Jews concerning the Antiquity of the present Hebrew
Characters, and finding themselves pressed not only with the Testimony of some
ancient Rabbis, but with the stronger evidence of the ancient shekels about
Solomon's time, inscribed with the Samaritan letters, have at last found this
Evasion, that the Samaritan letters were in vulgar use; but the present
Characters were then sacred, and not made common till after the time of the
Captivity. But this seems to be a mere shift found out by some modern Jews, and
greedily embraced by their Followers, because thereby they are in hopes to
evade the strength of the contrary arguments, which otherwise they can find no
probable solution of. And a mere shift it will appear to be, to any one that
considers on how little ground of reason it stands: For none of those reasons
which held for such a distinction of Characters among the Heathens, can have
any place among the Jews. For it was never any part of Gods design to have the
Law kept from the peoples view. Truth is never so fearful of being seen abroad;
it is only falsehood that walks under disguises, and must have its hiding-places
to retreat to: Nay, God expressly commanded it as a duty of all the Jews, to
search and study his Law, which they could not do, if it were locked up from
them in an unknown Character. Did not God himself promulge it among the people
of Israel by the Ministry of Moses? did he not command it to be as frontlets
between their eyes, Exodus 13. 16. D^ut. 6. 8.
and signs upon their hands (not that Phylacteries should be made of the Law to
wear, as the Pharisees interpreted it, and others from them have mistaken) but
that they should have the Law in continual remembrance, as if it were always
between their eyes, and engraven upon their hands. Again, if we suppose the Law
to be among the people, but in the vulgar character, I would fain know, what
sanctity, majesty, and authority, there was in that character more then in the
words and matter? and if there were, how comes the vulgar use of it to be
nowhere forbidden? and how durst Ezra, as is supposed, after the Captivity,
profane so sacred a thing by exposing it to Common use? But granting them yet
further, that it was lawful, but not useful to make use of that sacred
character; I demand then, how comes that disuse to continue so punctually till
the time of Ezra, and that it should never be divulged before? when there was
so great reason to make it common, since the square letters are less operose,
more expedite and facile, then the Samaritan, which is, when time serves, used
as a plea for their great Antiquity. But yiedling yet more, that the Sacred
Character was only used for the authentic copy of the Law, which was to
decide all differences of other coppies (which some run to as their last shift)
I appeal to any man's reason, whether this be not the most improbable of all?
For how could such a copy be the Judge of all others, which could not be read
or understood by those who appealed to it? Or was the knowledge and reading of
this character peculiar to the High Priest, and conveyed down as a Cabala from
one to another? but how many incongruities would follow hence, in case one High
Priest should dye before his son was capable of understanding the letters, and
so that Sacred treasure must needs be lost; or had they it all by inspiration,
and understood the Sacred Character by Urim and Thummim? Thus every way, this
opinion among the Jews is pressed with inconveniences, but it was most
suitable to the Heathens Priests to maintain a Meum and Tuum between their own
Character and the vulgar, For hereby they prohibited all prying into their
mysteries by any, but those who had the same Interest with themselves, and
therefore were unlikely to discover any thing that might lessen their
reputation. Whereas, had there been nothing but Truth in their records, or that
Truth had been for their Interest, what need had there been of so great
reservedness and privacy? but when the discovery of truth would undeceive the
world, it was their Interest to lock it up, and to give out such things to the
vulgar, which might advance themselves and please them; which artifices of
theirs give no small ground to Question the credibility of their Histories.

Especially if we add what we promised in the last place, to show the want of
credibility in the report of ancient times Sect. 9.
among them, which was not only defectiveness, and uncertainty, but apparent
partiality to themselves, and inconsistency with each other. How evident is it
in all these Nations we have spoken to, how much they strive to inhance the
reputation of their own Nation, and to that end blend the History of other
Nations with their own, to make theirs seem the greater. How much do the
Egyptians tell us of the excellency of their ancient Laws and Government? and
yet how evident is it, from their own Histories, that no such Laws were
observed by their Kings as they speak of? Can we think that such Kings as
Chemmis and the rest of them, who built those vast structures of the Pyramids,
and employed myriads of men for so many years for the doing of them, would be
content to be so dieted by their Laws, as Hercataeus and Diodorus tell us they
were to be? Nay it seems to be very suspicious, that the great enterprises of
their famous Sesoosis are merely fabulous, and some think an attributing to
themselves, what was done by the Assyrian Emperor in his time. By which we may
guess, what to think of the great Conquests of Osiris and Isis, and their
subduing almost the whole world to them. And it is most evident how partial the
Egyptians are in dissembling their greatest losses; as is clear in the story
of the Conquest of Pharao Neco by N^buchadnezzar, Jer. 46. 12. of which there
is not the least mention in Herodotus or Diodorus; But on the contrary,
Herodotus tells us this Necos, as he Lib. 2.
calls him, conquered the Syrians at Magdalos; and the story of Vaphres and
Amasis in him seems to be only a disguise of Nebuchadnezzars Conquest; only
lest men should think them conquered by a Forraigner, they make Amasis to be an
Egyptian Plebeian. Again, what a vast number of Cities does Diodorus tell us
of that were in Egypt in ^iblioth^. l. 1
their eldest times? no less then 18000. when yet himself confesses in the
time of Ptolomaeus Lagi there were reckoned but somewhat above 3000 Cities, and
then Egypt was the most populous that ever it had been. How probable does this
sound, that in those eldest times such vast multitudes of Cities should be
erected? But the truth is, it is not unsuitable to their opinion of the
production of the first men, which were caused, say they, by the heat of Sun,
and the mud of Nilus; and it is certain then they might be the most populous
Nation in the world: for there could be no defect as to either efficient or
material cause, there being mud enough to produce Myriads, and the Sun hot
enough to impregnate it. The partiality of other Nations has been already
discoursed of in our passage; and so likewise has their mutual repugnancy to,
and inconsistency with each other: Which yet might be more fully manifested
from the contradictions in reference to the Egyptian History between Manetho,
Herodotus, Diodorus, Dicaearchus, Eratosthenes, and all who have spoken of it;
as to the Assyrian Empire between Herodotus, Diodorus, and Julius Africanus; as
to the Persian Empire between Herodotus and Ctesias, and those in no
inconsiderable things, as is evident in Photius his excerpta out of him. Among
the Graecians we have already discovered it as to their History and Geography;
and if we should enter into their Theology, and the History of that, we should
find their other differences inconsiderable, if compared with these. Of which
we may partly make a conjecture by the incredible spite that is born by the
gravest Greek Authors, as Strabo, Plutarch, and others, toward Euemerus
Siculus, for offering to deliver the History of Jupiter, which he says, he
transcribed from the golden pillar in the Temple of Jupiter Triphyllius in
Panchetis.

But I suppose enough has been discovered already, to prove that there is no
credibility in any of those Heathen Histories, which pretend to give an account
of ancient times, there being in all of them so much defect and insufficiency,
so great uncertainty and confusion, so much partiality and inconsistency with
each other. It remains now that I proceed to demonstrate the credibility of
that account of ancient times, which is reported in the Sacred Scriptures,
which will be the second part of our Task.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. The certainty of the Writings of Moses.
In order to the proving the truth of Scripture-history, several Hypotheses
laid down. The first concerns the reasonableness of preserving the ancient
History of the world in some certain Records, from the importance of the
things, and the inconveniences of mere tradition or constant Revelation. The
second concerns the certainty that the Records under Moses his name, were
undoubtedly his. The certainty of a matter of fact enquired into in general,
and proved as to this particular by universal consent, and settling a
Commonwealth upon his Laws. The impossibility of an Imposture as to the
writings of Moses demonstrated. The plea's to the contrary largely answered.

HAving sufficiently demonstrated the want of credibility in the account of
ancient Sect. 1.
times, given by those Nations who have made the greatest pretense to Learning
and Antiquity in the world, we now proceed to evince the credibility and
certainty of that account which is given us in sacred Screptures: In order to
which I shall premise these following Hypotheses.

It stands to the greatest reason, that an account of things so concerning and
remarkable, should not be always left to the Hyp. 1.
uncertainty of an oral tradition; but should be timely entered into certain
Records, to be preserved to the memory of posterity. For it being of
concernment to the world, in order to the establishment of belief as to future
things, to be fully settled in the belief that all things past were managed by
Divine providence, there must be some certain Records of former ages, or else
the mind of man will be perpetually hovering in the greatest uncertainties:
Especially where there is such a mutual dependence and concatenation of one
thing with another, as there is in all the Scripture-history. For take away but
any one of the main foundations of the Mosaical history, all the superstructure
will be exceedingly weakened, if it does not fall quite to the ground. For man's
obligation to obedience unto God, does necessarily suppose his original to be
from him; his hearkening to any proposals of favor from God, does suppose his
Apostasy and fall; Gods designing to show mercy and favor to fallen man, does
suppose that there must be some way whereby the Great Creator must reveal
himself as to the conditions on which fallen man may expect a recovery; the
revealing of these conditions in such a way whereon a suspicious (because
guilty) creature may firmly rely, does suppose so certain a recording of them,
as may be least liable to any suspicion of imposture or deceit. For although
nothing else be in its self necessary from God to man, in order to his
salvation, but the bare revealing in a certain way the terms on which he must
expect it; yet considering the unbounded nature of Divine goodness, respecting
not only the good of some particular persons, but of the whole society of
mankind, it stands to the greatest reason that such a revelation should be so
propounded, as might be with equal certainty conveyed to the community of
mankind. Which could not with any such evidence of credibility be done by
private and particular revelations (which give satisfaction only to the inward
senses of the partakers of them) as by a public recording of the matters of
Divine revelation by such a person who is enabled to give the world all
reasonable satisfaction, that what he did was not of any private design of his
own head, but that he was deputed to it by no less then Divine authority. And
therefore it stands to the highest reason, that where Divine revelation is
necessary for the certain requiring of assent, the matter to be believed should
have a certain uniform conveyance to men's minds, rather then that perpetually
New revelations should be required for the making known of those things; which
being once recorded are not liable to so many impostures as the other way might
have been under pretended Revelations. For then men are not put to a continual
trial of every person pretending Divine revelation, as to the evidences which
he brings of Divine authority, but the great matters of concernment being
already recorded and attested by all rational evidence as to the truth of the
things, their minds therein rest satisfied without being under a continual
hesitancy, lest the Revelation of one should contradict another.

For supposing that God had left the matters of Divine Sect. 2.
revelation unrecorded at all, but left them to be discovered in every age by a
spirit of prophecy, by such a multitude as might be sufficient to inform the
world of the truth of the things; We cannot but conceive that an innumerable
company of croaking Enthusiasts would be continually pretending commissions
from heaven, by which the minds of men would be left in continual distraction,
because they would have no certain infallible rules given them, whereby to
difference the good and evil spirit from each other. But now supposing God to
inspire some particular persons, not only to reveal, but to record Divine
truths, then what ever evidences can be brought attesting a Divine revelation
in them, will likewise prove the undoubted certainty and infallibility of those
writings, it being impossible that persons employed by a God of truth should
make it their design to impose upon the world; which gives us a rational
account, why the wise God did not suffer the History of the world to lie still
unrecorded, but made choice of such a person to record it, who gave abundant
evidence to the world that he acted no private design, but was peculiarly
employed by God himself for the doing of it, as will appear afterward.
Besides, we find by our former discourse, how liable the most certain
tradition is to be corrupted in progress of time, where there are no standing
records, though it were at first delivered by persons of undoubted credit. For
we have no reason to doubt, but that the tradition of the old world, the flood
and the consequences of it, with the nature and worship of the true God, were
at first spread over the greatest part of the world in its first plantations,
yet we see how soon for want of certain conveyance, all the ancient tradition
was corrupted and abused into the greatest Idolatry. Which might be less
wondered at, had it been only in those parts which were furthest remote from
the seat of those grand transactions; but thus we find it was even among those
families, who had the nearest residence to the place of them, and among those
persons who were not far off in a lineal descent from the persons mainly
concerned in them; as is most evident in the family out of which Abraham came
(who was himself the tenth from Noah) yet of them it is said, that they served
other Gods. How unlikely then was it, that this tradition Josh. 24. 2.
should be afterward preserved entire, when the people God had peculiarly
chosen to himself, were so mixed among the Egyptians, and so prone to the
Idolatries of the Nations round about them, and that even after God had given
them a written Law attested with the greatest miracles? what would they have
done then, had they never been brought forth of Egypt by such signs and
wonders, and had no certain records left to preserve the memory of former ages?
Thus we see how much it stands to the greatest reason, that so memorable things
should be digested into sacred records.

We have as great certainty that Moses was the author of the records going
under his name, as we can have of any matter of Sect. 3. Hyp. 2.
fact done at so great a distance of time from us. We are to consider that
there are two very distinct questions to be thought of concerning a Divine
revelation to any person at a considerable distance of time from us; and those
are what evidences can be given that the matters recorded are of a true divine
revelation; and what evidence we have of the truth of the matter of fact, that
such things were recorded by such persons. They who do not carefully
distinguish between these two questions, will soon run themselves into an
inextricable labyrinth, when they either seek to understand themselves, or
explain to others the grounds on which they believe the Scriptures to be the
Word of God. The first step in order to which must be the proving the undoubted
certainty of the matter of fact, or the truth of the History, that such persons
were really existent, and did either do or record the things we speak of: After
this, succeeds the other to prove, not only the real existence of the things,
but that the persons who recorded the things were assisted by an infallible
spirit; then there can be no reason at all to doubt, but those records are the
Word of God. The first of these, is, that which at present we enquire after,
the certainty of the matter of fact, that the records under the name of Moses
were undoubtedly his. And here it will be most unreasonable for any to seek for
further evidence and demonstration of it, then the matter to be proved is
capable of. But if they should, I suppose we have sufficient reason to
demonstrate the folly of such a demand, and that on these accounts.

1. Whoever yet undertook to bring matters of fact into Mathematical
demonstrations, or thought he had ground to 1.
question the certainty of any thing that was not proved in a Mathematical way
to him? Who would ever undertake to prove that Archimedes was killed at Syracuse
by any of the demonstrations he was then about? or that Euclide was the
undoubted Author of the Geometry under his name? or do men question these
things for want of such demonstrations? Yet this is all we at present desire,
but the same liberty here which is used in any thing of a like nature.

2. I demand of the person who denies this moral certainty to be sufficient for
an assent, whether he does question 2.
every thing in the world, which he was not present at the doing of himself? If
he be peremptorily resolved to believe nothing but what he sees, he is fit for
nothing but a voyage to Anticyrae, or to be soundly purged with Hellebore to
free him from those cloudy humors that make him suspect the whole world to be
an imposture. But we cannot suppose any man so destitute of reason, as ^o
question the truth of every matter of fact which he does not see himself; if he
does then firmly believe any thing, there must be supposed sufficient grounds
to induce him to such a belief. And then what ground can there be to question
the certainty of such things which have as great evidence as any of those
things have which he most firmly believes? and this is all we desire from him.

3. Do we not see that the most concerning and weighty 3.
actions of men's lives, are built on no other foundation then this moral
certainty? yet men do not in the least question the truth of the thing they
rely upon: As is most evident in all titles to estates derived from Ancestors,
either by donation or purchase: In all trading which goes upon the moral
certainty, that there are such places as the Indyes, or France, or Spain, etc.
In all journyings, that there is such a place, as that I am going to, and this
is the way thither; for these we have but this moral certainty; for the
contrary to both these are possible, and the affirmatives are indemonstrable.
In eating and drinking there is a possibility of being poisoned by every bit of
meat or drop of drink; do we therefore continually doubt, whether we shall be
so or no? Chiefly this is seen in all natural affection and piety in Children
toward Parents, which undoubtedly suppose the truth of that, which it was
impossible they could be witnesses of themselves; viz. their coming out of
their Mothers wombs. And does any one think this sufficient ground to question
his mother, because the contrary is impossible to be demonstrated to him? In
short, then, either we must destroy all Historical faith out of the world, and
believe nothing (though never so much attested) but what we see our selves, or
else we must acknowledge, that a moral certainty is a sufficient foundation for
an undoubted assent, not such a one cui non potest subesse falsum, but such a
one cui non subest dubium, i. e. an assent undoubted, though not infallible. By
which we see what little reason the A^heist on one side can have to question
the truth of the Scriptures, to the History of it; and what little ground the
Papists on the other side have to make a pretense of the necessity of
infallibility, as to the proposal of such things where moral certainty is
sufficient, that is, to the matter of f^ct.

Which I now come to prove, as to the subject in hand; Sect. 4.
viz. that the writings of Moses are undoubtedly his, which I prove by a
twofold argument: 1. An universal consent of persons, who were best able to
know the truth of the things in question. 2. The settling of a Commonwealth upon
the Laws delivered by Moses. 1. The universal Consent of persons most capable
of judging in the Case in hand. I know nothing the most scrupulous and
inquisitive mind can possibly desire in order to satisfaction, concerning any
matter of fact beyond an universal Consent of such persons who have a greater
capacity of knowing the truth of it then we can have. And those are all such
persons who have lived nearest those times when the things were done, and have
best understood the affairs of the times when the things were pretended to be
done. Can we possibly conceive, that among the people of the Jews, who were so
exceedingly prone to transgress the Law of Moses, and to fall into Idolatry,
but if there had been any the least suspicion of any falsity or imposture in
the writing of Moses, the ringleaders of their revolts would have sufficiently
promulged it among them, as the most plausible plea to draw them off from the
worship of the true God? Can we think that a Nation and religion so maligned as
the Jewish were, could have escaped discovery, if there had been any deceit in
it, when so many lay in wait continually to expose them to all Contumelies
imaginable? Nay, among themselves in their frequent Apostacies, and occasions
given for such a pretense, how comes this to be never heard of, nor in the
least questioned, whether the Law was undoubtedly of Moses his writing or no?
What an excellent plea would this have been for Ieroboams Calves in Dan and
Bethel; for the Samaritans Temple on Mount Gerizim, could any the least
suspicion have been raised among them, concerning the aut bentickness of the
fundamental records of the Jewish Commonwealth? And which is most observable,
the Jews who were a people strangely suspicious and incredulous, while they
were fed and clothed with miracles, yet could never find ground to question
this. Nay, and Moses himself, we plainly see, was hugely envied by many of the
Israelites even in the wilderness, as is evident in the Conspiracy of Corah and
his accomplices, and that on this very ground, that he took too much upon him;
how unlikely then is it, that amidst so many enemies he should dare to venture
any thing into public records, which was not most undoubtedly true, or
undertake to prescribe a Law to oblige the people to posterity? Or that after
his own age any thing should come out under his name, which would not be
presently detected by the emulato^rs of his glory? What then, is the thing it
self incredible? surely not, that Moses should write the records we speak of.
Were not they able to understand the truth of it? What? not those, who were in
the same age, and conveyed it down by a certain tradition to posterity? Or did
not the Israelites all constantly believe it? What? not they, who would sooner
part with their lives and fortunes, then admit any variation or alteration as
to their Law?

Well, but if we should suppose the whole Jewish Nation Sect. 5.
partial to themselves, and that out of honor to the memory of so great a
person as Moses, they should attribute their ancient Laws and records to him:
Which is all that Infidelity its self can imagine in this Case: Yet this cannot
be with any shadow of reason pretended. For,

1. Who were those persons, who did give out this Law to the Jews under Moses
his name? Certainly they, who 1.
undertake to contradict that which is received by common consent, must bring
stronger and clearer evidence then that on which that consent is grounded; or
else their exceptions deserve to be rejected with the highest indignation. What
proof can be then brought, that not only the Jewish Nation, but the whole
Christian world has been so lamentably befooled to believe those things with
an undoubted assent, which are only the contrivances of some cunning men?

2. At what time could these things be contrived? Either while the memory of
Moses and his actions were remaining, 2.
or afterward. First, how could it possibly be, when his memory was remaining?
for then all things were so fresh in their memories, that it was impossible a
thing of this universal nature could be forged of him. If after, then I demand,
whether the people had observed the Law of Moses before or no? if not, then
they must certainly know it at the time of its promulgation to be counterfeit,
for had it been from Moses, it would have been observed before their times; if
it was observed before, then either continually down from the time of Moses, or
not? If continually down, then it was of Moses his doing, if we suppose him to
have had that authority among the people which the objection supposes; if not,
then still the nearer Moses his time, the more difficult such a counterfeiting
could be; because the Constitutions which Moses had left among them, would have
remained in their memories, whereby they would easily reject all pretenses and
counterfeits.

3. How can we conceive the Nation of the Jews would have ever embraced such a
Law, had it not been of Moses 3.
his enacting among them in that state of time when he did? For then the people
were in fittest capacity to receive a Law, being grown a great people, and
therefore necessary to have Laws; newly delivered from bondage, and therefore
wanting Laws of their own; and entering into a settled state of Commonwealth,
which was the most proper season of giving Laws.

These considerations make it so clear, that it is almost impossible to
conceive the Nation of the Jews could have Sect. 6.
their Laws given to them but at the time of their being in the wilderness,
before they were settled in Canaan. For suppose we at present, to gratify so
far the objection, that these Laws were brought forth long after the
constitution of the government and the national settlement, under Moses his
name; how improbable, nay how impossible is it to alter the fundamental Laws of
a Nation after long settlement? what confusion of interests does this bring?
what disturbance among all sorts of people, who must be disseised of their
rights, and brought to such strange unwonted customs so seemingly against their
interests, as many of the Constitutions among the Jews were? For can we
imagine, that a people always devoted to their own interest, would after it
had been quietly settled in their land, by Constitutions after the custom of
other Nations, presently under a pretense of a copy of Laws found (that were
pretended to be given by one in former ages of great esteem, called Moses)
throw open all their former enclosures, and part with their former Laws for
these of which they have no evidence, but the words of those that told it them?
We have a clear instance for this among the Romans; although there were great
evidence given of the undoubted certainty, that the books found in Numa's grave
by Petilius were his, yet because they were adjudged by the Senate to be
against the present Laws, they were without further enquiry adjudged to be
burnt. Was not here the greatest likelihood that might be, that these should
have taken place among the Romans, for the great veneration for wisdom which
Numa was in among them, and the great evidence that these were certain
remainders of his, wherein he gave a true account of the superstitions in use
among them? yet lest the state should be unsettled by it, they were prohibited
so much as a public view, when the Praetor had sworn they were against the
established Laws. Can we then conceive the Jewish Nation would have embraced so
burdensome and ceremonious a Law as Moses's was, had it been brought among them
in such a way as the books of Numa, though with all imaginable evidence, that
it was undoubtedly his, especially when they were engaged to the observation of
some Laws or customs already, by which their Commonwealth had been established?
And with all these Laws of Moses seeming so much against the interest and good
husbandry of a Nation, as all the neighbor Nations thought, who for that
accused them to be an i^le and slothful people, as they judged by their resting
wholly one day in seven, the great and many solemn feasts they had, the
repairing of all the males to Jerusalem thrice a year; the Sabbatical years,
years of Iubilee, etc. These things were apparently against the interest of
such a Nation, whose great subsistence was upon pasturage and agriculture. So
that it is evident these Laws respected not the outward interest of the Nation,
and so could not be the contrivance of any Politicians among them, but did
immediately aim at the honor of the God whom they served, for whom they were
to part even with their civil interests: The doing of which by a people
generally taken notice of for a particular Love of their own concernments, is
an impregnable argument these Laws could not take place among them, had they
not been given by Moses at the time of their unsettlement, and that their
future settlement did depend upon their present observation of them; which is
an evidence too that they could be of no less then divine original? Which was
more then I was to prove at present.

4. Were not these writings undoubtedly Moses's; Sect. 7.
whence should the neighbor Nations about the Jews notwithstanding the hatred
of the Jewish religion, retain so venerable an opinion of the Wisdom of Moses?
The Egyptians accounted him one of their Priests (which notes the esteem they
had of his learning) as appears by the testimonies produced out of Chaeremon
and Man^tho by Josephus. C. App. l. 1. Bib. l. 1. Geog. 16. De sublim.
Diodorus Siculus speaks of him with great respect among the famous
Legislatours, and so does Strabo, who speaks in commendation of the Religion
established by him. The testimony of Longinus is sufficiently known, that Moses
was no man of any vulgar wit ((...)) Chalcidius calls him sapientissimus Moses
(although I must not dissemble that Chalcidius has been, I think, undeservedly
reckoned among heathen writers, though he comments on Plato's Timaeus, V. Vos.
de Idol. l. 2. cap. 45.
it being most probable that he was a Christian Platonist, which might more
probably make Vaninus call him circumforaneum blateronem) but though we exempt
Chalcidius out of the number of those Heathens, who have born testimony to the
wisdom of Moses, yet there are number enough besides him produced by Justin
Martyr, Cyrill, and V. Grot. An. deverit. rel. Christ. l. 2.
others, whose evidence is clear and full to make us undoubtedly believe, that
there could never have been so universal and uninterrupted a tradition
concerning the writings and Laws of Moses, had they not been certainly his, and
conveyed down in a continual succession from his time to our present age. Which
will be yet more clear, if we consider in the second place, that the national
Constitution and setlement of the Jews, did depend on the truth of the Laws and
writings of Moses. Can we have more undoubted evidence, that there were such
persons as Solon, Ly^urgus, and Numa, and that the Laws bearing their names
were theirs, then the History of the several Commonwealths of Ath^ns, Sparta,
and Rome, who were governed by those Laws? When writings are not of general
concernment, they may be more easily counterfeited; but when they concern the
rights, privileges, and government of a Nation, there will be enough whose
interest will lead them to prevent impostures. It is no easy matter to forge a
Magna Charta and to invent Laws; men's caution and prudence is never so quick
sighted as in matters which concern their estates and freeholds. The general
interest lies contrary to such impostures, and therefore they will prevent
their obtaining among them. Now the Laws of Moses are incorporated into the
very Republic of the Jews, and their subsistence and Government depends upon
them, their Religion and Laws are so interwoven one with the other, that one
cannot be broken off from the other. Their right to their temporal possessions
in the land of Canaan depends on their owning the Sovereignty of God who gave
them to them; and on the truth of the History recorded by Moses concerning the
promises made to the Patriarchs. So that on that account it was impossible
those Laws should be counterfeit on which the welfare of a Nation depended, and
according to which they were governed ever since they were a Nation. So that I
shall now take it to be sufficiently proved, that the writings under the name
of Moses were undoubtedly his; for none, who acknowledge the Laws to have been
his, can have the face to deny the History, there being so necessary a
connection between them; and the book of Genesis being nothing else but a
general and very necessary introduction to that which sollows.

CHAP. II. Moses his certain knowledge of what he writ.
The third Hypothesis concerns the certainty of the matter of Moses his
History; that gradually proved: First, Moses his knowledge cleared, by his
education, and experience, and certain information. His education in the wisdom
of Egypt; what that was. The old Egyptian learning enquired into; the
conveniences for it of the Egyptian Priests. Moses reckoned among them for his
knowledge. The Mathematical, Natural, Divine, and Moral learning of Egypt:
their Political wisdom most considerable. The advantage of Moses above the
Greek Philosophers, as to wisdom and reason. Moses himself an eyewitness of
most of his history: the certain uninterrupted tradition of the other part
among the Jews, manifested by rational evidence.

HAving thus far cleared our way, we come to the third Sect. 1. Hyp. 3.
Hypothesis, which is, There are as manifest proofs of the undoubted truth and
certainty of the History recorded by Moses, as any can be given concerning any
thing which we yield the firmest assent unto: Here it must be considered, that
we proceed in a way of rational evidence to prove the truth of the thing in
hand, as to which, if in the judgment of impartial persons the arguments
produced be strong enough to convince an unbiassed mind; It is not material,
whether every rangling Atheist will sit down contented with them. For usually
persons of that inclination rather then judgment, are more resolved against
light, then inquisitive after it, and rather seek to stop the chinks at which
any light might come in, then open the windows for the free and cheerful
entertainment of it. It will certainly be sufficient to make it appear, that no
man can deny the truth of that part of Scripture which we are now speaking of,
without offering manifest violence to his own faculties, and making it appear
to the world, that he is one wholly forsaken of his own reason: which will be
satisfactorily done, if we can clear these things: First, that it was morally
impossible Moses should be ignorant of the things he undertook to write of, and
so be deceived himself. Secondly, That it was utterly impossible he should have
any design in deceiving others in reporting it. Thirdly, That it is certain
from all rational evidence, that he has not d^ceived the world, but that his
History is undoubtedly true. First, That it was morally impossible Moses should
be deceived himself, or be ignorant of the things which he writ of. Two things
are requisite to prevent a man's being deceived himself. First, That he be a
person of more then ordinary judgment, wisdom, and knowledge. Secondly, That
we have sufficient information concerning the things he undertakes to write of.
If either of these two be wanting, it is possible for a man of integrity to be
deceived; for an honest heart has not always an Urim and Thummim upon it; nor
is fide^^ty always furnished with the acutest intellectuals. The simplicity of
the Dove is as liable to be deceived its self, as the subtilty of the serpent
is to deceive others; but where the wisdom of the serpent is, to prevent being
deceived, and the Doves innocence in not deceiving others, there are all the
qualifications can be desired in any one who undertakes only to tell the Truth.
First, Then that Moses was a person of a great understanding, and sufficiently
qualified to put a difference between truth and falsehood, will appear; first,
from the ingenuity of his education; secondly, from the ripeness of his
judgment and greatness of his experience when he penned these things.

First, We begin with his education. And here we require at present no further
assent to be given to what is reported concerning Moses in Scripture, then what
we give to Plutarchs lives, or any other relations concerning the actions of
persons who lived in former ages. Two things then we find recorded in Scripture
concerning Moses his education; Heb. 11. 25 Act. 7. 22.
that he was brought up in the Court of Egypt, and that he was skild in all
the learning of the Egyptians; and these two will abundantly prove the
ingenuity of hi^ education, viz. That he was a person both conversant in civil
affairs, and acquainted with the abstruser parts of all the Egyptian wisdom.

And I confess there is nothing to me which does advance Sect. 2.
so much the repute of the ancient Egyptian Learning, as that the Spirit of
God in Scripture should take so much notice of it, as to set forth a person
(otherwise renowned for greater accomplishments) by his skill in this. For if
it be below the wisdom of any ordinary person, to set forth a person by that
which in its self is no matter of commendation, how much less can we imagine it
of that infinite wisdom which inspired Stephen in that Apology which he makes
for himself against the Libertines, who charged him with contempt of Moses and
the Law? And therefore certainly this was some very observable thing, which was
brought in as a singular commendation of Moses, by that person whose design was
to make it appear how high an esteem he had of him. And hence it appears that
Learning is not only in its self a great accomplishment of humane nature, but
that it ought to be looked upon with veneration, even in those who have
excellencies of a higher nature to commend them. If a Pearl retains its
excellency when it lies upon a dunghill, it can certainly lose nothing of its
luster by being set in a crown of gold; if Learning be commendable in an
Egyptian, it is no less in Moses, where it is enameled with more noble
perfections, then of it self it can reach unto. All the question is, Whither
the ancient learning of the Egyptians was such as might be supposed to improve
the reason and understanding of men to such an height, as thereby to make them
more capable of putting a difference between truth and falsehood? Whether it
were such an overflowing Nilus as would enrich the understandings of all those
who were in a capacity to receive its streams? The truth is, there want not
grounds of suspicion, that the old Egyptian Learning was not of that elevation
which the present distance of our age makes us apt to think it was. And a
learned man has in a set discourse endeavored to show the great defects that
there were in it; Conringius de Hermet. Medic. c. 10, 11, 12.
Neither can it, I think, be denied, but according to the reports we have now
concerning it, some parts of their Learning were frivilous, others obscure, a
great deal Magical, and the rest short of that improvement, which the accession
of the parts and industry of after ages gave unto it. But yet it is again as
evident, that some parts of learning were invented by the Egyptians, others
much improved, and that the Greeks did at first set up with the stock they
borrowed out of Egypt, and that learning chiefly flourished there, when there
was (I had almost said) an Egyptian darkness of Ignorance overspreading the
face of Greece as well as other Nations.

Which will appear by these considerations, the great antiquity Sect. 3.
of their repute for Learning, the great advantages they had for promoting it,
and the parts of Learning most in use among them. This, though it may seem a
digression here, will yet tend to promote our design, by showing thereby how
qualified and accomplished Moses was to deliver to the world an history of
ancient times. If we believe Macrobius, there was no people in the world could
^ye for Learning with the Egyptians, who makes Egypt in one place, the mother
Saturn. l. 1. cap. 15. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 19.
of all Arts, and in another the Egyptians omnium Philosophiae disciplinarum
parents, the Fathers of the Philosophic Sciences; he derives elsewhere the
original of all Astronomy from them, quos constat primos omnium coelum metiri,
and scrutari ausos: though it be more probable that the Nativity even of
Astronomy it self, was first calculated by the Chald^ans, from whom it was
conveyed to the Egyptians. He cap. 21.
likewise appropriates all divine knowledge to them, where he says they were
Soli rerum divinarum conscii, and after calls Egypt, divinarum omnium
disciplinarum compotem. It is Saturn. l. 1. cap. 14. l. ^. c. 13.
sufficiently notorious what great repute the Egyptian Learning has been in,
with some in our latter times, in that our Chemists look upon it as the
greatest honor to their profession, that they think they can claim kindred of
the old Egyptian Learning, and derive the pedigree of their Chemistry from the
old Egyptian Hermes. But that vain pretense is sufficiently refuted by the
forementioned learned man Conringius, in his Tract on this subject, de
Hermetica Medicina. Franciscus Patricius professes himself so great an admirer
of the old Egyptian Learning, that he thought it would be no bad exchange, if
the Peripatetick Philosophy were extruded, and the old Egyptian received
instead of it. But the world is now grown wiser, then to receive his Hermes
Trismegistus for the Author of the old Egyptian Philosophy, the credit of his
Author being for ever blasted, and the doctrine contained in the books under
his name, manifested to be a mere C^nto, a confused mixture of the Christian,
Platonic, and Egyptian doctrine together. So that we could hardly maintain
the justness of the repute of the ancient Egyptian Learning from any thing now
extant of it; but yet we see no reason to question it, especially since it is
so honorably spoken of in Sacred Writ, and seems in it to have been made the
standard and measure of humane wisdom. For which we have this observable
testimony, that when the wisdom of Solomon is spoken of with the greatest
advantage and commendation, it is set forth with this character, that it
exceeded the wisdom of all the children of the 1 King. 4. 29, 30, 31.
East Country, and all the wisdom of Egypt. Whence it is most natural and
easy to argue, that certainly their learning must be accounted the greatest at
that time in the world, or else it could not have been inferred, that Solomon
was wiser then all men, because his wisdom excelled theirs, unless we suppose
their wisdom to have been the greatest in that age of the world, when the
wisdom of the Graecians (although in that time Homer is supposed to flourish)
was not thought worthy the taking notice of. We see from hence then, as from an
irrefragable testimony, that the wisdom of the Egyptians anciently was no
trivial Pedantry, nor mere superstitious and Magical rites, but that there was
some thing in it solid and substantial, or it had not been worth triumphing
over by the wisdom of Solomon: It being true of that, what Lipsius faith of the
Roman Empire, Quicquid dignum vinci videbatur; vicit, caetera non tam non
potuit quam De Magnitud. Romans l. 1. c. 3.
contempsit; it was an argument of some great worth, that it was over-top'd and
conquered by it.

Thus we see how just the repute of the ancient Egyptian Sect. 4.
Learning is from Testimony, and we shall find as great reason for it, when we
con^ider the great advantages the Egyptians had for promoting of Learning
among them. Two ways men come to knowledge, either by tradition from others,
or by observation of their own; what the Egyptians had the first way, will be
spoken to afterward; we now consider the latter of these. All knowledge
arising from observation, must be either of those Sciences which immediately
conduce to the benefit of men's lives, or such whose end is to improve men's
rational faculties in the knowledge of things. The former necessity will put
men upon the finding Vid. Arist. Metaph. 1. l. c. 1.
out, the latter require secessum and otia, freedom from other employments, a
mind addicted to them, and industry in the study of them, and a care to
preserve their inventions in them. The study of Geometry among the Egyptians,
owed its original to necessity; for the river Nile being swelled with the
showers falling in Aethiopia, and thence annually overflowing the Country of
Egypt, and by its violence overturning all the marks they had to distinguish
their lands, made it necessary for them upon every abatement of the flood to
survey their lands, to find out every one his own by the quantity of the ground
upon the survey. The necessity of which put them upon a more diligent enquiry
into that study, that thereby they might attain to some exactness in that,
which was to be of such necessary, constant and perpetual use: Thence we find
the invention of Geometry particularly attributed by Herodotus, Diodorus,
Strabo and Herod. l. 2.

Diod. l. 1.

Strab. l. 17.

Coel. Rhodi. l. 18. c. 34.


others, to the Egyptians. This skill of theirs they after improved into a
greater benefit, viz the conveying the water of Nile into those places where it
had not overflown to so great a height, as to give them hopes of an ensuing
plenty; which they did by the artificial cutting of several Channels for that
end, wherein, says Strabo, the Egyptians Art and Industry out-went Nature its
self. By this likewise they observed the height of the overflowing of the
river, whereby they knew what harvest to expect the following year; which they
did by a well near Memphis (from the use of it called (...)) upon the walls of
which were the marks of several cubits, which they observe and publish it to
all, that they might provide themselves accordingly. We see what grounds there
are, even from profit and advantage, to make us believe that the Egyptians
were skilled in Geometry, and the knowledge relating thereto.

And for the promoting of all other knowledge whose Sect. 5.
end is Contemplation, the very constitution of their Commonwealth did much
conduce thereto: For thereby it was proved that they should always be a
sufficient number of persons freed srom all other employments, who might devote
themselves to a sedulous enquiry into the natures of things. Such were the
Egyptian Priests, who by the peculiar nature of the Egyptian Superstitions
were freed from that burdensome service of sacrificing beasts, which the
Priests of other Nations were continually employed about, and so they enjoyed
not only an easy but a very honorable employment; for they were the persons
of the greatest honor, esteem, and authority among the Egyptians, of which
rank, as far as I can find, all were accounted, who were not Soldiers,
Husbandmen, or Artificers. For Strabo Geogr. ^. 17.
mentions no Nobility at all in Egypt distinct from the Priests; for he
divides the whole Commonwealth into Soldiers, Husbandmen, and Priests. And
telling us that the other two were employed about matters of war, and the Kings
revenues in peace, he adds, (...), The Priests minded the study of Philosophy
and Astronomy, and conversed most with their Kings: And after, speaking of
their Kings being studied in their arts as well as others of the Priests, he
adds, (...), with whom they spent most of their lives. Agreeably to this
Plutarch tells us, that the Kings themselves were often Priests; and adds out
De Isid. (...) Osir.
of Hecataeus, that the Kings used to drink wine by measure, (...), because
they were Priests; for as he says, the Kings of Egypt were always chosen
either out of the rank of Priests or Soldiers, (...); those two orders being
of the greatest honor, the one for valor, and the other for wisdom; and if
the King were chosen out of the Soldiers, he was presently entered among the
Priests, to learn their mystical Sciences. Diodorus indeed seems to Lib. 1. ^
reckon some great persons after the Priests, and distinct from the Soldiery;
but if he means by these any other then some of the chief of the other two
professions, I must say as Causabon does in another case of Diodorus, Sane
Strabonis Not. ia Strab. l. 17.
anctoritas mult is Siculis apud me praevalet. Diodorus his testimony is not to
be weighed with Strabo's. From hence we may understand the reason why that
Potiphera, whose daughter Joseph married, is called (...), which some render
Genesis ^ 1. 45.
the Priest, others the Prince of On; but these two we see are very consistent,
their Priests being their great Princes; and Heliopolis, or On, of which
Potipherah was Prince or Priest, being the chief Seat and University of the
Priests of Egypt. Now it is evident from Clemens Alexandrinus, that the
Egyptians did not communicate their mysteries promiscuously to all, but only
to such as were in succession Strom. l. 5.
to the Crown, or else to those of the Priest and their Children, who were most
apt and fit for them, both by their diet, instruction, and family. For this was
unalterably observed among them, that there was a continued succession of a
profession in their several families, both of Priests, Soldiers, and
Husbandmen, whereby they kept their several orders without any mixture or
confusion, which is confessed both by Herodotus and Diodorus: So that by this
constitution Learning was among them confined to the Herod. l. 2. Diod. l. 1.
c. 71.
Priests, which highly advances the probability of that tradition, preserved
among the Egyptians concerning Moses (which likewise strongly proves our
present design) viz. Manetho's Records, as Josephus tells us, that Moses was
one of the Priests at Heliopolis, and that his name among them L. 1. c. App
was Osarsiphus, who changing his name, was called Moses; and in the time of
Amenophis conducted the leprous people out of Egypt (so the Egyptians out of
their hatred of the Israelites call them.) And Chaeremon, another Egyptian
Priest in the same Author, calls Moses a Scribe, and Joseph (by whom probably
he means Joshua) a sacred Scribe, and says, that the Egyptian name of Moses
was Tisithen, and of Joseph Peteleph. Now this tradition did in all probability
arise from the repute of Moses his learning and wisdom; which being among them
proper to their Priests, they thence ascribed that name to him, although
probably he might come to the knowledge of all their Mysteries, from the
relation he had to Pharaohs daughter.

We come now to consider the parts of the Egyptian Sect. 6. De vita Mosis.
learning, in which the Scripture tells us Moses was skilled: This by Philo
Iudaeus is branched into Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and Hicroglyphical
Philosophy: But Sixtus Senensis more comprehensively from Diodorus, Diogenes
Laertius, Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 39.
and others, divides it into four parts, Mathematical, Natural, Divine, and
Moral. Their skill in the Mathematical parts of learning has been partly
showed already, and might be more largely from that skill in them, which the
Graecians gained from the Egyptians, as both Iamblichus and Porphyrie speak of
Pythagoras, that he gained his skill Iambl. de vit. Pyth. l. 1. 29.

De vit. Pyth. p. 182.


in Geometry chiefly from the Egyptians: For these, as Porphyrie says, of a
long time had been very studious of Geometry, as the Phoenicians of
Arithmetic, and the Chaldaeans of Astronomy. But Iamblicus (and I think
deservedly) takes notice of the (...), the difficult access of the Egyptian
Priests, especially as to acquaintance with their mysteries; and so Strabo
calls them (...), such who concealed their learning under Geogr. l. 17.
many symbols, and were not easily drawn to unfold it. And yet we might think
the 22 years time which Pythayoras is thought to have spent among them, had
been enough to have insinuated himself into their utmost acquaintance, and to
have drawn from them the knowledge of their greatest mysteries; but yet we have
no great reason to think he did, if if we believe the story in Diogenes
Laertius of his sacrificing an Hecatomb for the finding out of that
demonstration, which is now contained in the 47 proposition of the first of
Euclide. Yet this did not abate the Graecians esteem of the Egyptians
Mathematical Learning; for in Plato's time Eudoxus Cnidius went into Egypt on
purpose to acquire it there; and Democritus his boast, that none of the
Arsepedonaptae in Egypt (so their Priests were called, as Clemens Alexandrinus
and Eusebius tell us, who Clem, Strom. l. 1 Eusebius Praepar. l. 10. c. 2.

^iod. l. 1. c. 49, 50. Strab. l. 17.


relate the story) exceeded him in the Mathematics, by which it may be at
least inferred, that they were then in greatest esteem for them. Their great
skill in Astronomy is attested by Diodorus, Strabo, Herodotus, and others, and
by their finding out the course of the year by the motion of the Sun, which was
the invention of the Heliopolitan Priests. Herod. l. 2.
How much they valued Geography, appears from Clemens his description of the
(...), or sacred Scribe in the Strom. l. 6. p. 631. Ed. Par
solemn procession; for he was required to be skilled in Hieroglyphics,
Cosmography, Geography, the motions of the Planets, the Choragraphy of Egypt,
and description of the Nile. Eustathius in his notes on Dionysius, attributes
the invention of Geographical Tables to Sesostris, who caused the Lands he had
conquered to be described in Tables, and so communicated to the Egyptians, and
from them to others. Their skill in natural Philosophy could not be very great,
because of their Magic and Superstition, whereby they were hindered from all
experiments in those natural things which they attributed a Divinity to; but
they seem to have been more exact and curious in natural history; for, any
prodigies, or any thing that was Anomalous in nature, they did, says Strabo,
(...), with a great deal of curiosity insert it in their sacred records; and
Herodotus adds, that more things of that nature are observed by them then by
any other Nation; which, says he, they not only diligently preserve, but
frequently compare together, and from a similitude of prodigies gather a
similitude of events. But that which gained the Egyptians the greatest repute
abroad, seems to have been their early skill in Physic, which is so much
spoken of by Homer, Plato, Herodotus, Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, and others,
that it were impertinent troubling a Readers patience with the proof of that
which is so generally confessed. A great evidence of the antiquity of this
study among them is (if Manetho may be so far credited) that Athothis the
second King of the first Dynasty of the Thimites was a Physician himself, and
writ some books of Anatomy; and the second King of the third Dynasty of the
Memphites, was for his skill in Physic honored among them by the name of
Aesculapius. Pliny affirms it to have been the custom of their Kings to cause
dead bodies to be dissected, to find out the nature of Nature. hist. lib. 19. c.
5. L. 29. c. 1.
diseases; and elsewhere tells us, that the original of Physic among them was
from the relations of those who by any remedy were cured of any disease, which
for a memorial to posterity were recorded in their Temples. Their
Hieroglyphical and mystical Learning has made the greatest noise in the world,
and has the least of substance in it; which whover will not be convinced of
without perusal of Kirchers Oedipus Aegyptiacus, will at last find it fully
done to his hand by the successess endeavors of that otherwise learned man. I
cannot think any rational man could think that study worth his pains, which at
the highest can amount but to a conjecture; and when it is come to that with a
great deal of pains, it is nothing but some ordinary and trivial observation.
As in that famous Hieroglyphick of Diospolis, so much spoken of by the
Ancients, where was a Child to express coming into the world, an old man for
going out of it, an Hawk for God, an Hippotamus for hatred, and a Crocodile for
impudence, and all to express this venerable Apothegm, O ye that come into the
world, and that go out of it, God hates impudence. And therefore certainly this
kind of Learning deserves the highest form among the difficiles Nugae, and all
these Hieroglyphics put together, will make but one good one, and that should
be for Labor lost.

There is yet one part of Learning more among them, Sect. 7.
which the Egyptians are esteemed for, which is the Political and civil part
of it, which may better be called wisdom then most of the foregoing; two
things speak much the wisdom of a Nation; good Laws, and a prudent management
of them; their Laws are highly commended by Strabo and Diodorus; and it is none
of the least commendations of them, that Solon and Lycurgus borrowed so many of
their constitutions from them; and for the prudent management of their
government, as the continuance of their state so long in peace and quietness,
is an invincible demonstration of it; so the report given of them in Scripture
adds a further testimony to it; for therein the King of Egypt is called the
Son of the wise, as well as the son of ancient Kings; and his counselors are
called wise counselors of Pharaoh, and Isa. 19. 11, 12.
the wise men; whereby a more then ordinary prudence and policy must be
understood. Can we now imagine such a person as Moses was bred up in all the
ingenucus literature of Egypt, conversant among their wisest persons in
Pharaohs Court, having thereby all advantages to improve himself, and to
understand the utmost of all that they knew, should not be able to pass a
judgment between a mere pr^tence and imposture, and real and important T^uths?
Can we think that one who had interest in so great a Court, all advantages of
raising himself therein, should willingly forsake all the pleasures and
delights at present, all his hopes and advantages for the future, were he not
fully persuaded of the certain and undoubted truth of all those things which
are recorded in his books? Is it possible a man of ordinary wisdom should
venture himself upon so hazardous, unlikely, and dangerous employment, ^s that
was Moses undertook, which could have no probability of success, but only upon
the belief that that God who appeared unto him, was greater then all the Gods
of Egypt, and could carry on his own design by his own power, maugre all the
opposition which the Princes of the world could make against it? And what
possible ground can we have to think that such a person who did verily believe
the truth of what God revealed unto him, should dare to write any otherwise
then as it was revealed unto him? If there had been any thing repugnant to
common reason in the history of the Creation, the fall of man, the universal
deluge, the propagation of the world by the sons of Noah, the history of the
Patriarchs, had not Moses rational faculties as well as we? nay, had he them
not far better improved then any of ours are? and was not he then able to judge
what was suitable to reason, and what not? and can we think he would then
deliver any thing inconsistent with reason or undoubted tradition then, when
the Egyptian Priests might so readily and plainly have triumphed over him, by
discovering the falsehood of what he wrote? Thus we see that Moses was as highly
qualified as any of the acutest Heathen Philosophers could be, for discerning
truth from falsehood; nay, in all probability he far excelled the most renowned
of the Grecian Philosophers in that very kind of learning wherewith they made
so great noise in the world, which was originally Egyptian, as is evident in
the whole series of the Grecian Philosphers, who went age after age to Egypt
to get some scraps of that learning there, which Moses could not have but full
meals of, because of his high place, great interest, and power in Egypt. And
must those hungry Philosophers then become the only Masters of our reason, and
their dictates be received as the s^nse and voice of nature, which they either
received from uncertain tradition, or else delivered in opposition to it, that
they might be more taken notice of in the world? Must an (...) be confronted
with Thus says the Lord? and a few pitiful symbols vye authority with divine
commands? and Ex nihilo nihil fit be sooner believed then In the beginning God
created the Heavens and the Earth? What irrefragable evidence of reason is that
so confident a presumption built upon, when it can signify nothing without
this hypothesis, that there is nothing but matter in the world; and let this
first be proved, and we will never stick to grant the other. I may confidently
say the great gullery of the world has been, taking philosophical dictates for
the standard of reason, and unproved hypotheses for certain foundations for our
discourse to rely upon. And the seeking to reconcile the mysteries of our faith
to these, has been that whith has almost destroyed it, and turned our
Religion into a mere philosophical speculation. But of this elsewhere. We see
then that insisting merely on the accomplishments and rational perfections of
the persons who speak, we have more reason to yield credit to Moses in his
history, then to any Philosophers in their speculations.

And that which in the next place speaks Moses to be a person of wisdom, and
judgment, and ability to find out Sect. 8.
truth, was his age and experience when he delivered these things to the world.
He vented no crude and indigested conceptions, no sudden and temerarious
fancies, the usual issues of teeming and juvenile wits; he lived long enough to
have experience to try, and judgment to distinguish a mere outside and
varnish, from what was solid and substantial. We cannot then have the least
ground of suspicion, that Moses was any ways unfit to discern truth from
falsehood, and therefore was capable of judging the one from the other.

But though persons be never so highly accomplished for parts, learning, and
experience, yet if they want due information of the certainty of the things
they deliver, they may be still dec^iving themselves; and if they preserve it
for posterity, be guilty of deceiving others. Let us now therefore see whether
Moses had not as great advantages for understanding the truth of his History,
as he had judgment to discern it. And concerning all those things contained in
the four last books of his, to his own death, it was impossible any should have
greater then himself, writing nothing but what he was pars magna himself, of
what he saw, and heard, and did; and can any testimony be desired greater then
his whose actions they were, or who was present at the doing of them, and that
not in any private way, but in the most public capacity? For although private
persons may be present at great actions, yet they may be guilty of
misrepresenting them, for want of understanding all circumstances precedent,
and subsequent, or for want of understanding the designs of the chief
instruments of action: but when the person himself, who was the chief in all,
shall undertake to write an exact History of it, what evidence can be desired
more certain then that is, that there could be no defect as to information
concerning what was done? The only seruple then that can be made, must be
concerning the passages of former times which Moses relates. And here I doubt
not but to make it appear, that insisting only on all that can be desired in a
bare Historian (setting aside Divine revelation) he had as true and certain
information of the History of those former ages, as any one can have of things
at that distance from themselves; and that is by a certain ^^interrupted
tradition of them, which will appear more clear and evident in that Nation of
which Moses was, then in any other Nation in the world: And that on these two
accounts: first, the undoubted lin^al deseent from Father to Son in the I^wish
Nation. Secondly, Their int^rest lying so much in the preserving this tradition
entire.

First, That there was a certain unmixed lin^al descent from Father to Son in
the Jewish Nation: the great ^ause of most Sect. 9.
of the confusion in the tradition of other Nations, was the frequent mixing of
several families one with another; now that God might as it were on purpose
satisfy the world of the Israelites capacity to preserve the tradition entire,
he prohibited their mixture by marriages with the people of other Nations and
families. So that in Moses his time it was a very easy matter to run up their
lineal descent as far as the flood, nay up to Adam; for Adam conversed sometime
with Noah; Sem his Son was probably living in some part of Jacobs time, or
Isaac's at least; and how easily and uninterruptedly might the general
tradition of the ancient History be continued thence to the time of Moses, when
the number of families agreeing in this tradition was increased, and withal
incorporated by a common ligament of Religion? I demand then, where can we
suppose any ignorance or cutting off this general tradition in so continued a
succession as here was? Can we imagine that the Grandchildren of Jacob could be
ignorant of their own pedigree, and whence they came into Egypt? can we think a
thing so late and so remarkable as the account of their coming thither, should
be forgotten, which was attended with so many memorable circumstances,
especially the selling and advancement of Joseph, whose memory it was
impossible should be obliterated in so short a time? Could Jacob be ignorant of
the Country whence his Grandfather Abraham came? especially when he lived so
long in it himself, and married into that branch of the family that was
remaining there, when he had served his Uncle Laban? Could Abraham, when he was
cotemporary with Sem, be ignorant of the truth of the flood, when Sem from whom
he derived himself, was one of the persons who escaped it in the Ark? Could Sem
be ignorant of the actions before the flood, when Adam the first man, lived
some part of his time with Noah? and could Noah then be ignorant of the
Creation, and the fall of man? Thus we see it almost impossible, that any age
among them then could be ignorant of the passages of the precedent, which they
were so few Generations removed from, that they could with ease derive
themselves from the first man. What then can we say? that any of these had a
design of deceiving their posterity, and so corrupted the tradition? but
besides, that it could be hardly possible at that time, when there were so many
remaining testimonies of former times; what end can we imagine that any Parents
should have in thus deceiving their Children, or what advantage should come to
them by such a deceit? Nay, I shall now manifest in the sicond place, that the
whole interest of their children lay in preserving this tradition certain and
entire. For their hopes of possessing Canaan and title to it, depended upon the
promise made to Abraham 400 years before; which would not only keep awake their
sense of Divine Providence, but would make them careful during their bondage to
preserve their Genealogies, because all the right they could plead to their
p^ssessions in Canaan, was from their being of Abraham's seed. And besides this,
on purpose to be a memorial to them of pass^ges between God and Abraham, they
had in their flesh a badge of circumcision, which would serve to call to mind
those transactions which had been between God and their for^-fathers. These
things then do fully demonstrate, that insisting only on rational evidence, the
Israelites were the most certain conservatours of the ancient History of the
world; and can we then think, that Moses who was the Ruler among them, should
not fully understand those things which every Israelite could scarce be
ignorant of, and might correct the mistakes of Moses in his History, if he had
been guilty of any such? These things I suppose have made the first proposition
evident, that it was morally impossible Moses should be deceived himself, or be
ignorant of the things which he reports to others, both because he had
abilities sufficient to discover truth from falsehood, and sufficient
information of the passages of former times.

CHAP. III. Moses his fidelity and integrity proved.
Moses considered as an Historian, and as a Lawgiver; his fidelity in both
proved: clear evidences that he had no intent to deceive in his History,
freedom from private interest, impartiality in his relations, plainness and
perspicuity of style. As a Lawgiver, he came armed with Divine authority, which
being the main thing, is fixed on to be fully proved from his actions and
writings. The power of miracles the great evidence of Divine revelation. Two
grand questions propounded. In what cases miracles may be expected, and how
known to be true. No necessity of a constant power of miracles in a Church: Two
Cases alone wherein they may be expected. When any thing comes as a Law from
God, and when a Divine Law is to be repealed The necessity of miracles in those
cases as an evidence of Divine revelation asserted. Objections answered. No use
of miracles when the doctrine is settled and owned by miracles in the first
revelation. No need of miracles in reformation of a Church.

THE second proposition contains the proof of Moses his fidelity, that he was
as far from having any intent to Sect. 1.
deceive others, as he was being deceived himself. Two ways Moses must be
considered, as an Historian, and as a Lawgiver; the only inducement for him to
deceive as an Historian, must be some particular interest which must draw him
aside from an impartial delivery of the truth; as a Lawgiver he might deceive,
if he pretended Divine revelation for those Laws which were only the issues of
his own brain, that they might be received with a greater veneration among the
people, as Numa Pompilius and others did. Now if we prove that Moses had no
interest to deceive in his History, and had all rational evidence of Divine
revelation in his Laws, we shall abundantly evince the undoubted fidelity of
Moses in every thing recorded by him. We begin then with his fidelity as an
Historian; and it being contrary to the common interest of the world to deceive
and be deceived, we have no reason to entertain any suspicions of the veracity
of any person where we cannot discern some pec^liar interest that might have a
stronger biass upon him then the common interest of the world. For it is
otherwise in morals then in naturals; for in naturals, we see that every thing
will leave its proper interest to preserve the common interest of nature; but
in morals, there is nothing more common then deserting the common interest of
mankind, to set up a peculiar interest against it: It being the truest
description of a Politician, that he is one who makes himself the center, and
the whole world his circumference; that he regards not how much the whole world
is abused, if any advantage does accrue to himself by it. Where we see it then
the design of any person to advance himself or his posterity, or to set up the
credit of the Nation whose History he writes, we may have just cause to suspect
his partiality, because we then find a sufficient inducement for such a one to
leave the common road of truth, and to fall into the paths of deceit. But we
have not the least ground to suspect any such partiality in the History of
Moses; for nothing is more clear then that he was free from the ambitious
design of advancing himself and his posterity. who notwithstanding the great
honor he enjoyed himself, was content to leave his posterity in the meanest
sort of attendance upon the Tabernacle. And as little have we ground to think
he intended to flatter that Nation, which he so lively describes, that one
would think he had rather an interest to set forth the frowardness, unbelief,
unthankfulness, and disobedience of a Nation toward a Gracious God, then any
ways to inhance their reputation in the world, or to ingratiate himself with
them by writing this History of them. Nay, and he sets forth so exactly the
lesser failings and grosser enormities of all the Ancestors of this Nation
whose acts he records, that any impartial reader will soon acquit him of a
design of flattery, when after he has recorded those faults, he seeks not to
extenuate them, or bring any excuse or pretense to palliate them. So that any
observing reader may easily take notice, that he was carried on by a higher
design then the common people of Historians are, and that his drift and scope
was to exalt the goodness and favor of God, toward a rebellious and obstinate
people. Of which there can be no greater nor more lively demonstration, then
the History of all the transactions of the Jewish Nation, from their coming
forth of Egypt to their utter ruin and desolation. And Moses tells them as
from God himself, it was neither for their number, nor their goodness, that God
set his Love upon them, but he loved them, because he loved them; i. e. no
other account was to be given Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.
of his gracious dealing with them, but the freeness of his own bonnty, and the
exuberancy of his goodness toward them. Nay, have we not cause to admire the
ingenuity as well as veracity of this excellent personage, who not only lays
so notorious a blot upon the stock of his own family Levi, recording so
punctually the inhumanity and cruelty of him and Simeon in their dealings with
the Shechemites; Genesis 34. 25.

Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7.


but likewise inserts that curse which was left upon their memory for it by
their own Father at his decease. And that he might not leave the least
suspicion of partiality behind him, he has not done as the statuary did, (who
engraved his own name so artificially in the statue of Jupiter, that one should
continue as long as the other,) but what the other intended for the praise of
his skill, Moses has done for his ingenuity, that he has so interwoven the
History of his own failings and disobedience with those of the Nation, that his
spots are like to continue as long as the whole web of his History is like to
do. Had it been the least part of his design to have his memory preserved with
a superstitious veneration among the Jews, how easy had it been for him to
have left out any thing that might in the least entrench upon his reputation?
but we find him very secure and careless in that particular; nay, on the other
side, very studious and industrious in depressing the honor and deserts of
men, and advancing the power and goodness of God. And all this he does, not in
an affected strain of Rhetoric, whose proper work is impetrare fidem mendacio,
and as Tully somewhere confesses, to make things seem otherwise then they are,
but with that innate simplicity and plainness, and yet withal with that
Imperatoria brevit as, that Majesty and authority, that it is thereby evident
he sought not to court acceptance, but to demand belief: Nor had any such
pitiful design of pleasing his Readers with some affected phrases, but thought
that Truth it self had presence enough with it, to command the submission of
our understandings to it.

Especially when all these were delivered by such a one Sect. 2.
who came sufficiently armed with all motives of credibility and inducements to
assent, by that evidence which he gave, that he was no pretender to divine
revelation, but was really employed as a peculiar instrument of State under the
God and Ruler of the whole world. Which if it be made clear, then all our
further doubts must presently cease, and all impertinent disputes be silenced,
when the supreme Majesty appears impowring any person to dictate to the world
the Laws they must be governed by. For if any thing be repugnant to our
rational faculties, that is, that God should dictate any thing but what is most
certainly true, or that the Governor of the world should prescribe any Laws,
but such as were most just and reasonable. If we suppose a God, we cannot
question veracity to be one of his chiefest Attributes, and that it is
impossible the God of truth should employ any, to reveal any thing as from him,
but what was undoubtedly true. So that it were an argument of the most gross
and unreasonable incredulity, to distrust the certainty of any thing which
comes to us with sufficient evidence of divine revelation; because thereby we
show our distrust of the veracity of God himself. All that we can desire then,
is only reasonable satisfactisn concerning the evidence of Divine revelation in
the person whose words we are to credit, and this our Gracious God has been so
far from denying men, that he has given all rational evidence of the truth of
it. For it implying no incongruity at all, to any notions of God or our selves,
that God should, when it pleases him, single out some instrument to manifest
his will to the world; our enquiry then leads us to those things which may be
proper notes and characters of such a person who is employed on so high an
Embassy. And those are chiefly these two, if his actions be such as could not
flow from the power of mere natural causes, and if the things he reveals be
such as could not proceed from any created understanding. First then, for his
actions, these striking most upon our outward senses when they are any thing
extraordinary, do transmit along with the impressions of them to the
understanding, an high opinion of the person that does them: Whereas the mere
height of knowledge, or profoundness of things discovered, can have no such
present power and influence upon any, but such as are of more raised and
inquisitive minds. And the world is generally more apt to suspect its self
deceived with words, then it can be with actions; and hence Miracles, or the
doing of things above the reach of nature, has been always embraced as the
greatest testimony of Divine authority and revelation. For which there is this
evident reason, that the course of nature being settled by divine power, and
every thing acting there by the force of that power it received at first, it
seems impossible that any thing should really alter the series of things,
without the same power which at first produced them. This then we take for
granted, that where ever such a power appears, there is a certain evidence of a
Divine presence going along with such a person who enjoyes it. And this is that
which is most evident in the actions of Moses, both as to the Miracles he
wrought, both in Egypt and the Wilderness, and his miraculous deliverance of
the Israelites out of Egypt, this latter being as much above the reach of any
merely civil power, as the other above natural.

We therefore come to the rational evidence of that divine authority whereby
Moses acted, which may be gathered Sect. 3.
from that divine power which appeared in his actions; which being a matter of
so great weight and importance (it being one of the main bases whereon the
evidence of divine revelation, as to us, does stand) and withal of so great
difficulty and obscurity, (caused through the preferring some parties in
Religion, above the common interest of it) it will require more care and
diligence to search what influence the power of miracles has upon the proving
the Divine Commission of those who do them. Whether they are such undoubted
credentials, that where ever they are produced, we are presently to receive the
persons who bring them, as extraordinary Ambassadors from heaven, employed on
some peculiar message to the sons of men? For the full stating of this
important question, two things must be cleared: First, In what cases miracles
may be expected as credentials to confirm an immediate commission from heaven?
Secondly, What rational evidence do attend those miracles, to assure us they
are such as they pretend to be?

First, For the cases wherein these miracles are to be expected as inducements
to, or confirmations of our faith, concerning the 1.
Divine employment of any persons in the world. And here I lay down this as a
certain foundation, that a power of miracles is not constantly and perpetually
necessary in all those who manage the affairs of Heaven here on earth, or that
act in the name of God in the world. When the doctrine of faith is once settled
in sacred records, and the divine revelation of that doctrine sufficiently
attested, by a power of miracles in the revealers of it, What imaginable
necessity or pretext can there be for a contrived power of miracles, especially
among such as already own the Divine revelation of the Scriptures? To make then
a power of working miracles to be constantly resident in the Church of God, as
one of the necessary notes and characters of it, is to put God upon that
necessity which common nature is freed from, viz. of multiplying things without
sufficient cause to be given for them; and to leave men's faith at a stand, when
God has given sufficient testimony for it to rely upon. It is a thing too
common and easy to be observed, that some persons out of their eagerness to
uphold the interest of their own party, have been fain to establish it upon
such grounds, which when they are sufficiently searched to the bottom, do
apparently undermine the common and sure foundations whereon the belief of our
common Christianity does mainly stand. It were easy to make a large discourse
on this subject, whereby we may rip open the wounds that Christianity has
received, through the contentions of the several parties of it; but this
imputation cannot with so much reason be fastened on any party, as that which
is nailed to a pretended infallible chair; for which we need no other instance,
then this before us. For while the leaders of that party make a power of
miracles to be a necessary note of the true Church, they unavoidably run men
upon this dangerous precipice, not to believe any thing as a matter of faith,
where they find not sufficient miracles to convince them that is the true
Church which propounds it to them. Which necessarily follows from their
acknowledged principles, for it being impossible according to them, to believe
any thing with a divine faith, but what is propounded by the Church as an
infallible guide, and it being impossible to know which is this infallible
guide, but by the notes and characters of it, and one of those notes being a
power of miracles, I cannot find out my guide but by this power; and this power
must be present in the Church, (for nothing of former ages concerning faith, as
the Miracles of Christ, his resurrection, etc. is to be believed, but on the
Churches account) and therefore where men do not find sufficient conviction
from present miracles, to believe the Church to be an infallible guide, they
must throw off all faith concerning the Gospel; for as good never a whit, as
never the better. And therefore it is no wonder At^eism should be so thriving a
plant in Italy, nay under, if not within the walls of Rome it self, where
inquisitive persons do daily see the juglings and impostures of Priests in
their pretended miracles, and from thence are brought to look upon Religion its
self as a mere imposture, and to think no Pope so infallible as he that said,
Quantum nobis profuit haec de Christo fabula? Such horrid consequences do men
drive others, if not bring themselves to, when they employ their parts and
industry rather to uphold a corrupt interest, then to promote the belief of the
acknowledged principles of Christian faith. But as long as we assert no
necessity of such a power of miracles to be the note of any true Church, nor
any such necessity of an infallible guide, but that the miracles wrought by
Christ and his Apostles, were sufficient evidences of a divine spirit in them;
and that the Scriptures were recorded by them to be an infallible rule of
faith, here we have more clear reason as to the primary motives and grounds of
faith, and withal the infallible veracity of God in the Scriptures, as the
last resolution of faith. And while we assert such an infallible rule of faith,
delivered to us by such an unanimous consent from the first delivery of it, and
then so fully attested by such uncontrollable miracles, we cannot in the least
understand to what end a power of miracles should now serve in the Church,
especially among those who all believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God.
Indeed before the great harvest of Converts in the primitive times were brought
in, both of Jews and Gentiles, and the Church sully settled in receiving the
Canon of the Scriptures universally, we find God did continue this power among
them; but after the books of the New Testament were generally embraced as the
rule of faith among Christians, we find them so far from pretending to any such
power, that they reject the pretenders to it, such as the Donatists were, and
plead upon the same accounts as we do now against the necessity of it. We see
then no reason in the world for miracles to be continued where the doctrine of
faith is settled, as being confirmed by miracles in the first preachers of it.

There are only these two cases then, wherein miracles may justly and with
reason be expected. First, when any person Sect. 4.
comes as by an extraordinary commission from God to the world, either to
deliver some peculiar message, or to do some more then ordinary service.
Secondly, When something that has been before established by Divine Law, is to
be repealed, and some other way of worship established in stead of it. First,
When any comes upon an extraordinary message to the world, in the name of, and
by commission from God, then it is but reason to require some more then
ordinary evidence of such authority. Because of the main importance of the duty
of giving credit to such a person, and the great sin of being guilty of
rejecting that divine authority which appears in him. And in this case we
cannot think that God would require it as a duty to believe, where he does not
give sufficient arguments for faith, nor that he will punish persons for such a
fault, which an invincible ignorance was the cause of. Indeed God does not use
to necessitate faith, as to the act of it, but he does so clearly propound the
object of it, with all arguments inducing to it, as may sufficiently justify a
Believers choice in point of reason and prudence, and may leave all unbelievers
without excuse. I cannot see what account a man can give to himself of his
faith, much less what Apology he can make to others for it, unless he be
sufficiently convinced, in point of the highest reason, that it was his duty to
believe; and in order to that conviction, there must be some clear evidence
given, that what is spoken has the impress of Divine authority upon it. Now
what convictions there can be to any sober mind concerning Divine authority in
any person without such a power of miracles going along with him, when he is to
deliver some new doctrine to the world to be believed, I confess I cannot
understand. For although I doubt not but where ever God does reveal any thing
to any person immediately, he gives demonstrable evidence to the inward senses
of the soul, that it comes from himself, yet this inward sense can be no ground
to another person to believe his doctrine divine, because no man can be a
competent judge of the actings of another senses; and it is impossible to
another person to distinguish the actings of the divine Spirit from strong
impressions of fancy by the force and energy of them. If it be said, that we
are bound to believe those, who say they are fully satisfied of their Divine
Commission. Object.
I answer, First, this will expose us to all delusions imaginable; Answ.
for if we are bound to believe them because they say so, 1.
we are bound to believe all which say so; and none are more confident
pretenders to this then the greatest deceivers, as the experience of our age
will sufficiently witness. Secondly, Men must necessarly be bound to believe
contradictions; for nothing more ordinary, then for such confident pretenders 2.
to a Divine Spirit, to contradict one another, and it may be, the same person
in a little time contradict himself: and must we still be bound to believe all
they say? If so, no Philosophers would be so much in request, as those
Aristotle disputes against in his Metaphysics, who thought a thing might be,
and not be, at the same time. Thirdly, The ground of faith at last will be but
a mere humane testimony, as far as 3
the person who is to believe is capable of judging of it. For the Question
being, Whether the person I am to believe has divine authority for what he
says, What ground can I have to believe that he has so? Must I take his bare
affirmation for it? If so, then a mere humane testimony must be the ground of
divine faith, and that which it is last resolved into; if it be said that I am
to believe the divine authority by which he speaks, when he speaks in the name
of God: I answer, the question will again return, how I shall know he speaks
this from divine authority? and so there must be a progress in infinitum, or
founding divine faith on a mere humane testimony, if I am to believe divine
revelation merely on the account of the persons affirmation who pretends unto
it. For in this case it holds good, non apparentis and non existentis eadem est
ratio, if he be divinely inspired, and there be no ground inducing me to
believe that he is so, I shall be excused, if I believe him not, if my
wilfulness and laziness be not the cause of my unbelief.

If it be said that God will satisfy the minds of good men Sect. 5.
concerning the truth of divine revelation. I grant it to be wonderfully true,
but all the question is de modo, how God will satisfy them? whether merely by
inspiration of his own spirit in them, assuring them that it is God that speaks
in such persons; or by giving them rational evidence, convincing them of
sufficient grounds to believe it. If we assert the former way, we run into
these inconveniences; First we make as immediate a revelation in all those who
believe, as in 1.
those who are to reveal divine truths to us, for there is a new revelation of
an object immediately to the mind; viz. that such a person is inspired of God;
and so is not after the common way of the Spirits illumination in Believers,
which is by inlightning the faculty, without the proposition of any new object,
as it is in the work of Grace: So that according to this opinion, there must be
immediate inspiration as to that act of faith, whereby we believe any one to
have been divinely inspired, and consequently to that whereby we believe the
Scriptures to be the Word of God. Secondly, Does 2.
not this make the fairest plea for men's unbelief? For I demand, Is it the duty
of those who want that immediate illumination to believe or no? If it be not
their duty, unbelief can be no sin to them; if it be a duty, it must be made
known to be a duty; and how can that be made known to them to be a duty, when
they want the only and necessary means of instruction in order to it? Will God
condemn them for that, which it was impossible they should have, unless God
gave it them? And how can they be left inexcuseable, who want so much as
rational inducements to faith? for of these I now speak, and not of efficacious
persuasions of the mind, when there are rational arguments for faith
propounded. But lastly, 3.
I suppose the case will be cleared, when we take notice what course God has
always taken to give all rational satisfaction to the minds of men, concerning
the persons whom he has employed in either of the forementioned cases. First,
for those who have been employed upon some special message and service for God,
he has sent them forth sufficiently provided with manifestations of the Divine
power whereby they acted: As is most clear and evident in the present case of
Moses, Exodus 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where Moses puts the case to God which we are
now debating of. Supposing, says he, that I should go to the Israelites and
tell them, God had appeared to me, and sent me to deliver them, and they should
say God had not appeared unto me, how should I satisfy them? God does not
reject this objection of Moses as favoring of unbelief, but presently shows
him how he should satisfy them, by causing a miracle before his face, turning
his rod into a Serpent; and God gives this as the reason of it, verse. 5. That
they may believe that the Lord God of their Fathers, the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, has appeared unto thee. It seems God himself
thought this would be the most pregnant evidence of Gods appearing to him, if
he wrought miracles before their faces. Nay, lest they should think one single
miracle was not sufficient, God in the immediate following verses adjoyns two
more, which he should do in order to their satisfaction; and further, verse 21.
God gave him a charge to do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which he had put
into his hand. And accordingly we find Pharaoh presently demanding a miracle of
Moses, Exodus 7. 9. which accordingly Moses did in his presence, though he
might suppose Pharoahs demand not to proceed from desire of satisfaction, but
from some hopes that for want of it, he might have rendered his credit suspected
among the Israelites.

Indeed after God had delivered his people, and had settled them in a way of
serving him according to the Laws delivered Sect. 6.
by Moses, which he had confirmed by unquestionable miracles among them, we
find a caution laid in by Moses himself, against those which should pretend
signs and wonders to draw them off from the Religion established by the Law of
Moses. And so likewise under the Gospel, after Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
that was established by the unparalled miracles of our Savior and his
Apostles, we find frequent cautions against being deceived by those who came
with pretenses of doing great miracles. But this is so far from infringing the
credibility of such a Testimony which is confirmed by miracles, that it yields
a strong confirmation to the truth of what I now assert. For the doctrine is
supposed to be already established by miracles, according to which we are to
judge of the spirits of such pretenders. Now it stands to the greatest reason,
that when a Religion is once established by uncontrouled miracles, we should
not hearken to every whiffling Conjurer that will pretend to do great feats, to
draw us off from the truth established. In which case, the surest way to
discover the imposture, is to compare his pretended miracles with those true
and real ones which were done by Moses and Christ; and the ground of it is,
because every person is no competent judge of the truth of a miracle; for the
Devil by his power and subtilty, may easily deceive all such as will be led by
the nose by him, in expectation of some wonders to be done by him. And
therefore as long as we have no ground to question the oertainty of those
miracles which were wrought by Christ or Moses, I am bound to adhere to the
doctrine established by those miracles, and to make them my rule of judging all
persons who shall pretend to work miracles: Because, 1. I do not know how far
God may give men over to be deceived by lying wonders, 1.
who will not receive the truth in the love of it; i. e. those that think not
the Christian Religion sufficiently confirmed by the miracles wrought at the
first promulgation of it. God in justice may permit the Devil to go further
then otherwise he could, and leave such persons to their own credulity, to
believe every imposture and illusion of their senses for true miracles. 2. That
doctrine which was confirmed by undoubted miracles, has assured us of the
coming of lying 2.
wonders, whereby many should be deceived. Now this part of the doctrine of the
Gospel is as certainly true as any of the rest; for it was confirmed by the
same miracles that the other was; and besides that, the very coming of such
miracles is an evidence of the truth of it, it falling out so exactly according
to what was foretold so many hundred years since. Now if this doctrine be true,
then am I certain the intent of these miracles is to deceive, and that those
are deceived who hearken to them; and what reason then have I to believe them?
3. To what end do these miracles serve? Are they to confirm the truths
contained in Scripture? 3.
But what need they any confirmation now, when we are assured by the miracles
wrought by Christ and his Apostles, that the doctrine by them preached came
from God? and so has been received upon the credit of those miracles ever
since. Were these truths sufficiently proved to be from God before or no? If
not, then all former ages have believed without sufficient ground for faith; if
they were, then what ground can there be to confirm us in them now? certainly
God, who never does anything but for very great purposes, will never alter the
course of nature, merely for satisfaction of men's vain curiosities.

But it may be it will be said, It was something not fully revealed in
Scripture which is thus confirmed by miracles: but Sect. 7.
where has the Scripture told us, that anything not fully revealed therein,
should be afterward confirmed? Was the Scripture an infallible rule of faith
while this was wanting in it? Did Christ and his Apostles discharge their
places, when they left something unr^vealed to us? Was this a duty before these
miracles, or no? if it was, what need miracles to confirm it? if not, Christ
has not told us all nec^ssary conditions of salvation. For whatever is
required as a duty, is such as the neglect of it runs men upon damnation.
Lastly, men's faith will be left at continual uncertainties; for we know not
according to this principle, when we have all that is necessary to be beli^ved,
or do all that is necessary to be practiced in order to salvation. For if God
may still make new articles of says, or constitute new duties by fresh
miracles, I must go and enquire what miracles are wrought in every place, to
see that I miss nothing that may be necessary for me, in order to my happiness
in another world.

If men pretend to deliver any doctrine contrary to the Scripture; then it is
not only necessary that they confirm it by miracles, but they must manifest the
falsity of those miracles on which that doctrine is believed, or else they must
use another miracle to prove that God will set his seal to confirm both parts
of a contradiction to be true. Which being the hardest task of all, had need be
proved by very sufficient and undoubted miracles, such as may be able to make
us believe those are miracles, and are not, at the same time, and so the
strength of the argument is utterly destroyed by the m^dium produced to prove
it by.

By this discour^e these two things are clear; First, that no pretenses of
miracles are to be hearkened to, when the doctrine we are to believe is already
established by them, if those miracles tend in the least to the derogation of
the truth of what was established by those former miracles. Secondly, that when
the full doctrine we are to believe is established by miracles, there is no
necessity at all of new miracles, for confirmation of any of the truths therein
delivered. And therefore it is a most unreasonable thing to demand miracles of
those to prove the truth of the doctrine they deliver, who do first solemnly
profess to deliver nothing but what was confirmed by miracles in the first
delivery of it, and is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament; and secondly do not pretend to any immediate Commission from heaven,
but do nothing but what in their consciences they think every true Christian is
bound to do; much more all Magistrates and Ministers who believe the truth of
what they profess, which is in their places to reform all errors and abuses
which are crept into the doctrine or practice of Christianity, through the
corruption of men or times. And therefore it is a most unjust and unreasonable
demand of the Papists, when they require miracles from our first reformers, to
prove the truth of their doctrine with. Had they pretended to have come with an
immediate commission from heaven to have added to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
there had been some plea for such a demand; but it was quite otherwise with
them: Their only design was to whip the buyers and sellers out of the Temple,
to purge the Church from its abuses: And although that by Jerome was thought to
be one of our Saviors greatest miracles, yet this by us is conceived to be no
other then the duty of all Magistrates, Ministers, and private Christians;
these by their prayers, Ministers, by their doctrine, and Magistrates by their
just authority.

CHAP. IV. The fidelity of the Prophets succeeding Moses.
In order of Prophets to succeed Moses, by Gods own appointment in the Law of
Moses. The Schools of the Prophets, the original and institution of them. The
Cities of the Levites. The occasion of their first institution. The places of
the Schools of the Prophets, and the tendency of the institution there to a
prophetical office. Of the Music used in the Schools of the Prophets. The
Roman Assamenta, and the Greek Hymns in their solemn worship. The two sorts of
Prophets among the Jews, Lieger and extraordinary. Ordinary Prophets taken out
of the Schools, proved by Amos and Saul.

BUt although now under the Gospel (the revelation of Gods will being
completed by Christ and his Apostles) Sect. 1.
we have no reason either to expect new Revelations, or new miracles for
confirming the old; yet under the Law, God training up his people by degrees
till the coming of Christ, there was a necessity of a new supply of Divine
Messengers (called Prophets) to prepare the people, and make way for the
coming of Christ. As to whom these two things are considerable.

First, Those Prophets whose work was to inform the people of their duties, or
to reprove them for their sins, or to prepare them for the coming of the
Messiah (which were their chief tasks) had no need to confirm the truth of
their doctrine or commission from heaven by the working of miracles among them.
And that on these two accounts.

First, Because God did not consummate the revelation of his mind and will to
the Jews by the Ministry of Moses, but appointed a succession of Prophets to be
among them, to make known his mind unto them. Now in this case, when the
prophetical ^ffice was established among them, what necessity was there tha^
every one that came to them upon an errand from God, should prove his testimony
to be true by miracles, when in the discharge of his office he delivered
nothing dissonant from the Law of Moses? It is one argument God intended a
succession of Prophets, when he laid down such rules in his Law for the judging
of them, and to know whether they were truly inspired or no, Deuteronomy. 15. 21, 22.
And in that same place God does promise a succession of Prophets, Deuteronomy. 18. 15,
18. A Prophet will the Lord God raise up unto thee like unto me; to him shall
ye hearken. Which words, though in their full and complete sense they do relate
to Christ (who is the great Prophet of the Church) yet whoever attends to the
full scope of the words, will easily perceive that the immediate sense of them
does relate to an order of Prophets which should succeed Moses among the Jews;
between whom and Moses there would be a great similitude as to their Birth,
Calling, and Doctrine, though not a just equality, which is excluded, Deuteronomy. 34.
10, 11. and the chief reason why it is said there that the other Prophets fell
so much short of Moses, is, in regard of the signs and wonders which he
wrought, as is there largely expressed. Nor may it seem strange, that by a
Prophet should be understood an order or succession of Prophets, when it is
acknowledged by most Protestants, that by (...), the Antichrist, is understood
a rank and succession of several persons in the same name and function: And
that it is to be understood in those words concerning a succession of Prophets,
will appear by the occasion of their being brought in; for verse 14. God
prohibits them to hearken after the manner of their neighbour-nations, to
observers of times and Diviners, and then brings in the following words, v. 15.
as to the reason of that prohibiteon, that God would raise up a Prophet among
themselves like unto Moses, and to him should they hearken. Now let any
rational man judge whether V. Arabic. verse. and Calv. in loc. P. Fagium, P.
Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 12. C. Celsum l. 1.
it were so probable an argument to keep them from hearkening to Diviners of
other Nations, that there should a Prophet arise 2000 years after like unto
Moses, as that he would raise up a continued succession of Prophets among
themselves, to whom they should hearken. Thus Origin in his excellent books
against Celsus, shows the necessity of the prophetical office among the Jews
from hence; for, says he, it being written in their Law that the Gentiles
hearkend unto Oracles and Divinations; but God would not suffer Deu. 18. 14.
it to be so among them, it presently follows, A Prophet will the Lord God
raise up in the midst of thee, etc. Therefore, says he, when the Nations round
about them had there Oracles, and several ways of divination, all which were
strictly prohibited among the Jews, if the Jews had no way of foreknowing
things to come, it had been almost impossible, considering the great curiosity
of humane nature, to have kept them from despising the Law of Moses, or
apostatizing to the heathen Oracles, or setting up something like them among
themselves. Which interpretation of his seems to have a great deal of reason,
not only from the coherence of the words here, but from the Analogy of many
other precepts of the Law of Moses, which it is most certain have a respect to
the customs of the Idolatrous Nations round about them. Another reason why it
is most probable, that by this is understood a succession of Prophets, is the
change which follows against false Prophets, and the rules to discover them, v.
20, 21, 22. which had not been so pertinent and coherent if the opposition did
not lie between the order of true Prophets among the Jews, and the false
Prophets which should rise up in the midst of them. And that which yet further
justifies this interpretation, is, that there is no other place in the whole
Pentateuch which does expressly speak of a su^cession of Prophets, if this be
not understood of it; and is it any ways probabe a matter of so great moment
and consequence should be wholly pretermitted? Especially when we find it so
exactly performed in the succeeding ages of the Jewish Commonwealth; their
immediate Rulers like Dictators at Rome, after Moses death, being most raised
up by immediate incitation and impulse from God, and many of them inspired with
a spirit of prophecy. How should the Jews have expected these, or obeyed them
when they appeared, had not God foretold it to them, and provided them for it
by the Law of Moses?

Neither did these Prophets arise singly among them, like blazing Stars, one in
an age to portend future events, but whole Constellations of them sometimes
appeared together; yea, so many smaller Prophets were sometimes united
together, as made up a perfect Galaxy, when they were entered into Societies,
and became Schools of the Prophets; for such we frequently read of in
Scripture. The original and institution of which may cast a further light into
our present design, and show us the little reason the Jews could have to expect
miracles from them to confirm their doctrine, who were brought up in the
knowledge of their Law, and were called out from their several societies into
the prophetical office by the immediate incitation of God himself. Which being
so commonly known among them, there needed no such extraordinary proofs to
manifest the Divine authority by which they were employed. Two things then we
shall endeavor to clear; First, the original and institution of these Schools
of the Prophets; and secondly, that it was the erdinary course for the Prophets
by employment to be taken forth of these societies wherein they were educated.
First, for the original and institution of these Schools of the Prophets. The
first Seminaries, or places of institution among the Jews, were the Cities of
the Levites, which were dispersed up and down in the several Tribes of Israel;
God thereby turning that into a blessing, which was pronounced as a curse upon
Levi by his Father Jacob, viz. that he should be divided in Jacob, and
scattered in Israel. But though the fulfilling of that Genesis 49. 7.
prophecy might be the primary ground o^ that scattering, yet it is evident
that God aimed at some further good in it, both in reference to the Levites and
the Israelites. Lyra undertakes to assign four reasons of this distribution of
the Cities of the Levites among the Tribes. (1) because if they Josh. 21.
had lived but in one Tribe, the worship of God would have seemed to have been
confined to that Tribe. (2) because they would have been a burden to that Tribe
they had their habitations in. (3) from the equity of being maintained by all,
who served for all. (4) because it was their office to teach the people, and
therefore it was necessary they should live among them. These reasons are most
of them opposed by Abul. in Josh. 21. c. 7, and 8.

V. Sherlog. Antiq. Hebr. l. 2. c. 3. s. 4.

Masius in Josh. c. 14.


Abulensis, but defended by others. The last is that which most insist on, it
being the peculiar office of the Levites to teach the people; so 2 Chronicles. 35.
4. And said unto the Levites, qui erudiebant omnem Israelem, as Vatablus
renders it, who taught all Israel; and Masius insists on that as the great
reason of their dispersion, to be ready to teach the Law among the Israelites.
But yet all those who are agreed that teaching the Law was the duty of the
Levites, are not yet agreed of the manner of that teaching; for there being two
parts of their Law, the one ceremonial and judicial, and the other moral and
spiritual, the question is, whether of these two did belong to, or was
performed by the Priests and Levites. There are many who understand all that
Office of teaching which belonged to the Priests and Levites, to be merely
concerning the ceremonial part of the Law, i. e. deciding all cases of
controversy which should arise concerning their ceremonial worship, which in
Levit. 10. 10. is called putting a difference between holy and unholy, and
between clean and unclean. But it seems somewhat strange that God should take
so great care about the shell and outside of his worship, and none at all for
the moral and spiritual part of it, especially when he had set apart a whole
Tribe merely for his own service, and freed them from all other employments,
that they might have a greater liberty to attend upon the things relating to
his service; especially when it is mentioned as the duty of the Priests and
Levites Lev. 10. 10. Deuteronomy. 3^. 10.
to teach all the statutes which the Lord had spoken to them by the hand of
Moses, and that they shall teach Jacob thy statutes, and Israel thy Law. Which
notwithstanding what Abarbinel and others say, must certainly comprehend as
well the moral as the ceremonial part of Moses his Law. And the Priests lips
are said to preserve knowledge; and God says they should seek the Law at his
mouth; for he is the messenger of the Mal. 2. 7.
Lord of Hosts. Do these things import no more then mere deciding the cases of
the ceremonial Law? But whatever Gods intention in the institution of the
Levites was, we find not much in Scripture of what they did for the promoting
the moral and spiritual part of divine worship; but it is no news to hear that
Societies instituted for good and pious ends, should degenerate from the first
intention of the Founders of them; and thus it is probable it was with the
Levites, who finding the most of their benefit and advantage to come in by the
ceremonial cases, might grow more negligent of the moral part of divine
service, which brought no secular emolument to them.

And thence we read not of these Schools of the Prophets, which were Societies
in order to spiritual in struction, till Sect. 3.
about the time of Samuel; and many think him to have been the first Author of
them. For it is evident, that about his time the Priesthood was grown to a
great degeneracy, and men thereby estranged from the worship of God, so that
there seemed almost a necessity then of restoring some Societies, 1 Samuel 3. 1.
who might have a special eye to the spiritual part of Gods worship and
service. The occasion of the in^titution of them, seems to have been from the
resort which the people had to the high places for sacrificing, during the
captivity or uncertain abode of the Ark of God, after the desolation of Shiloh:
now the people resorting to these places to perform their solemnities, it was
so ordered, that a company of Prophets should be there resident to bless the
sacrifices, and 1 Samuel 9. 12, 13.
instruct the people. Two of these places with these Societies in them we find
mentioned in the time of Samuel. The first mentioned, 1 Samuel 10. 5, 10, which
cannot be the same with Ramah, although the Syriack and Arabic versions so
render it. For Samuel had his own residence in Ramah whither Saul went to him,
1 Samuel 9. 18, 19. but in this chapter we find Samuel sending Saul on a journey
from him beyond Bethel and the plain of Tabor, and there tells him he should
meet with the company of Prophets upon. the hill of God, ver. 5; Some think it
was called the Hill of God, because of its height, as the Cedars of God, and
the mountains of God for the highest; so Tirinus understands it, but Menochius
far more probably, quia in ea erat caetus and veluti schola prophetarum. The
Chaldee Paraphrast renders it, ad collem in quo arca Domini: R. Solomon makes
this hill to be 1 Samuel 7. 1.
Kirjath-jearim, and therefore called the hill of God, because the Ark was
there in the house of Abinadab in the hill. But Lyra thinks he has proved,
that before this time the Ark was removed from Kirjath-jearim to Mizpah; but
Abulensis more probably conceives it was never removed thither, and withal
thinks this hill of God to be no other then Gibea of Benjamin, where Saul
inhabited; and thence the V. J^^. in l.
wonder was the greater, to see him Prophecy among those who had known his
former life and education. The other place is Naioth in Ramah, where was a high
place whither 1 Samuel 19. 18, 20.
the people came to sacrifice; this Ramah seems to have been the place of
Samuels nativity, called Ramathaim Sophim, 1 Samuel 1. 1.
which the Syriack version renders collis specularum (some who would be ready
to improve every thing for their purpose, would think it was so called in
allusion to the employment of the young Students there. So Heinsius conceives
(...) to be understood, Numb. 23. 14. the place of Exercit. Sacrae l. x. c. 2.
watchmen, from which word says he, without doubt the Greeks derived their
(...), who were wont in such high places to observe the course and motions of
the heavens; But to pass by such frivolous conjectures.) It seems a great deal
more probable, that this Ramah which the Septuagint by a light mutation of the
initial letters calls (...), was the same with Arimathaea, the Town of Joseph
mentioned in the Gospel. But the place where the school of the Prophets was,
seems to have been, with greatest convenience, for a place of education, at
some distance from the Town. Vatablus conceives it was built in the fields of
Ramah, and the word Naioth, says Pet. Martyr properly signifies pastures, and
some remote places; quae fere sunt studiis aptissima. The Chaldee Paraphrast
renders Naioth by (...) a College or School of prophetical education: over
this College Samuel himself was President, as most understand that place, 1 Samuel 19. 20. And when they saw the company of Prophets prophesying, and Samuel
standing as appointed over them; Jonathan renders it, and Semuelem stantem
docentem super eos. To which we may well apply the words of Philo, speaking of
the Jewish manner of instruction, (...). Philo de v. Mos. l. 3.
The President going before and teaching, the rest increasing in goodness, and
improving in life and manners.

Neither can we think so good and useful an institution should presently
degenerate or be turned into another channel; Sect. 4.
and therefore some conceive that the most noted Prophets to the time of David
were the Presidents of these Colleges; such as besides Samuel were H^lcana,
Gad, Nathan, Heman, and Ieduthun; and that they selected out the choycest and
most hopeful of the young Levites, and here educated them, together with the
Nazarites which came out of other tribes. And it seems very probable, that in
all the most noted high places whether they went to sacrifice, there were such
Schools erected after the first institution of them. Thence we read of such
multitudes of the Prophets together in the time of Ahab, 1 Kings 18. 4. for
when Iezabel cut off the Prophets of the Lord, Obadia^ took an hundred and hid
them in caves; certainly their number was very great, when an hundred might be
saved without missing. The chief places where they resided, seem to have been
Bethel, 2 Kings 2. 3. and Jericho, which was a large College; for therein we
read of fifty sons of the Prophets standing together out of their number, 2
Kings 2. 5, 7, 15. and Gilgal, which had been a place of Religion from the
first entrance into Canaan, there we find the sons of the Prophets sitting
before Elisha, 2 Kings 4. 38. It seems most probable, that the purity of Gods
worship among the ten tribes after the defection in the time of Jeroboam was
preserved by the Prophets in their several Schools and places of habitation,
which has sufficient foundation in that place, 2 Kings 4. 23. where the
Shunamites husband asks her wherefore she would go to the man of God that day,
seeing it was neither new mood nor Sabbath. Whereby it is both evident, that
the Prophets did undertake the office of instructing the people on their solemn
Festivals, and that it was their custom to resort to them for that end. Thus we
see what care God took for V. Manass. Ben. Israel. Council. in Exodus 9. 35.
the instruction of his people in a time of so general an Apostasy as that of
the ten tribes was, when the Church of God could not be known by that constant
visibility and o^tward glory which some speak so much of, but was then clouded
in obscurity, and shrouded it self under the mantl^s of some Prophets which God
continued among them, and that not by any lineal succession neither, though the
Jews would fain make the gift of Prophecy to be a kind of Cabala too, and
conveyed in a constant succession from one Prophet to another. Neither were
these Schools of the Prophets only in Israel, but in Judah likewise was God
known, and his Name was great among these Schools there. In Jerusalem it self
there was a College where Huldah the Prophetess lived, 2 Kings 22. 14. some
render Mishna in secunda urbis part; for Jerusalem was divided into the upper
and nether part of the City. Abulensis and Lyra will have it refer to the three
walls of the City in which the three chief parts of it were comprised; in the
first, the Temple and the Kings P^lace; in the second, the Nobles and the
Prophets houses; and in the third, the common people. Josephus seems to favor
the devision of the City into three parts, but Pineda Jos. de b^ll. Jud. l. 6.
c. 6.

Pineda de rebus Sol. l. 3. c. 28.


thinks the second part of the City was most inhabited by Artificers, and that
the Prophets, and the wise men, and such as frequented the Temple, most dwelt
in the City of David within the first wall; and therefore he conjectures that
the College was upon Mount Sion, (and so properly called Sion College) and he
explains that house which wisdom is said to have built and hewn out her seven
pillars, Prove. 9. 1. by this College which he supposes was built by Solomon
in Mount Sion, and thence ver. 3. she is said to cry upon the highest places of
the City. Thus much may serve concerning the original and institution of these
Schools of the Prophets.

I now come to the second thing promised concerning the Schools of the
Prophets, which is, that it was Gods ordinary Sect ^
method to call those persons out of these Schools, whom he did employ in the
discharge of the prophetical office. Two things will be necessary for the
clearing of this: First, what tendency their education in those Schools had
toward the fitting them for their prophetical office. Secondly, what evidence
the Scripture gives us that God called the Prophets out from these Colleges.
The first of these is very requisite to be cleared, because the prophetical
office depending upon immediate inspiration, it is hard to conceive what
influence any antecedent and preparatory dispositions can have upon receiving
the prophetical spirit. It is commonly known how much the generality of Jewish
Writers do insist on the necessity of these qualifications antecedent to a
spirit of prophecy. 1. An excellent natural temper. 2. Good accomplishments
both of with and fortunes. 3. Separation from the world. 4. Congruity of place
(which they make proper to Iudaea) 5. Opportunity of time. 6. And divine
inspiration. These are so largely discoursed of by many learned men from Jewish
Writers, that V. G. ^or. in M^im fundam. leg. c. 7. Sect. 1.

Mr. Smith of Prophecy chapter 8.


it will be both tedious and impertinent to recite much of their opinions
concerning them; who, since they have lost the gift of prophecy, seem to have
lost too that wisdom and natural understanding, which they make one of the most
necessary qualifications of a Prophet. It is not easy to imagine what
subserviency riches could have to a prophetical spirit, unless the Jews be of
Simon Magus his opinion, that these gifts of the Holy Ghost may be purchased
with money; and if so, they think themselves in as likely a way to bid fair for
a prophetical spirit as any people in the world. Or is it that they think it
impossible any without them should have that f^ee, cheerful, and generous
spirit, which they make so necessary to a prophetic spirit, that it is an
axiom of great authority with them, Spiritus sanctus non residet super hominem
moestum; and they think Elisha his fit of passion did excuss his prophetic
spirit from him, which he was fain to retrive again with a fit of Music. There
are only two sorts of those antecedent dispositions which seem to bear any
affinity with the prophetic spirit: And those are such as tended to the
improvement of their natural faculties, and such as tended to their advancement
in piety, and consequently to the subduing all irregular motions in their
souls: Not that either of these did concur by way of efficiency to the
production of a spirit of prophecy (which is an opinion Maimonides seems very
favorable to) but that God might More Nevoch. l. 2. c. 36.
make choice particularly of such persons, to remove all prejudices against
them in those they were sent unto. For nothing could possibly dissatisfie them
more concerning divine inspiration, then if the person who pretended to it were
of very weak and shallow intellectuals, or known to be of an irregular
conversation. In order therefore to the fuller satisfaction of men concerning
these two qualisications, this Institution of them in the Schools of the
Prophets was of great subserviency, because therein their only employment was
to improve in knowledge, and especially in true piety. This latter being the
most necessary disposition, since the Apostle has told us that the Prophets
were Holy men, who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And in order to
this, the greatest part we can find of the exercises of those who 2 Pet. 1. 21.
were educated in these Schools of the Prophets, were instructions in the Law,
and the solemn celebration of the praises of God: Which appears in Scripture to
have been their chief employment as Prophets, and by which they are said to
prophecy: So at Gibeah at the Oratory there, we find a company of Prophets
coming down from the high place with a Psaltery, 1 Samuel 10. 5.
a Tabret and pipe, and a Harp before them, and prophesying.

It may seem somewhat strange to consider what relation these Musical
instruments had to the prophesying here Sect. 6.
mentioned. Are Musical notes like some seeds Naturalists speak of, which will
help to excite a prophetic spirit? Or do they tend to elevate the spirits of
men, and so put them into a greater capacity of Enthusiasm? Or is it because
Music is so excellent for allaying the tumults of inward passions, and so
fitting the soul for the better entertainment of the Divine Spirit? Or was all
this prophesying here spoken of nothing else but vocal and instrumental Music?
So some indeed understand it, that it was only the praising God with spiritual
songs and melody; wherein one as the Praecentor began a hymn, which the rest
took from him and carried on. I confess it carries the fairest probability with
it, that this prophesying with Musical instruments was at their places and
times of sacrifice, an adjnuct, if not a part of the solemn service of God:
which was managed chiefly by the Quire of the Sons of the Prophets which were
resident there, and were trained up in all exercises of piety and devotion. But
yet I cannot see any reason to think that all this prophesying was merely
singing of Hymns, and playing upon their Musical instruments to them, as some
imagine, because there seems to be employed some immediate impulses of a
prophetic spirit, by what Samuel said to Saul, that when he came among the
Prophets, the spirit of the Lord would come upon him, and he should prophecy
with them, and he should become 1 Samuel 10. 6.
another man, What strange impulse and wonderful transformation was this merely
for Saul to join with the Prophets in their praises of God? And this needed not
so much admiration as followed there upon this action of Saul's, that it should
become a Proverb, Is Saul also among the Prophets? Certainly Saul was a very
great hater of all spiritual 1 Samuel 10. 12.
Music before, if it became a Proverb merely for his being present at, or
joining with this company in singing their Hymns. Therefore others think that
those who are said particularly to prophecy at these Musick-meetings, were
some persons as chief among the rest, who having their spirits elevated by the
Music, did compose Hymns upon the place by a Divine Energy inwardly moving
their minds. So that there were properly divine raptures in some of them, which
transported them beyond the ordinary power of fancy or imagination, in
dictating such Hymns as might be suitable for the design of celebrating the
honor of God.

Neither may it seem strange that such an Enthusiastic Spirit should seize on
them only at such selemn times, since Sect. 7.
we read in the New Testament of a like exercise of such gifts in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 26. where we see in coming together every one had a Psalm,
a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, etc. Whereby it appears that they were
inspired upon the place; etiam extemporales Hymni saepe ab afflatuerant, as
Grotius there observes; as we see it in frequent instances in Scripture of
Simeon and Anna, Moses and Miriam, Deborah, and Isaiah; and in the Christian
Church after that Landslood of inspired gifts was much abated in the Church,
they kept up a custom much like to these extemporal hymns, as appears
evidently by Tertullian, post Apol. c. 39
aquam manualem and lumina ut quisque de Scripturis sanctis vel de proprio
ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere; After they had ended their
Love Feasts, they begun their Hymns, which were either taken from the
Scriptures, or of their own composition. Which Pliny takes notice of as a great
part of the Christians worship, that they did secum Ep. l. 10. Ep. 97.
invicem carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere, they joined in singing hymns to
Christ as God. Nay, we find something very parallel to this preserved among the
ruins of the Heathen worship; such were the Assamenta among the old Romans,
which were peculiarly sung to the honor of some particular God; thence the
Assamenta Ianualia, Iunonia, Minervia, which were priva poemata and carmina in
singulos eos Deos Conject. in Varr. p. 121
conscripta, as the learned Joseph Scaliger observes. So likewise the old
Greeks had their solemn hymns to their Gods, some to the propitious Gods, which
they called (...), and the Latins properly Indigitamenta, and carmen
calatorium; others they had to their Vejoves, or laeva numina, which they
called (...); the Latins Carmen Averruncale; but besides these, they had some
peculiar to the several Deities, as (...) to Diana, (...) to Apollo, (...) to
Ceres, Dithyrambus to Bacchus, Adonidia to Adonis, as Proclus tells us in his
Chresto^^athia. And it is withal evident, that the Heathens thought some of
their Priest^ inspired Ap^d Phot. bibl. Cod. 239.
while they were performing these solemn devotions to the Gods (which probably
was by Satan, as many other things in Heathen worship taken up in imitation of
these inspired hymns, and Music used by the sons of the Prophets) but their
hymns were so composed, as to be fit rather to transport men beyond the power
of their reason, then to compose and sweeeten it, which was suitable to the
fanatic Enthusiasm, which was so common among them. So Proclus tells us that
the Io-Bacche was (...), full of noise and din; and the Dithyrambus was (...),
a kind of extatick Moricedance, and their Priests were apprehended by them to
be under a real Enthusiasm at these Solemnities. So the Corybantes are
described rather like mad men then mere Enthusiasts by Strabo; they were (...),
as he describes them, dancing about with their cymbals and drums, and arms and
pipes (as though a Bedlam had been broke loose among them) yet this was in high
esteem among them; for as Strabo after says, (...), this Enthusiasm Geogr. l.
10.
seemed to have a divine touch with it, and to come very near to a prophetic
spirit.

But though the prophesying with Music among the sons of the Prophets, might
be by some extemporary hymns immediately dictated by the praecentor of the
Chorus; yet we are not to imagine any such frantic actions among them as were
among the Curetes and Corybantes, it being always the Devils temper to overdo,
when he strives to imitate, and in stead of solemn and set devotions to carry
men beyond all sense and reason. The Spirit of God did never dictate any
Io-Bacche's or Dithyrambs to transport and amuse the spirits of men; but those
sweet airs which might both compose and elevate the spirits of all that heard
them. For in probability the spirits of all these Prophets were as Lutes tuned
to the same height, that when the Spirit of God did strike upon one of them,
the rest presently answered to it, and so made up an entire Consort among them.
So Menochius thinks the Spirit of God not only moved the spirit of him who was
the praecentor, but the rest likewise who joined with him; and they are said to
prophecy, says Torniellus, Annal. ad A. M. 2945. Sect. 14.
forte quod non quascunque sed Propheticas duntaxat cantiones praecinerent; but
from hence we clearly see what the great employment was in these Schools of the
Prophets, which, as the same Author expresses, it was statis horis de rebus
divinis disserere and divinis laudibus vacare; and thereby we understand what
reference this institution had in order to the prophetical office, because the
Spirit of God did much appear among them, and all their exercises tended to
piety, and so did remove all prejudices from their persons, when God did send
them abroad afterward.

And so it is evident he frequently did, not to say always, for that were to
put too great a restraint upon the boundless Sect. 9.
spirit of God: For sometimes, as will appear afterward, God sent the Prophets
upon extraordinary messages, and then furnished them with sufficient evidence
of their Divine commission without being beholding to the Testimonials of the
Schools of the Prophets. But besides these, God had a kind of Leiger-Prophets
among his people; such were the most of those whom we read of in Scripture,
which were no penmen of the sacred Scripture; such in David's time we may
conceive Gad and Nathan, and afterward we read of many other Prophets and
Seers among them, to whom the people made their resort: Now these in
probability were such as had been trained up in the Prophetic Schools, wherein
the spirit of God did appear, but in a more fixed and settled way then in the
extraordinary Prophets whom God did call out on some more signal occasions,
such as Isaiah and Jeremiah were. We have a clear foundation for such a
distinction of Prophets in those words of Amos to Amaziah, Amos 7. 14, 15. I
was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son; but I was a herdman, and a
gatherer of Sycamore fruits: And the Lord took me as I followed the stock; and
the Lord said unto me, Go prophecy to my people Israel. Some understand the
first words. I was not a Prophet, that he was not born a Prophet as Jeremiah
was, not designed and set apart to it from his mothers womb; but I rather think
by his not being a Prophet, he means he was none of those resident Prophets in
the Colleges or Schools of them, not any of those who had led a prophetic
life, and withdrawn themselves from converse with the world; nor was I (says
he) the son of a Prophet, i. e. not brought up in discipleship under those
Prophets, and thereby trained up in order to the prophetic function. Non
didici inter discipulos Prophetarum, as Pelican renders it; nec institutione
qua filii Prophetarum quasi ad donum Pr^phetiae a parentibus praeparabantur,
says Estius. Non a puero educatus in Schol is Propheticis; so Calvin and most
other modern Interpreters understand it as well as Abarbinel and the Jewish
Writers: Whereby it is evident that Gods ordinary way for the Prophets, was to
take such as had been trained up and educated in order to that end, although
God did not tie up hmself to this method, but sometimes called one from the
Court, as he did Isaiah; sometimes one from the herds, as here he did Amos, and
bid them go prophecy to the house of Israel. There was then a kind of a
standing College of Prophets among the Israelites, who shined as fixed Stars
in the Firmament; and there were others who had a more planetary motion, and
withal a more lively and resplendent illumination from the fountain of
prophetic light. And further it seems that the spirit of prophecy did not
ordinarily seize on any, but such whose institution was in order to that end,
by the great admiration which was caused among the people at Saul's so sudden
prophesying, 1 Sau^. 10. 12, 19, 24.
that it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the Prophets? which had not given
the least foundation for an adage for a strange and unwonted thing, unless the
most common appearances of the spirit of Prophecy had been among those who
were trained up in order to it. Thus I suppose we have fully cleared the first
reason why there was no necessity for the ordinary Prophets, whose chief office
was instruction of the people, to prove their commission by miracles, because
God had promised a succession of Prophets by Moses, and these were brought up
ordinarily to that end among them; so that all prejudices were sufficiently
removed from their persons without any such extraordinary power as that of
miracles.

CHAP. V. The trial of Prophetical Doctrine.
Rules of trying Prophets established in the Law of Moses. The punishment of
pretenders. The several sorts of false Prophets. The case of the Prophet at
Bethel discussed. The try^l of false Prophets belonging to the great Sanhedrin.
The particular rules whereby the Doctrine of Prophets was judged. The proper
notion of a Prophet, not for^telling future contingencies, but having immediate
Divine revelation. Several principles laid down for clearing the doctrine of
the Prophets. 1. That immediate dictates of natural light are not to be the
measure of Divine revelation. Several grounds for Divine revelation from
natural light. 2. What ever is directly repugnant to the dictates of nature,
cannot be of Divine revelation. 3. No Divine revelation does contradict a
Divine positive Law without sufficient evidence of Gods intention to repeal
that Law. 4. Divine revelation in the Prophets was not to be measured by the
words of the Law, but by the intention and reason of it. The Prophetical office
a kind of Chancery to the Law of Moses.

THE second reason why those Prophets whose main office was instruction of the
people, or merely foretelling future Sect. 1.
events, needed not to confirm their doctrine by mirales, is, because they had
certain rules of trial by their Law whereby to discern the false Prophets from
the true. So that if they were deceived by them, it was their own oscitancy and
inadvertency which was the cause of it. God in that Law which was confirmed by
miracles undoubtedly Divine, had established a Court of trial for Prophetic
Spirits, and given such certain rules of procedure in it, that no men needed to
be deceived unless they would themselves. And there was a greater necessity of
such a certain way of trial among them, because it could not otherwise be
expected but in a Nation where a Prophetic Spirit was so common, there would
be very many pretenders to it, who might much endanger the faith of the people
unless there were some certain way to find them out. And the more effectually
to deter men either from counterfeiting a Prophetic Spirit, or from
heark^ning to such as did, God appointed a severe punishment for every such
pretender, viz. upon legal conviction that he be punished with death. Deuteronomy. 18.
20. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name which I have
not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other Gods,
shall surely dye. The Jews generally understand this of strangling, as they do
always in the Law, when the particular manner of death is not expressed. And
therein a salse Prophet and a seducer were distinguished each from other, that
a mere seducer was to be stoned to death under sufficient testimony, Deuteronomy. 13.
6, 10. But the false Prophet is there said in general only to be put to death,
V. Maimon. de Idol. c. 5. s. 1. et ibi V^ssium.
Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 5. The main difference between the seducer and false Prophet was,
that the seducer sought by cunning persuasions and plausible arguments to draw
them off from the worship of the true God; but the false Prophet always
pretended Divine revelation for what he persuaded them to, whether he gave out
that he had that revelation from the true God, or from Idols and false Gods. So
that the mere pretense to Divine revelation was that which God would have
punished with so great severity.

The Jews tell us of three sorts of Prophets who were to be punished with death
by men, and three other sorts who Sect. 2.
were reserved to divine punishment: Of the first rank were these. 1. He that
prophesied that which he had not heard, V. Except. Gem. Sanbed. c. 10. s. 3.
and for this they instance in Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah, who made him
horns of iron and said, Thus says the Lord, this was the lying Prophet. 2. He
that speaks that which was revealed not to him but to another, and for this
they 1 King. 22. 11. Ie^. 28. 11.
instance in Hananiah the son of Azur, (but how truly I shall not determine)
this was the Plagiary Prophet. 3. He that prophesied in the name of an Idol, as
the Prophets of Baal did, this was the Idol Prophet. These three when once
fully convicted, were to be put to death. The other rank of those which were
left to Gods hand consisted of these. 1. He that stisles and smothers his own
prophecy as; Jonas did, by which it may seem that when the Divine Spirit did
overshadow the understanding of the Prophets, yet it offered no violence to
their faculties, but left them to the free determination of their own wills in
the execution of their office; but this must be understood of a lower degree of
prophecy; for at sometimes their prophecyes were as fire in their bones, that
they Jer. 20. 9.
were never at any rest till they had discharged their office. But withal by
the example of Jonas, we see, that though the Spirit of prophecy like the fire
on the Altar could only be kindled from heaven, yet it might be destroyed when
it was not maintained with something to feed upon; or when it met not with
suitable entertainment from the spirits of those it fell upon, it might retreat
back again to heaven, or at least lie hid in the embers till a new blast from
the Spirit of God does (...), retrieve it into its former heat and activity.
Thus it was with Jonas. 2. The other was, he that despised the words of a true
Prophet; of such God says Deuteronomy. 18. 19. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever shall not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him. Which Maimonides explains by (...) death by the hands of
God, which he thus distinguishes from the Cereth, that he makes the death per
Maim. desundam, legis c. 9. s 4. V. Abarbinel, de Cereth. apud Buxtorf. de
spons. and divort. p. 182. 1 Kings 13. 9. Ver. 18.
manus coeli to be less then the Cereth, because this latter continued in the
soul after death, but the other was expiated by death; but generally they
interpret it of a sudden death which falls upon the person. 3. The last is, he
who hearkens not to the words of his own Prophecy; of which we have a most
remarkable instance in Scripture, concerning the Prophet whom God sent to
Bethel (whom Tertullian calls Sameas, the Jews Hedua) whom God destroyed in an
unusual manner for not observing the command which God had given him, not to
eat bread nor drink water at Bethel, nor turn again by the way he came. Neither
was it any excuse to this Prophet that the old Prophet at Bethel told him that
an Angel spoke unto him by the word of the Lord that he should turn back. For,
1. Those whom God reveals his will unto, he gives them full assurance of it, in
that they have a clear and distinct perception of God upon their own minds; and
so they have no doubt but it is the word of the Lord which comes unto them; but
this Prophet could have no such certainty of the Divine revelation which was
made to another, especially when it came immediately to contradict that which
was so specially enjoined him. 2. Where God commands a Prophet to do any thing
in the pursuit of his message, there he can have no ground to question whether
God should countermand it or no by another Prophet; because that was in effect
to thwart the whole design of his message. So it was in this action of the
Prophets; for God intended his not eating and drinking in Bethel to testify
how much he loathed and abominated that place since its being polluted with
Idolatry. 3. He might have just cause to question the integrity of the old
Prophet, both because of his living in Bethel, and not openly, according to his
office, reproving their Idolatry, and that God should send him out of Judea
upon that very errand, which would not have seemed so probable, if there had
been true Prophets resident upon the place. 4. The thing he desired him to do
was not an act of that weight and importance on which God uses to send his
Word to any Prophets, much less by one Prophet to contradict what he had said
by another, and therefore Tertullian says of him, poenam deserti jejunii luit,
God punished him for breaking his De jejuniis, cap. 16.
fast at Bethel; and therefore that message of this Prophet seemed to gratify
more man's carnal appetite, then usually the actions of Prophets did, which were
most times matters of hardship and uneasiness to the flesh. 5. However all
these were, yet he yielded too soon, especially having so much reason on his
side as he had, being well assured that God had commanded him, he had reason to
see some clear evidence of a countermand, before he altered his mind: if he had
seen any thing upon trial which might have staggerd his faith, he ought to have
made his immediate recourse to God by prayer for the settlement of his mind and
removal of this great temptation. But so easily to hearken to the words of a
lying Prophet, which contradicted his own message, argued either great unbelief
as to his own commission, or too great easiness and inadvertency in being drawn
aside by the old Prophet. And therefore God made that old Prophet himself in
the midst of his entertainment, as with a hand writing against the wall to tell
him he was weighed in the balance and found too light, and therefore his life
should be taken from him. Thus we see how dangerous a thing it was either to
counterfeit a Spirit of Prophecy, or to hearken to those who did.

It is the generally received opinion among the Jewish Sect. 3.
Doctors, that the cognizance and trial of false Prophets did peculiarly belong
to the great Sanhedrin. And that this was one end of its institution. So
Maimonides after he has De Idololat. c. 5. s. 11.
largely discoursed of the punishment of a seducer, and speaking of that of a
false Prophet, he lays this down as a standing rule among them (...) No false
Prophet was to be judged but in the Court of seventy one; which was the number
of the great Sanhedrin. And there is some thing looks very like this in the
proceedings of the people of Israel against the Prophet Jeremiah; for the
people, the Priests and the Prophets, they laid hold on him; Ier. 26. ^.
and immediately after we read that the Princes of Judah (by whom Grotius
understands the Senators of the great Sanhedrin) they come up from the Kings
house to the house of Ver. 10.
the Lord, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the Lords house: (which
probably was the place where the great Sanhedrin V. Grol. in l. ^t Seldom. de
Syn. l. 2. c. 15. s. 4. et l. 3. c. 6. s. 4 Ier. 26. 16. Ier. 38. 5.
sat) where after a particular examination of Jeremiah, they acquit him as a
person not worthy to dye upon a counterfeiting Prophecy, but declare that he
spoke unto them in the name of the Lord. And in this sense Grotius likewise
understands what is said of Zedekiah concerning Jeremiah to the Princes of
Judah afterward, behold he is in your hand; for the King is not he that can do
ought against you, i. e. says Grotius, in manibus Synedrii, cujus est judicare
de Propheta vero aut falso. And to this many make those words of our Savior,
refer, that it is impossible a Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem, because
the seat of the great Sanhedrin was in Luk 13. 33.
Jerusalem; and so elsewhere our Savior says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Prophets and stonest them Matthew. 23. 37.
which are sent unto thee; because there it was the true Prophets were
destroyed as though they had been false ones, and Gods own messengers punished
with the death of seducers, which was l^pidation. And on this very account many
are of opinion that our Savior was condemned by the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem;
which is supposed to have been assembled in the house of Caiaphas the High
Priest, when Christ was carried thither for examination; which some think to
have been at his lodgings in the Temple, others at his Palace in the City. For
we read that the chief Priests, and the Elders, and all the Council were met
together at the High Priests Palace in order to our Saviors trial. The next
morning Matthew. 26. 59.
they were met early together again in order to the further scanning of this
business; but they seem not to examine Christ concerning a true spirit of
Prophecy, but concerning his being the Messiah, and calling himself the Son of
God, and so they would seem rather to proceed upon the Law against blasphemy,
Matthew. 26. 63.
then that against false Prophets.

But that which was the greatest security of the people Sect 4.
against the imposture of false Prophets, was the certain rules of judging them
which were laid down in the Law of Moses. Which may be comprehended under these
two heads, such as concern their doctrine, or such as concern their
predictions. First, such as concerned the Prophets doctrine, which should
especially be looked after because the main office of a Prophet was to be
interpres and internuncius divinae voluntatis, to be a revealer of Gods will to
men. For the primary notion of a Prophet does not lie in foretelling future
events, but in declaring and interpreting to the world the mind of God which he
receives by immediate revelation from himself. So that the receiving what he
makes known by immediate revelation, is that which formally constitutes a
Prophet, but it is wholly extrinsecal and accidental what time his Prophecy
respects, whether past, present, or to come; but because future contingencies
are the furthest out of the reach of humane understanding, therefore the
predictions of such have been chiefly looked on as the chief note and character
of a Prophet, as being apprehended to be the strongest evidence of Divine
revelation. And from hence it is in Scripture that the Patriarchs as Abraham
and others are called Prophets, not because of any predictions uttered by them,
but because of the frequency Psalm. 105. 15. Genesis 20. 7.
of immediate Divine revelation; among them. And hence likewise those in the
New Testament who expounded the Scriptures, by immediate inspiration, are
called Prophets, and this was the (...) spoken of by the Apostle, the 1 Cor.
14. 26.
exposition of the hidden mysteries of the Old Testament by an immediate
inspiration. And there is no word in the Hebrew for a Prophet, which may not
equally respect all differences of time, but every one does import immediate
inspiration, for (...) properly is one qui revelat abscondita (...) a Seer
chiefly respects the clear representation of the intellectual species, by the
lumen propheticum to the understanding, Vid. Alstedii Trisol. proph. p. 53.
and (...) carries an equal indifferency to all circumstances of times.

This being then the chief notion of a Prophet, whatever he Sect. 5.
declared as the mind and will of God, must be searched and examined to see
what consonancy it has thereto. For the question which Moses supposes, is
founded upon clear and evident reason, And if thou shall say in thine heart,
How shall Deuteronomy. 18. 21.
we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? For it being plain that there
may be false Prophets as well as true, we had need of some certain rules to
judge of what is delivered for divine revelation. For the clearing of which
important question, I lay down these principles.

The immediate dictates of natural light, are no sufficient standard to judge
of divine revelation by. I mean not in reference 1.
to consonancy or repugnancy to natural light, but in reference to the extent
and latitude of divine revelation, i. e. that natural light does not contain in
it whatever may be known of God or of his will; and that upon these reasons. 1.
It implies no repugnancy to any dictate of nature, that God should reveal any
thing more of his mind and will, then is contained in the light of nature. 2.
Nature reaches, as to matters concerning religion, no further then the
obligation to duty, but leaves the particular determination of the manner of
obedience to divine positive Laws, as is clear in reference to the time, place,
and particular duties of worship. 3. Nature owning an universal obligation to
the will of God in whatever he shall command, does suppose a power in God to
command what he pleases. 4. Nature is sensible of its own decays, and the
imperfection of its own light, and therefore seems rather to require further
illumination, then to put any bar against it. 5. Man's happiness being a free
gift of God, it stands to the highest reason that he should have the
prescribing of the conditions which are in order to it; now these conditions
being the results, not of Gods naeture, but of his arbitrarious will, it is
impossible that natural light could ever reach to the full discovery of them.
6. It has been the general sense of all Nations in the world, that God may
reveal more of his will then nature can reach unto; which sense discovers its
self in two things. 1. Praying to their several gods for direction. 2.
Heark^ing after pretended Oracles, which the Devil could never have had that
advantage of deceiving the world by, had it not been for this general sense of
mankind, that there wanted some particular revelation from God to make men
happy. So then this may be assumed as a principle, that God may reveal more of
his mind and will to mankind, then he has done by the dictates of mere natural
light and reason.

Whatever speaks a direct repugnancy to any of the fundamental dictates of
nature, cannot be of divine revelation. 2. Sect. 6.
For those being sounded, not upon any positive or arbitrary will, but upon
those inward impressions which are derived from the divine nature its self, it
cannot in reason be supposed that God should commission any to enervate his own
fundamental Law; and so by one will to contradict another. Placitum Regis must
never stand against the Placita Coronae; Those things which depend upon
fundamental and established Laws, hold good against any positive sentence or
declaration of a Princes will; Because he is supposed to have bound up himself
by the established Laws; and therefore any thing else which comes from him,
contrary to them, is supposed not to be the Will of the Prince, but of the
persons persuading him to it. But this now cannot be supposed in God, that he
should be any ways drawn to cassate the obligation of what is imprinted upon
the souls of men as his own Law. But yet we must distinguish between nulling
the general obligation, and altering the particular nature of any thing which
depends upon that general Law; the first in any case is impossible, that any
divine revelation should make it not to be man's duty to obey his maker, or not
to be a sin to commit murder, to lie, or to steal from another; but there may
come a particular revelation from God to alter the respects and nature of such
things as do immediately depend upon his own dominion; as the lives of persons
and the properties of things are, and thus God did reveal to Abraham that he
should go and sacrifice his son, which had been no murder when done upon Gods
immediate command, and for a sacrifice to himself; and therefore would have
been acceptable as a testimony of entire obedience (which God did accept
without the act) and so the Israelites taking the Egyptians Jewels, and
dispossessing the Canaanites, did depend upon Gods immediate disposal of these
things to them; which otherwise had been a sin in them; and no doubt was so to
any that were unsatisfied whether God had immediately commanded it or no. Or
from hence to infer any general rule, is no doubt a breach of divine commands,
and contrary to his nature and will.

Where God has established a positive Law, prescribing a form and manner
wherein he will be worshipped, it is sufficient 3. Sect. 7.
evidence of a false Prophet, to go about to null the obligation of that Law;
unless there be as great evidences given, that God did intend the establishing
a new Law by that person, as he did at first the institution of the old by the
hand of Moses. This latter clause is inserted, to show that the succeeding of
the doctrine of Christ into the place of the Law of Moses, does not bear any
repugnancy to the Hypothesis laid down, there being greater evidences of Gods
intending the abolishing the ceremonial Law by the Gospel of Christ, then there
were of the establishment of it by Moses. But of those afterward. I now only
speak of such as upon the mere pretense of divine revelation, should destroy
any precept of an established positive Law; and this, as far as we can find,
was the great rule the Jews went by, if any thing were spoken by any Prophet,
contrary to the Law of Moses, or tending to the alteration of the worship of
God established thereby, he was accounted a false Prophet. The modern Jews to
justify themselves in their own unbelief, as to the doctrine of Christ,
extends this further then the Law does; for they enlarge it to all the precepts
of the ceremonial Law; whereas God in the Law seems to limit it to the Moral
Law, and chiefly insists on the three first precepts of the Decalogue; and
therefore condemns such a one as spoke in the name of the Lord, when he had not
commanded them, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. and such as endeavored to bring in idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. where though the false Prophet should offer to do signs and
wonders before them, yet if his intention were to draw them to worship false
gods, they were not to hearken unto him. And therefore Maimonides, where he
largely disputes about the truth of prophesies, lays this down as a certain
rule: Si Propheta surrexerit, De fandam. leg. cap. 8. sect. 7.
at que magna miracula aut prodigiafecerit and ad laboraverit falsitatis
convincere Proph^tiam Mosis M. N. istum non audimus, quia certo novimus
prodigium praestigiis aut incant ationibus productum esse, as Vorstius renders
him. If a Prophet do never so great miracles, and seeks to convince Moses of
falsehood, we are not to hearken to him, for we know that they are not done by
the power of God, but by the illusions of the Devil. And elsewhere he tells us,
that if any one pretends De Idololat. cap 5. sect. 9.
to prophecy (...) in the name of Idols they must not so much as dispute with
him, nor answer him, nor desire any signs or miracles from him; and if of
himself he shows any, we are not to regard or mind them; for, says he, whoever
does but doubt in his mind concerning them, he breaks that command, and thou
shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet. So Deuteronomy. 13. 3
that the doctrine once established, ought to be our most certain rule,
according to which we must judge of all pretenders to miracles; if their design
be to draw men off from Gods Word, we are not to hearken to what they either
say or do.

The doctrine of those Prophets who seek not to introduce Idolatry, must not be
measured by a strict conformity to the words 4. Sect. 8.
of Moses his Law, but to the main reason and intention of it. The great reason
of this is, because God did not intend the Jews should always rest in the
Paedagogy of the Ceremonial Law, but sent them Prophets to train them up by
degrees, and to fit them for a state of greater perfection; and therefore it
would be very unreasonable to judge whether they were true Prophets or no
exactly by that, which they came gradually to wean them from; which were all
one, as to try one whether he were grown a man or no, by the swaddling clouts he
wore when he was a child. God tempered the Ceremonial Law much according to the
condition and capacity of the persons it was prescribed to, and therefore the
sanctions of it did immediately respect their temporary concerns; but we are
not to think the end of that dispensation was to be merely a Covenant for the
Land of Promise, but as the Cherubims in the Temple did always look toward
the Mercyseat, so did this whole Economy look toward the coming of the
Messiah. But it was with the generality of the Jews, as it is with Ignorant
people, who looking up to the heavens, cannot fancy the stars to be any bigger
then they seem to them; but Astronomers by the help of their Optic tubes and
Telescopes, do easily discern the just magnitude of them; so the Jews
ordinarily thought there was no more in those types and shadows, then was
visibly represented to them, but such as had the help of the Divine Spirit (the
best Telescope to discern the day star from on high with) could easily look
through those prospectives, into the most glorious mysteries of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. These types being like triang^lar Prismes, that must be set in a
due light and posture, before they can represent that great variety of
spiritual mysteries which was contained in them. Now the great office of the
Prophets was to administer this light to the people, and to direct them in
those excellent pieces of Perspective, wherein by the help of a Prophetic
glass they might see the Son of God fully represented to their view. Besides
this, the Prophetical office was a kind of Chancery to the Mosaic Law, wherein
the Prophets did interpret the Pandects of the Law ex aequo and bono, and
frequently showed in what cases God did dispense with the outward letter of it,
to exalt the more the inward sense and reason of it. Hence the Prophets seem
many times to speak contemptibly of the outward prescribed Psa. 50. 8. 51. 16.

Isa. 1. 11, 13. 66. 3.

Ierem. 7. 21, 22, 23.


Cer^monies, when their intent is not to condemn the observation of them, but
to tell the people there were greater things which God looked at, then the
outward observation of some Ceremonial precepts, and that God would never
accept of that by way of commutation, for real and internal goodness. Hence the
Prophets by their own practice, did frequently show that the Law of Moses did
not so indispensably oblige men, but that God would accept of those actions,
which were performed without the regularity required by the Law of Moses; and
thus he did of sacrificing upon high places, not only before the building of
the Temple, but sometimes after, as he accepted of the sacrifice of Elijah on
Mount Carmel, 1 Kings 18. 38.
even when high places were for bidden. Which the Jews are become so sensible
of, that they grant that a true Prophet may sometimes command something to be
done in violation of the Law of Moses, so he does not draw people to Idolatry,
Vid. Jarchi in Deuteronomy. 18. 21. Et Vorst. ad Maim. de sund. cap. 9. sect. 5, 6, 7.
nor destroy the obligation of Moses his Law. But this they restrain to (...)
something done in case of necessity, and that it should not pass into a
precedent or a perpetual Law; and therefore their rule is (...) The Prophet was
to be hearkened to in every thing he commanded in a case of necessity. But by
this it is clear that the Prophets were not to be tried by the letter of the
Law of Moses, but by the end and the reason of it. Thus much I suppose will
make it clear what rules the people had to try the Prophets doctrine by,
without miracles.

CHAP. VI. The trial of Prophetical Predictions and Miracles.
The great difficulty of the trying the truth of Prophetical predictions from
Jerem. 18. 7, 8, etc. Some general Hypo^heses premised for the clearing of it.
The first concerns the grounds why predictions are accounted an evidence of
divine revelation. Three Consectaries drawn thence. The second, the manner of
Gods revelation of his will to the minds of the Prophets. Of the several
degrees of prophecy. The third is, that God did not always reveal the internal
purposes of his will unto the true Prophets. The grand question propounded ^ow
it may be known when predictions express Gods decrees, and when only the series
of causes. For the first, several rules laid down. 1. When the prediction is
confirmed by ^ present miracle. 2. When the things foretold exceed the
probability of second causes. 3. When confirmed by Gods oath. 4. When the
blessings foretold are purely spiritual. Three rules for interpreting the
prophecyes which respect the state of things under the Gospel. 5. When all
circumstances are foretold. 6. When many Prophets in several ages agree in the
same predictions. Predictions do not express Gods unalterable purposes, when
they only contain comminations of judgments, or are predictions of temporal
blessings. The case of the Ninivites, Hezekiah and others opened. Of repentance
in God, what it implies. The Jewish objections about predictions of temporal
blessings answered. In what cases miracles were expected from the Prophets,
when they were to confirm the truth of their religion. Instanced in the Prophet
at Bethel, Elijah, Elishah, and of Moses himself; Whose divine authority that
it was proved by miracles, is demonstrated against the modern Jews, and their
pretenses answered.

THe next thing which the rules of trial concerned, was Sect. 1.
the predictions of the Prophets. Concerning which God himself has laid down
this general rule, Deuteronomy. 18. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the name of the
Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the
Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously; thou shall
not be afraid of him. Grotius understands this place of the Prophets telling
the people he would do some miracles to confirm his doctrine, but, says he, if
those miracles were not done as he said, it was an evident demonstration of a
false Prophet. It is certain it was so; for then his own mouth told him he was
a lying Prophet; but these words seem to referr rather to something future then
present, and are therefore generally understood concerning the truth of
predictions; which was a matter of very difficult trial, in regard of the
goodness or the justice of God so frequently interposing between the prediction
and the event. That place which makes it so difficult to discern the truth of a
prediction by the event, is Ierem. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall
speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
evil, I will repent of the evil I had thought to do unto them; And at what
instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build
and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then
will I repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them. By which place
it seems clear, that even after the predictions of Prophets, God does reserve a
liberty to himself, either to repent of the evil or the good that was foretold
concerning any people; how then can the fidelity of a Prophet be discovered by
the event, when God may alter the event, and yet the Prophet be a true Prophet?
This being a case very intricate and obscure, will call for the more diligence
in the unfolding of it: In order to which, we shall first premise some general
Hypotheses, and then come to the particular resolution of it. The general
Hypotheses will be concerning the way and method of Gods revealing future
contingencies to the Prophets, without which it will be impossible to resolve
the particular emergent cases concerning predictions.

The prediction of future events is no further an argument of Prophetic
spirit, then as the foreknowledge of those things Sect. 2. 3. Hypoth.
is supposed to be out of the reach of any created understanding. And therefore
God challenges this to himself in Scripture, as a peculiar prerogative of his
own, to declare the things that are to come, and thereby manifests the Idols of
the Gentiles to be no Gods, because they could not show to their worshippers
the things to come, Isaiah. 44. 6, 7. From this hypothesis these two
Consectaries follow.

1. That the events which are foretold, must be such as do exceed the reach of
any created intellect; for otherwise it could be no evidence of a Spirit of
true Prophecy; so that the foretelling of such events as depend upon a series
of natural causes, or such as though they are out of the reach of humane
understanding, yet are not of the Diabolical, or such things as fall out
casually true, but by no certain grounds of prediction, can none of them be any
argument of a Spirit of Prophecy.

2. That where there were any other evidences, that the Prophet spoke by Divine
Revelation, there was no reason to wait the fulfilling of every particular
Prophecy before he was believed as a Prophet. If so, then many of Gods chiefest
Prophets could not have been believed in their own Generations; because their
Prophecies did reach so far beyond them, as Isaiahs concerning Cyrus, the
Prophet at Bethel concerning Josias; and all the Prophecies concerning the
captivity and deliverance from it, must not have been believed till fulfilled,
that is, not believed at all; for when Prophecies are accomplished, they are no
longer the objects of faith, but of sense. Where then God gives other evidences
of Divine inspiration, the credit of the Prophet is not suspended upon the
minute accomplishment of every event foretold by him. Now it is evident there
may be particular Divine revelation of other things besides future
contingencies, so that if a reason may be given why events once foretold may
not come to pass, there can be no reason why the credit of any Prophecy should
be invalidated on that account; because every event is not exactly
correspondent to the prediction. It is most certain that what ever comes under
Divine knowledge, may be Divinely revealed; for the manifestation which is
caused by any light, may extend its self to all things to which that light is
extended; but that light which the Prophets saw by was a Divine light, and
therefore might equally extend it self to all kind of objects; but because
future contingencies are the most remote from humane knowledge, therefore the
foretelling of these has been accounted the great evidence of a true Prophet;
but yet there may be a knowledge of other things in a lower degree then future
contingencies which may immediately depend upon Divine revelation; and these
are,

1. Such things which cannot be known by one particular man, but yet is
certainly known by other men; as the present knowledge of things done by
persons at a remote distance from them: thus Elisha knew what Gehezi did, when
he 2 King. 5. 26.
followed N^aman; and thus the knowledge of the thoughts of another heart
depends upon immediate Divine revelation, whereas every one may certainly know
the thoughts of his own heart; and therefore to some those things may be 1 Cor.
14. 25.
matters of sense or evident demenstration, which to another may be a matter of
immediate revelation.

2. Such things as relate not to future contingencies, but are matters of faith
exceeding the reach of humane apprehension; such things as may be known when
revealed, but could never have been found out without immediate revelation;
such all the mysteries of our religion are, the mystery of the Trinity,
Incarnation, Hypostatical union, the death of the Son of God for the pardon of
the sins of mankind. Now the immediate revelation of either of these two sorts
of objects speaks as much a truly Prophetical spirit as the prediction of
future contingencies. So that this must not be looked on as the just and
adequate rule to measure a spirit of Prophecy by; because the ground of judging
a Prophetical spirit by that, is common with other things without that, seeing
other objects are out of the reach of humane understanding as well as future
events, and therefore the discovery of them must immediately flow from Divine
revelation.

3. The revelation of future events to the understanding of a Prophet, is never
the less immediate, although the event may not be correspondent to the
prediction. So that if it be manifest that God immediately reveal such future
contingencies to a Prophet, he would be nevertheless a true Prophet whether
those predictions took effect or no. For a true Prophet is known by the truth
of Divine revelation to the person of the Prophet, and not by the success of
the thing, which as is laid down in the hypothesis, is no further an evidence
of a true Prophet then as it is an argument a posteriori to prove Divine
revelation by. If then the alteration of events after predictions be
reconcilable with the truth and faithfulness of God, there is no question but
it is with the truth of a Prophetical spirit, the formality of which lies in
immediate revelation.

The Prophets could not declare any thing more to the people Sect. 3. Hyp. 2.
then was immediately revealed unto themselves; What was presently revealed, so
much they knew and no more, because the spirit of Prophecy came upon them per
modum impressionis transeuntis, as the Schools speak, and not per modum
habitus; the lumen propheticum was in them not as lumen in corpore lucido, but
as lumen in aere, and therefore the light of revelation in their spirits
depended upon the immediate irradiations of the Divine Spirit. The Prophets had
not always a power to Prophecy when they would themselves; and thence it is
said when they Prophesied that the Word of the Lord came unto them. And
therefore the Schools determine that a Prophet upon an immediate revelation did
not know omnia prophetabilia (as they speak in their barbarous language) all
things which God might reveal; the reason whereof Aquinas thus gives; the
ground says he, of the connection of diverse objects together is some common
tie or principle which 2. 2. 9. 171. A^t. 2. -- 4.
joins them together; as charity or prudence is in moral virtues, and the
right understanding of the principles of a science, is the ground why all
things belonging to that science are understood; but now in Divine revelation,
that which connects the objects of Divine revelation is God himself; now
because he cannot be fully apprehended by any humane intellect, therefore the
understanding of a Prophet cannot comprehend all matters capable of being
revealed, but only such as it pleases God himself freely to communicate to the
Prophets understanding by immediate revelation. This is further evident by all
those different degrees of illumination and Prophecy which the Jews and other
writers speak so much of, viz. of dreams and visions, the inspirations of the
Holy Spirit, the gradus Mosaicus, the external voice, etc. Now in every one of
these degrees the Prophet could go no further then his present revelation
extended; and therefore Aquinas determines that the understandings of the
Prophets were instrumenta deficientia respectu principalis agentis, i. e. that
in prophetical 2. 2. 9 173. art. 3.
illumination the mind of the Prophet was so moved by the Spirit of God, as an
instrument in the hand of an Artificer, which bears no proportion with the
skill of the workman: And therefore the mind of a Prophet is moved, sometimes
only to apprehend the thing represented (which they call instinctus divinus, of
which they say a Prophet may have no certainty whether it comes from God or no)
sometimes it is moved so far as to know certainly that this revelation is from
God (this they call lumen Propheticum) sometimes a Prophet may be moved to
speak those things which he fully understands; so it was with most of the true
Psophets; but sometimes men may be moved to speak that which they understand
not, as is plain in Caiaphas, and probable in Balaam. Sometimes a thing was
represented to the fancy of one without any possibility of understanding the
meaning of those imaginary species, as in Pharaohs and Nebnchadnezzars dreams;
and to another may be given the true judgment of those motions of fancy
without the representation of the things to them, as in Joseph and Daniel. Now
in these and many other different impressions of this prophetical spirit, the
Prophets to whom the things were revealed, could go no further then the degree
of the revelation made to them did extend.

God did not always reveal to the Prophets the internal counsels and decrees of
his own will, but often only the method and Sect. 4. 3 Hyp. (...)
series of his providence in the administration of things in the world. Which
is the ground of that threefold distinction of Prophecy in the Schools into
prophetia praedestinationis, prophetia praescientiae, and prophetia
comminationis; which is taken from the ordinary gloss upon Matthew. 1. where they
are thus explained; the Prophecy of Predestination is when the event depends
wholly upon Gods will without any respect to ours, as the Prophecy of the
Incarnation of Christ; the Prophecy of Praescience is of such things as depend
upon the liberty of man's will; and the Prophecy of Commination only denotes
Gods denunciations of heavy judgments against a people. But Aquinas does
better reduce the two former to one, and so the ground of the difference is to
be fetched from the different ways whereby God knows things in the world; which
is either as they are in their causes, and so they note the order and series of
things in the world, with the mutual respects and dependencies they have one
upon another, and this refers to Gods administration of things in the world; or
else God looks upon them as they are in themselves, or according to his own
positive determinations of them; and now in this sense they are unalterable;
but in the other they are not; but God may alter those respects of things when
he pleases. Now though this different manner of knowledge can never be
conceived separate from one another in the Divine understanding, yet in the
revelation made to the mind of a Prophet, they may be disjoined from each
other, because God does not always reveal things in the highest degree to the
Prophets; for no free agent does always act as far as he can. And therefore
prophetical revelation is sometimes a representation of Gods internal decrees,
and then they always take effect, and sometimes only the order of causes and
effects, and they may admit of an alteration, and the prophecy nevertheless be
true, because then it referred only to the series of causes in the world
according to which the events would follow if God himself did not interpose.
These things being thus premised, we come to particular resolutions, which must
arise from the evidences that may be given when prophetical predictions did
express Gods internal purpose and decree, and when only the order of causes in
the world; for in these latter it is apparent that events might not answer
predictions, and yet the Prophet be a true Prophet: which is a matter of
greater difficulty, viz. to find out the exact differences of these two, till
the event has made it apparent which came from Gods unalterable purpose, and
which not. But though it be a subject little spoken to either by Jewish or
Christian Writers, yet we are in hopes there may be some such clear notes of
distinction discovered between them, even a priori, which may sufficiently
clear Gods faithfulness, and the Prophets truth, though the event be not always
correspondent to the words of a prediction.

I begin then with the evidences that may be given when Sect. 5.
predictions do flow from internal purpose and decree.

Every prediction confirmed by a present miracle, does not express merely the
order of causes, but the determinations of 1.
Gods will, because there can be no sufficient reason given why the order of
causes in nature should be altered to express the dependences of things on each
other; for herein a miracle would rather ten d to weaken then strengthen faith,
because the end of the miracle would be to confirm their faith as to events
following upon their causes; but now the medium used for that end seems to
prove the contrary, viz. that God can alter the series of causes when he
pleases himself by working miracles, and therein going contrary to the course
of nature; and therefore a miracle seems to be a very incongruous argument in
this, because its self is an evidence that may be, which it comes to prove
shall not be. But when Prophets come to declare the internal purposes of the
will of God concerning future contingencies, no argument can be more suitable
to demonstrate the truth of what is spoken then the working of a present
miracle; for this demonstrates to the senses of men, that however unlikely the
event may be to them which is foretold, yet with God all things are possible,
and that it is very unlikely God would send such a messenger to declare a
falsehood, whom he entrusted so great a power with as that of working miracles.
Thus it was in that remarkable prophecy concerning Josias by the man of God at
Bethel, 260 years before his birth, which though it were to come to pass so
long after, God confirmed it by a sign, which 1 Kings 13. 3.
was the renting of the altar, and the pouring out of the ashes upon it, and
the withering of Jeroboams hand. We cannot therefore in reason think that God
would set so clear a seal, to any deed which he did intend himself to cancel
afterward.

Praedictions express Gods inward purpose when the things foretold do exceed
all probabilities of second causes; in which 2.
case, those words of Tertullian seem very harsh, credo quia impossible; yet
taking that impossibility as relating to second causes, and the ground of faith
to be some divine prediction, we see what reason there may be for them: For the
more unlikely the thing is to be effected by second causes, the greater
evidence is it that the Prophets in foretelling it did not respect the mere
order of things in the world, but the unalterable counsels of the will of God,
which therefore would certainly have their timely accomplishments. When
therefore any Prophets did foretell things above the reach of natural causes,
and those things did not come to pass, it was a certain evidence of a false
Prophet, as the contrary was of a true one; for none could know so long
beforehand such things as were above all humane power, but such to whom God
himself, who alone was able to effect them, did reveal and communicate the
knowledge of them. And hence we see in Scripture those predictions which have
seemed to carry the greatest improbabilities with them, have had the most
punctual accomplishments, as the Israelites returning out of Egypt at the end
of the 430 years; their deliverance by Gal. 3. 17.
Cyrus after the captivity in Babylon, which seemed so improbable a thing, that
when God speaks of it, he ushers it in Isa. 44. 25, 26, 28.
with this preface, that he frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes the
diviners mad, but confirms the word of his servant, and performs the
counsel of his messengers, that says to Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited,
etc. The more unlikely then the thing was to come to pass, the greater evidence
there was in so clear a prophecy of it so long before (above 100 years) and so
exact a fulfilling of it afterward precisely at the expiring of the L X X
years from the first Captivity.

Predictions concerning future events, which are confirmed by an oath from God
himself, do express the immutable determinations Sect. 6. 3.
of Gods will. For which we have the greatest assurance we can desire from that
remarkable expression of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 6. 17, 18. Wherein
God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things in which
it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, etc.
Wherein the Apostle obviates and removes all doubts and misprisions, lest God
after the declaring of his will, should alter the event foretold in it, and
that he does, both by showing that God had made an absolute promise, and
withal to prevent all doubts, lest some tacit condition might hinder
performance, he tells us that God had annexed his oath to it, which two things
were the most undoubted evidences of the immutability of Gods counsel. The word
(...) here used, does in Scripture often note the frustrating of men's hopes and
expectations; so it is used Habak. 3. 17. (...), we render it the labor of the
Olive shall fail. So Osea 9. 2. (...), and the new wine shall fail in her. Thus
the meaning here is, that by two immutable things in which it is impossible
that God should frustrate the expectations of men, or alter the events of
things after he had declared them. For Gods oath is an evident demonstration of
the immutability of his will in all predictions to which this is annexed, and
does fully exclude that which the Scripture calls repenting in God, that is,
doing otherwise then the words did seem to express, because of some tacit
conditions understood in them. So we find Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. If
they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes; nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail; my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His
seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me. Wherein we see
what way God takes to assure us of the immutability of his Covenant with his
people, by the oath which he adjoyns to his promises; whereby God does most
fully express the unalterable determinations of his own will, in that he swears
by his own holiness that he would not lie unto David, i. e. that he would
faithfully perform what he had promised to him. And therefore Tertullian well
says, Beati sumus quorum causa Deus jurat, sed miseri and detestabiles si ne
juranti quidem credimus. It is happy for us unbelieving creatures, that God
stoops so low as to confirm his Covenant with an oath; but it will be sad and
miserable for such as dare not venture their faith upon it, when God has
annexed his oath unto it. It is thought by expositors, that there is a peculiar
emphasis in those words (...) Once have I sworn, thereby noteing the
irrevocable nature of Gods oath, that there is no need of repetition of it as
among men, because when once God swears by himself, it is the highest
demonstration that no conditions whatever shall alter his declared purpose. And
therefore the Council of Toledo well explains the different nature of Gods Oath
and his repentance in Scriptures; Conc. Tol^t. 8. c. 3.
Iurare namque Dei est a se ordinata nullatenus convellere; poenitere vero
eadem ordinata cum voluerit immutare; God is said to swear when he binds
himself absolutely to performance; and to repent, when things fall out contrary
to the declaration of Gods will concerning them; for so it must be understood
to be only mutatio sententiae, and not consilii, that the alteration may be
only in the things, and not in the eternal purpose of God. But since it is
evident in Scripture, that many predictions do imply some tacit conditions,
and many declarations of Gods will do not express his internal purposes, it
seemed necessary in those things which God did declare to be the irrevocable
purposes of his will, there should be some peculiar mark and character set upon
them for the confirmation of his peoples faith; and this we find to be the
annexing an oath to his promises. Thus it is in that grand Instrument of Peace
between God and his people, the Covenant of Grace, wherein God was pleased so
far to strengthen the faith of his people in it, that he ratifies the articles
of peace therein contained, but especially the Act of Grace on his own part
with an oath, thereby to assure them it was never his purpose to repeal it, nor
to fail of performance in it. For we are not to think that an Oath lays any
greater obligation upon God for performance, then the mere declaration of his
will; it being a part of immutable justice, and consequently necessarily
employed in the Divine nature to perform promises when once made; but Gods Oath
respects us and not himself, viz. that it might be a testimony unto us that
Gods will thereby declared, is his eternal and unchangeable will, and so the
mercies thereby promised are sure mercies; such as are (...) without any
repentance on Gods part. Isa. 55. 3,


Predictions made by the Prophets concerning blessings merely spiritual, do
express Gods internal purpose, and therefore must Sect. 7. 4.
have their certain accomplishment in the time prefixed by the Prophets. The
grand reason of this Proposition, is, that the be stowing of blessings merely
spiritual, does immediately flow from the grace and favor of God, and depend
not upon conditions on our part, as procuring causes of them; and therefore
there can be no account given why God should suspend the performance of such
promises, which would not more strongly have held why he should not have made
any such promises at all. And therefore when we see that notwithstanding the
highest demerits, God made such free promises, we can have no reason to think
that any other demerits interposing between the promises and performance,
should hinder the accomplishment of them; unless it be inserted in the promises
themselves, which is contrary to the nature of free promises: Upon this ground
all the promises relating to the Gospel state, and to the Covenant of grace
therein contained, must have their due accomplishment in the time and manner
prefixed by the Prophets; and therefore the Jews are miserably blind when they
suppose the reason why the promise of the Messiah is yet deferred after so long
expectation of him, is, the sins of their people; for this seems to suppose
that Gods promise of the Messiah did depend upon their own righteousness and
worthiness above all other people, which if it does, they are like to be the
most miserable and desperate people the world has; and besides, if Gods
intuition of sin makes him deferr the coming of the Messiah, his foresight of
sin would have hindered him from ever promising a Messiah to come; but this was
so far from being a hinderance of Gods promise, that the main end of the coming
of the Messiah was to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to make an end of
sin, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. And we see wherever Dan. 9. 24.
the Prophets insist on the Covenant of grace, the great promise contained in
it is the blotting out of transgressions, and remembering sins no more, and that
merely on the account of Gods free love and for his own names sake: This can be
no reason then why predictions concerning spiritual blessings should not have
their exact accomplishment, because there can be no bar against free Love, and
the bestowing of such mercies which do suppose the greatest unworthiness of
them, as Gospel blessings do.

The great difficulty lies in explaining the Prophetical phrases concerning the
Gospel state, which seem to intimate a Sect. 8.
greater advancement and flourishing of peace and holiness therein, then has
as yet been seen in the Christian world; which gives the Jews the greater
occasion to imagine that the state so much spoken of by the Prophets, is not
yet established in the world. But all the difficulty herein arises from the
want of consideration of the Idiotisms of the Prophetical language, especially
where it respects the state of things under the Gospel, concerning which, we
may observe these following rules.

The Prophets under the old Testament, when they speak of things to come to
pass in the New, do set them forth by the representation 1.
of such things as were then in use among themselves; thus the spiritual
worship of the Gospel is prophesied of, under the notion of the legal worship
among the Jews; the conversion of Egypt to the Gospel, is foretold Isaiah 19.
19, 21. by the setting up of an Altar, and offering sacrifice to the Lord; and
the Conversion of the Gentiles in general, by the offering up of incense,
Malach. 1. 11. and the service of God under the Gospel, is set forth by going
up to Jerusalem, and keeping the feast of Tabernacles there, Zach. 14. 16. and
the plentiful effusion of the spirit of God in the miraculous gifts which
attended the preaching of the Gospel, is set forth by the Prophet, Joel 2. 28
by prophesying, and dreaming dreams, and seeing visions; not that these things
should really be under Gospel times; but that the Prophets meaning might be the
better understood by those he spoke unto, he sets forth the great measure of
gifts and Gospel light under those things which were accounted as the highest
seize among themselves. So the great measure and degree of holiness which
was to be under Gospel times, is set forth by the Prophet Zachary, Zach. 14.
20. by the placing of the motto which was among the Jews only upon the High
Priests forehead, that this should be so common under the Gospel, that even
the bells of the horses should bear it, i. e. those things which seem most
remote from a spiritual use, should be devoted to it, as the bells were, which
were commonly hanged upon their war-horses in those mountainous Countries; and
in the latter part of that verse, the height and progress of Gospel holiness is
described under that phrase, that the pots in the Loras house should be as
bowls before the Altar, i. e. should be advanced from a lower and more ignoble
service, to a higher and more spiritual degree of holiness. Now the Jews when
they observe these and many other Prophetical passages relating to the time of
the Messiah to run in the old strain of the Law, they presently conclude that
the Messiah must not innovate any thing concerning their way of worship, but
only be some great Prince to give them temporal deliverances, and so expound
all these texts in a litteral sense, which were only expressed in such a
strain, the better to help the capacities of those they spoke them to.

Things absolutely foretold to come to pass in Gospel times in 2.
a general manner, are to be understood comparatively in reference to what was
before. For when the measure of either grace or knowledge was so far above what
was then among the Jews, that there was scarce any proportion between them, the
Prophets made use of such expressions to set it forth by, which might raise up
the dull apprehension of the Jews to conceive the just measure and fullness of
it. Thus when the Prophets foretell the grand increase of spiritual knowledge
in Gospel times, they do it in this phrase, they shall not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know
me from the least to the greatest, Ierem. 31. 33, Where it was far from the
Prophets meaning to exclude all use of teaching under the Gospel, (which is
contrary to the end of all the Ordinances of the Gospel) but because teaching
does commonly suppose great Ignorance, he sets forth the abundance of knowledge
which should be then, by the exclusion of that which does imply it. So when it
is said that they shall all be taught of God, the meaning is not, that every
one that lives in the Gospel state, should be thus effectually taught by the
Spirit of God; but that the number of such under the Gospel, should so far
exceed those under the Law, that they could hardly apprehend the disproportion
between them, unless it had been set forth in so large an expression. Which
leads me to the next rule.

Things foretold as universally or indefinitely to come to 3.
pass under the Gospel, are to be understood as to the duty of all, but as to
the event only of Gods chosen people. Thus when there is so great peace
prophesied to be in Gospel times, that then men should beat their swords into
plow-shears, and spears Isa. 2. 4.
into pruning hooks; that the Woolf should lie down with the Lamb, and Leopard
with the Kid; that Nation should not lift 11. 6, 7.
up sword against Nation, nor learn war any more; with many others to the same
purpose; all these speeches are to be understood of what the nature and design
of the Gospel tends to, and what is the duty of all that profess it, and what
would effectually be in the Christian world, did all that profess the Christian
doctrine, heartily obey the dictates of it; and so far as the Gospel does
prevail upon any, it so far cicurates their wild and unruly natures, that of
furious Wolves they become innocent Lambs, and of raging Lions, tender Kids; so
far from hurting and injuring others, that they dare not entertain any thoughts
of ill will or revenge toward their greatest enemies. And thus we may see,
that notwithstanding the seeming repugnancies of the prophecyes of the Old
Testament concerning the state of the New, with the events which have been
observed in it, yet that all those predictions which concerned the bestowing of
the spiritual blessings which concerned the Gospel state, have had their
punctual accomplishment in the sense they were intended.

Predictions concerning future events where not only the thing its self is
foretold but the several circumstances of persons, Sect. 9. 5.
time, and place enumerated, are to have their due accomplishment, and
consequently express Gods inward purposes. For those promises or comminations
which are capable of alteration by some tacit conditions employed in them, do
most commonly run in general terms; or else are spoken by way of immediate
address to the persons concerned in order to the stirring them up the more to
the duty God aims at by those comminations; as when Jonas limited the Ninivites
d^struction to forty days. But when Prophecies are recorded, not by way of
commination but mere prediction, and particular circumstances set down, it
stands to reason that such Prophecies must have their certain accomplishment;
and that first, because God by setting down the circumstances would give them
greater evidences that the predictions came from himself; as when the Prophet
at Bethel not only foretold the destruction of the Altar there, but
particularly named the man that should do it, viz. Josias. So when God by
Isaiah called Cyrus by name, it was doubtless a great confirmation to them,
that the deliv^rance of the Jews should be by that person. Secondly, because
these circumstances are intended for Landmarks to know the certainty of the
accomplishment of the Prophecy. For when they find the circumstances fall out
exactly according to prediction, they have no ground to question the
accomplishment of the substance of the Prophecy. And hence it was that in the
grand Prophecy of the coming of the Messiah all particular circumstances were
so long before foretold. The first dawning of his day being to Adam after his
fall, when the nature he should be born of was foretold, viz. not Angelical but
humane, of the seed of the woman. To Abraham it was further revealed of what
Nation of mankind, viz. from his posterity; to Jacob at what time, when the
Scepter should be departed from Judah; and from what tribe, viz. Judah; to
David of what Family in that tribe, viz. his own; to Isaiah of what Person in
that Family, a Virgin; to Micah in what place, viz. Bethlehem; and to Daniel,
at what precise time, toward the expiring of his seventy weeks; which according
to to the most probable computation of them did comm^nce from the seventh year
of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and so the 490. years expired near upon our Saviors
passion. Now certainly the particular enumeration of all these circumstances
spoken of so long before, and falling out so exactly, they could not but give
the greatest conviction and evidence, that our blessed Savior was that person
so much spoken of by the Prophets, in whom all these several lines did meet as
in their center.

Lastly, Predictions then express divine purposes when many 6.
Proph^ts in several ages concur in the same predictions; because it is hardly
seen but all those tacit conditions which are supposed in general promises or
comminations may be altered in different ages; but when the conditions alter
and the predictions continue ^he same, it is a stronger evidence it is some
immutable counsel of God which is expressed in those predictions. And in this
case one prediction confirms the foregoing, as the Jews say of Prophets; One
Prophet that has the testimony of another Prophet, is supposed to be true; but
it must be with this supposition, that the other Prophet was before approved to
be a true Prophet. Now both these meet in the Prophecyes concerning our
Savior; for to him bear all the Prophets witness; and in their several ages
they had several things revealed to them concerning him; and the uniformity and
perfect harmony of all these several Prophecyes by persons at so great distance
from each other, and being of several interests and employments, and in several
places, yet all giving light to each other, and exactly meeting at last in the
accomplishment, do give us yet a further and clearer evidence that all those
several beams came from the same Sun, when all those scattered rays were at
last gath^red into one body again at the appearance of the Sun of righteousness
in the world.

Thus have we now cleared when predictions are expressive Sect. 10.
of Gods internal purposes, by observation of which rules we may easily resolve
the other part of the disficulty when they only express the series and
dependencies of things which would have their issue and accomplishment if God
by his immediate hand of providence did not cut off the entail of effects upon
their natural causes. Now as to these Prophecyes which concern things
considered in themselves, and not precisely as they are in the counsel of God,
we are to observe these rules.

1. Comminations of judgments to come do not in themselves speak the absolute
futurity of the event, but do only declare what the persons to whom they are
made are to expect, and what shall certainly come to pass, unless God by his
mercy interpose between the threatening and the event. So that comminations do
speak only the debitum poenae and the necessary obligation to punishment; but
therein God does not bind up himself as he does in absolute promises; the
reason is because comminations confer no right to any, which absolute promises
do; and therefore God is not bound to necessary performance of what he
threatens. Indeed the guilt, or obligation to punishment is necessary, where
the offense h^^ been committed to which the threatening was annexed; but the
execution of that punishment does still depend upon Gods arbitrarious will, and
therefore he may suspend or remove it upon serious addresses made to himself in
order to it. For since God was pleased not to take the present forfeiture of
the first grand transgression, but made such a relaxation of that penal Law,
that conditions of pardon were admittable, notwithstanding sentence passed upon
the malefactors, there is a strong ground of presumption in humane nature that
Gods forbearance of mankind notwithstanding sin, does suppose his readiness to
pardon offenders upon their repentance, and therefore that all particular
threatenings of judgments to come do suppose incorrigibleness in those they are
pronounced against: Upon which the foundation of hope is built, that if timely
repentance do intervene, God will remove those judgments which are threatened
against them.

And this was certainly the case of the Ninivites upon Jonas his preaching
among them. For when the threatening Sect. 11.
was so peremptory, Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed, all the hope
they could have of pardon must be from Jonah 3. 4.
the general persuasions of men's souls of Gods readiness to remove judgments
upon repentance. For otherwise there had been no place for any thing but
despair, and not the least encouragement to supplicate the mercy of God, which
we see they did in a most solemn manner after they were convinced these
comminations came from God himself by the mouth of his Prophet. Some think that
Jonas together with the threatening of judgment did intermix exhortations to
repentance; but we can find no probability at all for that on these two
accounts; first, Jonas then would not have been so unwilling to have undertaken
this message; for as far as we can see, the harshness of it was the main reason
he sought to have avoided it by flying to Tarshish. Secondly, Jonas would have
had no pretense at all for his anger and displeasure at Gods pardoning Ninive;
which is most probably conceived to have been, because the Ninivites might now
suspect him to be no true Prophet, because the event answered not his
prediction. Now there had been no reason at all for this, if he had mixed
promises together with his threatenings; for then nothing would have falln out
contrary to his own predictions. And therefore it seems evident that the
message Jonas was sent with, was only the commination of their speedy ruin,
which God did on purpose to awaken them the sooner and with the greater
earnestness to repentance, when the judgment was denounced in so peremptory a
manner; although it seems Jonas had before such apprehensions of the merciful
nature of God and his readiness to pardon, that he might suppose Gods intention
by this Jonah 4. 2.
severe denunciation of judgment, might be only to take occasion upon their
repentance to show his goodness and bounty to them. But this was no part of his
instructions, which he durst not go beyond in his Preaching, what ever his
private opinion might be: for the Prophets were to utter no more in their
Preaching or particular messages then was in their commission, and were not to
mix their own words with the Word of the Lord.

And by this we may further understand the denunciation of death to Hezekiah by
the Prophet Isaiah, Set thy house in Sect. 12. Isa. 38. 1.
order, for thou shall dye and not live. I question not but the Prophet
revealed to Hezekiah as much as God had revealed to him (for to say as
Molinaeus does, that the Prophet spoke Vates l. 1. c. 6.
these words of his own head before he fully understood Gods mind, is very
harsh and incongruous) but God might at first discover to Isaiah not his
internal purpose, but what the nature of the disease would bring him to (unless
his own immediate hand of providence interposed) which message he would have
Isaiah carry to Hezekiah for the trial of his faith, and exciting him to the
more lively acts of grace, and for a further demonstration of Gods goodness to
him in prolonging his life beyond humane probability and the course of second
causes. Now what repugnancy is there to the truth and faithfulness of God, that
God should conceal from his Prophets in their messages the internal purposes of
his will, and in order to the doing good to men should only reveal what would
certainly have come to pass unless himself had otherwise determind it. And thus
the repentance which is attributed to God in reference to these denunciations
of judgments, is far from importing any real mutation in the internal purposes
of God (a rock some have split themselves upon) but it only signifies the
outward changing of the Scene toward men, and acting otherwise then the words
of the Prophets did seem to import; and all the alteration is in the outward
discovery of his will, which is certainly far from being any collusion in God:
Unless we must suppose God so bound up that he has no liberty of using his own
methods for bringing men to repentance, or for trial of his peoples graces, but
must in every instance of his Word declare nothing but his own internal
purposes, which is contrary to the general method of Gods dealing with the
world, which is to govern men by his own Laws, and thereby to awaken them to
duty, and deter from sin by his annexed threatenings, without revealing any
thing of his internal purposes concerning the state and condition of any
particular persons at all: which threatenings of his though pronounced with the
greatest severity, do not speak Gods inward resolutions as to any particular
person, but what all must expect if they continue impenitent and incorrigible.
For the only condition employed in these threatenings being repentance, it
necessarily follows that where that is wanting, these hypothetical comminations
are absolute predictions of what shall certainly come to pass on all those who
are destitute of the condition supposed in them.

So that where any comminations are pronounced by any in a prophetical way
concerning any person or people, and no Sect. 13.
alteration happen at all in them, but they continue impenitent and
incorrigible, there the not coming of them to pass may be a token of a false
Prophet. For in this case the only tacit condition employed in these
threatening Prophecies is supposed to be wanting, and so the comminations must
be understood as absolute predictions: Now in those comminations in Scripture,
which are absolutely expressed, but conditionally understood, we find something
interposing, which we may rationally suppose was the very condition understood.
As Abimelechs restoring of Sarah was the ground why the sentence of death after
it was denounced, was not executed upon him: So Ahabs humiliation, Hezekiah his
earnest prayer, the Ninivites Genesis 20. 7. 1 Kings 21. 19.
repentance, all interposed between sentence and execution, whereby we may be
fully satisfied of the reason why these denunciations did not take effect: But
where the persons continue the same after threatenings that they were before,
there is no reason why the sentence should be suspended, unless we should
suppose it to be a mere effect of the patience and long-suffering of God,
leading men to repentance and amendment of life: Which is the ground the Jews
give, why the not fulfilling of denunciations of judgment was never accounted
sufficient to prove a man a false Prophet; to which purpose these words of
Maimonides are observable in his Iesude Th^rah, where he treats particularly on
the subject of prophecies. If a Prophet foretell sad things, as the death of any
De sund. legis cap. 10. s. 6.
one, or famine, or War, or the like, if these things come not to pass, he
shall not be accounted a false Prophet; neither let them say, hehold he has
foretold, and it comes not to pass; for eurblessed God is slow to anger, and
rich in mercy. and repents of the evil; and it may be that they repent, and
God may spare them, as he did the Ninivites, or defer the punishment, as he did
Hezekiah's. Thus we see that Prophetical comminations do not express Gods
internal purposes, and therefore the event may not come to pass, and yet the
Prophet be a true Prophet.

2. Predictions concerning temporal blessings, do not always Sect. 14.
absolutely speak the certainty of the event, but what God is ready to do if
they to whom they are made continue faithful to him: For which we have
sufficient ground from that place of Jeremiah, 18. 9, 10. At what instant I
shall speak concerning a Kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my
sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the good wherewith I
said I would benefit them. So Isaiah 1. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient,
ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Whereby we
see it evident, that all promises of temporal blessings are not to be taken
absolutely, but with the condition of obedience. But this the Jews can by no
means digest, whose rule is, that all prophecies of good things to come must
necessarily come to pass, or he was no true Prophet who spoke them: For says
Maimon. Whatever good thing God has promised, although Ibid^. 7, 8.
it be promised under a condition, he never revokes it; and we never find that
God repented him of any good thing promised, but in the destruction of the
first Temple, when God had promised to the right^ous they should not die with
the wicked; but it repented him of his words. But it is very plain to any one
that considers the Jewish Interpretations of Scripture, that in them they have
always an eye to themselves, and will be sure not to understand those
Scriptures which seem to thwart their own interest, as is most apparent in the
present case; for the grand reason why the Jews insist so much on the punctual
accomplishment of all promises of good to be the sign of a true Prophet, is to
uphold their own interest in those temporal blessings which are prophesied of
concerning them in the old Testament; although one would think the want of
correspondency in the event in reference to themselves, might make them a
little more tender of the honor of those Prophecies which they acknowledge to
be divine; and have appeared to be so in nothing more then the full
accompllshmen^ of all those threatenings which are denounced against them for
their disobedience, even by the mouth of Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 28. from the 15.
to the end. Can any thing be more plain and evident, then that the enjoyment of
all the privileges conferred upon them, did depend upon the condition of their
continuing faithful to Gods Covenant? The only place of Scripture produced by
them with any plausibility, is that, Ierem. 28. 9. The Prophet which
prophecieth of peace, when the word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then
shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has truly sent him. For reconciling
of which place with those already mentioned, we are to understand that here was
a particular contest between two Prophets, Hananiah and Jeremiah; Jeremiah he
foretold evil to come, though unwillingly, v 6. Hananiah he prophesied peace.
Now Jeremiah, according to Gods peculiar directions and inspiration, appeals to
the event to determine whose Prophecy was the truest: Now says Jeremiah, if
the Prophecy of Hananiah concerning peace be fulfilled, then he is the true
Prophet and I the false. And in this case when two Prophets Prophecy contrary
things, it stands to reason that God will not reveal any thing by the mouth of
his own Prophet which shall not infallibly come to pass, that thereby the truth
of his own Prophet may be fully manifested. Besides Jeremiah refers not merely
to the event foretold, but gives a sudden specimon of his own truth in another
Prophecy concerning the death of Hananiah, which was punctually accomplished
the same year, ver. 17. And which is most considerable to our purpose, both
these Prophets considered the same people under the same circumstances, and
with the same conditions; and so Jeremiah because of their incorrigibleness
foretells desolation certainly to come; notwithstanding this, Hananiah
foretells peace and safety, which was contrary directly to Gods method of
proceeding, and so the falsity of his Prophecy would infallibly be discovered
by the event. So that notwithstanding this instance it appears evident that
predictions of temporal blessings do suppose conditions, and so have not
always the event fulfilled, when the people do not perform their condition of
obedience. And thus we have now laid down the rules whereby the truth of
Prophecyes was to be judged; by which it appears what little need the constant
Prophets had to appeal to miracles to manifest the certainty of Divine
revelation in them. So we have finished our first proposition concerning the
manner of trying Divine revelation in the Prophets God sent among his people.

We now come to the second general proposition concerning Sect. 15. 2. Prop.
the Prophets. Those Prophets whom God did employ upon some extraordinary
message for confirming the truth of the religion established by him, had a
power of miracles conferd upon them in order to that end. So that we must
distinguish the ordinary employment of Prophets which was either instruction or
prediction of future events among Gods own people, from their peculiar messages
when they were sent to give evidence to the truth of that way of religion which
was then settled by Gods own appointment. Now the Prophets generally did suppose
the truth of their religion as owned by those they were sent to, and therefore
it had been very needless employing a power of miracles among them to convince
them of that which they believed already. For we never read among all the
revolts of the people of the Jews that they were lapsed so far as totally to
reject the Law of Moses, (which had been to alter the constitution of their
Commonwealth) although they did enormously offend against the Precepts of it,
and that in those things wherein the honor of God was mainly concernd, as is
most plain in their frequent and gross Idolatry: Which we are not so to
understand as though they wholly cast off the worship of the true God, but they
superinduced (as the Samaritans did) the worship of Heathen Idols with that of
the God of Israel. But when the revolt grew so great and dangerous that it was
ready to swallow up the true worship of God, unless some apparent evidence were
given of the falsity of those Heathen mixtures, and further confirmation of the
truth of the established religion, it pleased God sometimes to send his
Prophets on this peculiar message to the main instruments of this revolt: As is
most conspicuous in that dangerous design of Jeroboam, when he out of a
Politic end set up his two calves in opposition to the Temple at Jerusalem;
and therein it was the more dangerous in that in all probability he designed
not the alteration of the worship it self, but the establishment of it in Dan
and Bethel. For his interest lay not in drawing of the people from the worship
of God, but from his worship at Jerusalem, which was contrary to his 1 King.
12. 27.
design of Cantonizing the Kingdom, and taking the greatest share to himself.
Now that God might confirm his peoples faith in this dangerous juncture of time
he sends a Prophet to Bethel, who by the working of present miracles there,
viz. the renting the Altar and withering of Jeroboams hand, did manifest to
them that these Altars were displeasing to God, 1 Kin. 13. 2.
and that the true place of worship was at Jerusalem. So in that famous
fire-Ordeal for trying the truth of religion between 1 King 18. 38.
God and Baal upon mount Carmel by Elijah, God was pleased in a miraculous way
to give the most pr^gnant testimony to the truth of his own worship, by causing
a fire to come down from heaven and consume the sacrifice, by which the Priests
of Baal were confounded and the people confirmed in the belief of the only true
God; for presently upon the sight of this miracle the people fall on their
faces and say the Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. Whereby we plainly 1
King. 18. 39.
see what clear evidence is given to the truth of that religion which is
attested with a power of miracles. Thus the widow of Sarepta which was in the
Country of Zidon, was brought to believe Elijah to be a true Prophet by his
raising up her son to life. And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know
that thou art a man of God, and that the Word of the Lord by 1 King. 17. 24.
thy mouth is truth. So we see how Naaman was convinced of the true God by his
miraculous cure in Jordan by the appointment of Elisha, Behold now I know that
there is no God in 2 Kings 5. 15.
all the earth but in Israel; by which instances it is demonstrable that either
the faith of all these persons was built upon weak and insufficient grounds, or
that a power of miracles is an evident confirmation of the truth of that
religion which is established by them. For this we see was the great end for
which God did improve any of his Prophets to work miracles, viz. to be as an
evident demonstration of the truth of what was revealed by him. So that this
power of miracles is not merely a motive of credibility, or a probable
inducement to remove prejudice from the person, as many of our Divines speak,
but it does contain an evident demonstration to common sense of the truth of
that religion which is confirmed by them.

And thus we assert it to have been in the case of Moses, the truth of whose
message was attested both among the Sect. 16.
Egyptians and the Israelites by that power of miracles which he had. But
herein we have the great Patrons of Moses our greatest enemies, viz the present
Jews; who by reason of their emnity to the doctrine of Christ which was
attested by unparalleld miracles, are grown very shy of the argument drawn from
thence: In so much that their great Dr. Maimonides lays down this for a
confident maxim De sund. leg^s c. 8. s. 1.
(...) The Israelites did not believe in Moses our Master for the sake of the
miracles which he wrought. Did they not? the more shame for them: and if they
did, the more shame for this great Rabbi thus to belly them. But the reason he
gives for it is, because there may remain some suspicion in ones mind, that all
miracles may be wrought by a power of Magic or Incantation: Say you so? what
when Moses confounded all the Magicians in Egypt, and made themselves who were
the most cunning in these things confess it was the finger of God, and at last
give out as not able to stand before Moses? might one still suspect all this to
be done by a Magical power? Credat Iudaeus Apella, non ego. This is much like
what another of their Doctors says, whom they call the Divine Philosopher,
that Elisha his raising the child Albo. l. 1. cap. 18.
to life, and curing Naamans leprosy; and Daniels escaping the Lions, and
Jonas out of the Whales belly, might all come to pass by the influence of the
stars, or by Pythonisme. Very probable! but it is most true which Vortius there
observes of the Jews, nibil non nugacissimi mortalium fingunt ne cogantur
agnoscere virtute ac digito quasi ipsius Dei Iesum nostrum effecisse miracula
sua. All their design in this, is only to elevate the miracles of our blessed
Savior, and to derogate all they can from the belief of them. Hence they tell
us that nothing is so easy to be done as miracles; the mere recital of the
tetragrammaton will work wonders, and that by this Jeremiah and our Savior did
all their miracles: It is well yet that he did more then one of their own
Prophets had done before him; but where I wonder do we read that ever the
pronouncing of four letters raised one from the dead who had lain four days in
the grave? or by what power did Christ raise himself from the dead, (which was
the greatest miracle of all) could his dead body pronounce the tetragrammaton
to awaken its self with? But Maimonides further tells us that the miracles
which Moses wrought among the Israelites were merely for necessity, and not to
prove the truth of his Divine commission, for which he instanceth in dividing
the red sea, the raining of Manna, and the destruction of Corah and his
accomplices. But setting aside that these two latter were the immediate hand of
God and not miracles done by Moses, yet it is evidence that the intent of them
was to manifest a Divine presence among them; and in the trial of Corah Moses
appeals to Gods immediate Providence to manifest whether God had immediately
employed him or no. For it is evident by the text that the main charge they
laid against Moses was ambition and usurpation; Is it a small thing, say they,
that thou have brought us up out Numb. 16. 13.
of a Land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us? Whereby it is evident
they thought that Moses acted out of a private design, and aimed at his own
honor and authority; which was an imputation of the highest nature that could
be alleged against him. Now see how Moses proceeds to clear himself, (which is
sufficient to stop the mouths of these incredulous Jews) for he lays the
greatest evidence of his Divine commission upon a present miracle. And Moses
said, Hereby shall ye know that the Lord has V. 28, 29.
sent me to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind, If
these men dye the common death of all men, then the Lord has not sent me, etc.
Can any thing be more plain then that the only intent of this miracle was to
make it appear that Moses took not his office upon him, but was immediately
sent and employed by God in what he did. But that which will put an end to this
controversy is Gods giving Moses a power to work miracles for that very end
that the Israelites should believe him, Exodus 8. 8, 9. And can we think they
would have ever left Egypt as they did and followed Moses into the wilderness,
unless they had been fully convinced he was a deliverer sent from God? It is
true (that which the Jews speak so much of) the statio in monte Sina was a
great consirmation both to their own faith and to Moses his according to what
God had told him, Exodus 3. 12. but yet it follows not hence they had no firm
bottom for their faith to stand on before (for then they might have been
drowned in the red sea as well as the Egyptians) but God knowing their
incredulity and readiness to disobey his Law, did at the promulgation of it
testify to their eyes and Ex. 19. 9.
ears his own presence in the midst of them. And this certainly was one of the
greatest miracles of all; and therefore to oppose this to the evidence that is
produced by miracles, is only to oppose a power of working miracles to a power
of doing them. So vain and empty then, so false and fallacious, yea so directly
contrary to holy Scripture is that Axiom of the Jews, Prophetiae verit as non
confirmatur miraculis: for miracles are sufficient evidences of Divine
revelation in any whom God imployes to all but such as are resolved not to
believe them; and as one well says, Pertinaciae nullum remedium posuit Deus;
God never works miracles to convince obstinate Atheists and wilful Infidels.
This now is the first case wherein miracles are to be expected, which is, when
God imployes any upon an extraordinary message, to be as Credentials to confirm
their Divine commission.

CHAP. VII. The eternity of the Law of Moses discussed.
The second case wherein miracles may be expected, when a Divine positive Law
is to be repealed, and another way of worship established in stead of it. The
possibility in general of a repeal of a Divine Law asserted; the particular
case of the Law of Moses disputed against the Jews: the matter of that Law
proved not to be immutably obligatory; because the ceremonial precepts were
required not for themselves, but for some further end; that proved from
Maimonides his confession: the precepts of the Ceremonial Law frequently
dispensed with while the Law was in force. Of the Passover of Hezekiah, and
several other instances. It is not inconsistent with the wisdom of God to
repeal such an established Law. Abravanels arguments answered. Of the
perfection of the Law of Moses, compared with the Gospel. Whether God has ever
declared he would never repeal the Law of Moses. Of adding to the precepts. Of
the expressions seeming to imply the perpetuity of the Law of Moses. Reasons
assigned why those expressions are used, though perpetuity be not employed. The
Law of Moses not built upon immutable reason, because many particular precepts
were founded upon particular occasions, as the customs of the Zabii; many
ceremonial precepts thence deduced out of Maimonides; and because such a state
of things was foretold, with which the observation of the Ceremonial Law would
be inconsistent. That largely discovered from the Prophecyes of the old
Testament.

I Now come to the second case wherein miracles may be Sect. 1.
justly expected, which is, when something which has been before established
by Divine Law, is to be repealed, and some other way of worship to be set up in
stead of it. Two things are very necessary to be spoken to for the clearing of
this proposition; first, whether a Law once established by God himself be
capable of a repeal; Secondly, What necessity there is of miracles to manifest
Gods intention of repealing a former Law. These two contain the main foundation
of the dispute between the Jews and us, viz. whether the Law of Moses was ever
to be laid aside, and whether the miracles of our blessed Savior were
sufficient evidences of Gods intention by him to repeal the former Law
established by Moses? I begin with the first, whether a Divine Law in general,
or the Law of Moses in particular may be abrogated or repealed, after God
himself has made it evident that the promulgation of it was from himself. This
must be confessed the strongest and most plausible plea the present Jews have
for their Infidelity, and therefore the eternity of the Law of Moses, is made
by them one of the fundamental articles of their present Creed, and is pleaded
for with the greatest subtilty by their great R. Abravan^l, who spends his
whole 13. Chapter de capite fidei upon it, but with what success, will be seen
in our clearing of it. There are but three things can be supposed as the
grounds why a Law once promulged by God himself, should not be capable of
repeal; and those are either first, because the things themselves commanded in
that Law are of such a nature, that they are not capable of being dispensed
with: Or secondly, that it is not consistent with the wisdom of God to repeal a
Law once established: Or thirdly, that the reason of the Law continuing always
the same, it would argue mutability in God to revoke that Law, and establish
another instead of it: If we can therefore demonstrate, that the matter of the
Law of Moses is of a positive and mutable nature, that it is suitable to the
wisdom of God to alter it, and that sufficient account in reason may be given
for the alteration of it, then there can be no imaginable necessity that a Law
once having God for his Author, must therefore derive from him an eternal and
immutable obligation.

First then as to the matter of the Law; and here it must be Sect. 2.
supposed, that in the matter of controversy between us and the Jews, the
question is not of any of those things which are therefore commanded, because
they are intrinsecally good, as the precepts of the natural or moral Law, but
of those things which are therefore only good, because God commands them, i. e.
things merely positive, whose worth and value arises not from the intrinsic
weight of the things, but from the external impress of divine authority upon
them. Now it is no question on either hand whether God may require these things
or no, nor whether these things will be acceptable unto God, so long as he
requires them; but whether, when once required, the obligation to them can
never cease. Such kind of things among the Jews we suppose all the rites and
ceremonies of the Law to be; viz. circumcision, distinction of meats and days,
customs of sacrificing, and such like, and whatever other Laws respected them
as a distinct and peculiar Commonwealth. All these we say are such as do not
carry an immutable obligation along with them; and that on these accounts.

First, because these things are not primarily required for 1.
themselves, but in order to some further end. Things that are required upon
their own account, carry an indispensable obligation in them to their
performance; but where things are commanded not for themselves, but the
Legislator does express some particular grounds of requiring them, there the
end and intention of the Legislator is the measure of their obligation. To
which purpose Maimonides excellently speaks when he says, That the particular
manner of worship among More Nevoch. p. 3. c. 32.
the Jews, as sacrifices and oblations, were secundum intentionem secundam Dei,
Gods secondary intention and design; but prayer, invocation, and the like, were
nearer Gods primary intention: Now, says he, for the first, they are no
further acceptable to God, then as all the circumstances of time, place, and
persons are observed, which are prescribed by God himself; but the latter are
acceptable in any person, time, or place. And for this cause, says he, it is
that we find the Prophets often reproving men for their too great sedulity in
bringing oblations, and inculcating this to them, that God did not intend these
as the principal instances of his worship, and that God did not need any of
these things. So 1 Samuel 15. 22. Behold to obey is better then sacrifice, and to
hearken, then the fat of rams: Isa. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me? says the Lord. And especially Ierem. 7. 22, 23. For I
spoke not to your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them
forth out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings; but this thing I
commanded them, saying. Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be
my people. Of which words Maimonides says, Scrupulum moverunt omnibus, quos
mihi videre aut audire contigit; For say they, how can it be that God did not
commandthem concerning sacrifices, when great part of the Law is about them?
But Maimonides well resolves the doubt thus, That Gods primary intention, and
that which he chiefly looked at was obedience; but Gods intention in sacrifices
and oblations, was only to teach them the chief thing, which was obedience.
This then is of the number of those things which are spoken absolutely, but to
be understood comparatively, as, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. My
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. It is not you that speak, but the
holy Ghost, etc. So that we see all the goodness which is in these things, is
conveyed into them by that which is morally good, which is obedience; and God
did never regard the performance of those Laws any further then as it was an
expression of obedience; and it was conjoined with those other moral duties
which were most agreeable to the Divine nature. And in this sense many
understood that difficult place, Ezekiel. 20. 25. And I gave them (...) statutes
that were not good, i. e. say they, comparatively with these things which were
simply and in themselves good; to which purpose they give this rule, aliquid
negatur inesse alicui, quod alterius comparatione existimatur exiguum. But I
rather think that which the Chaldee Paraphrast suggests, and others explain
further, to be the meaning of that place, viz. that by the precepts that were
not good, is meant the cruel and tyrannical impositions of those enemies God
for their sins did deliver them over to, which were far from being acceptable
to them, which is frequently the sense of good in Scripture. Thus we see one
reason why the ceremonial precepts do not in themselves imply an immutable
obligation, because they are not commanded for themselves, but in order to a
further end.

Because God has frequently dispensed with the ceremonial precepts when they
were in greatest force, if the end of them Sect. 3. 2.
could be attained without them. Thus the precept of circumcision slept during
the Israelites travels in the wilderness. Thus David eat of the shewbread,
which is expressly forbidden in the Law; the Jews think to evade this by
distinguishing Exodus 29. 33.
between the bread of confession in the Eucharistical offering mentioned Levit.
7. 13. and the proper shewbread: Now they say David eat only of the first, and
not of the second; but this is glossa Aurelianensis, which overthrows the Text;
for it is expressly said, that the ground why the Priest gave him holy bread,
was because there was none there but (...) the shewbread, 1 Samuel 21. 6. A like
violation of the Law without reproof, is commonly supposed by the Jews to have
been in the siege of Jericho, viz. in the case of the Sabbath. But it is more
plain in that Anomalous Passover observed by Hezekiah, which many of the Jews
themselves acknowledge was not observed as the second Passover provided by the
Law to be celebrated on the 14 day of the second month by those who were
debarred of the first for their legal uncleanness; but they suppose it to have
been intended for the legal Passover; only because the fourteenth Numb. 9. 11.
of Nisan was passed before the sanctification of the Temple was finished, lest
they should celebrate none at all that year, they tell us that Hezekiah with
the consent of 2 Chronicles. 29. 17.
the Rulers, did make an Intercalation that year of a whole month, and so
Nisan was reckoned for the second Adar. and Iiar for Nisan, from whence they
say that Hezekiah did intercalate Nisan in Nisan, that is, added another Nisan
V. Seldom. de Amo civili Jud. cap. 9.
to the first. But where do we read any such thing permitted in the Law as the
celebrating the first Passover the 14 of the second month? But granting that
it was observed as a second Passover, because of the want of legal
sanctification both in Priests and people; yet we find great irregularities in
the observation of it; for it is expressly said, That a multitude of the people
had not cleansed themselves, yet they did eat the Passover otherwise then it
was written. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18.
And yet it is said upon Hezekiah's prayer, that the Lord hearkened to
Hezekiah, and healed every one. So that we see God himself did dispense with
the strict ceremonial precepts v. 20.
of the Law, where men did look after the main and substantial parts of the
worship God required from them. Nay God himself has expressly declared his own
will to dispense with the ritual and ceremonial Law, where it comees to stand
in competition with such things as have an internal goodness in them, when he
says he desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
burnt-offerings. Thus Hos. 6. 6.
we plainly see that the ceremonial Law, however positive it was, did yield as
to its obligation, when any thing that was moral, stood in competition with it.
And so the Jews themselves suppose an open violation of the judicial Law to
have been in the hanging up of Saul's sons a long time together, directly
contrary to Deuteronomy. 21. 23. which they conceive 2 Samuel 21. 9, 10.
to have been from the 16. of Nisan to the 17. of Marchesvan, which is as much
as from our March to September, whereas the Law says expressly that the body of
one that is hanged shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shall in
any wise bury him that day. One of the Jewish Rabbis, as G. Vorstius tells us,
is so troubled at this, that he Not. in Aboav. c. 13.
wishes that place in Samuel expunged out of Scripture, that the name of God
might be sanctified. But whether this were done (...) by the command of the
Oracle or no, or whether only by a general permission, we see it was acceptable
unto God; for upon that the Gibeonites famine was removed, and God was
entreated for the Land. Thus we have now proved that there is no immutable and
indispensable obligation which arises from the things themselves.

Secondly, it is no ways inconsistent with the wisdom of Sect. 4.
God to repeal such a Law when once established. The main argument of that
learned R. Abravanel, whereby he would establish the eternity of the Law of
Moses, is fetched from Rosh Amanana ^. 13.
hence, That this Law was the result of the wisdom of God, who knows the
suitableness of things he appoints to the ends he appoints them for, as God
has appointed bread to be the food of man's body: Now we are not to enquire why
God has appointed bread and no other thing to be the food of man; no more,
says he, are we to enquire why God has appointed this Law rather then another
for the food of our souls; but we are to rest contented with the counsels of
God, though we understand not tht reasons of them. This is the substance of
that argument, which he more largely deduceth. To which we answer, that his
argument holds good for obedience to all Gods positive precepts of what kind or
nature soever they be, so long as we know their obligation to continue; but all
the question is, whether every positive precept must always continue to oblige.
And thus far his similitude will hold good, that whatever God does command, we
are to look upon it to be as necessary to our souls, as bread to our bodies;
but hence it follows not that our souls must be always held to the same
positive precepts, any more then our bodies to the same kind of food. Nay, as
in our bodies we find some kind of food always necessary, but the kind of it to
alter according to age, health, and constitutions; so we say some kind of
Divine revelation is always necessary; but God is graciously pleased to temper
it according to the age and growth of his people; so he fed them as with milk
in their nonage, with a ritual and ceremonial Law, and trained them up by
degrees under the Nursery of the Prophets, till the Church was grown to age,
and then God fed it with the strong meat which is contained in Gods revelation
of his will by the Gospel of his Son. And therein was abundantly seen Gods
(...), his variegated wisdom, that he made choice of such excellent and
proportionable ways to his peoples capacity to prepare them gradually for that
full and complete revelation which was reserved for the time of the appearance
of the true Messiah in the world. For can any thing be more plain then the
gradual progress of Divine revelation from the beginning of the world? That
fair resemblance and portraicture of God himself, and his will upon his word
(if I may so express it) had its ground work laid upon man's first Apostasy, in
the promise made Genesis 3. 15. whereon some further lines were drawn in the times
of the Patriarchs; but it had its (...), it was shadowed out the most in the
typical and ceremonial Law, but was never filled up to the life, nor had its
perfect (...), till the Son of God himself appeared unto the world. If then it
be inconsistent with the wisdom of God to add any thing to the Law of Moses,
why not to the revelation made to Adam or the Patriarchs? or especially to the
seven precepts of Noah, which they suppose to have been given to all mankind
after the flood? If it were not repugnant to the wisdom of God to superadd
rituals and ceremonials to morals and naturals, why shall it be to take down
the Scaffolds of Ceremonies, when Gods spiritual Temple the Church of God is
come to its full height? Is there not more reason that rituals should give
place to substantials, then that such should be superinduced to morals?

There are only two things can be pleaded by the Jews why it should be more
repugnant to the wisdom of God to Sect. 5.
add to the Law of Moses, then to any former revelation, which are the greater
perfection they suppose to be in this revelation above others, and that God in
the promulgation of it did express that he would never alter it. But both these
are manifestly defective and insufficient in order to the end for which they
are produced. For first, what evidence is there that the Law of Moses contained
so great perfection in it, as that it was not capable of having any additions
made to it by God himself? We speak not now of the perfection of the Moral Law,
which it is granted contained in it the foundation of all positive precepts;
for this we never contend Ps. 19. 10.
for the abrogation of, but the ritual Law is that we meddle with; and is it
possible any men should be so little befriended by reason as to think this to
be the utmost pitch of what God could reveal to the world as to the way of his
own worship? Let any indifferent rational person take the precepts of the
Gospel, and lay them in the balance with those of the Ceremonial Law, and if
he makes any scruple of deciding on which side the over-weight lies, we may
have cause to suspect him forsaken of that little reason which gave him the
name of man. Let but the fifth of Matthew be laid against the whole book of
Leviticus, and then see whether contains the more excellent precepts, and more
suitable to the Divine nature? I speak not this to disparage any thing which
had once God for the Author of it, but to let us see how far God was from the
necessity of natural agents to act to the height of his strength in that
discovery of his Will. God is wise as well as righteous in all his ways; as he
can command nothing but what was just; so he will command nothing but what is
good, nay excellent in its kind. But though all the Starr^ be in the same
firmament, yet one star differs from another in glory; though they may be all
pearls, yet some may be more orient then others are; every place of holy
Scripture may have its crown, but some may have their aureolae, a greater
excellency, a fuller and larger capacity then the other has; every parcel of
Divine revelation may have some perfection in its kind, yet there may be some
monstra perfectionis in Scaligers expression, that may far outvy the glory and
excellency of the rest. Can we think the mists and umbrages of the Law could
ever cast so glorious a light as the Sun of righteousness himself in his
Meridian elevation? As well may we think a dark shady passage more magnificent
and glorious then the most Princely Palace, a picture drawn in Charcoale more
exquisite and curious then the lines of Apelles, some imperfect rudiments more
exact and accurate then the most elabarate work, as go about to compare the Law
of Moses with the Gospel of Jesus Christ in point of excellency and perfection.
Let the Jews then boast never so much of their gradus Mosaicus, and how much it
exceeded the degree of revelation in other Prophets, we know if his light be
compared with what the Gospel communicates, Moses himself saw but as in a glass
darkly, and not in speculo lucido, as the Jews are wont to speak. We honor
Moses much, but we have learnt to honor him at whose transfiguration he was
present more; neither can that be thought any disparagement to him who
accounted the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.

But it may be, though the Law in its self be not so absolutely perfect, yet
God may have declared he will never alter it, and Sect. 6.
then it is not consistent with Divine wisdom to repeal it. Very true: God will
never alter what he has said he will not; but where is it that he has thus
bound up himself? Is it in that noted place to this purpose, Thou shall not add
thereto nor diminish from it. So indeed Maimonides argues; but Deuteronomy. 12. 32.

De sund. leg. c. 9. s. 1.

Ikkarim. l. 3. c. 14.


therein more like a Jew then himself; and yet one of his own Nation therein
far more ingenuous then he, gives a most sufficient answer to it, which is R.
Ios. Albo whose words are thus produced by Vorstius and others; the Scripture
only admonishes us, that we should not add to nor diminish from Gods commands
according to our own wills; but what hinders says he, but God himself may
according to his own wisdom add or diminish what he pleases? But are they in
good earnest when they say God bound up himself by this speech? whence came
then all the Prophetical revelations among the Jews? did these add nothing to
the Law of Moses, which was as much the will of God when revealed by them; as
any thing was revealed by Moses himself? or will they say that all those things
were contained for the substance in the Law of Moses, as to what concerned
practice? very true; but not in the Ceremonial, but the Moral Law; and so we
shall not stick to grant that the whole duty of man may be reduced to that. But
if adding to the precepts be the doing of Gods commands in another way then he
has prescribed, and diminishing from them be merely not to do what God has
commanded, as some conceive, then these words are still more remote from the
sense affixed on them by the incredulous Jews. For why may not God himself add
to his own Laws or alter the form of them, although we are always bound
directly to follow Gods declared will? May not God enlarge his own will, and
bring his Scholars from the rudiments of their nonage to the higher knowledge
of those who are full grown? or must the world of necessity do that which the
old Roman so much abhorred, senescere in elementis, wax gray in learning this
A, B, C? or was the Ceremonial Law like the China Characters, that the world
r^ight spend its age in conning of them? But it appears that there was no other
meaning in that strict prohibition, then that men should not of their own heads
offer to find out new ways of worship as Jeroboam did, but that Gods
revelation of his own will in all its different degrees was to be the adaequate
rule of the way and parts of his own worship. And I would fain know of the Jews
whether their own severe and strict prohibitions of things not at all forbidden
in the Law of God, and that on a religious account, as (...) a boundary to the
Law, come not nearer the adding to Gods Law, then Gods own further declaration
of his will does? All the dispute then must be, not whether God may add to his
own Law, but whether the Gospel be a prohibited addition to the Law of Moses,
that is, whether it be only the invention of men, or it be the express
declaration of the will of God? As to which controversy, he is no true
Christian who dare not readily join issue with them, and undertake to prove by
all the arguments by which they believe the Law of Moses to have been of Divine
revelation, that the Gospel of Christ is a clear manifestation of the Will of
God. But of that afterward.

From hence it is evident that God has not by this place Sect. 7.
tied up himself from any surther manifestation of his mind beyond the Law of
Moses; but it may be they may put greater confidence in those expressions which
seem necessarily to imply a perpetual and unalterable obligation in the Law of
Moses: For, says the late learned Rabbi Manasse Ben Israel, If by such
expressions as those are used in Scripture Council. in Levil. 9. 7.
which seem to import the perpetuity of the Law of Moses, somewhat ^lse should
be meant then they seem to express; what did Moses and the Prophets in using
them but lay a stumbling block in the ways of men, whereas they might have
spoken clearly and told us there should a time come when the Ceremonial Law
should oblige no longer? This being a charge of so high a nature, must not be
dismissed without a particular enquiry into the expressions which are the
ground and reason of it. The places most insisted on by the Jews, are Deuteronomy. 29.
29. Things which are revealed belong to us and to our children (...) for ever.
So Levit. 23. 14. the precept of offering the first fruits is there called
(...) a statute for ever; and that of the Passover, Exodus 12. 17. where the
same expression is used. From hence they infer that no alteration can happen as
to the Ceremonial Law since God himself has declared that it shall continue
for ever. To this common argument of the Jews, it is in general replied that
the word in which the main force of the argument lies, does not carry with it
an absolute perpetuity, but it signifies according to the subject it is joined
with. So when it is applied to God, it signifies oternity, not so much from the
mere importance of the word, as from the necessary existence of the Divine
nature. Thence Maimonides himself can say, Proinde sciendumest quod Olam non
necessario significet aeternitatem, More Nevoch. p. 2. c. 28.
nisi ei conjungatur Ed ((...) vel (...)) idque vel post illud ut Olam vaed vel
ante Ad Olam. Although this rule of his has no certainty at all in it, as
appears from his collection of it, which is because it is said, Psalm. 10. 16.
The Lord he is King Olam vaed, for ever^ and ever: but as I said already, that
is not from the signification of the word, but the nature of the thing. And it
is most plain in Scripture that (...) is so far from implying a necessary
p^rpetuity, that it is applied to such things as can have no long duration, as
Exodus 21. 6. and he shall serve him (...) that is (as the Jews themselves
expound it) to the next Iubil^e though it were near or far off. So 1 Samuel 1.
22. Where Samuel is said to abide before the Lord (...) for ever, where we
find Maimonides his Ad Olam in a sense very far short of eternity; this is so
plain that the formerly cited R Joseph Albo does in terms confess it, and
produces a multitude of other places to the same purpose. ^or which though he
be sufficiently censured by his Brethren, yet we may see there may be some
ingenuity left in a Jewish Rabbi, even in the grand dispute concerning the
eternity of the Law of Moses.

All the difficulty now is to assign some rational accounts why such precepts
which God did not intend should be always Sect. 8.
obligatory, yet should be enforced upon them in such expressions which may
seem at least to imply a perpetuity. Of which these may be given. First, That
these precepts to which these expressions are annexed, should not be looked on
as mere ambulatory Laws that did only concern them in their travels through the
wilderness, and not continue obligatory when they were settled in Canaan. For
which purpose we are to observe, that though all the Laws were given in one
body in the wilderness, yet the obligation to all of them did not commence at
the same time, neither were they to continue for the same duration; these three
sorts of precepts may be observed among them; first such as concerned them only
in their present condition, as that about the Tabernacle, which was then a
moveable Temple among them, suitable to their condition; but when they were
settled, God was to have a settled house too. So that precept of going without
the camp, Deuteronomy. 23. 12. had an immediate respect to their peregrination.
Secondly, such precepts as were given them, but they were not bound to perform
them till their setlement in Canaan, as driving out the Canaanites, Numb. 33.
52. building the Temple in the place which God should choose, erecting
judicatories in their several Cities, choosing a King, etc. Thirdly, there were
such precepts as concern them where ever they were, whether in the wilderness
or in Canaan; now these are the precepts which are said to be perpetual. This
is the account given of it by H. Grotius; but because De Verit. Rel. Christ. l.
5. s. 7.
this may be liable to some exceptions, I therefore add, Secondly, That the
reason of those expressions being annexed to the precepts of the Ceremonial
Law, is, because they were to continue obligatory till such a remarkable period
of time came which should alter the state of things among them. And such a
period of time the coming of the Messiah is by themselves supposed to be, when
in their famous computation they make three Epocha's, before the Law, un^er the
Law, and the coming of the Messiah. And it is evident yet by them, that they do
still expect a wonderful alteration of the State of things when the Messiah
comes; does it not therefore stand to reason that (...) should be added to such
things which were to continue till so great an alteration as should be on the
coming of the Messiah, especially if the coming of the Messiah had been deferd
so long as they falsely suppose it to be? But however, granting that a new
series of times or (...) is to commence from the Messiah, there is very great
reason why that expression should be added to those things which were to
continue as long as the (...) did, i. e. till M^ssias came, which we freely
acknowledge. And in this sense is (...) often taken for such a duration of
things which had some remarkable period to conclude it, as in the case of the
Iubilee in the servant mentioned, and the special employment which God called
Samuel to in his case, as to the event, or the end of his life in Hannahs
designation, when she said he should attend upon the Lord for ever. Thirdly,
These precepts are said to endure for ever, which would still have continued
obligatory, unless God himself had altered the obligation of them, by a new
revelation of his will. For in this case it is most certain that all positive
precepts coming immediately from God, do carry with them an unalterable
obligation, unless the Legislator himself do in as evident a way repeal them as
he did once establish them; that is, in such Laws which depend merely upon Gods
positive and arbitrary will. For in this case God allows none to alter any
thing concerning his Laws; but indispensable obedience is our duty till God
himself repeal his former Laws. And this we assert to be the case in the
Gospel. So that it appears plainly that it implies nothing inconsistent with
the wisdom of God to repeal an established positive Law, though some
expressions to prejudiced minds seem to imply a perpetuity in it.

We come therefore to the third thing which may make a positive Law
unalterable, which is, when the reason of it is Sect. 9.
immutable; for then, say they, it would argue mutability in God to repeal it.
If we can therefore make it evident that the ceremonial Law was not established
on an immutable reason, and that the reason on which it was established does
suppose a state of things to come, in which it should expire, then there cannot
be the least pretense of mutability in God on the repeal of such a Law. First,
that it was not established upon an immutable reason: The immutable reason of a
Law must either be fetched from the nature of the things commanded, or the
grounds of the establishing of it; we have already proved that the nature of
the positive precepts of the ceremonial Law do not carry in them an intrinsecal
goodness. And here the Sophistry of the Jew^ is apparently discovered, that
when they are pressed with this, they take sanctuary in the Decalogue, or some
spiritual precepts, which comprehend in them the general foundation of the Law,
as Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. whereas these are
very remote from the matter in controversy, which concerns not what precepts
were moral in their Law, but what were purely ceremonial; which were so far
from being founded on an immutable reason that the particular occasions of the
giving of many of them, is particularly assigned by their own Writers;
especially in the main parts of the ceremonial worship of God among them, the
reasons of which Maimonides says may be deduced from the customs of the
Zabaists, the knowledge of whose opinions and customs, he tells us, is porta
magna ad reddendas praeceptorum More Nevoch. l. 3. cap. 29.
causas, gives much light to the Law of Moses; and particularly of himself he
says, quod multarum legum rations and causae mihi innotuerint ex cegnitione
fidei, rituum and ^ultus Zabiorum; that he came to the right understanding of
many of the Laws of Moses by his knowledge in the rites and customs of these
Zabaists. Granting therefore the hypothesis of this learned Rabbi, that the
precepts of the Law had most of them a particular respect to the Idolatrous
customs of these people; what will hence follow but only this, that the reason
of the ceremonial precepts did respect the customs in use when they were given,
and so are not founded upon an immutable reason? And the more the precepts are
whose reason is to be fetched from hence, the more plain and evident is the
thing we intend by it, viz. that the ceremonial Law is not founded upon an
unalterable reason.

Now from this one head of the Idolatrous customs of those Sect. 10.
Nations about them has that learned Author deduced the reasons of very many
of the most obscure commands of the ceremonial Law: As that concerning rounding
the corners Lev. 19. 27.
of their heads, which Herodotus tells us was the custom of the Arabians, and
others of the Babylonian Priests; by both V. Voss. in Maim. de Idol. c. 12.
which the Zabii may be meant, the superstition of the Zabii being Chaldean, as
I have showed already, and their name, as some conceive, from Saba the son of
Chus, whose posterity were seated in Arabia, near to the red Sea; and that
which confirms this opinion, is, that the Sabeans did as Philostorgius says,
worship the Sun and Moon, as the Zabaists did in Maimonides; and withal
Bochart us makes it evident from Strabo, that some of the Babylonians called
Gerrhaei, Phaleg. l. 4. cap. 8.
possessed themselves of the Country of the Sabaeans, whereby this originally
Chaldaick superstition might spread its self in these parts near the confines
of Judea, which might be the cause why all those rites which were used by these
Idolatrous people, are so severely forbidden to the Jews: God thereby setting
up a wall of separation between his people and the Nations round about them, by
making the customs of the Jews almost Antipodes to theirs; as those of Iapan
are to them of China. Upon the same ground it is supposed that other precept
was made against wearing a garment Lev. 19. ^. 19.
of linen and woollen, because the Idolatrous Pri^sts used to go so clothed,
as Maimonides tells us out of their books, and likewise that prohibition of a
woman's wearing the gar^ns of a More Nev^ch l. 3. c. 37.

Deu 22. 5.


man, and a man's wearing the garments of a woman, is very probably supposed to
have had its original from that Idolatrous custom mentioned by the same
Author, ut vir gestet V^stimentum muliebre coloratum quando stat coram stella
Veneris; simili^er ut muli^r induat loricam and arma bellica quando stat V.
Seld^n de Das yris, sy^^. 2. c^p 4.
coram stella Martis; but that Author does not deny a further reason to be
couched in it for the preservation of public honesty. Many other precepts are
drawn from the same fountain by that same Author, as the sowing of diverse seeds
in the same ground; the forbidding the eating of the fruit of Lev. 19. 19.
their trees for the first three years after they came to Canaan; that being
the furthest time wherein the trees of their own Lev. 19. 23.
plantation would begin to bear in that Country. Now it was the custom of all
those Idolatrous people, that the first time an^ tree did bear, part of the
fruit was to be burnt up in an offering to the Idol, and the other part eaten
in the Idol-temple; or else they supposed their trees would never prosper: Now
in opposition to this, God bids them bring the fruit of the fourth year to him,
and eat of the fifth themselves, that it may yield unto you the increase
thereof. So the Idolaters threatened all parents that their children would never
Lev. 19. 24, 25.
live, unless they caused them to pass thorough the fire; from which custom
Main-onides sa^^h, some even in his time would take the children that were new
born, and move them up and down over a fire wherein odoriferous smells were
cast: Thence comes that strict prohibition of giving the children to Moloch,
which was by that custom of passing thorough the fire. To this same Head, the
sa^e Author refers that of not eating Lev. 20. 2, 3.

Genesis 9. 4.


the member of a living creature, which we render flesh with the life thereof;
which was forbidden, as he elsewhere tells us, not only for avoiding cruelty
but because the Heathen Nations were wont in their Idolatrous Feasts to take a
More Nevoch. p. 3. cap. 48.
member off from a living creature, and eat it afterw^rds; and in them likewise
he supposes they used the boiling the flesh and the milk together, which,
says he, besides that it affords a most gross nourishment savours of their
Idolatrous practices too, and therefore, says he, it is observable that twice
where this precept is mentioned, it follows that of the solemn appearance of
Exodus 23. 17, 19. 34. 26.
the Males at Jerusalem thrice a year, whereby it seems to be employed, that
this action had relation to some great solemnity. These and several other
precepts of the Law of Moses are deduced by that very learned Rabbi from
Idolatrous customs, as the occasions of them; which seem to have the more
reason in them, because that God did in the general so strictly forbid the Jews
to walk after the Lev. 20. 23. c. Celsum. l. 4.
custom of the Nations about them. Thence Origin takes notice of the (...); for
which he says, they were (...), reproached by the Heathens, because their Laws
and Polity were so different from the custom of other Nations. Thus we see then
that many precepts of the Ceremonial Law were founded, neither on the goodness
of the things themselves, nor on any unalterable reason, but were enforced on a
peculiar reason on the people of the Jews at that time, as they were a people
separated from the rest of the world for the worship of the true God. And for
the other great offices wherein their Religion did so much consist, viz.
Sacrifices, distinction of meats, observation of Festivals, circumcision, and
such like, The particular account and reason of them is either evident in the
Law its self, or fully acknowledged by their own Writers, that it is here
superfluous to insist on them: Especially since so many have done that so
largely De verit. Rel. Christianae l. 5.
already (particularly Grotius) whose Labors I intend not to transcribe.

I come therefore to the second thing, which is, that the Sect. 11.
Ceremonial Law was so far from being founded on an immutable reason, that
while it was in its greatest force such a state of things was plainly foretold,
with which the observation of that Law would be inconsistent. For which we are
to consider, that though the Law of Moses seemed outwardly to respect the
temporal advantages of the people embracing it in the Land of Canaan; yet there
was a S^ring of Spiritual Promises whose head was higher then Jordan was, that
ran down from the Patriarchs, was more and fully opened to some of them, which
^^ough it seemed to run under ground in the midst of the Ceremonial
observations of the Law; yet it frequently brake forth and opened its self in
the midst of them, and by degrees in the Prophetical Age did make its self a
larger Channel, till in the time of the Messiah by its force and violence it
overthrew those banks which stood in the way of it, and overspread the face of
the whole earth. It is evident by the whole series of the Scripture of the Old
Testament, that Gods ultimate intention was not to confine the saving knowledge
of his will only to the Jews; for the great promise to Abraham was, That in his
seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed; And as Abraham rejoiced to
see that day afar off; so good Jacob when he leaned on his Jacobs staff, took
the height of that day star from on high, which though like some of the fixed
stars, he might not for some time be visible to the inferior world; yet he
foretold the time when he should descend into a lower orb, and become
conspicuous in our Horizon. And consequently to his appearance in the world,
would be the drawing not so much the eyes as the hearts of the world to him;
for no sooner is it mentioned that Shiluh comes when the Scepter departs from
Judah; but it immediately follows, and to him shall the gathering of the Genesis
49. 10.
people be. Thus we see before ever the Law of Moses came to enclose the people
of the Jews as Gods peculiar people, there was a design on foot, for enlarging
the bounds of Gods inheritance, and making the uttermost parts of the earth his
Sons possession. Can we then think that the Law which came afterward, could
disanull the Covenant made 430. years before, as the Apostle excellently
reasons? Can we believe the Gal. 4. 17.
Mosaical dispensation was the utmost of what God did intend, when God had
before promised that the blessing of Abraham should come upon us Gentiles also?
to which purpose it is very observable that Abraham was justified not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision; for he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of faith, being uncircumcised, Romans 4. 10, 11.
that he might be the Father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also. Whereby it is
evident that the great blessin^s promised to Abraham, did not respect him
merely as Progenitor of the Israelites, but in a higher capacity, as Father of
the faithful; and that the ground of his acceptance with God did not depend on
any Ceremonial Rite, such as circumcision was, God imputing his faith for
righteousness before his being circumcised. But because the time was not yet
come wherein that grand mystery of man's salvation by the death of the Son of
God was to be revealed; therefore when God called the Nation of the Jews from
their bondage, he made choice of a more obscure way of representing this
mystery to them through all the umbrages of the Law: And withal enforced his
precepts with such terrible sanctions of curses to all that continued not in
all that was written in that Law to do it, to make them the more apprehensive
that the ground of their acceptance with God, could not be the performance of
the precepts of that Law, but they ought to breath after that higher
dispensation wherein the way and method of man's salvation should be fully
revealed when the fullness of time was come. Now therefore God left them under
the Tutorage and Paedagogy of the Law, which spoke so severely to them, that
they might not think this was all God intended in order to the happiness of
men, but that he did reserve some greater thing in store to be enjoyed by his
people when they were come to age.

So that though the ceremonies of the Law had not a Sect. 12.
mouth to speak out Christ; yet tbey had a hand to point to him; for they were
the shadow or dark representation of that which was to be drawn afterward to
the greatest life. And this was understood by all those whose hearts were
carried beyond the outward, sapless Letter of the Law, to the more inward and
spiritual meaning of it (there being an (...) and (...) in the Law as well as
Philosophy) and these mysteries were not so veiled and hidden, but all that
were (...) fully initiated, might fully understand them; which made up that
true spiritual Cabala, which was constantly preserved among the true
Israelites, which was more largely commented on by the Prophets of succeeding
Ages; whose care it was to unlock this Cabala, and to raise up the hearts of
the people in a higher expectation of the great things which were to come.
Thence we not only read of the solemn prayer of the Church of the Jews, that
the knowledge of God might be dispersed over all the Nations of the earth, but
we have many prophecies that when the mountain Psalm. 67. 2.
of the Lords house should be exalted, all nations should flow unto it: that
from the rising of the Sun to the going Isa. 2. 2.
down thereof, Gods name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every ^lace
incense should be offered to his name, and a Mal. 1. 11.
pure offering; for his name shall be great among the Heathen. That the
Inscription on the High Priests forehead, Holiness to the Lord, should by
reason of the large diffusion of a Spirit of Holiness in the days of the
Gospel, be set upon the bells of Horses, and that the pots in the Lords house
should Zach. 14. 20.
be as bowls before the altar, i. e. that when the Levitical service should be
laid aside, and that Holiness which was that appropriated to the Priests and
Instruments of the Temple, should be discerned in those things which seemed
most remote from it. That a Priesthood after another order then that of Aaron
should be established, viz. after the order of Melchisedek; Psalm. 110. 4, 5. 6.
and that he that was the Priest after this order, should judge among the
Heathen, and wound the heads over many Countries; that in the day of his power
the people should (not be frighted to obedience with thunderclaps, and
earthquakes, Ver. 3.
as at Mount Sinai) but should come and yield themselves as a free will
offering unto him, and yet their number be as great as the drops of the dew
which distill in the morning. That God out of other nations would take unto
himself for Priests and for Levites; that the desire of all Nations ^sa. 66.
21. Hag. 2. 7. Mal. 3. 1.
should speedily come; that the Messenger of the Covenant should come into his
Temple; nay that seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy
holy City; that then the vision and prophecy should be sealed up; that the
Sacrifice Dan. 9. 24. 26, 27.
and oblation should be caused to cease; that the City and the sanctuary should
be destroyed, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of
the War desolations are determined; that after three score and two weeks
Messiah should be cut off, but not for himself; that by him transgression
should be finished, and reconciliation for iniquity should be made, and
everlasting righteousness should be brought in. And least all these things
should be apprehended to be only a higher advancing of the Levitical worship,
and the way of external Ceremonies, God expressly says, that he would make a
New Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not
according to the Covenant that I made Jer. 31. 31, 32.
with their Fathers, in the day I took them by the hand to bring them out of
the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake, although I was an husband to
them, says the Lord: But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Can any one that now considers seriously the state of
things thus described as it should come to pass, ever imagine that the
Levitical service was ever calculated for this State? Was Gods Worship to be
confined to his Temple at Jerusalem, when all the Nations of the earth should
come to serve him? Was the High Priest to make an atonement there, when an
order of Priesthood different from the Aaronical should be set up? Must the
Tribe of Levi only attend at the Temple when God would take Priests and Levites
out of all Nations that serve him? What would become of the Magnificence and
glory of the Temple when both City and Sanctuary shall be destroyed, and that
must be within few prophetical weeks after the Messiah is cut off? And must the
Covenant God made with the Israelites continue for ever, when God expressly
says, he would make a New one, and that not according to the Covenant which he
made with them then? It is so evident then, as nothing can well be more, that
under the Old Testament, such a state of Religion was described and promised,
with which the Levitical worship would be inconsistent; and so that the
Ceremonial Law was not at first established upon an immutable reason, which was
the thing to be proved.

CHAP. VIII. General Hypotheses concerning the Truth of the Doctrine of Christ.
The great prejudice against our Savior among Jews and Heathens, was the means
of his appearance. The difference of the miracles at the delivery of the Law
and Gospel. Some general Hypotheses to clear the subserviency of miracles to
the Doctrine of Christ. 1. That where the truth of a doctrine depends not on
evidence, but authority, the only way to prove the truth of the Doctrine, is to
prove the Testimony of the revealer to be infallible. Things may be true which
depend not on evidence of the things. What that is, and on what it depends. The
uncertainty of natural knowledge. The existence of God, the foundation of all
certainty. The certainty of matters of faith proved from the same principle.
Our knowladge of any thing supposes something incomprehensible. The certainty
of faith as great as that of knowledge; the grounds of it stronger. The
consistency of rational evidence with faith. Yet objects of faith exceed
reason; the absurdities following the contrary opinion. The uncertainty of that
which is called reason. Philosophical dictates no standard of reason. Of
transubstantiation and ubiquity etc. why rejected as contrary to reason. The
foundation of faith in matters above reason. Which is infallible Testimony that
there are ways to know which is infallible, proved: 2. Hypoth. A Divine
Testimony the most infallible. The resolution of faith into Gods veracity as
its formal object. 3. Hypoth. A Divine Testimony may be known, though God speak
not immediately. Of Inspiration among the Jews and Divination among the
Heathens. 4. Hyp. The evidences of a Divine Testimony must be clear and
certain. Of the common motives of faith, and the obligation to faith arising
from them. The original of Infidelity.

HAving now cleared that the Law of Moses was capable of a repeal, I come to
the second enquiry, whether the Sect. 1.
miracles of our Savior did give a sufficient evidence of his power and
authority to repeal it. I shall not (to prevent too large an excursion) insist
on any other evidences of our Saviors being the promised M^ssias, but keep
close to the matter of our present debate concerning the evidence which arises
from such a power of Miracles as our Savior had in order to his establishing
that doctrine which he came to publish to the world. The great stumbling block
in reference to our blessed Savior among both the Jews and learned Heathens,
was the meanness of his appearance in the world, not coming attended with that
state and magnificence, which they thought to be inseparable from so great a
person. The Jews had their senses so poss^ssed with the thundrings and
lightnings on mount Sinai, that they could not imagine the structure of their
Ceremonial worship could be taken down with less noise and terror then it was
er^cted with. And withal collecting all those passages of the Old Testament
which seemed to foretell such glorious things of the days of the Messiah,
(which ^ither refer to his second coming, or must be understood in a spiritual
sense) they having their minds oppressed with the sense of their present
calamities, applied them wholly to an external greatness, whereby they might be
delivered from the Tyranny of the Roman Power. The Heathens as appears by
Celsus and others, thought it very strange that the Son of God should appear in
the world with so little grandeur, and have no greater Train then twelve such
obscure persons as the Apostles were. For says Celsus, (...). As the Sun which
inlightens all other things, does A^ud Orig. l. 2.
first discover himself, so it was fitting the Son of God should do when he
appeared to the world. And so we say he did to all such whose minds were not
blinded through obstinacy and wilful ignorance. For although this Sun of
righteousness was pleased for the better carrying on his design in the world to
wrap up himself in a cloud, yet his glory could not be confined within it, but
did break through that dark vail of his humane nature, and did discover its
self in a most clear and convincing manner. His appearances indeed were not
like those upon Mount Sinai, because his design was not to amuse men with the
glory of his Majesty, and to terrify them from Idolatry, (which was a great
reason of those dreadful phenomenon at the delivery of the Law) but he came to
draw all men to him by the power and energy of his Grace, and therefore
afforded them all rational convictions in order to it. And therefore the
quality of our Saviors miracles was considerable as well as the greatness of
them; The intent of them all was to do good, and thereby to bring the world off
from its sin and folly, to the embracing of that holy doctrine which he came to
publish to the world. Sect. 2.


Now that such a power of miracles in our Savior had the greatest subserviency
to the giving full and convincing evidence that he was the person he declared
himself to be, and that his doctrine was thereby so clearly attested, that it
was nothing but obstinacy, which could withhold assent, will appear by these
following Hypotheses which I lay down in order to the proving it.

Where the truth of a doctrine depends not on the evidence of Hyp. 1.
the things themselves, but on the authority of him that reveals it, there the
only way to prove the doctrine to be true, is to prove the Testimony of him
that revealed it to be infallible. Several things are necessary to be proved
for the clearing this proposition.

1. That it is not repugnant to reason that a doctrine should be true which
depends not upon the evidence of the thing its self. By evidence of the thing I
understand so clear and distinct a perception of it, that every one who has
the use of his rational faculties, cannot but upon the first apprehension of
the terms yield a certain assent to it; as that the whole is greater then a
part; that if we take away equal things from equal, the remainder must be
equal. Now we are to observe, that as to all these common notices of humane
nature which carry such evidence with them, the certainty of them lies in the
proposition as it is an act of the mind abstracted from the things themselves;
for these do not suppose the existence of the things; but whether there be any
such things in the world or no as whole or parts, the understanding is assured
that the Idea of the whole carries more in its representation then that of a
part does. This is the great reason of the certainty and evidence of
Mathematical truths, not as some imagine, because men have no interest, or
design in those things, and therefore they never question them, but because
they proceed not upon sensible but abstracted matter; which is not liable to so
many doubts as the other is; for that a Triangle has three Angles no man
questions, but whether such sensible parts of matter make a Triangle, may be
very questionable. Now that the truth of beings, or the certainty of existence
of things cannot be so certain as Mathematical demonstrations, appears from
hence: because the manner of conveyance of these things to my mind cannot be so
clear and certain as in purely intellectual operations, abstracted from
existent matter. For the highest evidences of the existence of things must be
either the judgment of sense, or clear and distinct perception of the mind;
now proceeding in a mere natural way, there can be no infallible certainty in
either of these; For the perception of the mind in reference to the existence
of things being caused so much through those Idea's or Phantasmes which are
conveyed to the understanding through the impressions of sense, if these may be
demonstrated to be fallacious, I may well question the certainty of that, which
I am certain I have been deceived by; supposing then I should question the
truth of every thing which is conveyed in an uncertain way to my mind, I may
soon out-go even Pyrrho himself in real Skepticism. Neither can I conceive how
clear and distinct perception of any thing though not coming through the
senses, does necessarily infer the existence of the thing; for it only implies
a non-repugnancy of it to our natural faculties, and consequently the bare
possibility of it. For otherwise it were impossible for us to have a clear
perception of any thing any longer then it exists, nay then we know it to
exist; for existence or nonexistence is all one to the understanding, while it
is not assured of either. And it is withal evident that things imaginary may
clearly affect the mind as well as real; for I may have as real and distinct
perception of a Phoenix in my mind, as of a Partridge; does it therefore follow
that the one is really existent as well as the other? and it will be a very
hard matter to assign a certain difference between imagination and pure
intellection in such things, which though, not actually existent, yet imply no
repugnancy at all to the faculties of men's minds. It is evident then that there
cannot be so great certainty of the existence of things as there may be of
Mathematical demonstrations.

And if that principle be supposed as the foundation of all Physical certainty
as to the being of things, viz. that there Sect. 3.
is a God who being infinitely good will not suffer the minds of men to be
deceived in those things which they have a clear and distinct perception of
(without which supposition we cannot be assured of the certainty of any
operations of the mind, because we cannot know but we were so made that we
might be then most deceived, when we thought our selves most sure) If this
principle, I say, be supposed as the foundation of all certain knowledge, then
from it I infer many things which are very much advantageous to our certainty
in matters of faith.

That the foundation of all certainty lies in the necessary existence 1.
of a being absolutely perfect. So that unless I know that there is a God, I
cannot be assured that I know any thing in a certain manner; and if I know
there is a God, I must necessarily apprehend him to be absolutely perfect;
because the grounds of my knowledge that there is a God, are from those
absolute perfections which there are in him; and if I could suppose him not
absolutely perfect, I must suppose him not to be God; for that is necessarily
employed in his definition. Now then if all certainty does suppose the existence
of a being so absolutely perfect; I must before I can know any thing certainly,
conclude that there is an infinity of knowledge, wisdom, power and goodness in
this God; for those are things which all who understand them, will grant to be
perfections; and if they be in God, they must be absolute, i. e. infinite. And
if they be infinite, it necessarily follows that they must transcend our
apprehensions; so that now we have gained this principle in order to faith;
that we must grant something to be unconceivable before we can come certainly
to know any thing. From whence it follows that those who will not believe any
thing to be true because it is above their apprehensions, must deny the
foundation of all certainty, which (as we have proved) does suppose something
to be infinite, or above our capacity to comprehend.

That we have as great certainty of whatever is revealed to Sect. 4. 2.
us from God, as we can have of the truth of any thing which we most clearly
understand. For the truth of knowledge depending on this supposition, that
there is a God whose goodness will not suffer us to be deceived in the things
we clearly understand; there is the same foundation for the act of faith as for
that of knowledge, viz. That God will not suffer us to be deceived in matters
which himself has revealed to us. Nay there seems to be far greater on these
accounts. First, That there is not so great danger to be deceived in reference
to objects of sense, as there is in reference to objects of Divine revelation:
because objects of sense make a continual impression upon the Organs of sense;
and as to these things we see the whole world agrees in them so far as they are
necessary to life, and withal they bear a greater correspondency to the
present state of imperfection which the soul is now in: but now matters of
Divine revelation are of a more sublime and spiritual nature, which men's minds
on that account are more apt to doubt of, then of things obvious to sense; and
withal they call the mind so much off from sense that on these accounts the
proneness to doubt is greater, and therefore the foundation of certainty from
Gods not suffering us to be deceived must be stronger. Secondly, There is not
so great danger in being deceived as to matters of sense or knowledge, as there
is in things of Divine revelation. For we see granting sense to be deceived,
and that we have no certainty at all in natural things, yet affairs of life are
managed still; men's outward welfare depends not on the judgment of sense; the
merchant has never the less gold in his Ship because his sense deceives him in
judging that the earth moves from him, when the Ship moves from it. The Sun
does never the less inlighten the world, though our senses be a^l of Epicurus
his mind, that the Sun is no bigger then he seems to be; but now as to matters
of Divine revelation, they are things of the most unspeakable weight and
importance, which depend upon our believing or disbelieving them. And therefore
if the goodness of God be such as it will not suffer us to be deceived in our
judgment of material and sensible beings, how much less in reference to the
foundation of our certainty as to things Divinely revealed? We see then what
rational evidence there is not only consistent with, but necessarily employed in
the foundation of faith, even as great as in any thing which we do most
perfectly know; so that the in-evidence which is so much spoken of as an
ingredient of the nature of faith, must not be understood of the foundation
whereon the act of faith does stand, but of the condition of the object, which
being a matter of divine revelation, is a thing not obvious to our senses: In
which sense the Apostle speaks that faith is (...), the firm Heb. 11. 1.
expectation of things hoped for, and strong conviction of things which are not
seen: In which words, as Erasmus well observes, is contained only an high
Encomium of faith, and no Dialectical definition of it; viz. that faith soars
above things of sense or present enjoyment; yea, though the objects of it be
never so remote from either, yet where there is sufficient evidence of Divine
Revelation, faith boggles at no difficulties, but is firmly resolved that that
God, who has revealed these things, can and will bring them to pass in his own
time. There is not then any such contrariety between the foundation of faith
and knowledge, as the Schoolmen have persuaded the world, we see both of them
proceed on the same foundation of certainty; all the difference is, faith
fixes on the veracity of God immediately in reference to a Divine Testimony;
knowledge proceeds upon it, supposing no Divine revelation, as to the things it
does discover.

We hence infer, that if the certainty of our knowledge Sect. 5. 3.
depends on this principle, that God will not suffer us to be deceived, then we
are bound to believe whatever God does reveal to us, though we may not be able
to comprehend the nature of the things revealed. For as to these things, we
have the same ground of certainty, which we have as to any natural causes; for
as to them, we now suppose from the former principle, that setting aside the
existence of God, we could have no certainty of them, but that the formal
reason of our certainty is resolved into this, that Gods goodness will not
suffer the understanding to be deceived as to these things; the same I say as
to spiritual mysteries revealed by God; the ground of our certainty lies not in
the evidence of the things, but in the undoubted veracity of God, who has
revealed them. All that I can imagine possible to be replied to this, is, that
Gods veracity assures us in natural causes that we are not deceived only where
we have a clear and distinct perception of the things; but now in matters above
our reason to comprehend, there can be no clear and distinct perception. To
this I answer.

First, it is evident in the foundation of all certainty of knowledge, that
there may be a clear and distinct perception 1.
of that which we cannot comprehend, viz. of a being absolutely perfect; for if
we have not a clear and distinct perception of God, the foundation of all
certainty is destroyed, which is the necessary existence of such a being; and
he that shall say he cannot have a clear perception of God without
comprehending him, does contradict himself; for if he be a being infinite, he
must be incomprehensible; therefore there may be clear perception, where the
object its self is above our capacity. Now whatever foundation there is in
nature for such a perception without comprehension; that and much more is there
in such things as are revealed by God, though above our apprehension: For the
Idea of God upon the soul of man cannot be so strong an evidence of the
existence of a being above our apprehension, as the revelation of matters of
faith is, that we should believe the things so revealed, though our
understandings lose themselves in striving to reach the natures of them, and
the manner of their existence.

Secondly, that which is the only foundation of a scruple in this case, is a
principle most unreasonable in its self, that we are 2.
to embrace nothing for truth, though divinely revealed, but what our reason is
able to comprehend, as to the nature of the thing, and the manner of its
existence; on which account the doctrine of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Satisfaction, and consequently the whole mystery of the Gospel of Christ must
be rejected as incredible, and that on this bare pretense, because although
many expressions in Scripture seem to import all these things, yet we are bound
to interpret them to another sense, because this is incongruous to our reason.
But although Christianity be a Religion which comes in the highest way of
credibility to the minds of men, although we are not bound to believe any thing
but what we have sufficient reason to make it appear that it is revealed by
God, yet that any thing should be questioned whether it be of divine
revelation, merely because our reason is to seek, as to the full and adaequate
conception of it, is a most absurd and unreasonable pretense: And the Assertors
of it must run themselves on these unavoidable absurdities.

First, of believing nothing either in nature or Religion to 1.
be true, but what they can give a full and satisfactory account of, as to
every mode and circumstance of it. Therefore let such persons first try
themselves in all the appearances of nature; and then we may suppose they will
not believe that the Sun shines, till they have by demonstrative arguments
proved the undoubted truth of the Ptolomaick or Copernican hypothesis, that
they will never give credit to the flux and reflux of the Sea, till they
clearly resolve the doubts which attend the several opinions of it. That there
is no such thing as matter in the world, till they can satisfactorily tell us
how the parts of it are united; nor that there are any material beings, till
they have resolved all the perplexing difficulties about the several affections
of them; and that themselves have not so much as a rational soul, till they are
bound to satisfy us of the manner of the union of the soul and body together.
And if they can expedite all these, and many more difficulties about the most
obvious things (about which it is another thing to frame handsome and
consistent hypotheses, then to give a certain account of them) then let them be
let loose to the matters of divine revelation; as to which yet (if they could
perform the other) were there no reason for such an undertaking; for that were

Secondly, to commensurate the perfections of God with the narrow capacity of
the humane intellect; which is contrary to 2.
the natural Idea of God, and to the manner whereby we take up our conceptions
of God; for the Idea of God does suppose incomprehensibility to belong to his
nature; and the manner whereby we form our conceptions of God, is by taking
away all the imperfections we find in our selves, from the conception we form
of a being absolutely perfect, and by adding infinity to all the perfections we
find in our own natures. Now this method of proceeding does necessarily imply a
vast distance and disproportion between a finite and infinite understanding.
And if the understanding of God be infinite, why may not he discover such
things to us, which our shallow apprehensions cannot reach unto? what ground or
evidence of reason can we have that an infinite wisdom and understanding, when
it undertakes to discover matters of the highest nature and concernment to the
world, should be able to deliver nothing but what comes within the compass of
our imperfect and narrow intellects? And that it should not be sufficient that
the matters revealed do none of them contradict the prime results or common
notions of mankind (which none of them do) but that every particular mode and
circumstance, as to the manner of existence in God, or the extent of his
omnipotent power, must pass the scrutiny of our faculties, before it obtains a
Placet for a Divine revelation?

Thirdly, it must follow from this principle, that the pretenders to it must
affirm the rules or maxims which they go by Sect. 6. 3.
in the judgment of things, are the infallible standard of reason: Else they
are as far to seek in the judgment of the truth of things as any others are.
They must then, to be consistent with their principle, affirm themselves to be
the absolute Masters of reason: Now reason consisting of observations made
concerning the natures of all beings (for so it must be considered, as it is a
rule of judging, viz. as a Systeme of infallible rules collected from the
natures of things) they who pretend to it, must demonstrate these general
maxims according to which they judge, to be ^ollected from an universal
undoubted history of nature, which lies yet too dark and obscure for any to
pretend to the full knowledge of, and would be only a demonstration of the
highest arrogance after so many succesless endeavors of the most searching
wits in any society of persons to usurp it to themselves; especially if such
persons are so far from searching into the depths of nature, that they suffer
themselves very fairly to be led by the nose by the most dogmatical of all
Philosophers; and that in such principles which the more inquisitive world has
now found to be very short, uncertain, and fallacious. And upon severe enquiry
we shall find the grand principles which have been taken by these adorers of
reason, for almost the standard of it, have been some Theories which have been
taken up merely from observation of the course of nature by such persons, who
scarce owned any hand of providence in the world. Now it cannot otherwise be
conceived but that these Theories, or principles formed from such a narrow
inspection into the natures of things, must make strange work when we come to
apply those things to them, which were never looked at in the forming of them:
Whence came those two received principles, that nothing can be produced out of
nothing; that there is no possible return from a privation to a habit, but from
those Philosophers who believed there was nothing but matter in the world; or
if they did assert the existence of a God, yet supposed him unconcerned in the
Government of the world. Whence come our Masters of reason to tell us that the
soul cannot subsist after death without the boay; from what Philosophy was this
derived? certainly from that which was very loath to acknowledge the immortality
of the soul of man: And any one who strictly observes the close coherence of
the principles of the Peripatetick Philosophy, will find very little room left
for an eternal being to interpose its self in the world; and therefore some
have shrewdly observed that Aristotle speaks more favorably of the being of
God in his Exotericks, then in his Acroamaticks, which all that know the reason
of the names, will guess at the reason of. I demand then, must the received
principles of Philosophy, and those short imperfect Theories, which were formed
more from tradition then experience, by the ancient Greeks, be taken for the
standard of reason or no? If they must, we may soon forsake not only the
sublimer mysteries of the Trinity, Divinity of Christ, Resurrection, etc. but
we shall soon shake hands with Creation, Providence, if not immortality of
souls, and the Being of God himself. If these things be disowned as the
standard of reason, let us know what will be substituted in the room of them?
and what Laws our faith must be tried by? Are they only Mathematical
demonstrations, or the undoubted common notions of humane nature, which
whosoever understands assents to them, let any of the forementioned mysteries
be made appear to contradict these, and we will readily yield up our selves
captives to reason: But in the mean time, let no jejune unproved hypotheses in
Philosophy, be set as Judges over matters of faith, whose only warrant for that
office must be Stat pro ratione voluntas. Let the principles we proceed by, be
first manifested to be collected from a most certain and universal inspection
into the nature of all beings, let the manner of process be showed how they
were collected (lest they labor with the common fault of the Chemists, of
establishing hypostatical principles from the experiments of some particular
bodies, which others do as evidently refute) and lastly, let it be made appear
that these principles, thus collected, will serve indifferently for all beings,
spiritual as well as material, infinite as well as finite, and when this Task
is exactly performed, we will make room for Reason to sit upon the Bench, and
bring the Scriptures as the Prisoner to its Bar.

Fourthly, According to this principle, what certainty can Sect. 7. 4.
we have at all of anything we are to believe? who has fixed the bounds of
that which men call reason? how shall we know that thus far it will come, and
no further? If no banks be raised against it to keep it in its due channel, we
may have cause to fear it may in time overthrow not only the Trinity,
Incarnation, Resurrection of the dead, but all other articles of the creed too?
What prescription can be pleaded by one sort of men for reason more then for
another? One will not believe this article of his faith, because against his
reason, and why not another reject another article on the same pretense? for
whatever the ground of unbelief be, if it be but baptized by the name of
reason, it must by this principle pass uncontrouled; if a sullen Philosopher
shall tell us, that the notion of an immaterial substance contradicts his
reason as much as the Trinity does theirs, and that the Universe is nothing
else but a Systeme of bodies, by what Artifice will our Masters of reason purge
away all that black choler that so clouds his mind, that he cannot see the
notion of a spirit through it? And such one will make a hard shift, but he will
reconcile his opinion with Scripture too; and therefore why should he be bound
up to men's explications of Scripture, when there is no necessity, that he can
see, of understanding it in any other way then his own? If another should come
and tell us, that we must be all Anthropomorphites, and that otherwise the
Scripture were not intelligible; shall not this man put in for reason too? Nay
lastly, if another shall come and speak out, and tell us Religion is but a
device of subtle men, that all things come to pass through chance, that the
world was made by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms, and that all are fools which
are not Atheists, and that it is impossible to apprehend the Being of a God,
and therefore by the same reason that they reject some mysteries of Religion,
he rejects the foundation of all; because an infinite being is
incomprehensible: whither now has our Reason carried us? while we p^etend to
reject any thing as divinely revealed, merely on that account, that it is above
our reason? But it may be replied, On what account then do we reject the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the ubiquity of the body of Christ, as
repugnant to reason, if we do not make reason judge in matters of faith? I
answer, 1. We reject these opinions not only as repugnant to reason, but as
insufficiently proved from Scripture, whereas we here suppose (it not being our
present business to prove it) that the several doctrines of the Trinity,
Incarnation, Resurrection of bodies, etc. are only rejected on that account,
that though Scripture seems to speak fair for them, yet it is otherwise to be
interpreted, because supposed to be repugnant to reason. 2. Those doctrines
before mentioned are eminently serviceable to promote the great end of the
Gospel, and are inlaid in the very foundation o^ it, as that of the Trinity,
and Divinity of Christ; but these we now mention are no ways conduceable to
that end; but seem to thwart and overthrow it, and transubstantiation
establishes a way of worship contrary to the Gospel. 3. All the foundation of
transubstantiation is laid upon ambiguous places of Scripture, which must of
necessity have some Tropes and Figures in them; but the doctrine of the Trinity
is not only contained in plain Scripture, but is ^videnced by visible
appearance, as particularly at the baptism of our Savior. 4. There is far
greater ground why we should reject Transubstantiation and ubiquity, as
inconsistent with reason, then that they should the Trinity, on this account,
because the grounds of reason on which we reject those opinions, are fet^hed
from those essential and inseparable properties of bodies, which are
inconsistent with those opinions; now these are things within the reach of our
understandings (in which case God himself sometimes appeals to reason) but it
is quite another. case, when we search into the incomprehensible nature of God,
and pronounce with confidence that such things cannot be in God, because we
cannot comprehend them; which gives a sufficient answer to this objection. The
substance then of this discourse is, that whatever doctrine is sufficiently
manifested to be of divine revelation, is to be embraced and believed, as
undoubtedly true, though our reason cannot reach to the full apprehension of
all the Modes and circumstances of it. So that as to these sublime mysteries
our faith stands upon this twofold bottom. First, that the being,
understanding, and power of God does infinitely transcend ours, and therefore
he may reveal to us matters above our reach and capacity. Secondly, that
whatever God does reveal is undoubtedly true, though we may not fully
understand it; for this is a most undoubted principle, that God cannot and will
not deceive any in those things which he reveals to men. Thus our first
supposition is cleared, that it is not repugnant to reason, that a doctrine may
be true, which depends not on the evidence of the thing it self.

The second is, That in matters whose truth depends not on 2.
the evidence of the things themselves, infallible testimony is the fullest
demonstration of them. For these things, not being of Mathematical evidence,
there must be some other way found out for demonstrating the truth of them. And
in all those things whose truth depends on Testimony, the more creditable the
Testimony is, the higher evidence is given to them; but that testimony which
may deceive, cannot give so pregnant an evidence as that which cannot; for then
all imaginable objections are taken off. This is so clear, that it needs no
further proof; and therefore the third follows.

That there are certain ways whereby to know that a Testimony delivered is
infallible; and that is fully proved by 3.
these two Arguments. 1. That it is the duty of all those to whom it is
propounded to believe it; now how could that be a duty in them to believe,
which they had no ways to know whether it were a Testimony to be believed, or
no. 2. Because God will condemn the world for unbelief: In which the Justice of
Gods proceedings does necessarily suppose that there were sufficient arguments
to induce them to believe, which could not be, unless there were some certain
way supposed whereby a Testimony may be known to be infallible. These three
things now being supposed, viz. that a doctrine may be true which depends not
on evidonce of reason, that the greatest demonstration of the truth of such a
doctrine, is its being delivered by infallible Testimony, and that there are
certain ways whereby a Testimony may be known to be infallible: Our first
principle is fully confirmed, which was, that where the truth of a doctrine
depends not on evidence of reason, but on the authority of him that reveals it,
the only way to prove the doctrine to be true, is to prove the Testimony of him
that reveals it to be infallible.

The next principle or Hypothesis which I lay down, is, That there can be no
greater evidence that a Testimony is infallible, Sect. 8. Hyp. 2.
then that it is the Testimony of God himself. The truth of this depends upon a
common notion of humane nature, which is the veracity of God in whatever way he
discovers himself to men; and therefore the ultimate resolution of our faith,
as to its formal object, must be alone into the veracity of God revealing
things unto us; for the principium certitudinis, or foundation of all certain
assent can be fetched no higher, neither will it stand any lower then the
infallible verity of God himself; and the principium patefactionis, or the
ground of discovery of spiritual truth to our minds, must be resolved into
Divine Testimony, or revelation. These two then not taken asunder, but jointly,
God, who cannot lie, has revealed these things, is the only certain foundation
for a divine faith to rest its self upon. But now the particular exercise of a
Divine faith lies in a firm assent to such a particular thing as Divinely
revealed, and herein lies not so much the Testimony, as the peculiar energy of
the Spirit of God in inclining the soul to believe peculiar objects of faith,
as of Divine revelation. But the general ground of faith, which they call the
formal object, or the ratio propter quam credimus is the general infallibility
of a Divine Testimony. For in a matter concerning divine revelation, there are
two great questions to be resolved; The first is, Why I believe a Divine
Testimony with a firm assent? The answer to that is, because I am assured, that
what ever God speaks is true: the other is, upon what grounds do I believe this
to be a Divine Testimony? the resolution of which, as far as I can understand,
must be fetched from those rational evidences whereby a Divine Testimony must
be distinguished from one merely humane and fallible. For the Spirit of God in
its workings upon the mind, does not carry it on by a brutish impulse, but
draws it by a spiritual discovery of such strong and persuasive grounds to
assent to what is revealed, that the mind does readily give a firm assent to
that which it sees such convincing reason to believe. Now the strongest reason
to believe, is the manifestation of a divine Testimony; which the Spirit of God
so clearly discovers to a true believer, that he not only firmly assents to the
general foundation of faith, the veracity of God, but to the particular object
propounded, as a matter of Divine Revelation. But this latter question is not
here the matter of our discourse; our proposition only concerns the general
foundation of faith; which appears to be so rational and evident, as no
principle in nature can be more. For if the Testimony on which I am to rely be
only Gods, and I be assured from natural reason, that his Testimony can be no
other then infallible, wherein does the certainty of the foundation of faith
fall short of that in any Mathematical demonstration? Upon which account a
Divine Testimony has been regarded with so much veneration among all who have
owned a Deity, although they have been unacquainted with any certain way of
Divine revelation. And the reason why any rejected such a Testimony among the
Heathens, was either because they believed not a Deity, or else that the
particular Testimonies produced were mere frauds and impostures, and therefore
no Divine Testimony as it was given out to be. But the principle still remained
indisputable, that on supposition the Testimony were what it pretended to be,
there was the greatest reason to believe it, although it came not in such a way
of probation, as their sciences proceeded in. From which principle arose that
speech of Tully which he has translated I^ fragment. Cicer.
out of Plato's Timaeus, Ac difficillimum factu a Diis ortis sidem non haber^,
quanquam nec argumentis nec rationibus certis eorum oration confirmetur. By
which we see what a presumption there was of Truth, where there was any
evidence of a Divine Testimony. And no doubt upon the advantage of this
principle it was the Devil gained so great credit to his oracles, for therein
he did the most imitate Divine revelation. From hence then we see what a firm
bottom faith in the general stands upon, which is nothing short of an
Infallible Divine Testimony: other things may conduce by way of subserviency
for the discovery of this; but nothing else can be a sure foundation for a
Divine faith, but what is a Testimony of God himself.

A Testimony may be known to be Divine and infallible, though God himself do
not speak in an immediate way. By Sect. 9. Hyp. 3.
being known, I do not mean the firm persuasion of a mind enlightened by the
Spirit of God, but that there are sufficient evidences ex part rei to convince
men of it, which are not wilfully blind and obstinate, i. e. that the ground of
unbelief in any cannot be imputed to the defect of sufficient motives to faith,
but to their own perverseness and prejudice in not discerning them. Now that God
may reveal and declare his mind to the world, not in an immediate way, but by
some instruments he may make use of to that end, is not only evident from the
great suitableness of such a way to the conditions of the persons he speaks to,
but from the general persuasion of the world concerning the possibility of
Inspiration. The Jews are so far from denying this, that it is the very
foundation of their religion as well as ours, God discovering the most of his
will to them by the Prophets or by persons Divinely inspired. And the general
consent of all other Nations, that there is such a principle as Divination in
the world, does make it evident, that it carries no repugnancy at all to
natural light, supposing that there is a God, that he should reveal his mind by
some particular persons unto the world. For which purpose the Testimony of
Tully in the entrance of his books de Divinatione, is very considerable. Vetus
opinio est jam usque ab Heroicis ducta temporibus, eaque L. 1. de Div.
and populi Romani and omnium gentium firmata consensu, versari quandam inter
homines divinationem, quam Graeci (...) appellant, i. e. praesensionem and
scientiam rerum futurarum, and soon after adds, gentem quidem nullam video,
neque tam humanam at que doctam, neque tam immanem atque barbaram, quae non
significari futura, et a quibusdam intelligi, praedicique posse censeat. He
makes it appear to be an universal sentiment of all Nations in the world, and
instanceth particularly in the Assyrians, Egyptians, Cilicians, Pisidians,
Pamphilians, Grecians, Romans, Etrurians, and others. It is true indeed he
after mentions some Philosophers who denied it; but they were most part the
followers of Epicurus, who denied any providence, and therefore might well take
away divination; but if Xenophanes Colophonius had any followers who asserted
the one, and denied the other (as Tully seems to intimate that he was alone in
that persuasion) yet we may probably suppose the reason of their rejecting it
might be the impostures which went under the name of Divination among them;
which are excellently discovered by that Prince of Roman Philosophers as well
as Orators, in his second book of Divination; but it is apparent by the same
Author, that the generality of Philosophers consented with the people in this
persuasion, as the followers of those three great sects of Socrates,
Pythagoras, and Aristotle were all approvers of it; but of all persons the
Stoics were the most zealous contenders for it, especially Chrysippus,
Diogenes Babylonius, Antipater and Possidonius; some indeed rejected some ways
of Divination, yet embraced others, as Dicaearchus and Cratippus, who rejected
all but dreams and ecstasies; but in the general we find these two principles
went together among them, the existence of a Deity, and the certainty of
Divination; so that from Divination they proved a Deity, and from a Deity
Divination. Si sunt genera divinandi vera, esse Deos; vicissimque si Dii sint,
esse qui divinent, as Quintus Cicero there speaks: and at last thus triumphs in
the multitude of his witnesses, An dum bestiae loquantur expectamus, hominum
consenti^nte auctoritate contenti non simus? It may not be amiss to produce the
chief argument on which the Stoics insisted to prove the necessity of
Divination, supposing the existence of a Deity. If there be Gods, say they, and
they do not reveal to men things to come, it either is because they do not love
them, or because they do not know themselves what shall come to pass, or they
think it is of no concernment to men to know future things, or that it does not
become their Majesty to reveal them, or that they cannot reveal them to men if
they would; but neither is it true that they do not love men; for the Gods are
of a bountiful nature and friends to mankind; neither can they be ignorant of
future things, because they are appointed and decreed by them, neither is it of
no concernment to men to know future things; for that makes them more cautious
if they know them; neither is it repugnant to their Majesty to reveal them, for
nothing is more noble then bounty and doing good; and they must needs know
these things; therefore they may make them known to others; and if they do make
them known, there must be some way whereby to know that they do so; or else
they signify them to no purpose. If now instead of the knowledge of future
contingencies, and the multitude of their Gods, they had insisted on the
discovery and revelation by the true God of those ways which may lead men to
eternal happiness, that argument had been strong and convincing, which as it
stands, is Sophistical and fallacious. So that it is very plain, that not only
a possibility of Divination was acknowledged by those who wanted Divine
revelation, but that this divination did not arise from mere natural causes,
but from an afflatus Divinus, and a concitatio quaedam animi, as they there
speak, which imports nothing short of Divine inspiration. Nay the opinion of
this was so common among them, that they thought any extraordinary persons had
something of Divine Enthusiasm in them, as Tully elsewhere tells us, Nemo vir
^. 2. (...) Not. Deorum.
magnus sine aliquo afflatu Divino unquam fuit. Although then these Heathens
were greatly mistaken as to those things they took for a Divine afflatus and
Divination, yet we cannot conceive so general a sense should be imprinted on
the minds of men of such a thing as that was, were it not a thing highly
consonant to principles of reason, that God should communicate his mind to the
world by the inspiration of some persons. And therefore I conceive that Cicero
and his brother Quintus, who manage that excellent dispute of Divination
between them, have divided the truth between them too. For on the one side
Quintus evidently proves the possibility of the thing, the consequence of it
upon the acknowledgement of a Deity, and the general consent of mankind in the
owning of it; and on the other side Tully himself excellently lays open the
vanity, folly, and uncertainty, not only of the common ways of Divination, but
of the oracles which were in such great esteem among the Heathens. And although
Tully does so sharply and sarcastically answer the argument from the common
consent of men; quasi vero quidquam sit, tam valde, quam nihil sapere, vulgar;
as though nothing men did more generally agree in, then in being fools; yet as
it is evident that the ground of that scoff was from the several manners of
Divination then in use, so it cannot be thought to be a general impeachment of
humane nature in a thing so consequent upon the being of a God, which as
himself elsewhere proves, is as clear from reason as from that Testimonium
gentium in hac una re non dissidentium, as the Christian Cicero, Lactantius
speaks, the consent of Nations, De falls. relig. cap. 2.
which scarce agree in any thing else, but that there is a God. That which we
now infer from hence is, that God may make known his mind in a way infallible,
though not immediate; for in case of Inspiration of mere men, it is not they so
much which speak, as God by them; and in case that God himself should speak
through the vail of humane nature, the Testimony must needs be infallible
though the appearance of the Divinity be not visible.

Those evidences whereby a Divine Testimony may be known, must be such as may
not leave men's minds in suspense, but are Sect. 10. Hyp. 4.
of their own nature convincing proofs of it. For although as to the event some
may doubt, and others disbelieve the Testimony so proved, yet it is sufficient
for our purpose, that in the nature of the things (supposing them to be such as
we speak of) they are sufficient for the eviction that the testimony attested
by them is divine and infallible. I know it is a great dispute among many,
whether those things which are usually called the common motives of faith, do
of their own nature only induce a probable persuasion of the truth of the
doctrine as probable which they are joined with, or else are they sufficient
for the producing a firm assent to the doctrine as True? I grant they are not
demonstrative so as to enforce assent; for we see the contrary by the
experience of all ages; but that they are not sufficient foundation for an
unprejudiced mind to establish a firm assent upon, is a thing not easy to be
granted; chiefly upon this account, that an obligation to believe does lie upon
every one to whom these evidences of a Divine Testimony are sufficiently
discovered. And otherwise of all sins the sin of unbelief as to God revealing
his mind, were the most excusable and pardonable sin; nay, it would be little
less then a part of prudence; because what can it be accounted but temerity and
imprudence in any to believe a doctrine as true only upon probable inducements?
and what can it be but wisdom to withhold assent upon a mere verisimilitude?
considering what the Lyrick Poet has long since truly told us, (...) Piadtr.
Od. 1.

(...)
(...)
(...).
That a falsehood may frequently seem truer to common understandings then truth
its self: and as Menander speaks, (...), that a mere verisimilitude may have
more force on vulgar minds then truth has. If therefore there be no evidences
given sufficient to carry the minds of men beyond mere probability, what sin
can it be in those to disbelieve who cannot be obliged to believe as true what
is only discovered as probable: I cannot therefore see how an obligation to
believe a Divine Testimony is consistent with their opinion, who make the
utmost which any outward evidences can extend to, to be only the bare
credibility of the doctrine attested by them. I can very well satisfy my self
with the ground and reason why the more subtle wits of the Church of Rome do
essert this; for if nothing else can be produced by all motives of faith but
only a probable persuasion of the truth of Christian doctrine, then here comes
in the fairest pretense for the Infallibility of their Church; for otherwise
they tell us we can have no foundation for a Divine faith; for how can that be
a foundation for Divine faith, which can reach no higher then a moral
inducement, and beget only a probable persuasion of the credibility of the
doctrine of Christ? But on what account those who disown the Infallibility of
the Church of Rome in the proposal of matters of faith, should yet consent with
those of it in an hypothesis taken up in probability, merely out of
subserviency to that most advantageous piece of the mystery of iniquity, is
not easy to resolve. Unless the over-fondness of some upon the doctrine of the
Schools, more then of the Gospel, has been the occasion of it. For how
agreeable can that opinion be to the Gospel which so evidently puts the most
defensive weapons into the hands of unbelief? For doubtless in the judgment of
any rational person, a mere probable persuasion of the credibility of the
doctrine of Christ, where an assent to it as true is required, can never be
looked on as an act of faith; for if my assent to the truth of the thing be
according to the strength of the arguments inducing me to believe, and these
arguments do only prove a probability of Divine Testimony, my assent can be no
stronger then to a thing merely probable; which is, that it may be or not be
true; which is not properly assent, but a suspending our judgments till some
convincing argument be produced on either side. And therefore according to this
opinion those who saw all the miracles which Christ did, could not be bound to
believe in Christ, but only to have a favorable opinion of his person and
doctrine, as a thing which though not evidenced to be true by what he did, yet
it was very piously credible; but they must have a care withal of venturing
their belief too far, only on such moral inducements as miracels were, for fear
they should go farther then the force of the arguments would carry them. Had
not this opinion now, think we, been a very probable way to have converted the
world upon the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles; when Christ says, though
ye believe not me, believe the works, Ioh 10. 38.
that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him; Nay says
this opinion, that is more then we are bound to do, though we see thy works, we
are not bound to believe thy Testimony to be Divine and certainly true; but we
will do all we are bound to do; we will entertain a favorable opinion of thy
person and doctrine, and wait for somewhat else, but we do not well know what,
to persuade us to believe. When the Apostles Preach the danger of unbelief,
because the doctrine of the Gospel was confirmed by signs and wonders, Heb. 2.
3, 4.
and diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost; what a fair answer does this
opinion put into the mouths of Infidels, that notwithstanding all these signs
and wonders, they were never bound to believe the Gospel as a certain Truth,
and therefore they hope the danger is not so great in neglecting the salvation
promised by the Gospel.

I cannot conceive that men otherwise learned and sober, Sect. 11.
should with so much confidence assert that the rational evidences of a Divine
Testimony are insufficient to prove a doctrine true, unless it be from hence,
that they find that notwithstanding the strongest evidences many persons
continue in unbelief. For, say they, if these arguments were scientifical and
demonstrative, (as they speak) of the truth of the doctrine attested by them,
then all persons to whom they are propounded, must certainly believe. But this
is very easily answered; for we speak not of internal, but outward evidence,
not of that in the subject, but of the object, or more fully of the reason of
the thing, and not the event in us; for doubtless there may be undoubted truth
and evidence in many things which some persons either cannot or will not
understand. If Epicurus should contend still that the Sun and stars are no
bigger then they seem to be, will it hence follow that there can be no rational
demonstration of the contrary? Nay if the way of demonstration be offered him,
and Telescopes put into his hands, yet if he be resolved to maintain his
credit, and therefore his opinion, and will not use the Telescopes, or suspect
still they are intended only to deceive his sight, what possible way will there
be of convincing such a person, though the thing be in its self demonstrable?
Now if the strength of prejudice or maintaining of credit can prevail so much
in matters of Mathematical evidence to withhold assent, what power may we think
a corrupt interest may have upon the understanding, as to the arguments which
tend to prove the truth of that doctrine, which is so repugnant to that carnal
interest which the heart is already devoted to. Our Blessed Savior has
himself given us so full an account of the original and causes of unbelief in
the persons he conversed with, that that may yield us a sufficient answer to
this objection. He tells us the ground of it was not want of light, nay, there
was light sufficient to convince any, but that those to whom the light came
loved darkness rather then it, because their deeds were evil. That they could
Joh. 3. 19.
not believe while they received honor one of another, and sought not the
honor which was of God only, i. e. That they Joh. 5. 44.
were so greedy of applause from each other, that they would not impartially
search into the truth of that doctrine, which did touch their sores so to the
quick, that they had rather have them fester upon them, then go to the trouble
of so sharp a cure. That the reason so few followed him was because the way was
narrow and the gate straight which men must go in at; and therefore no wonder
so few of the rich Matthew. 7. 14.
and proud pharisees could get in at it; they were partly so sweld with a high
opinion of themselves, and partly so laden with their riches, that they
thought it was to no purpose for them to think of going in at so straight a
gate, while they were resolved to part with neither.

That the final ground of the rejection of any, was not want of evidence to
bring them to believe, nor want of readiness in Christ to receive them if they
did, but it was a peevish, wilful, obstinate, malicious spirit, that they would
not come Ioh. 5. 40.
to Christ, nor believe his Doctrine (for those import the same) but when the
most convincing miracles were used, they would rather attribute them to the
Prince of Devils, Matthew. 1^. 24.
then to the power of God. And though our Savior presently by rational and
demonstrative arguments did prove the contrary to their faces; yet we see
thereby it was a resolution not to be convinced, or yield to the Truth, which
was the cause why they did not believe. Now from this very instance of our
Saviors proceedings with the Pharisees by rational arguments, I demand,
whether these arguments of our Savior were sufficient foundations for a divine
assent to that truth that our Savior did not his miracles by any Diabolical,
but by Divine power or no? If they were, then it is evident that rational
evidence may be a foundation for Divine faith; or that some motives to believe
may be so strong, as to be sufficient evidence of the truth and certainty of
the Doctrine: If these arguments were not sufficient proofs of what our Savior
spoke, then well fare the Pharisees; it seems they said nothing but what might
be thus far justified, that the contrary to it, could not be demonstrated. And
if the evidence of our S^viours miracles were so great, as some suppose, that
the Pharisees could not but be convinced that they were divine; but out of
their malice and envy they uttered this blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, to
keep the people from following Christ; then we hence infer two things: First,
how strong an evidence there was in the miracles of Christ, when it convinced
his most resolute enemies that they were divine. Secondly, what power a corrupt
will may have over a convinced understanding: For although the will may not
hinder conviction, yet it may soon stifle it, by suggesting those things to the
mind which may divert it from those convictions of Truth, and seek to find out
any ways to disgrace it. It would be no difficult task to discover in all those
instances wherein the unbelief of men is discovered in the New T^stament, that
the persons guilty of it did not proceed like rational men, or such as desired
Truth, but were wholly carried away through passion, interest, prejudice,
disaffection, or some other cause of that nature, which may give us a
sufficient account why those persons did not believe, although there might be
clear and undoubted evidence to persw^de them to it. But although I assert that
these rational evidences are sufficient arguments of the truth of the doctrine
they come to manifest, yet I would not be so understood, that I thereby resolve
all Religion into a mere act of reason and knowledge, and that no more power is
required in the understanding to believe the Gospel, then to believe a
Mathematical demonstration; which is another objection some lay in the way of
this opinion; but it is^ ot difficult getting over it. For the sufficiency
which I attribute to rational evidence, is not absolute and simple, but in suo
genere, as an objective evidence. Notwithstanding this, the whole work of the
Spirit of God in its peculiar energy and way of operation upon the soul, is
left entire to its self: But then when the spirit works as to the planting of a
truly divine faith, I do not think that it only persuades the soul of the Truth
of a Divine Testimony, but withal represents the Truths revealed by that
Testimony, with all that excellency and suitableness that there is in them,
that by the most agreeable, yet effectual influence of the spirit upon the
soul, it cheerfully embraces that Truth which is revealed, and cordially
yields up its self in obedience to it. This is the Divine faith which the
Scripture acquaints us with, and not such a one as merely believes the truth of
a Divine Testimony; and as to the production of this faith, I acknowledge mere
rational evidence to be insufficient, because they proceed in 2^ very different
ways; the one is to satisfy men's minds of the truth of the doctrine, the other
is to bring them effectually to adhere unto it. The asserting of the one
therefore does no more tend to destroy the other, then the saying that a
Telescope will help us to discover very much of the heavenly bodies, does imply
that a blind man may see them, if he makes but use of them. Although therefore
the natural man cannot savingly apprehend the things of God, yet there may be
so much rational evidence going along with Divine revelation, that supposing
reason to be pure, and not corrupted and steeped in sense as now it is, it
would discover spiritual evidence to be the most real and convincing evidence.
Thus far we have proved, that where there is any infallible Testimony, there is
sufficient rational evidence going along with it, to make it appear that it is
from God.

CHAP. IX. The rational evidence of the truth of Christian Religion from
Miracles.
The possibility of miracles appears from God and providence; the evidence of a
Divine Testimony by them. God alone can really alter the course of nature. The
Devils power of working miracles considered. Of Simon Magus, Apollonius. The
cures in the Temple of Aesculapius at Rome, etc. God never works miracles, but
for some particular end. The particular reasons of the miracles of Christ. The
repealing the Law of Moses, which had been settled by miracles. Why Christ
checked the Pharisees for demanding a sign, when himself appeals to his
miracles. The power of Christ's miracles on many who did not thoroughly believe.
Christ's miracles made it evident that he was the Messiah, because the
predictions were fulfilled in him. Why John Baptist wrought no miracles.
Christ's miracles necessary for the overthrow of the Devils Kingdom. Of the
Daemoniacks and Lunaticks in the Gospel, and in the Primitiv^ Church. The power
of the name of Christ over them largely proved by several Testimonies. The
evidence thence of a Divine power in Christ. Of counterfeit dispossessions. Of
miracles wrought among Infidels. Of the future state of the Church. The
necessity of the miracles of Christ, as to the propagation of Christian
Religion: that proved from the condition of the publishers, and the success of
the Doctrine. The Apostles knew the hazard of their employment, before they
entered on it. The boldness and resolution of the Apostles notwithstanding this,
compared with heathen Philosophers. No motive could carry the Apostles through
their employment, but the truth of their Doctrine; not seeking the honor,
profit or pleasure of the world. The Apostles evidence of the truth of their
doctrine lay in being eyewitnesses of our Saviors miracles and resurrection.
That attested by themselves; their sufficiency thence for preaching the Gospel.
Of the nature of the doctrine of the Gospel; contrariety of it to natural
inclinations. Strange success of it, notwithstanding it came not with humane
power: No Christian Emperor, till the Gospel universally preached. The
weakness and simplicity of the instruments which preached the Gospel. From all
which the great evidence of the power of miracles is proved.

OF all rational evidences which tend to confirm the truth of a Divine
Testimony, there can be none greater then Sect. 1. Hyp. 5.
a power of working miracles for confirmation that the Testimony which is
revealed is infallible. The possibility of a power of miracles cannot be
questiond by any who assert a Deity and a Providence; for by the same power
that things were either at first produced, or are still conserved (which is
equivalent to the other) the course of nature may be altered, and things caused
which are beyond the power of inferior causes: For though that be an immutable
Law of nature as to Physical beings, that every thing remains in the course and
order wherein it was set at the Creation; yet that only holds till the same
power which set it in that order shall otherwise dispose of it; granting then
the possibility of miracles, the subject of this Hypothesis is, that a power of
miracles is the clearest evidence of a Divine Testimony, which will appear from
these following considerations.

God alone can really alter the course of nature. I speak 1.
not of such things which are apt only to raise admiration in us because of our
unacquaintedness with the causes of them, or manner of their production, which
are thence called wonders, much less of mere juggles and impostures, whereby
the eyes of men are deceived; but I speak of such things as are in themselves
either contrary to, or above the course of nature, i. e. that order which is
established in the universe. The Devil no question may, and does often deceive
the world, and may by the subtilty and agility of his nature, perform such
things as may amuse the minds of men, and sometimes put them to it, to find a
difference between them and real miracles, if they only make their s^nses
judges of them. And such kind of wonders, though they are but spa^ingly done,
and with a kind of secrecy (as though they were consulting with Catiline about
the burning Rome) yet the Devil would have some (especially when Ignorance and
Superstition are Ascendents) to keep up his interest in the world. Or else when
he is like to be dispossessed and thrown out of all, he then tryes his utmost
to keep as many to him as may be; thus when the Spirit of God appeared in the
miracles of our Savior and his Apostles and the Primitive Church he then
conjured up all the infernal powers to do something parallel, to keep
possession of his Idolatrous Temples, as long as he could. Thus we find Simon
Magus dogging the Apostles (as it were) at the heels, that by his Magic he
might stagger the faith of people concerning the miracles wrought by the
Apostles: after him Apollonius appeared upon the Stage; but his wonders are
such pitiful things, compared with those wrought by Christ or his Apostles,
that it could be nothing but malice in Hierocles to mention him in competition
with Christ. But those things which seem a great deal more considerable then
either of these, were the cure of a blind man by Vespasian in Egypt, Sucton.
Vesp. c. 7.
mentioned by Tacitus and Suetonius, wherein there was a palpable imitation of
our Saviors curing the blind man in the Gospel; for the man told Vespasian,
restituturum oculos si inspuisset, that he should receive his sight by his
spittle; so Spartianus tells us of a woman that was cured of her blindness by
kissing the knees of the Emperor Adrian; and Boxhornius has produced an old
Fable in the Temple of Aesculapius at Rome of several diseased persons that
were cured there. A Blind man in the time of Antoninus was cured by this
oracle; he must come to the Altar, and kneel there; from the right side he must
turn to the left, and put five fingers upon the Altar, and then lift up his
hands and touch his eyes, and so was cured. Another called Lucius cured of the
pain of his side, by mixing the ashes of the altar with the wine, and applying
it to his side; another cured of spitting of blood by the kernel of a pine
apple, and honey used three days; a fourth cured of Qu^st. Romans q. 7.
blindness by the blood of a white Cock and honey, used three days upon his
eyes. These are the most considerable of all the pretended mir^^les done about
that time, when the noise of the Christian miracles were spread so far and done
so frequently, that they challenged the Heathens again and again to bring forth
any person possessed with a Devil, if he did not confess to them that he was a
Devil, though he made the Heathens believe that he was a God, they were
contented to leave their blood in the place.

For thus Tertullian speaks in his Apology to them. Edat Apol. cap. 23.
ur hic aliquis sub tribunalibus vestris, quem Daemone agi constet: jussus a
quolibet Christiano loqui spiritus ille, tam se Daemonem confitebitur de vero,
quam alibi Deum de falso: aeque producatur aliquis ex iis qui de Deo pati ex
stimantur, qui aris inhalantes numen de nidore concipiunt, qui ructando
curantur, qui anhelando praefantur. Ista ipsa virgo coelest is pluviarum
pollicitatrix, iste ipse Aesculapius Medicinarum demonstrator, alias de
morituris scordii and denatii and Asclepiadoti subministrator, nisi se Daemones
confessi fuerint, Christiano mentiri non audentes, ibidem illius Christiani
procacissimi sanguinem fundite. Quid isto opere manifestius, quid hac
probatione fidelius? simplicit as veritat is in medio est; virtus illi sua
assistit, nihil suspicari licebit, magia aut aliqua fallacia fieri. Dictis non
stetis, si oculi vestri and aures permiserint vobis. In these very daring
words, we see how the Christians appealed to their senses, even with the hazard
of their own lives, that they would make even Aesculapius himself confess what
he was, and by whose power all the cures were wrought upon the dreamers in his
Temples. And for the manner of the Devils cures, the same Author explains it
thus, Laedunt primo, dehinc remedia praecipiunt ad miraculum nova, sive
contraria, post quae definunt laedere and Apql. c. 23^
curassecreduntur. They first possess the bodies themselves (as Daemoniacks
were common in those times) and affect it with various distempers, afterward
upon using the strange remedies prescribed by Aesculapius, they forsake their
station, and the person is cured. And for the cures performed by the Emperors,
those who consider what various artifices were about that time used to procure
an opinion of Divinity in the Emperors, will not much wonder that such reports
should be spread of them, or that any persons should fain these distempers to
give themselves out to be cured by them But granting somewhat wonderful in
these, what are they, compared with those done by Christians? and whoever would
lay down his life to attest any of them? So that though the Devil by his
subtilty may easily impose upon Spectators eyes, yet it was impossible for him
by any power of his own to alter the course o^ nature or produce any real
miracle. For every true miracle is a production of something out of nothing
(which cannot be done by less then an omnipotent arm) and that either in the
thing it self, or the manner of producing it. In the thing it self when it is
of that nature that it cannot be produced by any second causes as the raising
of the dead; in the manner of doing it, when though the thing lies within the
possibility of second causes, yet it is performed without the help of any of
them, as in the cure of diseases without any use of means, by a word speaking,
the touch of a garment, etc. Now that all those miracles which were wrought in
confirmation of the Christian doctrine were such true and proper miracles, will
be discovered afterward.

God never alters the course of nature, but for some very Sect. 2. 2.
considerable end. For otherwise when he did it, it would not be taken notice
of, nor thought to be an alteration of the order of nature, but only some rare
contingencies which lie hid in the order of causes, but only break out at some
times: of which sort are all those things which the ignorant World is apt to
account as Prodigies. Of all which rare contingencies in nature, I say, as the
Roman Orator does, Si quod raro fit, id portentum putandum est, sapientem esse
Ciccro de Div. l. 2.
portentum est; saepius enim mulum peperisse arbitror, quam sapientem fuisse.
If all rare contingencies be accounted prodigies, a Wise man is certainly the
greatest prodigy. But these are quite of another nature from true miracles,
which are immediately produced by a Divine power, and intended for a
confirmation of some Divine Testimony. There are now several weighty reasons
which might make miracles necessary in the time of our Savior, as an evidence
of his Divine Authority and power.

That he came to take down that way of worship which had 1.
been at first settled by a power of miracles in Moses. God would not be so much
wanting to the faith of that people which had received their Law by signs and
wonders from heaven, but that there should be as strong an evidence given to
them, that the fullness of time was come when that dispensation was to have an
end, and to give place to one more perfect, which was to be established instead
of it. Upon which account the Jews might rationally enquire after a sign where
any new revelation was discovered, which might null the obligation of any
former Law: And when they enquire so much after a sign, our Savior does not
reject the enquiry as in its self unreasonable, but as made in an unreasonable
manner; for they would not be contented with the miracles which our Savior
wrought, which sufficiently manifested a Divine power; but all that they
desired was a sign from heaven, i. e. such as were done at the giving of the
Matthew. 12. 38. 16. 1.
Law, the thundering and lightenings there, or as the reigning of Manna in the
wilderness; now our Savior justly checks this demand as importune and
impudent; partly as knowing upon what account they asked it, merely to tempt
him, and not out of any real desire of satisfaction; and partly because of that
abundant evidence which was given in the miraculous cures which were wrought by
him, which were more suitable to that design of doing good in the world, then
all the Thunderclaps on Mount Sinai were; neither were the people in a
condition to be fed by Manna as they were in the wilderness, God graciously
suiting the discoveries of his power to the peculiar advantages of the people
which they were made to, and the dispensation they ushered in. Those terrible
signs at Mount Sinai being very suitable to the severity and rigor of the Law;
and the gracious miracles of our Savior, to the sweetness and grace of the
Gospel. And on this account our Savior charged the Jews with hypocrisy in
requiring a (...) as something above (...), a prodigy rather then a miracle; An
evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign
Matthew. 12. 3. 9.
be given it but that of the prophet Jonas, i. e. this people which are so far
from the faith of Abraham, (and therefore are supposititious Children) that no
miracles which I do, will convince them, but they seek only to have their
humors gratified more then their faith confirmed by some prodigy from heaven,
shall not by me be thus gratified; but having done enough already to persuade
them, if they had any heart to believe, instead of a sign from heaven they
shall have only one from the earth, and that not so much intended for the
conversion of such wilful unbelievers, as for the testifying my Innocence to
the world, viz. his resurrection from the dead. And so elsewhere when the Jews
demand a sign, it was upon the doing of that, which if they had attended to,
had been a sufficient sign to them, viz. his driving the buyers and sellers out
of the Temple. Which being a thing permitted Joh. 2. 18.
by the Sanbedrim and the Priests, how could they think so mean a person, in
appearance, as our Savior was, could ever have effected it, had it not been
for a Divine Majesty and power which appeared in him. It was not then the
expectation of miracles which our Savior rebuked in the Jews, but being
unsatisfied with the kind and nature of our Saviors miracles. It was their
hypocrisy and unbelief which Christ condemned, notwithstanding the frequent
miracles which he wrought among them: For we plainly find our Savior very
often appealing to his miracles as the evidences of his Divine Commission: If I
had not done the Joh. 5. 36. 10. 25.

Ioh. 15. 24.


works among them, which no man else did, they had not sin, i. e. in not
believing me. Whereby Christ both sets forth the necessity of his working
miracles in order to the c^nviction of the wo^ld, and the greatness of the
miracles which he wrought; he did those no man else had done, no not Moses and
Elias, in curing all manner of diseases by the word of his mouth; and those
miracles which they had done, he exceeded them in the manner of doing them.
Moses fed them with bread from heaven, but Christ multiplied on earth some few
loaves and fishes, to the feeding of many thousands: Elias indeed raised one
from the dead; but Christ raised more, and one after he had been four days in
the grave. And upon this very evidence of our Saviors miracles we find many
believing on him. And even of those who were not so far wrought upon as to
become followers of Christ, as Ioh. 1. 49. 3. 11.
the only Messiah, yet we find them so far persuaded by the power of his
miracles, that they looked upon him as a great Prophet, or one that was sent
from God: So Nicodemus, who came first to Christ more as a rational enquirer
then a believer, yet we see he was persuaded that he was a teacher come from
God, because no man could do Ioh. 3. 2.
the miracles which Christ did, unless God were with him. And before him many
of the Jews at Jerusalem believed in his Ioh. 2. 23.
name when they saw the miracles which he did; yet these persons Christ would
not trust himself with, because he knew their hearts were not subdued to his
doctrine, though their understandings were convinced by his miracles. And after
this others of the Jews that looked not on him as the Messiah, yet it is said
they believed on him on the account of his miracles. And many of the people
believed on him, and said, When Christ comes, will he do more miracles then
these which this man has done? Although herein they were most unreasonable in
believing the evidence, and not the truth attested by it, in believing Christ
to be one sent from God by his miracles, Joh. 7. 31.
and yet not believing him to be the Messiah, which was the thing attested by
them. Not that mere miracles would prove the person to be the Messiah who did
them, but the miracles proved the testimony to be Divine; now that which Christ
delivered to them as a Divine Testimony, was his being the Messiah, and
therefore by the same reason they believed him to be one sent from God, they
ought to have believed him to be the Messiah; for one sent from God could never
falsify in the main of his message, as this was of our Saviors preaching. And
thence it is observable, our Savior did not show forth his Divine power till
he entered upon his office of preaching, thereby making it appear he intended
this as the great evidence of the truth of the doctrine which he preached to
them. And herein the blind man in the Gospel saw more truth and reason then the
whole Court of Sanhedrin, before which in probability he was convented about
his cure by Christ; for when they sought to get something out of him in
disparagement of our Saviors person and miracle, he sharply and roundly tells
them, when they said they knew God spoke to Moses, but for this fellow, we know
not from whence he is. Why herein, says he, is a mavelous thing, that ye
know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. If this man were
not of God he Ioh. 9. 29, 30. ver. 33.
could do nothing (as though he had said) is it not plain that this man is
employed by God in the world by the miracles which he does? for otherwise God
would not so readily assist him in doing such great works; for we know that God
hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, ver. 31.
and does his will, him he hears; i. e. If this man pretended a Commission
from heaven falsely (whereby he would be the greatest of sinners) can we think
God would so miraculously assist him? but we know by our Law, if one comes with
a Commission from God, and draw men not to Idolatry, which is meant by a
worshipper of God, such a one God is present with, and we are bound to believe
him. And for this very miracle, of curing one born blind, was the like ever
heard of before? did ever Moses or the Prophets do it? Thus we see what strong
rational evidence there was in this miracle of Christ in the judgment of this
blind man, which he uttered with so much reason before the Court of Sanhedrin,
when he knew how like he was to be excommunicated for it; and yet this very
person was as yet ignorant that Christ was the true Messiah, as appears by the
sequel of the chapter; but upon Christ's revelation of himself to ver. 36.
him, he presently believed on him. How strangely irrational were the Jews then
in rejecting our Savior when his ver. 38.
miracles not only exceeded those of Moses both in number and quality; but
which was more, they saw themselves the miracles which Christ did, but they
received those of Moses only upon the credit of their Fathers. And from the
strength of the evidence arising from the power of miracles it is that St.
Peter tells the promiscuous Assembly, Acts 2. 22. That Jesus of Nazareth was a
man approved of God among them, by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did
by him in the midst of them, as they themselves also knew. He appeals to their
own knowledge, which he would not certainly have done, had it not been in a
case beyond all dispute among them. Which was a thing so notorious among them,
that we find the Pharisees themselves confessing it, What do we? For this man
does many miracles: Now then in a Nation John 11. 47.
whose religion had been established by miracles, and the certainty of the
truth of it, among those who then professed it, did depend so much upon the
constant credit which the report of the miracles done at the settling of their
Law had among them; what could be a more rational convincing way of proceeding,
then for our Savior to manifest by a greater power of miracles in himself the
undoubted credentials of his commission from heaven; and that he was the true
Messiah, which was foretold by their own most sacred and authentical records?
Which will appear more,

Because the power of miracles did evidently declare that he was the very
person promised. For if the exact correspondency Sect. 3. 2.
of the event to the predictions in a Nation owning them as Divine, be an
undoubted evidence that they are exactly fulfilled, our Savior was most
certainly the person so often spoken of in the Old Testament. For many of the
Prophecies of the Old Testament concerning the Messiah, if they were not
fulfilled in Christ, in the conditions the Jews have been in since their
dispersion, (which fell out exactly according to the prediction of Christ) it
is impossible they should be fulfilled at all. So that either the predictions
must lose their Divine authority, or they must be accomplished in our Blessed
Savior. For as Tertullian sharply says to the Jew, Read statum Iudaeae quem
Christus inveniat, C. Judaeos c. 13.
and alium contend venire; let the people of the Jews be in their former
condition, and then plead for a Messiah to come. For can any thing be more
plain then that the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem of Judea? but where is
that now, and how long since the Jews enjoyed any civil Polity there? what is
become of the second Temple in the time of which the desire of all Nations
should come? Is not Jerusalem already destroyed, and the oblation there long
since ceased, which was to come to pass so soon after the Messiah, and did
accordingly? Is not the Scepter yet departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from
between his feet, and is not Shiloh yet come? What strange unintelligible weeks
were those of Daniel, if they were extended to so indefinite a space of time as
the Jews pretend? and if indefinite, what certain ground could from thence be
gathered of any time wherein their accomplishment was to be expected? but not
to expatiate on those things which are already so largely proved beyond all
possibility of contradiction, by the ancient and modern learned writers against
the Jews: To insist therefore on our present business; are not the Prophecies
concerning the miracles which the Messiah should work exactly fulfilled in
Christ? Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the Isa.
35. 5, 6
deaf shall be unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the
tongue of the dumb shall sing. He must be a great stranger in the history of
the New Testament that is to seek for an exact fulfilling of this Prophecy.
Nay, and the Jewish Midrasch upon Psalm. 146. 8. says that when Messiah comes,
V. Grot. in Joh. 9. 32.
he should open the eyes of the blind; and the Jews themselves often speak of
the great miracles which the Messiah should do when he appears; and therefore
out of their own mouths will they be condemned, when the miracles of Christ
make it so evident that he was the true Messiah. Hence when John Baptist sent
his Disciples to Christ for them to be fully satisfied concerning him, Christ
gives this answer to them; he bids them tell him the blind receive their sight,
and the lame walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the Mat.
11. 5.
dead raised up, etc. as though the mentioning of these miracles was sufficient
to make it appear to them who he was whom they came to enquire after. And
therefore it is observable that John Baptist himself, though greater then the
Prophets, nay then whom there was not a greater born of women Mat. 11. 9, 11.
by our Saviors own Testimony; yet of him it is said, that he wrought no
miracle: of which no account can be ^oh. 10. 41.
given so probable and rational, as that God in his infinite wisdom was pleased
so to order it, that the evidence of our Saviors being the Messiah might be
made more clear by the miracles which he wrought; that the minds of people
might not be distracted between John and Christ; he therefore reserved the
glory of miracles wholly to the name of Christ, that there might be no pretense
of a competition between john and him.

Another reason of the necessity of miracles in our Savior by way of rational
evidence, is, the overthrowing the Sect. 4. 3.
power and Kingdom of the Devil in the world. For which purpose it is
observable that the Devil had scarce ever greater power over the bodies of men
as well as their souls, then at that time; thence we read of such a multitude
of Daemoniacks in the Gospel. For it seems very harsh to interpret those merely
of Epilepticall and Lunatic persons, both because the (...) Mat. 4. 24.
are mentioned distinctly, and that it appears by the primitive Church
afterward how frequent it was to eject the Devil out of possessed persons. Nay
so far am I from thinking that the Daemoniacks were mere Lunaticks, that I
rather think with Vossius that the Lunaticks were truly Daemoniacks, only they
were not constantly under the power of De Idolatr. l. 2. c. 19.
the Devil, but as their paroxysmes returned upon them, the Devil loving to
fifh in such troubled waters. And thence Mat. 17. 14 Luke 9. 39.
the same person is called a Lunatic in one place, who is called a Daemoniack
in another; because he did ruere in principiis lunationum, as the Arabic
version expresses it; or as Rusticus Elpidius more fully explains it, Repserat
in medium rabies horrenda furoris Lib. 5.

Daemonis afflatu, propria qui peste nocivus
Allidit captas foedo discrimine mentes,
Menstrua deciduos cum Luna recolligit ignes.
Theophylact is of opinion, that the Jews in the time of our Savior supposed,
that the souls of dead men became Demons, and thence we read in Scripture of
the Daemoniacks Mat. 8. 28
among the Tombs: but it is far more probable which Grotius conceives, that the
Jews were of opinion, that the souls of dead men did hover up and down about
their bodies, and that these were so long under the Devils power, which many of
the Jews to this day believe and make use of the instance of the Pythonisse
raising Samuel; on which account the Devils to favor an opinion so
advantageous to their interest, might appear with greater terror and fury about
their burying places, as we see they did in those possessed persons. But on
whatever account it was, we find it evident that about the time of our
Saviors appearance, and some time after, the truly (...) were very frequent;
whether it were that the Devil by such frequent possessions of persons, and
making them do such strange things, might thereby endeavor to invalidate the
evidence of our Saviors miracles (from whence it is probable the Pharisees
raised their calumny, that Christ did miracles by Beelzebub, because they saw so
many strange appearances caused by possessed persons) or whether it were
through the admirable providence of God, which might give Satan the greater
liberty at that time, on purpose to heighten the glory of our Savior in
dispossessing of him, and thereby to give the highest rational evidence, that
his power was of God, which tended so much to the destruction of the Kingdom of
Satan.

And hence the Primitive Christians did so much triumph, and as it were insult
over the Devil where ever they found Sect. 5.
him, making him to remove his lodgings from possessed persons, by a writ of
ejection from the name of Christ. Thence Origin rationally concludes that
Christ had his power given him from above, because at his very name the Devils
forsook the bodies which they had possessed. (...). Orig. c. Cells. l. 3.
And he elsewhere tells us, that even the meanest sort of Christians without
any ceremony, but merely by their prayers, did ordinarily eject the Devil out
of men's bodies: (...). Lib. 7.
Ordinary Christians, says he, most commonly do this, the grace of Christ by
its word thereby discovering the contemptibleness and infirmity of the Devils,
that in order to their ejection they did not so much as want any learned or
experienced Christian. And for this they appeal to the Heathens themselves, as
appears not only by the challenge of Tertullian already mentioned, but by the
Testimony of almost all of them who have writ against the Heathens in
vindication of the Christian religion. Thence Minutius Felix, Haec omnia sciunt
plerique, Pars vestrum, ipsos Pl 31. cd. Ouz.
daemonas de semetipsis confiteri, quoties a nobis torment is verborum, and
orationis incendiis de co^poribus exiguntur. Ipse Saturnus and Serapis, et
Jupiter, et quiequid daemonum colitis, victi dolor quod sunt eloquuntur, nec
utique in turpitudinem sui, nonnullis praesertim vestrum assistentib^s,
mentiuntur. Ipsis testibus eos esse Daemonas, de se verum confitentibus
credit; adjuratienim per Deum verum et solum, inviti, miseri corporibus
inhorrescunt; et vel exiliunt statim, vel evanesount gradatim, prout fides
patientis adjuvat, aut gratia curantis aspirat. Can we now think the Devil
should not only forsake his Tyranny over the bodies of men, but let go so
advantageous a pillar of his tyranny over the consciences of men in Idolatroius
worship, as the concealing himself was, had he not been forced to it by a power
far greater then his own? So Cyprian ad Demetrianum, appeals to him being the
Proconsul of Africa, about the same thing (who had written sharply against the
Christians) for speaking of the Devils whom they worshipped in their Idols. O
si audire eos velles et AdDemetr: s. 12.
videre, quando a nobis adjurantur et torquentur Spiritualibus flagris et
verborum tormentis de obsessis corporibus ejiciuntur, quando ejulantes et
gementes voce humana, et potestate divina flagella et verbera sentientes,
venturum judicium confitentur; veni et cognosce vera esse quae dicimus: and a
little after, videbis sub manu nostra stare vinctos, et tremere captivos, quos
tu suspicis et veneraris ut Dominos. Did ever any of the Heathen Magicians (of
which there were good store) extort such things from the Devils as the
Christians did merely by their prayers, and invocations of the name of God and
Christ? did they ever make them confess to be what they were, not only in
possessed bodies but in their Temples too? that was beyond the power of their
Ephesian letters, or any of their Magical incantations. Did the Devils ever
dread so much the name of Socrates or Aristides as they did that of God and of
Christ? Of which Lactantius thus speaks, Quo audito De justitia lib. 5. c. (...)
tremunt, exclamant, et urise verberarique testantur, et interrogati qui sint,
quando venerint, quando in hominem irrepserint, confitentur sic extorti, et
excruciati virtate divininuminis exulant; propter haec verbera et minas,
sanctos et justos viros semper oderunt. And even Apollo himself at the name of
Christ trembled as much as ever the Pythian Prophetess did in her greatest
furies; so Prudentius tells us, Torquetur Apollo
Nomine percussus Christi, nec fulmina verbi Apoth^os.

Far potest; agitant miserum tot verbera linguae,
Quot laudata Dei resonant miracula Christi.
To these we may add what Firmicus says to the same purpose, Ecce Demon est
quem colis; cum Dei et Christi ejus nomen audierit, contremiseit, et ut
interrogantibus nob is respondeat De errore pro^. relig.
trepidantia verba, vix se colligit; adhaerens homini laceratur, uritur,
vapulat, et statim de commissis sceleribus confitetur. By which Testimonies it
appears what power over Satan, when he was in his Kingdom, the Christians by
the power of Christ had; not as though the bare name of Christ had so great an
efficacy in the ejection of Devils, as Origin seem^ to be of opinion (in a
discourse about the efficacy of names, unworthy of so great a Philosopher) but
that God I.. 1. c. C^ls.
might manifest to the world the truth that was contained in that name, he did
give a power to such as made use of it, of working miracles by it. And thence
we read in Scripture, that some who were not thoroughly Christians, but yet
professed the truth of the Gospel, and that what they did was for the honor of
Christ, had a power of casting out Devils and doing many wonderful things
through his name.

By these and many other testimonies which might be Mat 7. 22. Sect. 6.
produced out of the Primitive Church, we find an exact accomplishment of our
Saviors promise to his Disciples when he took his leave of them: And these
signs shall follow Mark. 16. 17.
them that believe, In my name shall they cast out Devils, etc. This power then
in the Primitive Church had a twofold argument in it, both as it was a
manifestation of the truth of the predictions of our Savior, and as it was an
evidence of the Divine power of Christ, when his name so long after his
ascension had so great a command over all the infernal spirits; and that so
evidently that at that time when the Christians did as it were Tyrannize over
Satan so in his own territories, yet then the greatest of his Magicians had no
power to hurt the bodies of the Christians, which is a thing Origin takes much
notice of. For when Celsus says from Diogenes Aegyptius that Magic could only
hurt ignorant and wicked men, and had no power over Philosophers, Origin
replies, first, that Philosophy was no such charm against the power of Magic,
as appears by Maeragenes who writ the story of Apollonius Tyaneus, the famous
Magician and Philosopher, who therein mentions how Euphrates and an Epicurean
((...) no vulgar Philosophers) were catched by the Magic of Apollonius (and
although Philostratus disowns this History of Maeragenes as fabulous, yet he
that thinks Philostratus for that, to be of any greater credit, is much
deceived, of whom Lud. Vives gives this true character, that he does magna
Homeri mendacia majoribus mendaciis De trad. disc. l. 5.
corrigere, mend one hole and make three) but says Origin as to the
Christians, this is undoubtedly true: (...). Cont. Cells. l. 6. p. 302.
This, says he, we are most certain of and have found it by experience true,
that those who according to the principles of Christianity do worship God over
all, through Jesus, and do live according to the Gospel, being constant in
their solemn prayers night and day, are not obnoxious to the power of any
Magic or Devils whatsoever. Now then if the Devil who had then so much power
over others, had none upon the true followers of Christ; and if in stead of
that they had so great a commanding power over the Devil even in things which
tended most to his disadvantage, not only dislodging him out of bodies, ^^t out
of his Idolatrous Temples; what can be more evident, then that this power which
was so efficacious for the overthrowing the Kingdom of Satan, must needs be far
greater then the power of Satan is? For it is an undoubted Maxim in natural
reason, that whatever is put out of its former place by force and violence, is
extruded by something stronger then its self; for if the force on either side
were equal, there could be no disposses sing of either; if any thing then be
cast out of its former possession unwillingly, it is an undeniable proof there
was some power greater then his who was dispossessed. Now we cannot conceive,
if there be such malignant spirits as by many undeniable proofs it is evident
there are, that they should willingly quit their possessions to such a doctrine
which tends to the unavoydable ruin of their interest in the world; if then
the power of this doctrine has overthrown the Devils Kingdom in the world,
wherever it has been truly entertained, it must necessarily follow, that this
power is far above the power of any damned spirits. Now what folly and madness
was it in the Heathens to worship those for Gods, which they could not but see,
if they would open their eyes, were under so great slavery to a power above
them, which could make them confess what was most to their disadvantage in the
presence of their great adorers?

Neither ought the many counterfeits and impostures which have been in the
world in this kind since the establishment of Sect. 7.
Christian Religion (among the advancers of particular interests and designs)
make us suspect the truth of those things which were done in the first Ages of
the Church of Christ. For first it stands to the greatest reason, that the
strongest arguments for the truth of a Religion ought to be fetched from the
ages of its first appearance in the world; if then the evidence be undoubted as
to those first times, we ought to embrace our Religion as true, whatever the
impostures have been among those who have apparently gone aside from that
purity and simplicity of the Gospel, which had so great power. Then secondly,
if all that has been done in this kind of ejecting Devils, where Christianity
is owned, be acknowledged for impostures; one of these two things must be
supposed as the ground of it; either that there was no such thing as a real
possession by the Devil, or else there was no such thing as a dispossessing
him: If the first, then hereby will be seen a confirmation of our former
argument, that where Christianity is owned, by the power of that, the Devil is
more curbed and restrained, then where it is not, or else is much overrun with
ignorance and superstition. Of the latter, the ages of the Christian Church,
from the 10. Century to the beginning of the 16. current, are a clear evidence:
Of the first, all those who have been conversant in the places where Paganism
or gross Idolatry do yet reign, will bring in their creditable testimonies, how
tyrannical the power of the Devil is yet among them. If it be not so then,
where careful endeavors have been used for retriving the ancient p^rity of
Christian doctrine and worship, we ought to impute it to the power of him who
is stronger then Satan, who wherever he comes to dwell, does dispossess him of
his former habitations. If the second then be entertained as the ground of
concluding all things as impostures, which are accounted dispossessions of
Satan, viz. that he never is really dispossessed, then it must either be said,
that where he is once seized, there is no possibility of ejecting him; which is
to say, that the Devil has an absolute and infinite power, and that there is
no power greater then his, which is to own him for God; or else that God
suffers him to tyrannize where and how he will, which is contrary to divine
providence, and the care God takes of the world, and of the good of mankind; or
else lastly, that those persons who pretend to do it, are not such persons who
are armed so much with the power of Christ, nor possessed with such a due
spirit of the Gospel, which has command over these infernal spirits. And this
in the cases pretended by the great Iuglers and Impostors of the Christian
world, the Popish Priests have been so notorious, that none of their own party
of any great faith or credit would stand to vouch them. And we have this
impregnable argument against all such Impostures, that the matters which they
by such actions would give an evidence to, being so vastly different from, if
not in some things diametrically opposite to the first delivery and design of
the Christian faith, it is inconsistent with the way used for the confirmation
of Christian Religion in the first publishing of it, to attest the truth of
such things by any real miracles: For so it would invalidate the great force of
the evidences of the truth of Christianity, if the same argument should be used
for the proving of that which in the judgment of any impartial person was not
delivered, when the truth of the doctri^e of Christ was confirmed by so many
and uncontrouled miracles. But hereby we see what unconceivable prejudice has
been done to the true primitive doctrine of the Gospel; and what
stumbling blocks have been laid in the way of considerative persons, to keep
them from embracing the truly Christian faith, by those who would be thought
the infallible directors of men in it, by making use of the broad-seal of
Heaven (set only to the truth of the Scriptures) to confirm their unwritten and
superstitious ways of worship. For if I once see that which I looked on as an
undoubted evidence of divine power, brought to attest any thing directly
contrary to divine revelation; I must either conclude that God may contradict
himself by sealing both parts of a contradiction, which is both blasphemous and
impossible; or that that society of men which own such things, is not at all
tender of the honor of Christain doctrine, but seeks to set up an interest
contrary to it, and matters not what disadvantage is done to the grounds of
Religion by such unworthy pretenses; and which of these two is more rational
and true, let every ones conscience judge. And therefore it is much the
interest of the Christian world to have all such frauds and impostures
discovered, which do so much disservice to the Christian faith, and are such
secret fomenters of Atheism and Infidelity. But how far that promise of our
Savior, that they which believe in his name, shall cast out Devils, and do
many miracles, may extend Mat. 16. 17.
even in these last ages of the world to such generous and primitive-spirited
Christians, who out of a great and deep sense of the truth of Christianity and
tenderness to the souls of men, should go among Heathens and Infidels to
convert them only to Christ (and not to a secular interest, under pretense of
an infallible head) is not here a place fully to enquire. I confess I cannot
see any reason why God may not yet for the conviction of Infidels, employ such
a power of miracles, although there be not such necessity of it, as there was
in the first propagation of the Gospel, there being some evidences of the power
of Christianity now, which were not so clear then (as the overthrowing the
Kingdom of Satan in the world, the prevailing of Christianity notwithstanding
force used against it; the recov^ry of it from amidst all the corruptions which
were mixed with it; the consent of those parties in the common foundations of
Christianity, which yet disagre^ from each other with great bittern^ss of
spirit) though I say it be not of that necessity now, when the Scriptures are
conv^yed to us in a certain uninterrupted manner; yet God may please out of his
abundant provision for the satisfaction of the minds of men, concerning the
truth of Christian doctrine, to employ good men to do something which may
manifest the power of Christ to be above the D^vils, whom they worship. And
therefore I should far sooner believe the relation of the miracles of Xaverius
and his Brethren, employed in the conversion of Infidels, then Lipsius his
Virgo Hallensis and Asprecollis, could it but be made evident to me that the
design of those persons had more of Christianity then Popery in it; that is,
that they went more upon a design to bring the souls of the Infidels to heaven,
then to enlarge the authority and jurisdiction of the Roman Church.

But whatever the truth of those miracles, or the design of those persons were,
we have certain and undoubted evidence Sect. 8.
of the truth of those miracles, whereby Christianity was first propagated, and
the Kingdom of Satan overthrown in the world; Christ thereby making it appear
that his power was greater then the Devils, who had possession, because he
overcame him, took from him all his armor wherein he trusted, Luke 11. 21, 22.
and divided his spoils; i. e. disposs^ssed him of men's bodies, and his
Idolatrous Temples, silenced his Oracles, nonplust his Magicians, and at last,
when Christianity had overcome by suffering, wrested the worldly power and
Empire out of the Devils hands, and employed it against himself. Neither may we
think, because since that time the Devil has got some ground in the world
again by the large spread of Mahometism, and the general corruptions in the
Christian world, that therefore the other was no argument of divine power;
because the truth of Christianity is not tied to any particular places; because
such a falling away has been foretold in Scripture; and therefore the truth of
them is proved by it, and because God himself has threatened that those who
will not receive the truth in the love of it, shall be given up to strong
de'usions. Does not this then in stead of abating the strength of the argument,
confirm it more, and that nothing is fallen out in the Christian world, but
what was foretold by those whom God employed in the converting of it? But we
are neither without some fair hopes even from that divine revelation which was
sealed by uncontrouled evidence, that there may be yet a time to come when
Christ will recover his Churches to their pristine purity and simplicity; but
withal I think we are not to measure the future felicity of the Church by
outward splendour and greatness (which too many so strongly fancy) but by a
recovery of that true spirit of Christianity which breathed in the first ages
of the Church, whatever the outward condition of the Church may be: For if
worldly greatness, and ease, and riches, were the first impairers of the purity
of Christian Religion, it is hard to conceive how the restoring of the Church
of Christ to its true glory, can be by the advancing of that, which gives so
great an occasion to pride and sensuality, which are so contrary to the design
of Christian Religion; unless we suppose men free from those corruptions, which
continual experience still tells the world the Rulers as well as members of the
Christian society are subject to. Neither may that be wonderd at, when such
uneveness of parts is now discovered in the great Luminaries of the world, and
the Sun himself is found to have his maculae, as though the Sun had a purple
fever, or as Kiroher expresses it, Ipse Phoebus, qui rerum omnium in universo
naturae Theatro aspectabilium long pulcherrimus omnium opinione Propyl.
Agonist. ad Oedipum. cap. 2.
est habitus, hoc seculo tandem fumosa facie, ac infecto vultu maculis prodiit;
diceres eum variolis laborare senescentem: I speak not this as though an
outward flourishing condition of the Church were inconsistent with its purity;
for then the way to refine it, were to throw it into the flames of persecution;
but that the advancement of the flourishing condition of the Church, is not
merely by outward pomp and grandeur, and that the purity of the Church is not
inconsistent with a state of outward difficulties, which the experience o^ the
Primitive Church gives an irrefragable demonstration of. Thus much may serve to
show the necessity of a power of miracles, conjoined with the Christian
Doctrine, to manifest the truth of it by overthrowing the Kingdom of that great
Antichrist the Devil, who had usurped so much Tyranny over the world.

The last reason why a power of miracles was so necessary Sect. 9.
for confirming the truth of the Gospel, is, because the Gospel was to be
propagated over the world without any other rational evidence then was
contained in the miracles wrought for the confirmation of it. Now the admirable
success which this doctrine found in the world, considering all the
circumstances of it, does make it clear what certainty there was that the
miracles which were wrought were true, and they were certain evidences that the
doctrine attested by them was from God. Now this will appear from these two
things.

That no rational account can be given why the Apostles should undertake to
publish such a doctrine, unless they had 1.
been undoubtedly certain that the Doctrine was true, and they had sufficient
evidence to persuade others to believe it.

That no satisfactory account can be given, considering the nature of the
doctrine of Christ, and the manner of its propagation, why it should meet with
so great acceptance in the world, had there not been such convincing evidence
as might fully persuade men of the truth of it.

I begin with the first, from the publishers of this doctrine 2.
in the world: All that I here require by way of a Postulatum or supposition,
are onlythese two things, which no man right in his wits I suppose will deny:
1. That men are so far rational agents, that they will not set upon any work of
moment and difficulty, without sufficient grounds inducing them to it; and by
so much the greater the work is, the more sure and steadfast had the grounds
need to be which they proceed upon. 2. That the Apostles or first Publishers of
the Christian doctrine were not men distracted, or bereft of their wits, but
acted by principles of common sense, reason, and understanding, as other men in
the world do: Which if any one should be so far beside his wits as to question,
if he have but patience and understanding enough to read and consider those
admirable writings of theirs which are conveyed to us by as certain
uninterrupted a Tradition as any thing in the world has been; and by that time
he will see cause to alter his judgment, and to say that they are not mad, but
speak the words of the greatest truth and soberness. These things supposed, I
now proceed to the proving of the thing in hand, which will be done by these
three things: First, That the Apostles could not but know how h^zardous an
employment the preaching of the Gospel would be to them. Secondly, that no
motive can be conceived sufficient for them to undertake such an employment,
but the infallible truth of the doctrine which they preached. Thirdly, that the
greatest assurance they had themselves of the truth of their Doctrine, was by
being eyewitnesses of the miracles of Christ.

First, That the Apostles could not but understand the hazard of their
employment, notwithstanding which they cheerfully undertook it. That men armed
with no external power, nor cried up for their wit and learning, and carrying a
doctrine with them so contra^y to the general inclinations of the world, having
nothing in it to recommend it to mankind but the Truth of it, should go about
to persuade the world to part with the Religion they owned, and was settled by
their laws, and to embrace such a religion as called them off from all the
things they loved in this world, and to prepare themselves by mortification and
self-denial for another world, is a thing to humane reason incredible, unless
we suppose them acted by a higher spirit then mankind is ordinarily acted by.
For what is there so desirable in continual reproaches and contumelies? what
delight is there in racks and prisons? what agreeableness in flames and
martyrdoms to make men undergo some, nay all of these rather then disown that
doctrine which they came to publish? Yet these did the Apostles cheerfully
undergo in order to the conversion of the world, to the truth of that doctrine
which they delivered to it. And not only so, but though they did foresee them,
they were not discouraged from this undertaking by it. I confess, when men are
upon hopes of profit and interest in the world, engaged upon a design which
they promise themselves impunity in, having power on their side, though
afterward things should fall out contrary to their expectation, such persons
may die in such a cause, because they must, and some may carry it out with more
resolution, partly through an innate fortitude of spirit, heightened with the
advantages of Religion, or an Enthusiastic temper. But it is hard to conceive
that such persons would have undertaken so hazardous an employment, if
beforehand they had foreseen what they must have undergone for it. But now the
Apostles did foreknow that bonds and imprisonment, nay death its self must be
undergone in a violent manner, for the sake of the doctrine which they
preached; yet not withstanding all this, they go boldly and with resolution on
with their work, and give not over because of any hardships and persecutions
they met withal. One of the chiesest of them, S. Peter, and as forward as any
in Preaching the Gospel, had the very manner of his death foretold him by
Christ himself, Joh. 21. 19
before his Ascension; yet soon after we find him preaching Christ in the midst
of those who had crucified him, and telling them to their faces the greatness
of their sin in it, and appealing to the miracles which Christ had done among
them, and bidding them repent and believe in him whom they had crucified, if
ever they would be saved: And this he did, Acts 2. 22, 23, 38.

Acts 3. 14, 15, 16, 19.

Acts 4. 5.


not only among the people who gave their consent to the crucifying of Christ,
but soon after, being convented together with John, before the Court of
Sanbedrin (probably the very same which not long before had sentenced Christ to
death) for a miracle wrought by them, with what incredible boldness does he to
their faces tell them of their murdering Acts 4. 10, 12.
Christ; and withal, that there was no other way to salvation but by him whom
they had crucified! Be it known unto you all (says Peter to the Sanhedrin) and
to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ whom ye have
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does this man stand here
before you whole. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. What an
heroickfreedom of spirit appears in these words! what magnanimity and courage
was there now in that person, who durst in the face of this Court tell them of
their murder, and that there was no salvation but by him whom they had
crucified! Well might they wonder at the boldness of the men, who feared not
the same death which they had so lately brought their Lord and Master to.

Neither was this singly the case of Peter and John, but all Sect. 10.
the rest of the Apostles undertook their work with the same resolution and
preparation of Spirit to under go the greatest hardship in the world sor the
sake of the truths they Preached. And accordingly as far as Ecclesiastical
history can ascertain us of it, they did all but John (and that to make good
Joh. 2^. 22.
the prediction of Christ) suffer violent deaths by the hands of those who
persecuted them merely for their doctrine. And which is most observable, when
Christ designed them first of all for this work, he told them before hand of
reproaches, persecutions, all manner of hardships, nay of death its self which
they must undergo for his sake. All that he gave them Matthew. 10. 17, 18, 21,
22, 28.
by way of encouragement, was, that they could only kill the body and not the
soul, and therefore that they should fear him only who could destroy both body
and soul in hell; all the support they had, was, an expectation in another
world, and that animated them to go through all the hardships of this. Where do
we ever read of any such boldness and courage in the most knowing Philos^phers
of the Heathens? with what saintness and misgiving of mind does Socrates speak
in his famous discourse suppo^ed to be made by him before his death? how Pl. u.
Phaed.
uncertainly does he speak of a state of immortality? and yet in all
probability Plato set it forth with all advantages imaginable. Where do we
find that ever any of the great friends of Socrates, who were present at his
death, as Phaedo, Cebes, Crito, and Simmias, durst enter the Areopagus, and
condemn them there for the murder of Socrates, though this would be far short
of what the Apostles did? why were they not so charitable as to inform the
world better of those grand truths of the being of God and immortality of
souls, if at least they were fully convinced of them themselves? Why did not
Plato at least speak out, and tell the world the truth, and not disguise his
^iscourses under feigned names, the better to avoid accusation and the fate of
Socrates? how does he mince his excellent matter, and plays as it were at
Bo-peep with his readers, sometimes appearing and then pulling in his horns
again? It may not be an improbable conjecture that the death of Socrates was
the foundation of the Academy; I mean of that cautelous doctrine of withholding
assent, and being both pro and con, sometimes of this side, and sometimes of
that: for Socrates his death had made all his friends very fearful of being too
dogmatical. And Plato himself had too much riches and withal too much of a
Courtier in him to hazard the dear prison of his soul, viz. his body, merely
for an aethereall vehicle. He had rather let his soul flutter up and down in a
terrestrial matter, or the cage it was p^nt up in, then hazard too violent an
opening of it by the hands of the Areopagus. And the great Roman Orator among
the rest of Plato's sentiments had learnt this too; for although in his
discourses he has many times sufficiently laid open the folly of the Heathen
worship and Theology, yet he knows how to bring himself off safe enough with
the people; and will be sure to be dogmatical only in this, that nothing is to
be innovated in the religion of a Commonwealth, and that the customs of our
Ancestors are inviolably to be observed. Which principles had they been true as
they were safe for the persons who spoke them, the Christian religion had never
gained any entertainment in the world; for where ever it came, it met with this
potent prejudice that it was looked on as an innovation, and therefore was
shrewdly suspected by the Governors of Commonwealths, and the Preachers of it
punished as factious and seditious persons; which was all the pretext the wise
Politicians of the world had for their cruel and inhumane persecutions of such
multitudes of peaceable and innocent Christians. Now when these things were
foretold by the Apostles themselves before their going abroad so plainly, that
with the same says they did believe the doctrine they Preached to be true,
they must believe that all these things should come to pass, what courage and
magnanimity of spirit was it in them thus to encounter dangers and as it were
court the slames? Nay and before the time was come that they must dye, to seal
the truth of their doctrine, their whole life was a continual peregrination,
wherein they were as so many Jobs in pilgrimage, encounterd with perils and
dangers on every side; of which one of the most painful and succesful, S. Paul
has given in such a large inventory of his perils, that the very reading of
them were 2 Cor 6. ^. 5, 8, 9.
enough to undo a poor Epicurean Philosopher, and at once to spoil him of the
two pillars of his happiness, the quietness of his mind and ease of his body.
Thus we see what a hazardous employment that was which the Apostles went upon,
and that it was such as they very well understood the di^^iculty of before they
set upon it.

Secondly, We cannot find out any rational motive which Sect. 11.
could carry them through so hazardous an employment, but the full convictions
of their minds of the undoubted truth and certainty of the doctrine which they
delivered. We find before that no vulgar motives in the world could carry them
upon that design which they went upon; Could they be led by ambition and vain
glory who met with such reproaches where ever they went; and not only
persecutions of the tongue, but the sharper ones of the hands too? we never
read of any but the Primitive Christians who were ambitious of being Martyrs,
and thought long till they were in the flames: which made Arrius Antoninus
being Proconsul of Asia when Christians in multitudes beset his tribunal and
thronged in to be condemned, say to them, (...). O miserable people, had not ye
ways enough to Tertul. ad Scapul. c. 5.
end your lives at h^me, but ye must crowd for an execution! This was a higher
ambition by far then any of those mancipia gloriae, those Chamaeleons that
lived on the breath of applause, the Heathen Philosophers ever reached to, who
were as Tertullian expresses it, homines gloriae and eloquentiae solius
libidinosi, unsatiable thirsters after the honor and eloquence of Apolog. c.
47.
the world; but the Spirit of a Christian did soar too high to quarry on so
mean a pr^y. When the more sober heathens had taken a stricter notice of the
carriages and lives of the Preachers of the Gospel and all their genuine
followers, they instead of the common and rude name of impostors, gave them a
more civil title of Philosophers, and looked upon their doctrine as a sublimer
kind of Philosophy, non utique divinum negotium existimant sed mag is
Philosophiae genus, as Tertullian Apolog. c. 46.
tells us, because the Philosophers pretended so much to moral virtues which
they saw the Christians so excellent in; but as Tertullian there replies, nomen
hoc Philosophorum Daemonia non fugat, The Devil was never afraid of a
Philosophers beard, nor were diseases cured by the touch of a Philosophic
pallium. There was something more Divine in Christians then in the grave
Philosophers; and that not only in reference to their lives, and the Divine
power which was seen in them, but in reference to the truth and certainty of
their doctrine, it being a true character given of both, by that same excellent
writer in behalf of the Christians of his time: Veritatem Philosophi quidem
aff^ctant, possident autem Christiani; what the Philosophers desired only, the
Christians enjoy, Ad. Nationes. l. 1. c. 4.
which was Truth: and as he elsewhere more fully speaks, mimice Philosophi
affectant veritatem, and affectando corrum. punt, ut qui gloriam captant;
Christianieam necessario appetunt Apol. c. 46.
and integri praestant, ut qui saluti suae curant. Truth is the Philosophers
mistress which by courting he vitiates and corrupts, looking at nothing but his
own glory: but truth is the Christians Matron whose directions he observes and
follows, because he regards no glory but that to come. And to let them further
see what a difference there was between a Christian and a Philosopher, he
concludes that discourse with these words, Quid adeo simile Philosophus and
Christianus? Graeciae Discipulus et coeli? famae negotiator et vitae? verborum
et factorum operator? rerum aedificator et destructor? amicus et inimicus
erroris? veritatis interpolator et integrator? furator ejus et custos? As much
distance (says he) as there is between Greece and Heaven, between applause and
eternal glory, between words and things, between building and destroying,
between truth and error, between a plagiary and corrupter of truth, and a
preserver and advancer of it; so much is there between a Philosopher and a
Christian. The Heathens might suspect indeed some kind of affinity between the
first Preachers of the Gospel and the ancient Sophists of Greece, because of
their frequent going from place to place, and pretending a kind of Enthusiasm
as they did: but as much difference as there is between a Knight Errant and
Hercules, between a Mountebank and Hippocrates, that and much greater there is
between a Greek Sophist and an Apostle. Socrates in Plato's Euthydemus has
excellently discovered the vanity and futility of those persons under the
persons of Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, and so likewise in his Protagoras;
their intent was only like the retiaries in the Roman Spectacles to catch their
adversaries in a net; to entangle them with some captious question or other;
but how vastly different from this was the design of the Apostles who abhord
those endless contentions which then were in the Heathen world; and came to
show them that Truth which was revealed with an intent of making them better
men!

We see the Apostles were not carried forth by any mean Sect. 12.
and vulgar motives, neither did they drive on any private ends of their own;
all that they minded was the promoting of the doctrine which they preached. Nay
they accounted no hazards comparable with the advantage which the world enjoyed
through the propagation of the Christian Religion. This showed a truly noble
and generous spirit in them which would not be hindered from doing the world
good, though they found so bad entertainment from it; yea they rejoiced in
their greatest sufferings which they underwent in so good a cause; wherein
those Primitive Christians who were the genuine followers of the Apostles, did
so far imitate them, that, etiam damnati gratias agunt, they gave the Judges
Tertul. Apol. c. 46.
thanks that they thought them worthy to lose their lives in a cause which they
had reason to triumph in, though they died for it. And when any of them were
apprehended, they discovered so little fear of punishment, ut unum solummodo
quod non ante suerint paeniteret, that nothing troubled them so much as that
they had been Christians no sooner, as one of Miautius Felix.
their number speaks. And when the Heathens usually scoffed at them and called
them Sarmentitii and Semaxii because they were burned upon the Cross, one of
them in the name of the rest answers, hic est habitus victoriae nostrae, haec
palmata vestis, tali curru triumphamus; the Cross was only Tertul. Ap. cap. 50.
their triumphant chariot which carried them sooner to Heaven. Now this courage
and resolution of spirit which was seen in the first planters of Christianity
in the world made all serious and inquisitive persons look more narrowly into
those things. which made men slight so much the common bug-bears of humane
nature, sufferings and death.

Quis enim non contemplatione ejus concutitur, adrequirendum ^^^
quid intus in re sit? quis non ubi requisivit accedit? ubi accessit
patiexoptat? These sufferings made men enquire; this enquiry made them believe;
that belief made them as willing to suffer themselves as they had seen others
do it before them. Thus it appeared to be true in them, (...) q^^que
crudelitas, illecebra magis est sectae; plures ^fficimur qu^^ties metimur a
vobis; semen est sanguis Christianorum; The cruelty of their ^nemies did but
increase their number; the harvest of their pretended justice was but the
seed-time of Christianity, and no seed was so fruitful as that which was
steeped in the blood of Martyrs. Thence Justin Martyr ingenuously says of
himself, that while he was a Platonic Philosopher, he derided and scoffed at
the Christians; but when he considered their great courage and constancy in
dying for their profession, he could not think those could possibly be men
wicked and voluptuous, who when offers of life were made them, would rather
choose death then deny Christ. By which he found plainly that there was a
higher spirit in Christianity then could be obtained by the sublime notions and
speculations of Plato, and that a poor ignorant Christian would do and suffer
more for the sake of Christ then any of the Academy in defense of their master
Plato. Now since all men naturally abhor sufferings, what is it which should so
powerfully alter the nature and disposition of Christians above all other
persons, that they alone should seem in that to have forgot humanity, that not
only with patience, but with joy they endured torments and abode the flames?
What! were they all p^ssessed with a far more then Stoical Apathy, that no
sense o^ pain could work at all upon them? or were they all besotted and
infatuated persons that did not know what it was they underwent? ^t is true
some of the more blind and wilful Heathens derided them as such; but who were
the more infatuated, let any sober person judge; they who slighted and rejected
a doctrine of so great concernment, which came attested with so much resolution
and courage in the professors of it; or they who were so far persuaded of the
truth of it, that they would rather die than deny it? dicimus and palam
dicimus, et vobis torquentibus lacerati et cruenti Tertul. A^ cap. 2^
vociferamur, Deum colimus per Christum. They were not ashamed to believe in
the blood of Christ even when their own blood ran down besore their eyes, and
confess Christ with their mouths when their bodies were upon the rack.
Certainly then there were some very powerful and convincing arguments which
buoyed up the spirits of true Christians in that deluge of sufferings which
they were to swim through; it must be a strong and well grounded faith which
would hold out under so great trials, and they could not be to seek for the
most persuasive motives to faith, who were so ready to give an account to
others of the hope that was in them, and to persuade all other persons to the
embracing of it. With what face and confidence otherwise could they persuade
men to embrace a doctrine so dangerous as that was, had there not been motives
sufficient to bear up against the weight of susferings, and arguments
persuasive to convince them of the undoubted certainty of that doctrine which
they encouraged them to believe?

Now that which appears to have been the main ground of satisfaction to the
Primitive Christians as to the truth and Sect. 13.
certainty of the doctrine of Christ, was this, that the doctrine of the Gospel
was at first delivered to the world, by those persons who were themselves
eyewitnesses of all the miracles which our Savior wrought in confirmation of
the truth of what he spoke. They were such persons who had been themselves
present, not only to hear most of our Saviors admirable discourses when he was
in the world, but to see all those glorious things which were done by him, to
make it appear that he was immediately sent from God. Let us now appeal to our
own faculties, and examine a little what rational evidence could possibly be
desired, that the doctrine of the Gospel was true, which God did not afford to
the world? What could the persons who were the auditors of our Savior desire
more as an evidence that he came from God, then his doing such things which
were certainly above any created power either humane or Diabolical, and
therefore must needs be Divine? What could other persons desire more who were
not present at the doing of these miracles, but that the report of them should
be conveyed to them in an undoubted manner by those persons who were
eyewitnesses of them, and made it appear to the world they were far from any
intention of deceiving it? Now this makes the Apostles themselves in their own
writings (though they were divinely inspired) appeal to the rational evidence
of the truth of the things in that they were delivered by them who were
eyewitnesses of them. There St. Peter speaks thus to the dispersed Jews, (...)
2 Pet. 1. 16.
(...). For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known
unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses
of his Majesty. The power and coming of Christ which the Apostle speaks of, was
not as some improbably conceive, either his general coming to judgment upon
the world, or his particular coming upon the Nation of the Jews; but by an
Hendyades, by his power and coming is meant his powerful appearance in the
world, whereby he mightily discovered himself to be the Son of God. Now this
says the Apostle, was no (...), not like the Heathen Mythology concerning the
(...) and (...) of their Gods among them (which were so frequently believed
among them that Dionysins Antiq. l. 2. page 128.
Halycarnassaeus condemns the Epicureans, because they did deride (...) the
appearances of their Gods in the world) now says the Apostle, assure your
selves this is no such appearance of a God on earth as that among the Heathens
was; for says he we our selves who declare these things were (...), we fully
understood this (...) this great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the
flesh, for we saw his (...), that great majesty which attended him in all which
he spoke or did; we saw all those (...) the great Acts 2. 11.
things of God, which were manifest in him, all those mir^culous operations
which were wrought by him. Therefore as this was a great confirmation of the
faith of the Apostles themselves that they saw all these things, so we see it
was of great concernment to the world in order to their belief that the Gospel
was no cunningly devised fable, in that it was delivered by such who were (...)
eyewitnesses of what they declared. To the same purpose St. John speaks ad
conciliandam fidem, to make it appear how true what they delivered was, in the
entrance of his Epistle; That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with 1 John 1, 2, 3.
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested
unto us) That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you. We see what
great force and weight the Apostle lays upon this, that they delivered nothing
but what they had seen and heard; as they heard the doctrine of Christ, so they
saw the miracles which he wrought in confirmation of it. St. Luke likewise in
the beginning of his Gospel declares that he intended to write nothing but what
he had perfect understanding of from such persons who had been (...)
eyewitnesses, Luke 1. 1, 2, 3.
and instruments themselves in part of what was written, for that is meant by
(...): and those things which were written, he says were (...), things which
are abundantly proved to be true; for being matters of ^act, there could be no
stronger proof of them, then by such who were eyewitnesses of what they spoke.
And this we find the Apostles themselves very cautious about, in the choice of
a new Apostle in the room of Judas. Wherefore of these Acts 1. 21, 22.
men which have companied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and
out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day, that he
was taken from us, must one be ordained to be a witness of his resurrection:
For, because Christ was mightily declared to be the Son of God by his
resurrection from the dead, (as that which was the great Seal of our Saviors
being the Son of God) therefore we find the Apostles so frequently attesting
the truth of the resurrection of Christ, and that themselves were eyewitnesses
of it. This Jesus, says Peter, has God raised up, whereof we all are
witnesses. And again, And killed the Prince of life, whom Acts 2. 32.
God has raised up from the dead, whereof we are witnesses; and both Peter and
John to the Sanhedrin; For we cannot 3. 15.
but speak the things which we have seen and heard. And the ^. 20.
whole College of Apostles afterward, And we are his witnesses of these
things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God ^. 32.
has given to them that obey him. In which words they give them that twofold
rational evidence which did manifest the undoubted truth of what they spoke;
for they delivered nothing but what themselves were witnesses of, and withal
was declared to be true by the power of the Holy Ghost in the miracles which
were wrought by and upon believers. Afterward we read the sum o^ the Apostles
Preaching, and the manner used by them to persuade men of the truth of it, in
the words of Peter to Cern^lius and his company, How God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power, who went about doing good, and
healing all that were 10. 39, 40, 41, 42.
oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him: And we are witnesses of all
things which he did both in the land of the Jews and in Jerusalem, whom they
stew and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to
us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And he com^anded
us to ^reach unto the people, that it is be which was ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead. By all which we see what care God was pleased to take
for the satisfaction of the world in point of rational evidence, as to the
truth of the matters which were discovered concerning our Savior Christ,
because he made choice of such persons to be the preachers and writers of these
things who were the best ab^e to satisfy the world about them, viz. such as
had been eye witnesses of them.

Now in order to the making it more fully evident what Sect. 14.
strength there was in this Testimony given by the Apostles to the miracles of
Christ, we shall more fully manifest the rational evidence which attended it in
these following propositions. Where the truth of a doctrine depends upon a
matter of fact, the truth of the doctrine is sufficiently manifested, if the
matter of fact be evidently proved in the highest way it is capable Prop. 1.
of. Thus it is in reference to the doctrine of Christ; for the truth of that
is so interwoven with the truth of the story of Christ, that if the relations
concerning Christ be true, his doctrine must needs be Divine and infallible.
For if it be undoubtedly true, that there was such a person as Christ born at
Bethlehem, who did so many miracles, and at last suffered the death of the
Cross, and after he had lain three days in the grave rose again from the dead,
what reason imaginable can I have to question, but that the Testimony of this
person was certainly Divine, and consequently what ever he preached to the
world was most certain and undoubted truth: So that if we have clear evidence
as to the truth of these passages concerning our Savior, we must likewise
believe his doctrine, which came attested with such pregnant evidences of a
Divine commission which he had from God to the world: No Prince can think he
has any reason to refuse audience to an Ambassador, when he finds his
Credentials such as he may rely upon; although himself does not see the sealing
of them; much less reason have we to question the truth of the doctrine of the
Gospel, if we have sufficient evidence of the truth of the matters of fact
concerning Christ, in such a way as those things are capable of being proved.

The greatest evidence which can be given to a matter of fact, Prop. 2.
is the attesting of it by those persons who were eyewitnesses of it. This is
the Foundation whereon the firmest assent is built, as to any matter of fact;
for although we conceive we have reason to suspect the truth of a story, as
long as it is conveyed only in a general way, by an uncertain fame and
tradition, yet when it comes to be attested by a sufficient number of credible
persons who profess themselves the cye-witnesses of it, it is accounted an
unreasonable thing to distrust any longer the truth of it; especially in these
two cases. 1. When the matter they bear witness to is a thing which they might
easily and clearly perceive. 2. When many witnesses exactly agree in the same
Testimony.

1. When the matter it self is of that nature that it may be fully perceived by
those who saw it: i. e. if it be a common object of sense. And thus it
certainly was as to the person and actions of Jesus Christ. For he was of the
same nature with mankind; and they had as great evidence that they conversed
with Jesus Christ in the flesh, as we can have that we converse one with
another. The miracles of Christ were real and visible miracles, they could be
no illusions of senses, nor deceits of their eyes; the man who was born blind
and cured by our Savior, was known to have been born blind through all the
Country, and his cure was after as public as his blindness before, and
acknowledged by the greatest enemies of John 9. 26.
Christ at the time of its being done. When Christ raised up the dead man at
Naim, it was before much people, and such Luke 7. 12.
persons in probability who were many of them present at his death. But least
there might be any suspicion as to him, that he was not really dead, the case
is plain and beyond all dispute in Lazarus, who had been to the knowledge of
all persons thereabouts dead four days; here could be no deceit at all Joh.
11. 39.
when the stone was rolled away, and Lazarus came forth in the presence of them
all. And yet further the death and passion of our Savior was a plain object of
sense done in presence of his greatest adversaries. The soldiers themselves
were sufficient witnesses of his being really dead when they came to break his
bones, and spared him because they saw he was dead already. At his resurrection
the stone was rolled away from the Sepulcher and no body found therein,
although the Sepulcher was guarded by soldiers, and the Disciples of Christ
all so fearful, that they were dispersed up and down in several places. And
that it was the same real body which he rose withal, and no aereall vehicle,
appears by Thomas his serupulosity and unbelief, who would not believe unless
^e might put his hands into the hole of his sides, and see John 20. 25, 27.
in his hands the ^rint of the nails; now our Savior condeseending so far as
to satisfy the incredulity of Thomas, has made it thereby evident that the
body which our Savior rose from the grave with, was the same individual body
which before was crucified and buried in the Sepulcher. And we sind all the
Apostles together upon our Saviors appearance to them after his resurrection,
so far from being credulous in embracing a phantasm instead of Christ, that
they susp^cted that it was either a mere phantasm, or an evil spirit which
appeared among them; upon which it is said, they were terrified Luke 24. 37.
and affrighted, and supposed they had seen a spirit. Which our Savior could
not beat them off from, but by appealing to the judgment of their senses,
Handle me and see, for a spirit 39.
has not flesh and bones as ye see me have, and afterward more fully to
convince them, he did eat in the midst of them. Now the more suspicious and
inc^edulous the Apostles themselves 43.
at first were, the greater evidence is it how far they were from any design of
abusing the world in what they after preached unto it, and what strong
conviction there was in the thing its self, which was able to satisfy such
scrupulous and suspicious persons.

2. When many witnesses concur in the same Testimony. Nothing can disparage
more the truth of a testimony, then the counter witness of such who were
present at the same actions, but when all the witnesses fully agree not only in
the substance, but in all material circumstances of the story, what ground or
reason can there be to suspect a forgery or design in it; especially when the
persons cannot by any fears or threatenings be brought to vary from each other
in it! Thus it is in our present case, we find no real dissent at all mentioned
either as to the birth, miracles, life, death, or resurrection of Jesus Christ,
all the witnesses attest the same things, though writing in different places,
and upon different occasions; no alteration in any circumstance of the story,
out of any design of pleasing or gratifying any persons by it. Most of our
Saviors miracles, not only his Apostles but the people and his very enemies
were witnesses of, whose posterity to this day dare not deny the truth of such
strange works which were wrought by him. And for his resurrection, it would be
very strange that five hundred persons should all agree in the same thing, and
that no torments or death could bring any of them to deny the truth of it, had
there not been the greatest certainty in it.

There can be no reason to suspect such a testimony which is given by
eyewitnesses, but either from questi^ning their knowledge Sect. 15. Prop. 3.
of the things they speak of, or their fi^elity in reporting them. Now there is
not the least ground to doubt either of these, in reference to those persons
who gave testimony to the world concerning the person and actions of our
blessed Savior.

For first, They were such as were intimately conversant both with the person
and actions of Jesus Christ; whom he had 1.
chosen and trained up for that very end, that they might be sufficiently
qualified to acquaint the world with the truth of things concerning himself
after his resurrection from the dead. And accordingly they followed him up and
down wheresoever he went, they were with him in his solitudes and retirements,
and had thereby occasion to observe all his actions, and to take notice of the
unspotted innocence of his life. Some of his Disciples were with him in his
transfiguration, others in his agony and bloody sweat, they heard the
expressions which came from his mouth; in all which he discovered a wonderful
submission to the will of God, and a great readiness of mind to suffer for the
good of the world. Now therefore the first thing cannot at all be questioned,
their means of knowing the truth of what they spoke.

Neither secondly is there any reas^n to suspect their fidelity 2. 1
in reporting what they knew: For, 1. The truth of this doctrine wrought so far
upon them, that they parted with all their worldly subsistence for the sake of
it: Although their riches were not great, yet their way of subsistence in the
world was necessary; they left their houses, their wives and children, and all
for Christ, and that not to gain any higher preferments in this world (which
had they done, it would have rendered their design suspicious to the curious and
inquisitive world) but they let go at least a quiet and easy life, for one
most troublesome and dangerous. So that it is not, how much they parted withal,
but how freely they did it, and with what cheerfulness they underwent
disgraces, persecutions, nay death its self for the sake of the Gospel. Now can
it be imagined, that ever men were so prodigal of their ease and lives, as to
throw both of them away upon a thing which themselves were not fully assured of
the truth of? It had been the highest folly imaginable, to have deceived
themselves in a thing of so great moment to them, as the truth of the doctrine
which they preached was; because all their hopes and happiness depended upon
the truth of that doctrine which they preached. And as Tertullian observes, non
fas est ulli de sua religione mentiri; for, says he, he that says he worships
any thing be sides what he does, he denies what he does worship, and transfers
his worship upon another, and thereby does not worship that which he thus
denies: Besides, what probability is there men should lie for the sake of that
Religion which tells them that those which do so shall not receive the reward
which is promised to those who cordially adhere unto it. Nay, they declared
themselves to be the most miserable of all persons if their hopes were only in
this present life. Can we now 1 Cor. 15. 19.
think that any who had the common reason of men, would part with all the
contentments of this world, and expose themselves to continual hazards, and at
last undergo death its self for the sake of something which was merely the
fiction of their own brains? What should make them so sedulous and industrious
in preaching such things that they could say necessity was laid upon them, yea
woe was unto them if they preached not the 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Gospel, when yet they saw so many woes attending them in the preaching of it,
had there not been some more powerful attractive in the beauty and excellency
of the doctrine which they preached, then any could be in the ease and
tranquillity of this present world? Thus we see the fid^lity of the Apostles
manifested in such a way as no other witnesses were ever yet willing to hazard
theirs. And therefore Origin deservedly 1. 3. C^^sam. p. 127
condemns Celsus of a ridiculous impertinency, when he would parallel the
relations of Herodotus and Pindarus concerning Aristeus Proconnesius with those
of the Apostles concerning Christ: For, faith he, did either of those two
venture their lives upon the truth of what they writ concerning him, as the
Apostles did to attest the truth of what they preached concerning our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ?

2. The fidelity of the Apostles is evident in their manner of Sect. 16.
reporting the things which they deliver. For if ever there may be any thing
gathered from the manner of expression, or the (...) concerning the particular
temper and disposition of the person from whom it comes, we may certainly read
the greatest fidelity in the Apostles from the peculiar manner of their
expressing themselves to the world. Which they do,

1. With the greatest impartiality: not declaring only what was glorious and
admirable to the world, but what they knew would be accounted foolishness by
it. They who had sought only to have been admired for the rare discoveries
which they brought to the world, would be sure to conceal any thing which might
be accounted ridiculous; but the Apostles fixed themselves most on what was
most contemptible in the eyes of the world, and what they were most mocked and
derided for, that they delighted most in the preaching of, which was the Cross
of Christ. Paul was so much in Love with this, which was a stumbling block to
the Jews and foolishness to the Greeks, that he valued the knowledge of nothing
else in comparison of the knowledge of Christ and him crucified. Nay 1 Cor. 2.
2. Phil. 3. 8. Gal. 6. 14.
he elsewhere says, God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of
Christ. What now should be the reason that they should rejoice in that most
which was most despicable to the world, had not they seen far ^reater truth and
excellency in it, then in the most sublime speculations concerning God or the
souls of men in the School of Plato or any other heathen Philosophers? That all
men should be bound in order to their salvation, to believe in one who was
crucified at Jerusalem, was a strange doctrine to the unbelieving world: but
if the Apostles had but endeavored to have suited their doctrine to the School
of Plato, what rare persons might they have been accounted among the Heathen
Philosophers! Had they only in general terms discoursed of the Benignity of the
Divine nature, and the manifestations of Divine goodness in the world, and
that, in order to the bringing of the souls of men to a nearer participation of
the Divine nature, the perfect Idea of true goodness, and the express image of
the person of God, and the resplendency of his glory had veiled himself in
humane nature, and had everywhere scattered such beams of light and goodness,
as warmed and invigorated the frozen spirits of men with higher sentiments of
God and themselves, and raised them up above the faeculency of this terrestrial
matter to breath in a freer air, and converse with more noble objects, and by
degrees to fit the souls of men for those more pure illapses of real goodness,
which might always satisfy the souls desires, and yet always keep them up
till the soul should be sunning its self to all eternity under the immediate
beams of Light and Love: And that after this Incarnate Deity had spread abroad
the wings of his Love for a while upon this lower world, till by his gentle
heat and incubation he had quickened the more pliable world to some degree of a
Divine life, he then retreated himself back again into the superior world, and
put off that vail by which he made himself known to those who are here confined
to the prisons of their bodies: Thus, I say, had the Apostles minded applause
among the admired Philosophers of the Heathens, how easy had it been for them
to have made some considerable additions to their highest speculations, and
have left out any thing which might seem so mean and contemptible as the death
of the Son of God! But this they were so far from, that the main thing which
they preached to the world, was, the vanity of humane wisdom without Christ,
and the necessity of all men's believing in that Jesus who was crucified at
Jerusalem.

The Apostles indeed discover very much, infinitely more then ever the most
lofty Pl -- tonist could do, concerning the goodness and Love of God to
mankind; but that wherein they manifested the Love of God to the world, was
that he gave his Joh. 3. 16.
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have
everlasting life. And that herein was the Love Romans 5. 8.
of God manifested, that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. And
that this was the greatest truth and worthy of all 1. Tim. 1. 15.
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. They never
dreamt of any divine goodness which should make men happy without Christ: No,
it was their design to persuade the world that all the communications of Gods
goodness to the world were wholly in and through Jesus Christ, and it is
impossible that any should think otherwise, unless Plato knew more of the mind
of God then our blessed Savior, and Plotinus then Saint Paul. Can we think now
that the Apostles should hazard the reputation of their own wits so much as
they did to the world, and be accounted bablers, and fools, and madmen, for
preaching the way of salvation to be only by a person crucified between two
thieves at Jerusalem, had they not been convinced not only of the truth but
importance of it, and that it concerned men as much to believe it, as it did to
avoid eternal misery? Did Saint Paul preach ever the less the words of truth
and soberness, because he was told to his face that his Learning had made him
mad? But if he was besides himself, it was for Christ; and what wonder was it
if the Love of Christ in the Apostle should make him willing to lose his
reputation for him, seeing Christ made himself of no reputation, that he might
be in a capacity to do us good? We see the Apostles were not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, because they knew it was the power of God to salvation, and
therefore neither in their preaching or their writings would they omit any of
those passages concerning our Saviors death, which might be accounted the most
dishonorable to his person. Which is certainly as great an evidence of their
sidelity as can be expected; which makes Origin say that the Disciples of
Christ writ all things (...) with a great deal of candor and L. 3. c. Cells.
love of truth. (...); not concealing from the world those passages of the life
of Christ, which would be accounted most foolish and ridiculous.

2. With the greatest plainness and simplicity of speech. Such whose design is
to impose upon the minds of men with some cunningly devised fables, love as
much ambiguity as ever Apollo did in his most winding oracles, of whom it is
said, Ambage nexa Delphico mos est Dco
Arcana tegere.
Servius tells us, that Jupiter Ammon was therefore pictured In 4. Aen. id.
with Rams-horns, because his answers had as many turnings and windings as they
had. But the horns which Moses was wont to be pictured with, did only note
light and perspicuity (from the ambiguity of (...) which notes the sending
forth of rays of light like a horn) and yet Moses himself was veiled, in
comparison of the openness and plainness of speech which was in the Apostles.
Impostors cast a mist of many dark and cloudy words before them, but when they
are once brought into the open light, their vizard falls off, and their
deformity appears. Such persons delight in soaring quite out of the
apprehensions of those who follow them, and never think themselves better
recompensed for their pains, then when they are most admired and least
understood. But never was Christianity more dishonored, then when men brought
it from its native simplicity and plainness, into a company of cloudy and
insignificant expressions, which are so far from making men better understand
the truth of it, that it was certainly the Devils design by such obscure terms
to make way for a mystery to be advanced (but it was of iniquity) and soon
after, we see the effect of it in another oracle set up at Rome instead of
Delphos, and all the pretense of it, was the obscurity supposed in Scripture.
What! darkness come by the rising of the Sun! Or is the Sun at last grown so
beggarly, that he is fain to borrow light of the earth? Must the S^ripture be
beholding to the Church for its clearness, and Christ himself not speak
intelligibly, unless the Pop^ be his Interpreter? Did Christ reveal to the
world the Way to salvation, and yet leave men to se^k which was it, till a
Guide never heard of in the Scripture come to direct them in the Way to it?
What strange witnesses were the Apostles, if they did no^ speak the truth with
plainness? How had men been to s^^k as ^o the truth of Christianity, if the
Apostles had not declared the doctrine of the Gospel with all evidence and
perspicuity? Whom must we believe in this case, the Apostles or the Roman
oracle? The Apostles they tell us they speak ^ Cor. 3. 12. 1

Cor. 2. 1, 4. 1

Cor. 4. 3, 4.


with all plainness of speech and for that end purposely lay aside all
exc^llency of words and humane wisdom, that men might not be to seek for their
m^aning in a matter of so great moment; that the Gospel was hid to none but
such as are lost, and whose eyes are blinded by the god of this world; that the
doctrine revealed by them is a light to direct us in our way to heaven, and a
rule to walk by; and it is a strange property of light to be obscure, and of a
rule to be crooked. But it is not only evident from the Apostles own
affirmations, that they laid aside all affected obscurity, ambiguous
expressions, and Philosophical terms, whereby the world might have been to seek
for what they were to believe, but it is likewise clear from the very nature of
the doctrine they preached, and the design of their preaching of it. What need
Rhetoric in plain truths? or affected phrases in giving evidence? How
incongruous would obscure expressions have been to the design of saving souls
by the foolishness of preaching? For if they had industriously spoken in their
preaching, above the capacities of those they spoke to, they could never have
converted a soul without a miracle; for the ordinary way of conversion must be
by the understanding; and how could that work upon the understanding, which was
so much above it? But says the Apostle, we preach not our selves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. If they had sought
themselves or their own credit and reputation, there might 2 Cor. 4. 5.
have been some reason that they should have used the way of the Sophists among
the Greeks, and by declamatory speeches to have inhanceed their esteem among
the v^lgar. But the Apostles disowned and rejected all these vulgar artifices
of mean and low-spirited men; they laid aside all those enticing words (...) of
the way of the Heathen Sophists, and declared the T^stimony of God with
spiritual evidence; 1 Co^. 2. 4.
they handled not the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the
truth, commended themselves to every man's 2 Cor. 4. 2.
cons^ience in the sight of God: Now what could be so suiteable to such a
design, as the greatest plainness and faithfulness in what they spoke? We find
in the testimony of the Apostles (...), as Origin Orig. c. Cells. l. 3. p. 135.
speaks, nothing that is spurious or counterfeit, nothing savouring of the
cunning craftiness of such as lie in wait to deceive; and says he, it is
impossible to think that men never bred up in the Sophistry of the Gre^ks, nor
experienced in the Rhetorical insinuations used among them, could ever be able
so suddenly to persuade the world to embrace that which had been a figment of
their own brains. The truth is, the Apostles speak like men very confident of
the truth of what they speak, and not like such who were fain to fetch in the
help of all their Topics, to find out some probable arguments to make men
believe that which it is probable they did not believe themselves, which was
most commonly the case of the great Orators among the Heathens. We find no
pedantick flourishes, no slattering insinuations, no affected cadencyes, no
such great care of the rising and falling of words in the several sentences,
which make up so great a part of that which was accounted eloquence in the
Apostles times. These things were too mean a prey for the spirits of the
Apostles to quarry upon; every thing in them was grave and serious, every word
had its due weight, every sentence brim-full of spiritual matter, their whole
discourse most becoming the Majesty and Authority of that spirit which they
spoke by. And therein was seen a great part of the infinite wisdom of God in
the choice he made of the persons who were to propagate the Doctrine of Christ
in the world, that they were not such who by reason of their great repute and
fame in the world, might easily draw whole multitudes to embrace their
dictates, but (that there might not be the least foundation for an implicit
faith) they were of so mean rank and condition in the world, that in all
probability their names had never been hard of, had not their doctrine made
them famous. To this purpose Origin excellently speaks, (...). I am of opinion,
says he, that Jesus did purposely make use of such preachers of his doctrine,
that there might be no place for suspicion that they came instructed with the
arts of Sophistry; but that it be clearly manifest to all that would consider
it, that there was nothing of design in those who discovered so much simplicity
in their writings, and that they had a more divine power which was more
efficacious then the greatest volubility of expressions, or ornaments of
speech, or the artifices which were used in the Grecian compositions.

3. The Apostles delivered their doctrine with the greatest openness and
freedom of spirit; they did not give out one thing to the world, and another to
their private Disciples; but with great freedom and boldness declared their
doctrine in the most public places, and before their greatest enemies. They
knew they were looked on as deceivers by the world, but yet they knew
themselves to be true, (...). This is 2 Cor. 6. 8.
the usual requital good men have from the world, that they are looked on as
the greatest deceivers of it; if it be so with others, they have much less
cause to wonder at it, when even he, who by one Prophet is styled the desire of
Nations, is Hag. 2. 7.

Isa. 53. 3.

Mat. 27. 63.


by another said to be despised and rejected of men; and when Christ was in the
world he was called (...), the deceiver; no wonder, then if his Disciples were
accounted such, although they manifested their veracity by their open carriage
and free speaking to the faces of their greatest adversaries. The Apostles
neither feared the Jews skill in their Law, nor the wisdom and subtilty of the
Greeks: Saint Paul preaches Christ openly among the Jews in their Synagogues,
and among the Athenians he encounters the Epicureans and Stoics, and preaches
to them Jesus and the resurrection. Act. 17. 18.
If the Apostles had any thing of deceivers in them, as to the things they
related concerning Christ, they would not certainly have spoken with so much
confidence concerning Christ in the presence of those who had been his
murderers, but we see they appealed to themselves, as to the miracles which he
had wrought among them, and for his resurrection they were ready to lay down
their lives in giving testimony to the truth of it. That his body was gone, was
evident; that the Apostles should take it away was impossible, considering what
a guard of soldiers they had set upon it, and how timorous and fearful the
Apostles were, that they fled upon Christ's being apprehended. Now what could it
be, could make such fearful persons afterward so courageous and resolute as
they were, had there not been some more then ordinary power to convince and
encourage them?

4. The Apostles deliver their Testimony with the greatest particularity as to
all circumstances. They do not change or alter any of them upon different
examinations before several persons; they all agree in the greatest constancy
to themselves and uniformity with each other. As to matters of indifferency, we
find the Apostles very yielding and condescending, but as to any thing which
concerned their testimony, most constant and resolved. Had the Gospel been some
cunningly contrived fancy, it had been impossible but so many different
persons, in such different places, and under such different conditions, would
have varyed as to some material circumstance of it: Or else they would have
been so wise as to have delivered it in general terms, without insisting much
on such particular circumstances, which if they had been false, might have been
very easily disproved: but with what particular enumeration of circumstances do
the Apostles preach Christ to the world? Peter tells the Jews that it was Jesus
Acts 2. 22.
of Nazareth whom he preached; and lest they should think it was not the same
person who rose again, with great boldness and freedom of spirit he says to
them, Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has made
that same 2. 36.
Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Yea that same individual
person who was conversant in the world, and dyed upon the Cross, is now become
a Prince and Savior to 5. 31, 32.
give repentance to Israel and remission of sins. If there had been any ground
of suspicion as to these things, who had been so able to disprove them, or so
ready to do it, as those persons who had crucified him? For we cannot conceive
but those who had a hand in his death, would endeavor by all possible means to
disprove his resurrection from the dead. For what a case were they like to be
in, if those things which the Apostles so confidently preached were true? If
Christ had all power now in his hands, and there were salvation in no other
name, but only in his whom they had crucified, they were like to be in a most
desperate condition; therefore if any men can be supposed inquisitive after the
truth of these circumstances, no doubt these were; and if they could have found
the least flaw in their testimony, the world would soon have ringed of it; and
the Jews who were then so much dispersed abroad, would have divulged it into
all parts, the Apostles would have been told of it as they preached Christ in
the Synagogues. And can we in any reason think, but those Jews who persecuted
Paul as he preached in the Synagogues of Asia, and afterward impeached him so
openly at Jerusalem, would there enquire into all the circumstances concerning
Christ, and all the other Jews would write to their Friends at Jerusalem to be
fully informed of those strange things which were told them openly in all
places in their Synagogues by men of their own Nation and language, concerning
one Jesus who was crucified and rose again from the dead. Had there been now
any so much as plausible pretext that any of these circumstances were not true,
can we think but that a people so unmeasureably given to their own ways and
traditions, would in all places have vented any thing that might have tended to
the disparagement of Christ and his Apostles? But we see malice its self could
not find any flaw in the Apostles testimony; for if it had, we should certainly
have heard of it, either from the Jews, or from the great opposers of
Christianity among the Heathens, who pretended to be curious and inquisitive
persons, such as Celsus, Julian, Hierocles, and Porphyrie were. What reason can
we have then in the least to suspect such a Testimony which passed so
uncontrouled in that time when it was alone capable of being disproved, and
men's interest and design would put them so much upon it? The strength of which
will appear from the next proposition, which is,

No Testimony ought to be taken against a matter of fact thus Sect. 17. Prop. 4.
attested, but from such persons who had greater knowledge of the things
attested, and manifest greater fidelity in reporting them. It is easy to make
it appear, that supposing any persons at that time had contradicted the
Testimony of the Apostles concerning our Savior, yet there had been no reason
in the world to have hearkened to their Testimony in opposition to that of the
Apostles; and that on these accounts. 1. The Apostles witnessed the
Affirmative, which is more capable of being attested then any negative can be.
2. The Apostles were more conversant with Christ then any other persons were,
because they were chosen for that very end by him to be constantly with him;
could any therefore be more capable of knowing the truth of all particulars
concerning Christ then these were? Had there been any ground of suspicion
concerning the design of Christ, why could not the Jews prevail with Judas to
discover it as well as to betray his person? Judas had done but a good work if
Christ had been such an impostor as the Jews blasphemously said he was; what
made Judas then so little satisfied with his work, that he grew weary of his
life upon it, and threw himself away in the most horrid despair? No person
certainly had been so fit to have been produced as a witness against Christ, as
Judas who had been so long with him, and had heard his speeches and observed
his miracles; but he had not patience enough to stay after that horrid fact to
be a witness against him; nay he was the greatest witness at that time for him,
when he who had betrayed him came to the Sanhedrim when consulting about his
death, and told them that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood. What
possible evidence Mat. 27. 5.
could have been given more in behalf of our Savior then that was? when a
person so covetous as to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver, was so
weary of his bargain that he comes and throws back the money, and declares the
person innocent whom he had betrayed? And this person too was such a one as
knew our Savior far better then any of the witnesses whom afterward they
suborned against him, who yet contradicted each other, and at last could
produce nothing which in the judgment of the Heathen Governor could make him
judge Christ worthy of death. 3. The Apostles were freer from design then any
counter-witness at that time could be; we have already proved the Apostles
could not possibly have any other motive to affirm what they did but full
conviction of the truth of what they spoke; but now if any among the Jews at
that time had asserted any thing contrary to the Apostles, we have a clear
account of it, and what motive might induce them to it; viz. the preserving of
their honor and reputation with the people, the upholding their traditions,
besides their open and declared enmity against Christ without any sufficient
reason at all for it: now who would believe the testimony of the Scribes and
Pharisees who had so great authority among the people, which they were like to
lose, if Christ's doctrine were true, before that of the Apostles who parted
with all for the sake of Christ, and ventured themselves wholly upon the truth
of our Saviors doctrine? 4. None ever did so much to attest the negative, as
the Apostles did to prove their fidelity as to the affirmative. Had sufficient
counter-witness been timely produced, we cannot think the Apostles would have
run so many continual hazards in Preaching the things which related to the
person and actions of Christ. Did ever any lay down their lives to undeceive
the world if the Apostles were guilty of abusing it? 5. The number of such
persons had been inconsiderable in comparison of those who were so fully
persuaded of the truth of those things which concern our Savior; who were all
ready (as most of them did) to seal the truth of them with their lives. Whence
should so many men grow so suddenly confident of the truth of such things which
were contrary to their former persuasions, interest; education, had they not
been delivered in such a way, that they were assured of the undoubted truth of
them? which brings me to the last proposition, which is,

Matters of fact being first believed on the account of eyewitnesses, and
received with an universal and uncontrouled Sect. 18. Prop. 5.
assent by all such persons who have thought themselves concerned in knowing
the truth of them, do yield a sufficient foundation for a firm assent to be
built upon. I take it for granted that there is sufficient foundation for a
firm assent, where there can be no reason given to question the evidence; which
that there is not in this present case will appear from these following
considerations.

1. That the multitudes of those persons who did believe these things, had
liberty and opportunity to be satisfied of the truth of them before they
believed them. Therefore no reason or motive can be assigned, on which they
should be induced to believe these things, but the undoubted evidence of truth
which went along with them. I confess in Mahumetisme a very great number of
persons have for some centuries of years continued in the belief of the
doctrine of Mahomet; but then withal there is a sufficient account to be given
of that, viz. the power of the sword which keeps them in aw, and strictly
forbids all the followers of Mahomet to dispute their religion at all, or
compare it with any other. Therefore I can no more wonder at this, then I do to
see so great a part of the world under the Tyranny of the great Turk: Neither
on the other side do I wonder that such a multitude of those professing
Christianity should together with it, believe a great number of erroneous
doctrines, and live in the practice of many gross superstitions, because I
consider what a strange prevalency education has upon softer spirits and more
easy intellectuals, and what an aw an Inquisition bears upon timorous and
irresolved persons. But now when a great multitude of persons sober and
inquisitive shall contrary to the principles of their education, and without
fear of any humane force, (which they beforehand see will persecute them) and
after diligent enquiry made into the grounds on which they believe, for sake
all their former persuasions, and resolvedly adhere to the truth of the
doctrine propounded to them, though it cost them their lives; if this give us
not reason to think this doctrine true, we must believe mankind to be the most
miserable unhappy creatures in the world; that will with so much resolution
part with all advantages of this life for the sake of one to come, if that be
not undoubtedly certain, and the doctrine proposing it infallibly true. It is
an observable circumstance in the propagation of Christian Religion, that
though God made choice at first of persons generally of mean rank and condition
in the world to be Preachers of the Gospel, God thereby making it appear that
our faith did not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, and
therefore chose the weak things of the world to confound 1 Cor. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1.
27.
the strong; yet soon after the Gospel was preached abroad in the world, we
find persons of great place and reputation, of great parts and abilities
engaged in the profession of the Christian faith. In the History of the Acts we
read of Sergius a Proconsul, of Dionysius the Areopagite converted to the
faith, and in the following ages of the Church many persons of great esteem for
their excellent learning and abilities; such was Justin Martyr, one who before
he became a Christian, was conversant with all sects of Philosophers, Stoics,
Peripateticks, Pythagoreans, and at last was a professed Platonist till he was
converted from Plato to Christ, and then found that true which he speaks of in
his Dialogue with Trypho, that after all his enquiries into Philosophy,
speaking of the doctrine of Christ, (...), I found this at last to be the only
sure Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 125. ed. Par.
and profitable Philosophy. And when Trypho after derides him as a man of very
easy faith, who would leave the doctrine of Plato for that of Christ, (for it
seems by him the Jews then had a more favorable opinion of the state of
Platonists then Christians) Justin is so far from being moved with such
reproaches, that he tells him he would undertake to demonstrate to him (...)
that the Christians did not give credit to empty fables, and unprovable
assertions, but to such a doctrine as was full of a Divine spirit and power,
and flourished with grace: The proving of which is the subject of that
discourse. At Alexandria we meet with a succession of excellent persons, all
which were not only embracers themselves, but defenders of the Christian faith;
for setting aside there Abilius, Iustus, Cerdo, Eumenes, Marcus, Celadion,
Agrippinus, Iulianus, Demetrius and others who flourished about the second
Century, I shall only fix on those persons who were famous enquirers after
truth and noted for excellency in Heathen learning; yet these persons after all
their inquiries found nothing to fix on but the Christian faith, and valued no
other discovery of truth in comparison with that. Such was Pantaenus, who as
Eusebius tells us, was an excellent Stoic before he became a Christian, and
was after so eminent a one, that in imitation of the Apostles he wen^ into
India to convert the inhabitants to the Christian faith, and at his return was
made Rector of the School at Alexandria; which as the same author tells us, was
much frequented by such who were Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 10.
(...), well skild in humane as well as Divine learning. How excellent
Pantaenus was in Eusebius. l. 6. c. 20.
humane learning may appear in that Origin and Hierome both make his example
their plea for the studying of it. After him succeeded Clemens Alexandrinus,
Pantaenus his Scholar, a person of great depth of learning and exquisitly
skild in all Heathen Antiquities, as appears by his remaining writings. The
Learning of Origin is sufficiently known, which was in such great reputation in
his own time, that not only Christians Hist. l. 6. cap. 18.
but Philosophers flocked to his Lectures at Alexandria as Eusebius tells us,
wherein he read the Mathematics, and other parts of Philosophy as well as the
Scriptures; and the same author informs us that the Philosophers did dedicate
their books to him, and sometimes chose him as arbitrator between them in
matters of dispute; and Porphyrie himself in his books against the Christians
vouchsafed a high encomium of Origin for his excellent learning. In Origens
time Heraclas a Presbyter of Alexandria for five years together frequented the
Schools of the Philosophers, and put on the Philosophic pallium, (...), and
E^seb. l. 6. cap. 20.
was very conversant in the books of the Grecian Learning. Besides these we
read of Pierius and Achillas two Presbyters of Alexandria who were (...) Hist.
Eccles. l. 6. c. 35.
as Nicephorus Callistus speaks, persons well skild in the Grecian learning and
Philosophy. If from Alexandria we go to Caesarea, there we not only meet with a
School of learning among the Christians, but with persons very eminent in all
kinds of learning; such were the famous Pamphilus and Eusebius so great an
admirer of him, that ever since he is called Eusebius Pamphili. At Antioch was
(...), as Nicephorus Lib. 6. c. 35.
speaks, a person versed in all kind of ingenuous literature. Anatclius Bishop
of Laodicea one versed in Geometry, Astronomy, and all kind of Philosophy as
well as in the doctrine of Lib. 6 c. 36.
Christ. Thus we see how in those early days of the Greek Church what
excellent persons many of those were who were zealous Professors of
Christianity; and concerning those of the Latin Church, I shall only mention
that speech of St. Austin who was himself an instance of the same nature and a
star of the first magnitude among them. Nonne aspicimus quanto auro and argento
and v^ste s^ffarcinatus exierit de A^g. de doctr. Christiana. l. 2. cap. 40.
Aegypto Cyprian^s Doctor suavissimus and Martyr beatissimus? quanto
Lactantius? quanto Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious? ut de vivis taceam: quanto
innumerabiles Graeci? quod prior ipse fidelissimus Dei servus Moses fecerat, de
quo Scriptum est, quod eruditus fuerit omni sapientia Aegyptiorum. To whose
catalogue of learned persons, among the Latin Christians Tertullian, Arnobius
and several others may be deservedly added. But as St. Austin there well
observes, though the Israclites went rich out of Egypt, yet it was their
eating the Passover which saved them from destruction; so though these were
accomplished with those perfections and riches of the soul, the ornaments of
learning, yet it was their eating the true Passover which was Christ, by their
adhering to his doctrine, was that which would be of more advantage to them,
then all their accomplishments would be. Now then since in the first ages of
the Christian Church, we find not only innumerable multitudes of persons of
great integrity and sobriety in their lives embracing the doctrine of Christ,
but so many persons that were curious enquirers after the truth of things, we
can certainly have no reason to distrust such a Testimony which was received in
so unanimous a manner by persons as able to judge of the truth of things, and
as fearful of being deceived in reference to them as any now in the world can
be.

2. As this testimony was received by persons in^uisitive after the truth of
things, so the doctrine conveyed by it was a Sect. 19.
matter of the highest moment in the world: and therefore we cannot conceive
but persons ordinarily inquisitive about other things would be more then
ordinarily so about this, because their eternal welfare and happiness did
depend upon it. All persons that are truly religious, must at least be allowed
to be persons very inquisitive after the state and condition of their souls
when they shall be dislodged from their bodies. And if we do but grant this,
can we in any reason think that such a multitude of persons in so many ages
should continue venturing their souls upon a Testimony which they had no
assurance of the truth of? And that none of all these persons though men
otherwise rational and judicious, should be able to discover the falsity of
that doctrine they went upon, if at least any upon consideration of it can
imagine it to be so? It is not reconcilable with the general presumption of
humane nature concerning Divine providence and the care God takes of the
welfare of men, to suffer so many persons who sincerely desire to serve God in
the way which is most pleasing to him, to go on in such a continual delusion,
and never have it at all discovered to them. If all then who have believed the
doctrine of Christ to be the only way to salvation have been deceived, either
we must deny altogether a Divine Providence, or say the Devil has more power
to deceive men then God to direct them, which is worse then the former, or else
assert that there are no such things at all as either God or Devils, but that
all things come to pass by chance and fortune; and if so, it is still more
inexplicable why such multitudes of rational and serious men, and the most
inquisitive part of the world as to such things should all be so possessed with
the truth and certainty of these things; and the more profane, wicked, and
ignorant any persons are, the more prone they are to mock and deride them. If
such men then see more into truth and reason then the sober and judicious part
of mankind, let us bid adieu to humanity and adore the brutes, since we admire
their judgment most who come the nearest to them.

3. The multitude of these persons thus consenting in this Testimony, could
have no other engagement to this consent, but only their firm persuasion of the
truth of the doctrine conveyed by it; because those who unanimously agree in
this thing are such persons whose other designs and interests in this world,
differ as much as any men's do. If it had been only a consent of Jews, there
might have been some probable pretense to have suspected a matter of interest
in it; but as to this thing, we find the Jews divided among themselves about
it; and the stiffest denyers of the truth of it, do yet inviolably preserve
those sacred records among them, from which the truth of the doctrine of Christ
may be undoubtedly proved. Had the Christian Religion been enforced upon the
world by the Roman Emperors at the time of its first promulgation, there would
have been some suspicion of particular design in it; but it came with no other
strength but the evidence of its own truth; yet it found sudden and strange
entertainment among persons of all Nations and degrees of men. In a short time
it had eaten into the heart of the Roman Empire, and made so large a spread
therein, that it made Tertullian say, Hesterni sumus, and vestra omnia
implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula, castraipsa,
tribus, decurias, ^polog. ^p. 36.
palatium, senatum, forum; sola vobis relinquimus Templa. We have but newly
appeared, says he, and yet we have filled all places with our company but only
your Temples; and before speaking of the Heathens, Obsessam vociferantur
civitatem, in agris, in castellis, in insulis Christianos, omnem sexum,
aetatem, conditionem, etiam dignitatem transgredi ad hoc nomen ^pol. c. 3.
quasi detrimento moerent. All sorts and conditions of men in all places, were
suddenly become Christians. What common tie could there be now to unite all
these persons together, if we set aside the undoubted truth and certainty of
the doctrine of Christ which was first preached to them by such who were
eyewitnesses of Christ's actions, and had left sacred records behind them,
containing the substance of the doctrine of Christ and those admirable
instructions which were their only certain guides in the way to heaven?

4. Because many persons do join in this consent with true Christians, who yet
could heartily with that the doctrine of Christianity were not true. Such are
all those persons who are sensual in their lives, and walk not according to the
rules of the Gospel, yet dare not question or deny the truth of it. Such who
could heartily wish there were no future state, nor judgment to come, that
they might indulge themselves in this world without fear of another; yet their
consciences are so far convinced of, and awed by the truth of these things,
that they raise many perplexities and anxieties in their minds which they would
most willingly be rid of; which they can never thoroughly be, till instead of
having the name of Christians, they come to live the life of Christians, and
become experimentally acquainted with the truth and power of Religion. And
withal we find that the more men have been acquainted with the practice of
Christianity, the greater evidence they have had of the truth of it, and been
more fully and rationally persuaded of it. To such I grant there are such
powerful evidences of the truth of the doctrine of Christ by the effectual
workings of the Spirit of God upon their souls, that all other arguments, as to
their own satisfaction, may fall short of these. As to which, those verses of
the Poet Dantes, rendered into Latin by F. S. are very pertinent and
significant; for when he had introduced the Apostle Peter asking him what it
was which his faith was founded on, he answers, Deinde exivit ex luce profunda
Quae illic splendebat pretiosa gemma
Super quam omnis virtus fundatur.
i. e. That God was pleased by immediate revelation of himself, to discover
that divine truth to the world whereon our faith does stand as on its sure
foundation; but when the Apostle goes on to enquire how he knew this came at
first from God, his answer to that is, larga pluvia
Spiritus Sancti, quae est diffusa
Super veteres and super novas membranas,
Est syllogismus ille qui eam mihi conclusit
Ad^o acute, ut prae illa demonstratione
Omnis demonstratio alia mihi videatur obtusa.
i. e. That the Spirit of God does so fully discover its self both in the Old
and New Testament, that all other arguments are but dull and heavy if compared
with this. It is true they are so to a truly enlightened conscience which
discovers so much beauty and glory in the Scriptures, that they ravish the
soul, although it be unable to give so full an account of this unto others who
want the eyes to see that beauty with, which a heart truly gracious has. We
see ordinarily in the world, that the attraction of beauty is an unaccountable
thing; and one may discern that which ravisheth him, which another looks on as
mean and ordinary; and why may it not be much more thus in divine objects which
want spiritual eyes to discover them? Therefore I grant that good men enjoy
that satisfaction to their own Consciences, as to the truth of the Doctrine of
Christ, which others cannot attain to; but yet I say, that such do likewise see
the most strong, rational, and convincing evidence which does induce them to
believe; which evidence is then most convincing, when it is seconded by the
peculiar energy of the Spirit of God upon the souls of true Believers. But yet
we see that the power and force of the truth of these things may be so great,
even upon such minds which are not yet molded into the fashion of true
goodness, that it may awe with its light and clearness, where it does not
soften and alter by its heat and influence. Now whence can it be that such
convictions should stick so fast in the minds of those who would fain pull out
those pier^ing arrows, but that there is a greater power in them then they are
mnsters of, and they cannot stand against the force whereby they come upon
them; nor find any salve to cure the wounds which are made within them, but by
those weapons which were the causes of them? And therefore when wicked persons
under conflicts of conscience, cannot ease themselves by direct Atheism, or
finding reasons to cast off such convictions by discerning any invalidity in
the Testimony whereon the truth of these things depends, it is a certain
argument that there is abundant truth in that Testimony, when men would fain
persuade themselves to believe the contrary, and yet cannot.

5. The truth of this consent appears, from the unanimity of it among those
persons who have yet strangely differed from each other in many controversies
in Religion. We see thereby this unanimity is no forced or designed thing,
because we see the persons agreeing in this, do very much disagree from each
other in other things. And the same grounds and reasons whereon they disagree
as to other things, would have held as to these too, were there not greater
evidence of the certainty of these things then of those they fall out about. It
has not yet become a question among those who differ so much about the sense
of Scripture, whether the Scripture its self be the Word of God, although the
very accounts on which we are to believe it to be so, has been the subject of
no mean Controversies. All the divided parts of the Christian world do yet
fully agree in the matters of fact, viz. that there was such a person as Jesus
Christ, and that he did many great miracles, that he dyed on the Cross at
Jerusalem, and rose again from the dead; now these contain the great
foundations of Christian faith; and therefore the multitude of other
controversies in the world ought to be so far from weakening our faith, as to
the truth of the doctrine of Christ (which men of weak judgments and
Atheistical spirits pre^end) that it ought to be a strong confirmation of it,
when we see persons which so peevishly quarrel with each other about some
inferior and less weighty parts of Religion, do yet unanimously consent in the
principal foundations of Christian faith, and such whereon the necessity of
faith and obedience, as the way to salvation, does more immediately depend. And
this may be one great reason why the infinitely wise God may suffer such
lamentable contentions and divisions to be in the Christian world, that thereby
inquisitive persons may see that if Religion had been a mere design of some few
politic persons, the quarrelsom world (where it is not held in by force) would
never have consented so long in the owning such common principles which all the
other controversies are built upon. And although it be continually seen that in
divided parties, one is apt to run from any thing which is received by the
other, and men generally think they can never run far enough from them whose
errors they have discovered, that yet this principle has not carried any
considerable party of the Christian world (out of their indignation against
those great corruptions which have crept into the world under a pretense of
Religion) to the disowning the foundation of Christian Faith, must be ^artly
imputed to the signal hand of divine providence, and partly to those strong
^vidences which there are of the truth of that Testimony which conveyes to u^
the foundations of Christian Faith. Thus we see now, how great and uncontrouled
this consent is, as to the matters of fact delivered down from the
eyewitnesses of them, concerning the actions and miracles of our blessed
Savior (which are contained in the Scriptures as authentical records of them)
and what a sure foundation there is for a firm assent to the truth of the
things from so universal and uninterrupted a tradition.

Thus far we have now manifested the necessity of the miracles Sect. 20.
of Christ, in order to the propagation of Christianity in the world, from the
consideration of the persons who were to propagate it in the world; the next
thing we are to consid^r, is, the admirable success which the Gospel met with
in the world upon its being preached to it: Of which no rational account can be
given, unless the actions and miracles of our Savior were most undoubtedly
true. That the Gospel of Christ had very strange and wonderful success upon its
first preaching, has been partly discovered already, and is withal so plain
from the long continuance of it in these European parts, that none any ways
conversant in the history of former ages, can have any ground to question it.
But that this strange and admirable success of the doctrine of Christ should be
an evidence of the Truth of it, and the miracles wrought in confirmation of it,
will appear from these two considerations. 1. That the doctrine its self was so
directly contrary to the general inclinations of the world. 2. That the
propagation of it was so much opposed by all worldly power.

1. That the doctrine its self was so opposite to the general inclinations of
the world. The doctrine may be considered either as to its credenda, or matters
of faith, or as to its agenda, or matters of life and practice; both these were
contrary to the inclinations of the world; the former seemed hard and
incredible, the latter harsh and impossible.

1. The matters of faith which were to be believed by the world, were not such
things which we may imagine the vulgar sort of men would be very forward to run
after, nor very greedy to embrace. 1. Because contrary to the principles of
their education, and the Religion they were brought up in 1.
the generality of mankind is very tenacious of those principles and prejudices
which are sucked in in the time of Infancy. There are some Religions one would
think it were impossible that any rational men should believe them, but only on
this account because they are bred up under them. It is a very great advantage
any Religion has against another, that it comes to speak first, and thereby
insinuates such an apprehension of its self to the mind, that it is very hard
removing it afterward. The understanding seems to be of the nature of those
things which are communis juris, and therefore primi sunt possidentis; when an
opinion has once got possession of the mind, it usually keeps out whatever
comes to disturb it. Now we cannot otherwise conceive but all those persons who
had been bred up under Paganism and the most gross Idolatry, must needs have a
very potent prejudice against such a doctrine which was wholly irreconcilable
with that Religion which they had been devoted to. Now the stronger the
prejudice is which is conveyed into men's minds by the force of education, the
greater strength and power must there needs be in the Gospel of Christ, which
did so easily demolish these strong holds, and captivate the understandings of
men to the obedience of Christ. To which purpose Arnobius excellently speaks in
these words to the Heathens; Sed non creditis gesta haec. Sed qui ea conspicati
sunt fieri and sub oculis suis viderunt agi, testes optimi certissimique
auctores, Arnob. ^. gentes l. ^.
and crediderunt haec ipsi, and credenda posteris nobis haud exilibus cum
approbationibus tradiderunt. Quinam isti fortasse quaeritis? gentes, populi,
nationes, and incredulum illud genus humanum. Quod nisi aperta res esset, and
luce ipsa quemadmodum dicitur clarior, nunquam rebus hujusmodi credulitatis
suae commodarent assensum. An nunquid dicemus illius temporis homines usque
adeo fuisse vanos, mendaces, stolidos, brutos, ut quae nunquam viderant vidisse
se fingerent? and quae facta omnino non erant falsis proderent testimoniis aut
puerili assertione sirmarent? Cumque possent vobiscum and unanimiter vivere,
and inoffensas ducere conjunctiones, gratuita susciperent odia and execrabili
haberentur in nomine? Quod si falsa ut dicit is historia illa rerum est, unde
tam brevi tempore totus mundus ista religione complet us est? Aut in unam coire
qui potuerunt mentem gentes regionibus dissi^^ae, ventis coelique convexionibus
dimotae? Asseverationibus illectae sunt nudis, inductae in spes cassas, and in
pericula capitis immittere se sponte temeraria desperatione voluerunt, cum
nihil tale vidissent quod eas in hos cult us novitatis suae possit excitare
miraculo. Imo quia haec omnia ab ipso cernebant geri and ab ejus praeconibus
qui per orbem totum missi beneficia patris and munera sanandis animis
hominibusque portabant, veritatis ipsius vi victae, and dederunt se Deo, nec in
magnis posuere despendiis membra vobis projicere, and viscera sua lanianda
praebere. The substance of whose discourse is, that it is impossible to suppose
so many persons of so many Nations to be so far besotted and infatuated, as not
only to believe a Religion to be true which was contrary to that they were
educated in, but to venture their lives as well as estates upon it, had it not
been discovered to them in a most certain and infallible way by such who had
been eyewitnesses of the actions and miracles of Christ and his Apostles. And
as he elsewhere speaks, Vel haec saltem C. gentes lib. 2 p. 44.
fidem vobis faciant argumenta credendi quod jam peromnes terras in tam brevi
tempore and parvo immensi nominis hujus sacramenta diffusa sunt; quod nulla jam
natio est tam barbari moris, and mansuetudinem nesciens, quae non ejus amore
versa molliverit asperitatem suam, and in placidos sensus assumpt a
tranquillitate migraverit; quod tam magnis ingeniis praediti Oratores,
Grammatici, Rhetores, Consulti juris ac Medici, Philosophiae etiam secreta
rimantes, magisteria haec expetunt, spretis quibus paulo ante sidebant, etc.
Will not this persuade the world what firm foundations the faith of Christans
stands on, when in so short a time it is spread over all parts of the world?
that by it the most inhumane and barbarous Nations are softened into more then
civility? That men of the greatest wits and parts, Orators, Grammarians,
Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, Philosophers, who not? have for saken then
former sentiments, and adhered to the doctrine of Christ. Now, I say, if the
power of education be so strong upon the minds of men to persuade them of the
truth of the Religion they are bred up under (which Atheistically disposed
persons make so much advantage of) this is so far from weakening the truth of
Christianity, that it proves a great confirmation of it, because it obtained so
much upon its first Preaching in the world, notwithstanding the highest
prejudices from education were against it. If then men be so prone to believe
that to be most true which they have been educated under, it must argue a more
then ordinary evidence and power in that religion which unsettles so much the
principles of education, as to make men not only question the truth of them but
to renounce them, and embrace a religion contrary to them.

Especially when we withal consider what strongholds these principles of
education were backed with among the Sect. 21.
Heathens, when the doctrine of Christ was first divulged among them, i. e.
what plausible pretenses they had of continuing in the religion which they were
brought up in, and why they should not exchange it for Christianity; and those
were.

1. The pretended antiquity of their religion above the Christian; the main
thing pleaded against the Christians was Tertul. ad Not. l. 1. cap. 10.

Symmach. cp. l. 10. ep. 61.

Liban. oral. de Templis.


divortium ab institutis majorum, that they thought themselves wiser then their
forefathers; and Symmachus, Libanius and others plead this most in behalf of
Paganism; servanda est tot seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents qui
secuti sunt feliciter suos; their religion pleaded prescription against any
other, and they were resolved to sollow the steps of their ancestors wherein
they thought themselves happy and secure. Caecilius in Minutius Felix first
argues much against dogmatizing in religion, but withal says it Minul. F^
lix. p. 6.
most becomes a lover of truth, majorum excipere disciplinam, religiones tradit
as colere, Deos quos a parentibus ante imbutus es timere; nec de numinibus
far sententiam sed prioribus credere. So Arnobius tells us the main thing
objected against Arnob. ^. gent. l. 2. page 90.
the Christians was novellam esse religionem nostram, and ante dies natam
propemodum paucos, n^que vos potuisse antiquam and patriam linquere, and in
barbaros ritus peregrinosque traduci. And Cotta in Tully long before, laid this
down as the main principle of Pagan religion, majoribus nostris etiam nulla De
not. Deorum l. 3.
ratione reddita credere, to believe the tradition of our Fathers although
there be no evidence in reason for it: And after he has discovered the vanity
of the Stoical arguments about religion, concludes with this as the only thing
he resolved his religion into, mihi unum satis erit, majores nostros it a
tradidisse, It is enough for me that it comes by tradition from our
forefathers. Lactantius fully sets forth the manner of Lactant. de orig.
error. l. 2. c. 6.
pleading used by the Heathens against the Christians in the point of
antiquity. Hae sunt religiones, quas sibi a majoribus suis traditas,
pertinacissime tueri ac defendere persiverant; nec considerant quales sint, sed
ex hoc probat as atque veras esse confidunt, quod eas veteres tradider^nt;
tantaque est auctoritas vetustatis, ut inquircre in eam scelus esse dicatur.
The English is, they accounted tradition infallible, and knew no other way
whereby to find the truth of religion but by its conveyance from their
forefathers. How like herein do they speak to those who contend for the
corruptions crept into the Christian Church? who make use of the same pretenses
for them; viz. that they were delivered down from the Fathers; tantaque est
auctoritas vetustatis, ut inquirere in eam scelus esse dicatur; who are we who
will see further then Antiquity? But it is no wonder if Antiquity be
accompanied with dimness of sight; and so it was undoubtedly as to the Pagan
world, and as to the Christian too, when such a mixture of Heathenism came into
it. And the very same arguments by which the pleaders for Christianity did
justify the truth of their religion, notwithstanding this pretended antiquity,
will with equal force hold for a reformation of such inveterate abuses which
under a pretense of antiquity have crept into the Christian Church. Nullus
pudor est ad Ambros. ep. c. Symmach.
meliora transire, says Ambrose in his answer to Symmachus, what shame is it
to grow better? Quid facies? says Lactantius, majores ne potius an rationem
sequeris? Sirationem mavis, De orig. err. l. 2. c. 6.
discedere te necesse est ab institutis and auctoritate majorum: quoniam id
solum rectum est, quod ratio praescribit. Sin autem ^ietas majores sequi
suadet: sateris igitur and stultos illos esse qui excogitatis contra rationem
religionibus servierint; and te ineptum qui id colas quod falsum esse
conviceris. Where reason and mere authority of forefathers stand in
competition, he is more a child then a man that knows not on which side to give
his suffrage. But with the greatest strength and clearest reason Arnobius
speaks in this case. C. gent. l. 2.
Itaque cum nobis intenditis aversionem a religione priorum, causam convenit ut
inspiciat is, non sactum, nec quid reliquerimus opponere, sed secuti quid simus
potissimum contueri. When you charge us, says he, that we are revolted from
the religion of our forefathers, you ought not presently to condemn the fact
but to examine the reasons of it; neither ought you so much to look at what we
have left, as what it is we have embraced. Nam simutare sententiam culpa est
ulla vel crimen, and i veteribus institutis in alias res novas voluntatesque
migrare, criminatio ista and vos spectat, qui totics vitam consuetudinem que
mutastis; qui in mores alios, atque alios ritus priorum condemnatione
transistis. If mere departing from the religion of our ancestors be the great
sault, all those who own themselves to be Christians, were themselves guilty of
it when they revolted from Heathenism. If it be here said that the case is
different, because there was sufficient reason for it, which there is not as to
the corruptions of the Christian Church; if so, then all the dispute is taken
off from the matter of fact, or the revolt, to the causes inducing to it; and
if the Protestant be not able as to the causes of our separation from Rome to
manifest that they were sufficient, let him then be triumphed over by the
Romanist, and not before. I affert then and that with much assurance of mind,
that the principles of the Reformation are justifiable upon the same grounds of
reason, which the embracing Christianity was, when men of Heathens became
Christians; and that the arguments made use of by the Romanists against our
separation from them, are such as would have justified a Pagan Philosopher in
not embracing Christianity. For if it be unlawful for any party of men to
divide from others in a matter of religion which pretends antiquity and
universality, it had been unlawful for a Philosopher to have deserted Paganism,
as well as for a Protest^nt to depart from Rome. For according to the
principles of the Romanists, the judgment in the cause of the separation and
of the truth of religion lies in that party from which we depart; if we do now
but apply this to the old Roman Senate or Emperors in the case of Christian
religion and dividing from Heathen worship, we shall quickly see how easy a
matter it will be to make Christianity its self a Schism, and the doctrine of
Christ the greatest here sie. But as strong as those pretenses were then, or
have been since, the power of the doctrine of Christ has been so great, as to
conquer them, and thereby to manifest that it was of God, when such potent
prejudices were not able to withstand it. Of which Antiquity is the first.

2. The large and universal spread of Pagan religion, when Christianity came
into the world; there was never so great Catholicism as in Heathen worship,
when the Apostles first appeared in the Gentile world. Inde adeo per universa
imperia, provincias, oppida, videmus singulos sacrorum ritus Minut. i^ Octavio.
page 6.
gentiles babere, and Dcos colere municipes, says Caecilius in Minutius Felix.
The great charge against the Christians was Novellism, that they brought in a
strange and unheard of religion. The common Question was, Where was your
religion before Jesus of Nazareth, as it has been since, Where was your
religion before Luther? and the same answer which served then, will stand
unmovable now, there where no other religion is, in the Word of God. For this
was the weapon whereby the Primitive Christians defended themselves against the
assaults of Paganism, and the evidences they brought that the doctrine preached
by them and contained in the Scriptures was originally from God, were the only
means of overthrowing Paganism, notwithstanding its pretended universality.

3. Settlement by Laws of Heathen worship. This was so much pretended and
pleaded for, that as far as we can find by the history of the Primitive
Church, the pretense on which the Christians suffered, was sedition and
opposing the established Laws. The Christians were reckoned inter illicitas
factiones, as appears by Tertullian, among unlawful corporations; the Apolo. c.
38.
Politicians and Statesmen were all for preserving the Laws; they troubled not
themselves much about any religion; but only that which was settled by Law,
they sought to uphold, because the acting contrary to it might bring some
disturbance to the civil state. There were several Laws which the Christians
were then brought under, and condemned for the breach of. 1. The Law against
hetaeriae, or conventicles as they were pleased frequently to style the meeting
of Christians together; thence the places where the Christians assembled for
worship, were commonly called Conventicula; Observat. in Arnob. l. 4.
it a appellabant loca, says Heraldus, ubi congregabantur Christiani oraturi,
and verbi divini interpretationem accepturi, ac sacras Synaxes habituri: but
Elmenhorstius more shortly; Conventicula loca sunt ubi Christiani Congregati
orare consucverunt. The places where the Christians did meet and pray together,
were called Conventicles: in Basi^ica Siciunini ubi ritus Christiani est
conventiculum, says Histor. l. 27 Arnob. l. 4.
Ammianus Marccllinus; cur immaniter conventicula dirui? says Arnobius; qui
universum populum cum ipso pariter conventiculo concremavit, as Lactantius
likewise speaks. Now Lact. (...). l. 5. c. 11.
the reason of the name was, because the Heathens judged these assemblies of
Christians to be Illegal Societies. For which we are to understand that in the
time of the Roman Emperors when they grew suspicious of their own safety, they
severely prohibited ail those Sodalitia, or Societies and Colleges, which were
very much in use in the Roman Commonwealth, in imitation of the (...) in the
Cities of Greece. These were such societies of persons, which voluntarily
confederated together either for some particular design, or for preserving Love
and Friendship among each other, and thence had their frequent meetings in
common together. Now the more numerous these were, and the more ^losely they
confederated, the more jealous eye the Roman Emperors had upon them, because of
some clandestine designs, which they suspected might be carried on for
disturbance of the public peace in such suspicious meetings. Thence came out
many particular edicts of the Emperors against all such kinds of societies.

Now when the Christians began to be somewhat numerous, and had according to
the principles of their Religion frequent Assemblies for Divine worship, and
did confederate together by such Symbols, of being washed with water, and
eating and drinking together (which was all the Heath^ns apprehended by their
use of baptism, and the Lords Supper) the Proconsuls and other Magistrates in
their several Provinces bring the Christians under these Edicts, and so
punished them for the breach of the Laws. Which as appears by Pliny his Epistle
to Trajan, was the only account on which L^b. 10. ^p. 97.
the wiser Heathens did proceed against the Christians; for we see he troubled
not himself much about the truth and evidence of Christian Religion, but such
persons were brought before him, and after he had interrogated them whether
they were Christians, or no, several times, if they persisted, he then punished
them not so much for their Religion, as for their obstinacy and contempt of
authority. For so much is im^lyed in those words of his, Neque enim dubitabam,
qual^cunque esset quod faterentur, pervicaciam certe, and inflexibilem
obstin^tionem debere puniri: that whatever their Religion was, their obstinacy
and disobedience deserved punishment. That which the Christians now pleaded for
themselves, why they should not be reckoned among the factions of the people,
was that which they gave in answer to Pliny, that all their fault was, Quod
essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo
dicere secum invicem; seque sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed
ne furta, nelatrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum appellati abnegarent. That they were wont upon their solemn days to
meet together for divine worship, and to Covenant with each other only for the
practice of those things which were as much for the good of mankind as their
own, viz. that they would not wrong and defraud others, as to their bodies or
estates. And Tertullian approves of the Law against factions, as de providentia
and modestia publica, ne civitas in parts seinderetur, as wisely intended to
prevent Apolog. cap. 38.
Seditions; but withal pleads, that the society of Christians could not be
reckoned inter illicitas factiones; for, says he, haec coitio Christianorum
merito sane illicita si illicitis par; merito damnanda si quis de ea queritur
eo titulo quo de factionibus querela est. In cujus perniciem aliquando
convenimus? Hoc sumus congregati quod and dispersi; hoc universi quod and
singuli; neminem laedentes, neminem contristantes; quum probi, quum boni
coeunt, quum pii quum casti congregantur, non est factio dicenda sed curia. If,
says he, the societies of Christians were like others, there might be some
reason to condemn them, under the head of factions: but as long as we meet
together for no man's injury, that whether divided, or assembled, we are still
the same, that we grieve and injure no body; when such a company of good men
meet together, it is rather a Council then a faction.

2. Another Law the Christians were brought under, was, that against
Innovations in Religion; thence it was laid so much to the charge of the
Christians, that they did (...), go contrary to the established Laws; as
Porphyrie said of Origin, because he was a Christian, he did, Apud Eusebius. l. 6.
Eccl. hist. cap. 19.
(...), and when he speaks of Ammonius revolting from Christianity to Paganism,
(...), he turned to the way of life, which was agreeable to the established
Laws. Now Christianity was every where looked on as a great Innovation,
insomuch that the Christians were accused to be legum, morum, Tertul. Apol. c.
4.
naturae inimici, as enemies to mankind as well as the Laws, because they drew
men off from that way of Religion which mankind had generally agreed in.
Thence Aemilianus the Apud Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 7. cap. 11.
Prefect of Egypt, when he bids the Christians return to Paganism, he uses
these expressions, (...). to return to the common sense of mankind, and to
forget what was so much against it, as he supposed Christianity to be. When
Paul preached at Athens, his first accusation was, that he was a prea^her of
strange Deities, because he preached to them Jesus, and the resurrection. And
Demctrius at Ephesus knew no such potent Acts 17. 18.
argument against Paul, as that his Religion destroyed the worship of Diana,
whom all Asia and the world worship. 19. 27.
So that the primitive Christians were then accounted the Antipodes to the
whole world, on which account they were so severely dealt with; most
Commonwealths observing the counsel of Mecaenas to Augustus, in Dio, to be
sure to have a watchful eye upon all Innovations in Religion, because they
tend so much to the disturbance of the Civil State.

3. The Law of Sacrilege. Thence Lactantius calls their Laws, Constitutiones
Sacrilegae, Quin etiam sceleratissimi homicidae contra pios jura impia
condiderunt; nam and constitutiones Lactant. l. 5. cap. 11.
Sacrilegae, and disputationes Iurisperitorum leguntur injustae; and as he tells
us, Domitius Ulpianus had collected all those Rescripta nefaria together, which
concerned the Christians; from hence it was, Christianity by Pliny, is called
amentia, by Tacitus exitiabilis superstitio, by Suet^nius Plia ep. l. 10. cp.
97.

Tac^. An. l. 15.

Sucton. in N^. one.


Superstitio nova and exitiabilis; so much did these three great men agree, in
condemning the best Religion in the world for madness, and new, and detestable
Superstition; the ground of the great pique was, the emnity declared by
Christians against the Idolatrous Temples, and worship of the Heathens.

4. The Law against Treason; for sometimes they proceeded so high, as to accuse
the Christians laesae Majestatis, and thence they are commonly called publici
hosts, enemies to all civil Government. Which they inferred from hence: Tertal.
Ap. c. 27. c. 35.
1. Because they would not sacrifice for the Emperors safety; Ideo committimus,
says Tertullian, in Majestatem Imperatorum, Apol. c. 29.
quia illos non subjicimus rebus suis; Quia non ludimus de officio salutis
eorum, qui eam non putamus in manibus esse plumbatis. The accusation for
treason lay in their refusing to supplicate the Idols for the Emperors welfare.
2. Because they would not swear by the Emperors Genius. Thence Herold. in
Tertul. Apol. cap. 29.
Saturnius said to the Martyr, Tantum jura per genium Caesaris nostri, if he
would but swear by the Genius of Caesar, he should be saved. Yet though they
refused to swear by the Emperors genius, they did not refuse to testify their
Allegiance, and to swear by the Emperors safety. Sed and juramus, says
Tertullian, Sicut non per genios Caesarum, it ae Apol. c. 32.
per salutem little quae est augustior omnibus geniis. 3. Because they would not
worship the Emperors as Gods; which was then grown a common custom. Non enim
Deum Imperatorem dicam, vel quia mentirinescio, vel quia illum deridere non
audeo, vel quia necipse se Deum volet dici si homo sit, as the same Author
speaks. Nay the primitive Christians cap. 33.
were very scrupulous of calling the Emperors Dominus, hoc enim Dei est
cognomen, because the name Lord was an attribute of Gods, and applied as his
name to him in Scripture. The reason of this Scrupulosity was not, from any
question they made of the Sovereignty of Princes, or their obligation to
obedience to them (which they are very free in the acknowledgement of) but from
a jealousy and just suspicion that something of Divine honor might be employed
in it, when the adoration of Princes was grown a custom. Therefore Tertullian
to prevent misunderstandings, says, Dicam plane Imperatorem Dominum, sed more
Communi, sed Cap. 34.
quando non cogor ut Dominum Dei vice dicam. They refused not the name in a
common sense, but as it employed Divine honor.

4. Because they would not observe the public festivals of the Emperors in the
way that others did, which it seems were observed with abundance of looseness
and debauchery by all sorts of persons; and as Tertullian smartly says,
malorum Cap. 35.
morum licentia piet as erit; and occasio luxuriae religio deputabitur?
Debauchery is accounted a piece of loyalty, and intemperance a part of
religion. Which made the Christians rather hazard the reputation of their
loyalty, then bear a part in so much rudeness as was then used, and thence they
abhorred all the solemn spectacles of the Romans; nihil est nobis, says the
same author, dictu, visu, auditu, cum insania Circi, cum impudicitia Theatri,
cum atrocitate arenae, cum Cap. 38.
Xysti vanitate. They had nothing to do either with the madness of the Cirque,
or the immodesty of the Theater, or the cruelty of the Amphitheatre, or the
vanity of the public wrestlings. We see then what a hard Province the
Christians had, when so many Laws were laid as birdlime in their way to catch
them, that it was impossible for them to profess themselves Christians and not
run into a Praemunire by their Laws. And therefore it cannot be conceived that
many out of affectation of novelty should then declare themselves Christians,
when so great hazards were run upon the professing of it. Few soft-spirited
men, and lovers of their own ease, but would have found some fine distinctions
and nice evasions to have reconciled themselves to the public Laws by such
things which the Primitive Christians so unaenimously refused, when tending to
profaneness or Idolatry. And from this discourse we cannot but conclude with the
Apostle Paul, that the weapons whereby the Ap^stles and Primitive Christians
encountered the Heathen world, were not 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
fleshly or weak, but exceeding strong and powerful, in that they obtained so
great a conquest over the imaginations and carnal reasonings of men (which were
their strong holds they secured themselves in) as to make them readily to
forsake their Heathen worship, and become cheerful servants to Christ. Thus we
see the power of the doctrine of Christ which prevailed over the principles of
education, though backed with pretended antiquity, universality, and
establishment by civil Laws.

But this will further appear if we consider that not only the matters of faith
were contrary to the principles of education, Sect. 22. 2.
but because many of them seemed incredible to men's natural reason; that we
cannot think persons would be over forward to believe such things. Every one
being so ready to take any advantage against a religion which did so little
flatter corrupt nature either as to its power or capacity; in so much that
those who preached this doctrine, declared openly to the world, that such
persons who would judge of the Christian doctrine, by such principles which
mere natural reason did proceed upon (such one I suppose it is whom the Apostle
calls (...) one that owned nothing but 3 Cor. 2. 14.
natural reason whereby to judge of Divine truths) could not entertain matters
of faith or of Divine revelation, because such things would seem but folly to
him that owned no higher principle then Philosophy, or that did not believe any
Divine inspiration; neither can such a one know them, because a Divine
revelation is the only way to come to a through understanding of them: and a
person who does not believe such a Divine revelation, it is impossible he
should be a competent judge of the truth of the doctrine of Christ. So that the
only ground of receiving the doctrine of the Gospel is upon a Divine
revelation, that God himself by his Son and his Apostles has revealed these
deep mysteries to the world, on which account it is we are bound to receive
them, although they go beyond our reach and comprehension. But we see generally
in the Heathen world how few of those did believe the doctrine of Christ in
comparison, who were the great admirers of the Philosophy and way of learning
which was then cried up: the reason was, because Christianity not only
contained far deeper mysteries then any they were acquainted with, but
delivered them in such a way of authority, commanding them to believe the
doctrine they preached on the account of the Divine authority of the revealers
of it. Such a way of proposal of doctrines to the world the Philosophy of the
Greeks was unacquainted with, which on that account they derided as not being
suited to the exact method which their sciences proceeded in. No doubt had the
Apostles come among the Greeks (...) with a great deal of pomp and ostentation,
and had fed men's curiositi^s with vain and unnecessary speculations, they might
have had as many followers among the Greeks for their sakes, as Christ had
among the Jews for the sake of the loaves. But the matters of the Gospel being
more of inward worth and moment, then of outward pomp and show, the vain and
empty Greeks presently find a quarrel with the manner of proposing them; that
they came not in a way of clear demonstr^tion, but stood so much upon faith as
soon as it were delivered. Thence Celsus and Galen think they have reason
enough to reject the Laws of Moses and Christ, because Celsus calls them (...),
Galen Christianity (...), Orig. l. 1. c. Cells. Gal. de d ffer. pulls. lib. 2. c.
4.
that they were such doctrines which require faith and obedience without giving
men's reason an account of the things commanded. As though the authority of a
Legislator sufficiently manifested, were not enough to enforce a Law, unless a
sufficient account were given of the thing required to the purblind reason of
every individual person acted by passions and private interests, as to the
justice and equity of it. And so the primary obligation on man's part to faith
and obedience, must arise not from the evidence of Divine authority, but of the
thing it self which is revealed, to the most partial judgment of every one to
whom it is proposed. Which those who know how short the stock of reason is at
the best in men, and how easily that which is, is fashioned and molded
according to pr^judices and interests already entertained, will look upon only
as a design to comply with the carnal desires of men, in that thereby none
shall be bound to go any further, then this blind and corrupted guide shall
lead them. Now these being the terms on which the Gospel of Christ must have
expected entertainment in the Gentile world, how impossible l^ad it been ever
to have sound any success among men, had there not been sufficient evidence
given by a power of miracles, that however strange and incredible the doctrine
might seem, yet it was to be believed because there was sufficient means to
convince men that it was of Divine revelation.

Neither were the matters of says only contrary to the Sect. 23.
inclinations of the world, but so were the precepts of life or those things in
Christianity which concerned practice. There are two things which are the main
scope and design of Christianity in reference to men's lives, to take them off
from their sins, and from the world; and of all things these are they which
men's hearts are so bewitched with. Now the precepts of the Gospel are such
which require the greatest Matt^. 58. 16. 24.

Tit. 2. 12.


purity of heart and life, which call upon men to deny themselves, and all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly
in this present world; that, all that name the name of Christ must depart from
iniquity; that, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

2 Cor. 7. 1.


all true Christians must be cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
and must perfect holiness in the fear of God. And the Gospel enforces these
precepts of holiness with the most terrible denunciations of the wrath of God
on those who disobey them; that, the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from 2
These. 1. 7, 8.
heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God and that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ. That, the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
who Romans 1. 18.
hold the truth in unrighteousness. That, no persons who live in the habitual
practice of any known sin, shall inherit the 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

Gal. 420.

Ephesians. 5. 5, 6.


Kingdom of God. That, no man should deceive them with vain words, for because
of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience; that
men do but vainly flatter themselves when they seek to reconcile unholy lives
with the hopes of future happiness; for without holiness, no man shall see the
Lord. And then in reference to the things Heb. 12. 34.
of this present life which men busy themselves so much about, the Gospel
declares that, they who love this world, the love of the Father is not in them;
that, the friendship of this world ^ Joh. 2. 14.
is enmity with God; and whosoever will be a friend of the James 4. 4.

Col. 3. 1, 2.

Phil. 3. 20.

Mat. 6. 20.

2 Cor. 4. 18.


world, is an enemy to God: That, Christians must not set their affections on
earth, but on things in heaven; That, the conversation of true Christians is in
heaven. That, we ought not to lay up our treasure on earth, but in heaven;
That, we must not look at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal. Now the whole design of the doctrine of Christ being
to persuade men to lead a holy and heavenly life while they are in this world,
and thereby to be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints
in Col. 1. 12.
light, can we think so many men whose hearts were wedded to sin and the world,
could so suddenly be brought off from both without a divine power accompanying
that doctrine which was preached to them? And therefore the Apostle says,
(...), I am not ashamed Romans 1. 16.
of the Gospel of Christ; i. e. though the Gospel of Christ be the only true
mystery, yet I do not by it as the Heathens are wont to do with their famous
Eleusinian mysteries which were kept so secret by all the mystae and (...);
but, says he, I know no reason I have to be ashamed of any thing in the
Gospel, that I should labor its concealment to advance its veneration; but the
more public the Gospel is, the more it manifests its power; for through it God
is pleased mightily to work in order to the salvation both of Jew and Gentile.
And of all the success of the Gospel, that upon the hearts and lives of men
deserves the greatest consideration.

The great efficacy and power of the Gospel was abundantly seen in that great
alteration which it wrought in all those who were the hearty imbracers of it.
The Philosophers did very frequently and deservedly complain of the great
inefficacy of all their moral precepts upon the minds of men, and that by all
their instructions, politiora non meliora, ingenia fiunt, men improved more in
knowledge then goodness; but now Christianity not only enforced duties on men
with greater power and authority: For the Scriptures do, as Saint Austin
speaks, Non tanquam ex Philosophorum concertationibus strepere, sed tanquam ex
oraculis and Dei nubibus intonare, August. de Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 19.
not make some obstreperous clamours, like those tinkling Cymbals the
Philosophers, but awe the souls of men with the majesty of that God from whom
they came. Neither was it only a great and empty sound which was heard in the
preaching of the Gospel, but when God thundered therein, he broke down the
stately Cedars, and shook the Wilderness, and made the Hinds to Calve, (as it
is said of Thunder, called the voice Psalm 29. 5, 8, 9.
of the Lord in Scripture) he humbled the pride of men, unsettled the Gentile
world from its former foundations, and wrought great alterations on all those
who hearkened to it. The whose design of the Gospel is couched in those words
which Saint Paul tells us were spoken to him by Christ himself, when he
appointed him to be an Apostle, to open men's Act. 26. 18.
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which were sanctified by faith in Christ. And the efficacy of this doctrine in
order to these great ^nds, was abundantly seen in the preaching of that
Apostle, who was so instrumental in converting the world to piety and sobriety,
as well as to the doctrine of Christ. What strange persons were the Corinthians
before they became Christians! for when the Apostle had enumerated many of the
vilest persons of the world, he presently adds, And such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but 1 Cor. 6. ^. 10, 11.
ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.
The more dangerous the distemper is, the more malignant its nature, the more
inveterate its continuance, the greater the efficacy of the remedy which works
a cure of it. The power of grace is the more seen in conversion, the greater
the sins have been before it. It is an easy matter in comparison, to remove a
disease at its first onset, of what it is to cure it when it becomes Chronical.
The power of the Gospel wrought upon all sorts and kinds of persons, to
manifest to the world there was no distemper of men's souls so great, but there
was a possibility of a remedy for it; and not only so, but pregnant and visible
instances were given of the power and efficacy of it. For they themselves show
of us, says the Apostle, what manner of entering in we had among you, and how
ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true 1 These. 1. 9, 10.
God, and to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even
Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. Now that which manifests the
exceeding great power and excellency of the Gospel, was, that it not only
turned men from one way of worship to another, which is a matter of no great
difficulty, but that it turned men together with that, from their lusts and
sensuality, to a holy and unblameable life. For being more in love with their
sins then with their opinions, it must needs be a greater power which draws men
from the practice of habitual sins, then that which only makes them change
their opinions, or alter the way of worship they were brought up in. This is
that which Origin throughout his books against Celsus triumphs in as the most
signal evidence of a divine power in the doctrine of Christ, that it wrought so
great an alteration on all that truly embraced it, that of vicious, debauched,
and dissolute, it made them temperate, sober and religious. (...). C. Celsum l.
2. p. 78, 85. lib. 1. p. 21.
The doctrine of Christ did convert the most wicked persons who embraced it,
from all their debaucheries, to a life most suitable to nature and reason, and
to the practice of all virtues. Therefore certainly the Gospel could not want
that commendation among all ingenuous Moralists, that it was the most excellent
instrument in the world to reform the lives of men, and to promote real
goodness in it. When they could not but take notice of so many persons
continually so brought off from their follies and vain conversations, to a life
serious, sober, and unblameable; nay and some of the Christians were of so much
integrity and goodness, that their greatest enemies were forced to say that
their only fault was that they were Christians. Bonus vir Cajus Sejus, tantum
quod Christianus. A very good man, only a Christian. But one would think this
should have made them have a higher opinion of Christianity, when it did so
suddenly make so many good men in the world. Especially when this power was so
manifest on such persons who were supposed incapable of being reformed by
Philosophy, young, illiterate, and mean-spirited persons; therefore it may be
justly supposed that it was not by the strength of their own reason that this
alteration was wrought within them, but by that Divine power which was able to
tame the most unruly, to instruct the most ignorant, to raise up the most
sordid persons to such a generous temper as to slight the good things of this
life, in comparison with those to come. And so remarkable was the difference of
life then between those who were Christians, and those who were not, (as there
is still between true Christians and mere pretenders) that Origin dares Celsus
to compare them in point of morality with any other Societies in the world.
Orig. c. Cells. l. 3. p. 128.
(...); For the Churches of God, which are discipled to Christ, being compared
with other Societies, shine among them like lights in the world. For who can
but confess, that even the worser part of the Christian Churches exceeds the
best of the popular Assemblies? For, as he goes on, the Church of God which is
at Athens, that is (...), very quiet and peaceable, because it seeks to approve
its sels to God; but the popular Assemby at Athens that is (...), seditious and
quarrelsom, and in nothing comparable to the Church of God there. So it is, if
we compare the Churches of Corinth and Alexandria with the Assemblies of the
people there. So that any candid enquirer after truth will exceedingly wonder
(how such fair Islands should appear nantes in gurgite vasto, in the midst of
such a Sea of wickedness as was in those Cities) how these Churches of God
should be planted in such rude and profane places. So the same Author goes on,
to compare the Churches Senate with that of the Cities, the Churches Officers
with theirs, and appeals to themselves, that even those among them who were
most lukewarm in their office, did yet far exceed all the City Magistrates in
all manner of virtues. From whence he rationally concludes, (...); If these
things be so, how can it but be most rational to adore the Divinity of Jesus,
who was able to accomplish such great things. And that not upon one or two, but
upon such great multitudes as were then converted to the Christian faith. We
read of one Phoedon, and one Polemon brought from their debaucheries by
Socrates and Xenocrates; but what are these compared with those who were turned
from their sins to God by the Gospel of Christ! (...), Orig. l. 1. p. 50.
etc. The twelve Apostles were but the first fruits of that plentiful harvest
of converts which followed afterward. And although Celsus (like an Epicurean)
seems to deny the possibility Orig. l. 3. p. 150.
of any such thing as conversion, because customary sins become a second
nature, that no punishments can reform them; Yet, says Origin, herein he not
only contradicts us Christians, but all such as were (...), who owned any
generous principles of Philosophy, and did not despair of recovering virtue, as
a thing feasible by humane nature; and gives instances ad hominem, to prove the
possibility of the thing from the ancient Heroes, Hercules and Ulysses, from
the two Philosophers, Socrates and Musonius, and the two famous converts to
Philosophy, Phoedon and Polemon. But yet, says he, these are not so much to be
wondered at, that the eloquence and reason of the Philosophers should prevail
on some very few persons, but that the mean and contemptible language of the
Apostles, should convert such multitudes from intemperance to sobriety, from
injustice to fair dealing, from cowardice to the highest constancy, yea so
great as to lay down their lives for the sake of virtue; how can we but admire
so divine a power as was seen in it? And therefore, says he, we conclude,
(...) That it is so far from being impossible, that it is not at all difficult
for corrupt nature to be changed by the Word of God. Lactantius excellently
manifests that Philosophy could never do so much good in the world as (...). ac
salf. sap. l. 3. c. 25.
Christianity did, because that was not suited at all to common capacities, and
did require so much skill in the Arts to prepare men for it, which it is
impossible all should be well skilled in, which yet are as capable of being
happy, as any others are. And how inefficacious the precepts of Philosophy
were, appears by the Philosophers themselves, who were far from having command
by them over their masterless passions, and were fain sometimes to confess that
nature was too headstrong to be kept in by such weak reins as the Precepts of
Philosophy were: But, says he, what great command divine precepts have upon
the souls of men, daily experience shows. Da mihi virum qui sit iracundus,
maledicus, effrenatus; ^ap. 26.
paucissimis Dei verbis, tam placidum quam ovem reddam. Da cupidum, avarum,
tenacem; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo, and pecuniam suam plenis manibus
largientem. Da timidum doloris ac mortis; jam cruces, and ignes, taurum
contemnet. Da libidinosum, adulterum; ganeonem; jam sobrium castum ^ontinentem
videbis. Da crudelem, and sanguinis appetentem, jam in veram clementiam furor
ille mutabitur. Da injustum, insipientem, peccatorem, continuo and aequus and
prudens, and innocens crit. In which words that elegant writer does by a
Rhetorical Scheme set out the remarkable alteration which was in any who became
true Christians, that although they were passionate, covetous, fearful,
lustful, cruel, unjust, vicious, yet upon their being Christians, they became
mild, liberal, courageous, temperate, merciful, just and unblameable; which
never any were brought to by mere Philosophy, which rather teaches the art of
concealing vices, then of healing them. But now when Christianity was so
effectual in the cure of those distempers which Philosophy gave over as beyond
its skill and power, when it cured them with so great success, and that not in
a Paracelsian way, for them to relapse afterward with greater violence, but it
did so thoroughly unsettle the fomes morbi, that it should never gather to so
great a head again; does not this argue a power more then Philosophical, and
that could be no less then divine power which tended so much to reform the
world, and to promote true goodness in it?

Thus we have considered the contrariety of the doctrine Sect. 24.
of Christ to men's natural inclinations, and yet the strange success it had in
the world, which in the last place will appear yet more strange, when we add
the almost continual opposition it met with from worldly power and policy. Had
it been possible for a cunningly devised fable, or any mere contrivance of
impostors to have prevailed in the world, when the most potent and subtle
persons bent their whole wits and designs for suppressing it? Whatever it were
in others, we are sure of some of the Roman Emperors, as Julian and
Dioclesian, that it was their master-design to root out and abolish
Christianity; and was it only the subtilty of the Christians which made these
persons give over their work in despair of accomplishing it? If the Christians
were such subtle men, whence came all their enemies to agree in one common
calumny, that they were a company of poor, weak, ignorant, inconsiderable men!
and if they were so, how came it to pass that by all their power and wisdom
they could never exterminate these persons, but as they cut them down, they
grew up the faster, and multiplied by their substraction of them! There was
something then certainly peculiar in Christianity, from all other doctrines,
that it not only was not advanced by any civil power, but it got ground by the
opposition it met with in the world. And therefore it is an observable
circumstance, that the first Christian Emperor (who acted as Emperor for
Christianity) viz. Constantine (for otherwise I know what may be said for
Philippus) did not appear in the world till Christianity had spread its self
over most parts of the habitable world. God thereby letting us see, that though
the civil power, when become Christian, might be very useful for protecting
Christianity, yet that he stood in no need at all of it as to the propagation
of it abroad in the world. But we see it was quite otherwise in that Religion
which had Mars its ascendant, viz. Mahometism; For like Paracelsus his Demon,
it always sat upon the pummel of the sword, and made its way in the world
merely by force and violence; and as its first constitution had much of blood
in it, so by it has it been fed and nourished ever since. But it was quite
otherwise with the Christian Religion; it never thrived better then in the most
barren places, nor triumphed more, then when it suffered most; nor spread its
self further then when it encountered the greatest opposition. Because therein
was seen the great force and efficacy of the doctrine of Christ, that it bore
up men's spirits under the greatest miseries of life, and made them with
cheerfulness to undergo the most exquisite torments which the cruelty of
Tyrants could invent. The Stoics and Epicureans boasts that their wise man
would be happy in the Bull of Phalaris, were but empty and Thrasonical words
which none would venture the truth of by an experiment upon themselves. It was
the Christian alone, and not the Epicurean, that could truly say in the midst
of torments, Suave est and nihil curo, and might justly alter a little of that
common saying of the Christians, and say, Non magna l^quimur, sed patimur, as
well as vivimus; the Christians did not speak great things, but do and suffer
them. And this gained not only great r^putation of integrity to themselves, but
much advanced the honor of their Religion in the world, when it was so
apparently seen that no force or power was able to withstand it. Will not this
at least persuade you that our Religion is true, and srom God, says Ar^^bius?
Quod cum genera poenarum tanta sint a vobis proposita ^^^.
Religionis hujus sequentibus leges, augeatur res magis, and contra omnes
minas, atque interdicta formidinum animosius populus obnitatur, and ad credendi
studium prohibitionis ipsius stimulis ^xcitetur? -- Itane istud non divinum and
sacrum est, aut sine Deo, little tantas animorum ficri conversiones ut cum
carnisices unci, aliique innumeri cruciatus, quemadmodum diximus, impendeant
credituris, v^luti quadam dulcedine, atque omnium virtutum amore correpti,
cognitas accipiant rations, atque mundi omnibus rebus praeponant amicitias
Christi? That no fears, penalties, or torments, were able to m^ke a Christian
alter his profession, but he would rather bid adi^u to his life then to his
Savior. This Origin likewise frequently takes notice of, when Celsus (...).
(...). c. Celsam ^. 21. (...). (...) ^. 110.
had objected the novelty of Christianity; the more wonderful it is (says
Origin) that in so short a time it should so largely spread its self in the
world; for if the cure of men's bodies be not wrought without Divine Providence,
how much less the cure of so many thousands of souls which have been converted
at once to humanity and Christianity, especially when all the pow^rs of the
world were from the first engaged to hinder the progress of this doctrine, and
yet notwithstanding all this opposition, (...) (...). The Word of God
pr^vailed, as not being able to be stopped by men, and became master over all its
enemies, and not only spread its self quite through Greece, but through a great
part of the world besides, and converted an innumerable company of souls to the
true worship and service of God. Thus we have now manifested from all the
circumstances of the propagation of the doctrine of Christ, what evidence there
was of a divine power accompanying of it; and how useful the first miracles
were in order to it.

CHAP. X. The difference of true miracles from false.
The unreasonableness of rejecting the evidence from miracles, because of
impostures. That there are certain rules of distinguishing true miracles from
false, and Divine from diabolical, proved from Gods intention in giving a power
of miracles, and the providence of God in the world. The inconvenience of
taking away the rational grounds of faith and placing it on self-evidence. Of
the self-evidence of the Scriptures, and the insufficiency of that for
resolving the question about the authority of the Scriptures. Of the pretended
miracles of Impostors and false Christ's, as Barchochelas David el-David and
others. The rules whereby to judge true miracles from false. 1. True Divine
miracles are wrought to confirm a Divine testimony. No miracles necessary for
the certain conveyance of a Divine testimony: proved from the evidences that
the Scriptures could not be corrupted. 2. No miracles Divine which contradict
Divine revelation. Of Popish miracles. 3. Divine miracles leave Divine effects
on those who believe them. Of the miracles of Simon Magus. 4. Divine miracles
tend to the overthrow of the devils power in the world: the antipathy of the
doctrine of Christ to the devils designs in the world. 5. The distinction of
true miracles from others, from the circumstances and manner of their
operation. The miracles of Christ compared with those of the Heathen Gods. 6.
God makes it evident to all impartial judgments that Divine miracles exceed
created power. This manifested from the unparalleld miracles of Moses and our
Savior. From all which the rational evidence of Divine revelation is
manifested, as to the persons whom God imployes to teach the world.

HAving thus far stated the cases wherein miracles may Sect. 1.
justly be expected as a rational evidence of Divine authority in the persons
whom God imployes by way of peculiar message to the world, and in the
prosecution of this discourse manifested the evidences of Divine authority in
Moses and the Prophets, and in our Savior and his Apostles; the only remaining
question concerning this subject is, how we may certainly distinguish true and
real miracles from such as are only pretended and counterfeit. For it being as
evident that there have been impostures and delusions in the world as real
miracles, the minds of men will be wholly to seek when to rely upon the
evidence of miracles as an argument of Divine authority in those persons who do
them, unless a way be found out to distinguish them from each other. But if we
can make it appear, that, unless men through weakness of judgment or
incogitancy deceive themselves, they may have certain evidence of the truth of
miracles, then there can be nothing wanting as to the establishment of their
minds in the truth of that doctrine which is confirmed by them. There has been
nothing which has made men of better affections then understandings, so ready
to suspect the strength of the evidence from miracles concerning Divine
testimony, as the multitude of impostures in the world under the name of
miracles, and that the Scripture its self tells us we must not hearken to such
as come with lying wonders. But may we not therefore safely rely on such
miracles which we have certain evidence could not be wrought but by Divine
power, because forsooth the Devil may sometimes abuse the ignorance and
credulity of unwary men? or is it because the Scripture forbids us to believe
such as should come with a pretense of miracles, therefore we cannot rely on
the miracles of Christ himself? which is as much as to say, because the
Scripture tells us that we must not believe every spirit, therefore we must
believe none at all; or because we must not entertain any other doctrine
besides the Gospel, therefore we have no reason to believe that. For the ground
whereby we are assured by the Scriptures that the testimony of Christ was
Divine, and therefore his doctrine true, is, because it was confirmed by such
miracles as he did; now if that argument were insufficient which the Scriptures
tell us was the great evidence of Christ's being sent from God, we cannot give
our selves a sufficient account in point of evidence on which we believe the
doctrine of the Gospel to be true and Divine. But the only rational pretense of
any scruple in this case must be a supposed uncertainty in our rules of judging
concerning the nature of miracles; for if there be no certain (...) or notes of
difference, whereby to know Divine miracles from delusions of senses and the
impostures of the Devil, I must confess that there is an apparent insufficiency
in the evidence from miracles; but if there be any certain rules of proceeding
in this case, we are to blame nothing but our incredulity if we be not
satisfied by them. For the full clearing of this, I shall first make it appear
that there may be certain evidence found out, whereby we may know true miracles
from false, and Divine from diabolical. And, Secondly, Enquire into those
things which are the main notes of difference between them. First, That there
may be certain evidence whereby to know the truth of miracles. I speak not of
the difference ex part r^i between miracles and those called wonders, as that
the one exceed the power of created agents, and the other does not; for this
leaves the enquirer as far to seek for satisfaction as ever; for granting that
a Divine power is seen in one and not in the other, he must needs be still
dissatisfied, unless it can be made evident to him that such things are from
Divine power, and others cannot be. Now the main distinction being placed here
in the natures of the things abstractly considered, and not as they bear any
evidence to our understandings, in stead of resolving doubts it increases
more; for, as for instance, in the case of the Magicians rods turning into
scrpents, as well as Moses his; what satisfaction could this yield to any
spectator to tell him, that in the one there was a Divine power and not in the
other, unless it were made appear by some evidence from the thing, that the one
was a mere imposture, and the other a real alteration in the thing it self? I
take it then for granted, that no general discourses concerning the formal
difference of miracles and wonders considered in themselves can afford any
rational satisfaction to an inquisitive mind; that which alone is able to give
it, must be something which may be discerned by any judicious and considerative
person. And that God never gives to any a power of miracles, but he gives some
such ground of satisfaction concerning them, will appear upon these two
considerations.

1. From Gods intention in giving to any this power of doing miracles. We have
largely made it manifest that the end of true miracles is to be a confirmation
to the world of the Divine commission of the persons who have it, and that the
testimony is Divine which is confirmed by it. Now if there be no way to know
when miracles are true or false, this power is to no purpose at all; for men
are as much to seek for satisfaction, as if there had been no such things at
all. Therefore if men are bound to believe a Divine testimony, and to rely on
the miracles wrought by the persons bringing it, as an evidence of it, they
must have some assurance that these miracles could not come from any but a
Divine power.

2. From the providence of God in the world; which if we own, we cannot imagine
that God should permit the Devil, whose only design is to ruin mankind, to
abuse the credulity of the world so far, as to have his lying wonders pass
uncontrouled, which they must do, if nothing can be found out as a certain
difference between such things as are only of Diabolical and such as are of
Divine power. If then it may be discovered that there is a malignant spirit
which acts in the world, and does produce strange things, either we must impute
all strange things to him, which must be to attribute to him an infinite power,
or else that there is a being infinitely perfect which crosses this malignant
spirit in his designs; and if so, we cannot imagine he should suffer him to
usurp so much tyranny over the minds of men, as to make those things pass in
the more sober and inquisitive part of the world for Divine miracles which were
only counterfeits and impostures. If then the providence of God be so deeply
engaged in the discovering the designs of Satan, there must be some means of
this discovery, and that means can be supposed to be no other in this case, but
some rational and satisfactory evidence, whereby we may know when strange and
miraculous things are done by Satan to deceive men, and when by a Divine power
to confirm a Divine testimony.

But how is it possible, say some, that miracles should be Sect. 2.
any ground on which to believe a testimony Divine, when Christ himself has
told us, that there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets and shall show
great signs and wonders; in Matthew. 24. 24.
so much that if it were possible they should deceive the very elect? and the
Apostle tells us, that the coming of Antichrist will be with all power and
signs and lying wonders. How then can ^. These. 2. 9
we fix on miracles as an evidence of Divine testimony when we see they are
common to good and bad men, and may seal indifferently either truth or
falsehood? To this I reply;

1. Men are guilty of doing no small disservice to the doctrine of Christ, when
upon such weak and frivolous pretenses they give so great an advantage to
infidelity, as to call in question the validity of that which yielded so ample
a testimony to the truth of Christian religion. For if once the rational
grounds on which we believe the doctrine of Christ to be true and Divine, be
taken away, and the whole evidence of the truth of it be laid on things not
only derided by men of Atheistical spirits, but in themselves such as cannot be
discerned or judged of by any but themselves, upon what grounds can we proceed
to convince an unbeliever that the doctrine which we believe is true! If they
tell him, that as light and fire manifest themselves, so does the doctrine of
the Scri^ture to those who believe it; It will be soon replied, that
self-evidence in a matter of faith can imply nothing but either a firm
persuasion of the mind concerning the thing propounded; or else that there are
such clear evidences in the thing it self, that none who freely use their
reason can deny it; the first can be no argument to any other person any
further then the authority of the person who declares it to have such
self-evidence to him, does extend its self over the mind of the other; and to
ones self it seems a strange way of arguing, I believe the Scriptures because
they are true, and they are true because I believe them; for self-evidence
implies so much, if by it be meant the persuasion of the mind that the thing is
true; but if by self-evidence be further meant such clear evidence in the
matter propounded that all who do consider it, must believe it; I then further
enquire whether this evidence does lie in the n^ked proposal of the things to
the understanding; and if so, then every one who assents to this proposition
that the whole is greater then the part, must likewise assent to this, that the
Scripture is the Word of God; or whether does the evidence lie, not in the
naked proposal, but in the efficacy of the Spirit of God on the minds of those
to whom it is propounded. Then, 1. The self-evidence is taken off from the
written Word which was the object, and removed to a quite different thing which
is the efficient cause. 2. Whether then any persons who want this efficacious
operation of the Spirit of God, are or can be bound to believe the Scripture to
be Gods Word? If they are bound, the duty must be propounded in such a way as
may be sufficient to convince them that it is their duty; but if all the
evidence of the truth of the Scripture lie on this testimony of the Spirit,
then such as want this, can have none at all. But if ^astly, by this
self-evidence be meant such an impress of Gods authority on the Scriptures that
any who consider them as they ought, cannot but discern, I still further
enquire, whether this impress lies in the positive assertions in Scripture that
they are from God, and that cannot be unless it be made appear to be impossible
that any writing should pretend to be from God when it is not; or else in the
written books of Scripture, and then let it be made appear that any one merely
by the evidence of the writings themselves without any further arguments can
pronounce the Proverbs to be the Word of God, and not the book of Wisdom; and
Ecclesiastes to be Divinely inspired and not Ecclesiasticus: or else the
self-evidence must be in the excellency of the matters which are revealed in
Scripture; but this still falls very short of resolving wholly the question
whether the Scripture be the Word of God; for the utmost that this can reach to
is, that the things contained in Scripture are of so high and excellent a
nature, that we cannot conceive that any other should be the author of them,
but God himself; all which being granted, I am as far to seek as ever what
grounds I have to believe that those particular writings which we call the
Scripture are the Word of God, or that God did immediately employ such and such
persons to write such and such books; for I may believe the substance of the
doctrine to be of God, and yet not believe the books wherein it is contained,
to be a Divine and infallible testimony; as is evident in the many excellent
devotional books which are in the world.

But yet further, if the only ground on which we are to believe a doctrine
Divine, be the self-evidencing light and power of it, then I suppose there was
the same ground of beli^ving a Divine testimony when the doctrine was declared
without writing by the first Preachers of it. So that by this method of
proceeding, the ground of believing Christ to be sent as the M^ssias sent from
God, must be wholly and solely resolved into this, that there was so much
self-evidence in this proposition uttered by Christ, I am the light of the
world, that all the Jews had been bound to have believed him sent from God (for
light manifests its self) although our Savior had never done any one miracle
to make it appear that he came from God. And we cannot but charge our Savior
on this account with being at a very unnecessary expense upon the world in
doing so many miracles, when the bare naked affirmation that he was the
Messiah, had been sufficient to have convinced the whole world. But is it
conceivable then upon what account our Savior should lay so much force on the
miracles done by himself in order to the proving his testimony to be Divine,
that he says himself, that he had a greater witness then that of John (who yet
doubtless had John 5. 36.
self-evidencing light going along with his doctrine too) for the works which
the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of
me that the Father has sent me. Can any thing be more plain, or have greater
selfevidence in it, then that our Savior in these words does lay the evidence
of his Divine testimony upon the miracles which he wrought, which on that
account he so often appeals to, on this very reason because they bear witness
of him; and if (...). 10. 25, 38. 14. 11. 15. 24.
they would not believe him on his own testimony, yet they ought to believe him
for his works sake. Does all this now amount only to a removing of prejudices
from the person of Christ? which yet according to the tenor of the objection
we are considering of, it is impossible the power of miracles should do, if
these miracles may be so far done or counterfeited by false Christ's, that we
can have no certain evidence to distinguish the one from the other,

Which the objection pretends; and was the great thing Sect. 3.
wherein Celsus the Epicurean triumphed so much, that Christ should foretell
that others should come and do miracles O^ig. lib. 2. c Cells.
which they must not hearken to, and thence would infer as from Christ's own
confession that miracles have in them (...), nothing divine, but what may be
done by wicked men: (...); Is it not a wretched thing, says he, that from the
same works one should be accounted a God, and others deceivers? Whereby those
who would invalidate the argument from miracles, may take notice how finely
they fall in with one of the most bitter enemies of Christian religion, and
make use of the same arguments which he did; and therefore Origens reply to
him, will reach them too. For, says he, our Savior in those words of his does
not bid men beware in general of such as did miracles, (...); but bids them
beware of that when men gave themselves out to be the true Christ the Son of
God, and endeavor to draw Christ's Disciples from him, by some mere appearances
in stead of miracles. Therefore Christ being evidently made appear to be the
Son of God, by the powerful and uncontrouled miracles which he wrought, what
pretense of reason could there be to hearken to any who gave themselves out to
be Christ's, merely from some strange wonders which they wrought? And from
hence, as he further observes, may be justly inferd contrary to what Celsus
imagined, that there was certainly an evidence of Divine power in miracles,
when these false Christ's gave themselves out to be Christ's, merely from the
supposal that they had this power of doing miracles. And so it is evident in
all the false Christ's which have appeared, they have made this their great
pretense that they did many signs and wonders; which God might justly permit
them to do, to punish the great infidelity of the Jews who would not believe in
Christ notwithstanding those frequent and apparent miracles which he did, which
did infinitely transcend those of any such pretenders. Such among the Jews were
Ionathas, who after the d^struction of Jerusalem, as Josephus tells us, drew
many of the people into the Wilderness of Cyrene, (...), promising to show them
many prodigies and strange appearances. Not long after in the times of Adrian,
appeared that famous blazing-star Barchochebas, who not only portended but
brought so much mischief upon the Jews; his pretense was that he vomited
flames, and so he did, such as consumed himself and his followers; after him
many other Impostors arose in Egypt, Cyprus and Crete, who all went upon the
same pretense of doing Miracles. In latter times the famous impostor was David
el-David, whose story is thus briefly reported by David Ganz. David el-David
pretended to be the true Messiah, and rebelled against Tzemach David n. 895.
the King of Persia, and did many signs and prodigies before the Jews and the
King of Persia: at last his head was cut off, and the Jews fined an hundred
talents of Gold; in the Epistle of Rambam or R. Moses Maimon. It is said, that
the King of Persia desired of him a sign, and he told him, that he should cut
off his head and he would rise again; (which he cunningly desired to avoid,
being tormented) which the King was resolved to try, and accordingly executed
him; but I suppose his resurrection and Mahomets will be both in a day,
although Maimonides tells us, some of the Jews are yet such fools as to expect
his resurrection. Several other Impostors Maimonides V. ep. Maimon. in not.
Vorstii ad Tzem. Dav.
mentions in his Epistle de Australi regione. One who pretended to be the
Messiah because he cured himself of the leprosy in a night; several others he
mentions in Spain, France, and other parts, and the issue of them all was only
a further aggravation of the miseries and captivities of the poor Jews, who
were so credulous in following Impostors, and yet such strange Infidels where
there were plain and undoubted miracles to persuade them to believe in our
blessed Savior as the true Messiah. We freely grant then that many pretended
miracles may be done in the world to deceive men with; but does it hence follow
that either there are no true miracles done in the world, or that there are no
certain rules to distinguish the one from the other? But as Origin yet further
replies to Celsus, as a Woolf does very much resemble a dog, yet they are not
of the same kind; nor a turtle Dove and a Pigeon; so that which is produced by
a divine power, is not of the same nature with that which is produced by
Magic; but as he argues, Is it possible that there should be only deceits in
the world, and magical operations; and can there be no true miracles at all
wrought? Is humane nature only capable of Impostures, or can none work miracles
but Devils? Where there is a worse, there may be a better; and so from the
impostures and counterfeits, we may infer that there are true miracles,
wrought by a divine power; otherwise it were all one as to say, there are
counterfeits, but no Jewels; or there are Sophisms and Paralogisms, but no
l^gitimate demonstrations; if then there be such deceits, there are true
miracl^s too; all the business is (...), strictly and severely to examine the
pret^nders to do them, and that from the life and manners of those that do
them, and from the eff^cts and consequents of them, wheth^r they do good or
hurt in the world, whither they correct men's manners, or bring men to goodness,
holin^ss and truth; and on this account we are neither to reject all miracles,
nor embrace all pret^nces, but carefully and prudently examine the rational
evidences whereby those which are true and divine, may be known from such which
are counterfeit and Diabolical.

And this now leads us to the main subject of this Chapter, Sect. 4.
viz. What rules we have to ^roceed by, in judging miracles to be true or
false; which may be these following.

True Divine miracles are wrought in confirmation of some 1.
Divine T^stimony. Because we have manifested by all the precedent discourse,
that the intention of miracles is to seal some divine revelation. Therefore if
God should work miracles when no divine T^stimony is to be confirmed, God would
set the broad Seal of heaven to a blank. If it be said no, because it will
witness to us now the truth of that Testimony which was delivered so many ages
since. I answer, 1. The truth of that Testimony was sufficiently sealed at the
time of the delivery of it, and is conveyed down in a certain way to us. Is it
not sufficient that the Chart^r of a Corporation had the Princes broad Seal in
the time of the giving of it, but that every succ^ssion of men in that
Corporation must have a new broad Seal, or else they ought to question their
Patent? What ground can there be for that, when the original Seal and Patent is
preserved, and is certainly conveyed down from age to age? So I say it is as to
us, Gods Grand Charter of Grace and Mercy to the world through Jesus Christ,
was sealed by divine miracles at the delivery of it to the world; the original
Patent, viz. the Scriptures, wherein this Charter is contained, is conveyed in
a most certain manner to us; to this Patent the Seal is annexed, and in it are
contained those undoubted miracles which were wrought in confirmation of it, so
that a new sealing of this Patent is wholly needless, unless we had some cause
of suspicion that the original Patent it self were lost, or the first sealing
was not true. If the latt^r, then Christian Religion is not true, if the
miracles wrought for confirmation of it were false, because the truth of it
depends so much on the verity and Divinity of the miracles which were then
wrought. If the first be suspected, viz. the certain conveyance of the Patent,
viz. the Scriptures, some certain grounds of such a suspicion must be
discovered in a matter of so great moment, especially when the great and many
Societies of the Christian world do all consent unanimously in the contrary.
Nay it is impossible that any rational man can conc^ive that the Patent which
we now rely upon, is supposititious or corrupted in any of those things which
are of concernment to the Christian world; and that on these accounts.

1. From the watchfulness of Divine providence for the good of mankind. Can we
conceive that there is a God who rules and takes care of the world, and who to
manifest his signal Love to mankind, should not only grant a Patent of Mercy to
the world by his son Christ, and then sealed it by divine miracles, and in
order to the certain conveyance of it to the world, caused it by persons
employed by himself to be record^d in a language fittest for its dispersing up
and down the world (all which I here suppose) Can we I say conceive that this
God should so far have cast off his care of the world and the good of mankind,
which was the original ground of the Grant it self, as to suffer any wicked
men, or malignant spirits to corrupt or alter any of those Terms in it, on
which men's eternal salvation depends; much less wholly to suppress and destroy
it, and to send forth one that is counterfeit and supposititious instead of it,
and which should not be discovered by the Christians of that age wherein that
corrupt Copy was set forth, nor by any of the most learned and inquisitive
Christians ever since. They who can give any the least entertainment to so
wild, absurd, and irrational an imagination, are so far from reason, that they
are in good disposition to Atheism; and next to the suspecting the Scriptures
to be corrupted, they may rationally susp^ct there is no such thing as a God
and providence in the world; or that the world is governed by a spirit most
malignant and envious of the good of mankind. Which is a suspicion only
becoming those Heathens (among whom it was very frequent) who worshipped the
devils instead of Gods.

2. Because of the general dispersion of Copies in the world upon the first
publishing of them. We cannot otherwise co^ceive, but that records containing
so weighty and important things, would be transcribed by all those Churches
which believed the truth of the things contained in them. We see how far
curiosity will carry men as to the care of transcribing ancient MSS. of old
Authors, which contain only some history of things past that are of no great
concernment to us: Can we then imagine those who ventured estates and lives
upon the truth of the things revealed in Scripture, would not be very careful
to preserve the authentic instrument whereby they are revealed in a certain
way to the whole world? And besides this, for a long time the originals
themselves of the Apostolical writings were preserved in the Church; which
makes Tertullian in his time appeal to them. Age jam qui voles curiositatem
melius exercere in negotio salutis tuae; De s^escript. adv. haeret. cap. 36.
percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quasipsae adhuc cathedrae Apostolorum
suis locis praesidentur, apud quas ipsae authenticae little literae recitantur,
sonantes vocem, and representantes faciem uniuscujusque. Now how was it
possible that in that time the Scriptures could be corrupted, when in some of
the Churches the original writings of the Apostles were preserved in a
continual succession of persons from the Apostles themselves; and from these
originals so many Copies were transcribed, as were conveyed almost all the
world over, through the large spread of the Christian Churches at that time?
and therefore it is impossible to conceive that a Copy should be corrupted in
one Church, when it would so speedily be discovered by another; especially
considering these three circumstances. 1. The innumerable multitude of Copies
wh ch would speedily be taken, both considering the moment of the thing, and
the easiness of doing it; God, probably for that very end, not loading the
world with Pand^cts and Codes of his Laws, but contriving the whole instrument
of man's salvation in so narrow a compass, that it might be easily preserved and
transcribed by such who were passionate admirers of the Scriptures. 2. The
great number of learned and inquisitive men who soon sprung up in the Christian
Church; whose great care was to explain and vindicate the sacred Scriptures;
can we then think that all these Watchmen should be asleep together when the
^vil one came to sow his Tares, which it is most unreasonable to imagine, when
in the writings of all these learned men, which were very many and voluminous,
so much of the Scripture was inserted, that had there been corruption in the
Copies themselves, yet comparing them with those writings, the corruptions
would be soon discovered? 3. The great ven^ration which all Christians had of
the Scripture; that they placed the hopes of their eternal happiness, upon the
truth of the things contained in the Scriptures: Can we then think these would
suffer any material alteration to creep into these records without their
observing and discovering it? Can we now think when all persons are so
exceeding careful of their Deeds, and the Records whereon their estates depend,
that the Christians who valued not this world in comparison of that to come,
should suffer the Magna Charta of that to be lost, corrupted, or imbezzeled
away? Especially considering what care and industry was used by many primitive
Christians to compare Copies together, as is evident in Pantaenus, who brought
the Hebrew Copy of Matthew out of the Indies to Alexandria, as Eusebius tells
us in Pamphilus, and the Library he errected at Caesar^a, but especially in
Origens admirable Hexapla, which were mainly intended for this end.

3. It is impossible to conceive a corruption of the copy of the Scriptures;
because of the great differences which were all along the several ages of the
Church, between those who acknowledged the Scriptures to be Divine. So that if
one party of them had foisted in or taken out any thing, another party was
ready to take notice of it, and would be sure to tell the world of it. And this
might be one great reason, why God in his wise providence might permit such an
increase of heresies in the Infancy of the Church, viz. that thereby Christians
might be forced to stand upon their guard, and to have a special eye to the
Scriptures, which were always the great eye-sores of heretics. And from this
great wariness of the Church it was that some of the Epistles were so long
abroad before they found general entertainment in all the Churches of Christ,
because in those Epistles which were doubted for some t^me, there were some
passages which seemed to favor some of the heresies then abroad; but when upon
severe enquiry they are found to be what they pretended, they were received in
all the Christian Churches.

4. Because of the agreement between the Old T^stament and the New: the
Prophesies of the Old Testament appear with their full accomplishment in the
New which we have; so that it is impossible to think the New should be
corrupted unless the old were too, which is most unreasonable to imagine, when
the Jews who have been the great conservators of the Old Testament, have been
all along the most inveterate enemies of the Christians: So that we cannot at
all conceive it possible that any material corruptions or alterations should
creep into the Scriptures, much less that the true copy should be lost and a
new one forged.

Supposing then that we have the same authentic records preserved and handed
down to us by the care of all Christian Sect. 5^
Churches, which were written in the first ages of the Church of Christ: what
necessity can we imagine that God should work new miracles to confirm that
doctrine which is conveyed down in a certain uninterrupted way to us, as being
se^led by miracles undoubtedly Divine in the first promulgation and penning of
it? And this is the first reason, why the truth of the Scriptures need not now
be sealed by new miracles. 2. Another, may be because God in the Scripture has
appointed other things to continue in his Church to be as seals to his people
of the truth of the things contained in Scriptures. Such are outwardly, the
Sacraments of the Gospel, baptism and the Lords Supper, which are set apart to
be as seals to confirm the truth of the Covenant on Gods part toward us in
reference to the great promises contained in it, in reference to pardon of sin,
and the ground of our acceptance with God by Jesus Christ: and inwardly God
has promised his Spirit to be as a witness within them, that by its working
and strengthening grace in the hearts of believers, it may confirm to them the
truth of the records of Scripture when they find the counter part of them
written in their hearts by the singer of the Spirit of God. It cannot then be
with any reason at all supposed, that when a Divine testimony is already
confirmed by miracles undoubtedly Divine, that new miracles should be wrought
in the Church to assure us of the truth of it. So Chrysostom fully expresses
himself concerning miracles, speaking of the first ages of the Christian
Chrysosl. in 1 Cor. 2. ^om. 6. p. 276. To. 3. ed. Eton.
Church: (...). Miracles were very useful then and not at all useful now; for
now we manifest the truth of what we speak from the Sacred Scriptures, and the
miracles wrought in confirmation of them. Which that excellent author there
fully manifests in a discourse on this subject, why miracles were necessary in
the beginning of the Christian Church, and are not now. To the same purpose St.
Austin speaks where he discourses of the truth of religion. Accepimus majores
nostros visibilia miracula secutos esse; (...). Re^g. cap. 25.
per quos id actum est ut necessaria non essent posteris; because the world
believed by the miracles which were wrought at the first preaching of the
Gospel, therefore miracles are no longer necessary. For we cannot conceive how
the world should be at first induced to believe without manifest and
uncontrouled miracles. For as Chrysostom speaks, (...). It was the greatest
miracle of all, if the world should believe without miracles. Which the Poet
Dantes has well expressed in the twenty fourth Canto of Paradise. For when the
Apostle is there brought in, asking the Poet upon what account he took the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word of God; his answer is,
Probatio quae verum hoc mihi recludit,
Sunt opera, quae secuta sunt, ad quae Natura
Non candefecit ferrum unquam aut percussit incudem.
i. e. the evidence of that is the Divine power of miracles which was in those
who delivered these things to the world. And when the Apostle catechiseth him
further, how he knew those miracles were such as they pretend to be, viz. that
they were true and Divine; his answer is, Si orbis terrae sese convertit ad
Christianismum,
Inquiebam ego, sine miraculis: hoc unum
Est tale, ut reliqua non sint ejus cente sima pars.
i. e. If the world should be converted to the Christian faith without
miracles, this would be so great a miracle, that others were not to be compared
with it. I conclude this then, with that known saying of St. Austin; Quisquis
adhuc prodigia, ut credat, inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium qui mundo
credente De Civit. Dei l. 22. cap. 8.
non credit. He that seeks for miracles still to induce him to faith, when the
world is converted to the Christian faith, he needs not seek for prodigies
abroad; he wants only a looking glass to discover one. For as he goes on, unde
temporibus erudit is and omne quod fieri non potest respuentibus, sine ullis
miraculis nimium mirabiliter incredibiliter credidit mundus? whence came it to
pass that in so learned and wary an age as that was which the Apostles preached
in, the world without miracles should be brought to believe things so strangely
incredible as those were which Christ and his Apostles preached? So that by
this it appears that the intention of miracles was to confirm a Divine
testimony to the world, and to make that appear credible which otherwise would
have seemed incredible; but to what end now, when this Divine testimony is
believed in the world, should miracles be continued among those who believe the
doctrine to be Divine, the miracles wrought for the confirmation of it to have
been true, and the Scriptures which contain both, to be the undoubted Word of
God? To what purpose then the huge outery of miracles in the Roman Church is,
hard to conceive, unless it be to make it appear how ambitions that Church is
of being called by the name of him whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 2 These.
2. 9, 10.
of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth that they might be saved. For had they received the Love of the Truth
of the Gospel, they would have believed it on the account of those miracles and
signs and wonders which were wrought for the confirmation of it, by Christ and
his Apostles; and not have gone about by their juglings and impostures in stead
of bringing men to believe the Gospel, to make them question the truth of the
first miracles when they see so many counterfeits; had we not great assurance
the Apostles were men of other designs and interests then Popish Priests are,
and that there is not now any such necessity of miracles, as there was then
when a Divine testimony revealing the truth of Christian religion was confirmed
by them?

Those miracles cannot be Divine, which are done now for Sect. 6. 2.
the confirmation of any thing contrary to that Divine testimony, which is
confirmed by uncontrouled Divine miracles. The case is not the same now which
was before the coming of Christ; for then though the Law of Moses was confirmed
by miracles; yet though the doctrine of Christ did null the obligation of that
Law, the miracles of Christ were to be looked on as Divine, because God did not
intend the Ceremonial Law to be perpetual; and there were many Prophesies which
could not have their accomplishment but under a new state: But now under the
Gospel, God has declared this to be the last revelation of his mind and will
to the world by his Son, that now the Prophesies of the old Testament are
accomplished, and the Prophesies of the New respect only the various conditions
of the Christian Church, without any the least intimation of any further
revelation of Gods mind and will to the world: So that now the Scriptures are
our adaequate rule of faith, and that according to which we are to judge all
pretenders to inspiration or miracles. And according to this rule we are to
proceed in any thing which is propounded to us to believe by any persons, upon
any pretenses whatsoever. Under the Law after the establishment of the Law its
self by the miracles of Moses, the rule of judging all pretenders to miracles
was by the worship of the true God. If there arise Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a
wonder, and the sign or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke to thee,
saying, Let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve
them: thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the Lord your God proves you to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your soul. Whereby it is plain that
after the true doctrine is confirmed by Divine miracles, God may give the Devil
or false Prophets power to work if not real miracles, yet such as men cannot
judge by the things themselves whether they be real or no; and this God may do
for the trial of means faith, whether they will forsake the true doctrine
confirmed by greater miracles for the sake of such doctrines which are contrary
thereto, and are confirmed by false Prophets by signs and wonders. Now in this
case our rule of trial must not be so much the wonders considered in
themselves, whether real or no, as the comparing them with the miracles which
were wrought in confirmation of that doctrine, which is contrary to this which
these wonders tend to the proving of. Therefore Gods people under the Law were
to examine the scope and drift of the miracles; if they were intended to bring
them to Idolatry, whatever they were, they were not to hearken to those who did
them. So now under the Gospel, as the worship of the true God was then the
standard whereby to judge of miracles by the Law of Moses, so the worship of
the true God through Jesus Christ, and by the doctrine revealed by him, is the
standard whereby we ought to judge of all pretenders to work miracles. So that
let the miracles be what they will, if they contradict that doctrine which
Christ revealed to the world, we are to look upon them as only trials of our
faith in Christ, to see whether we Love him with our whole hearts or no. And
therefore I think it needless to examine all the particulars of Lipsius his
relations of miracles wrought by his Diva Virgo Hallensis and Asprecollis; for
if I see, that their intention and scope is to set up the worship of Demons,
or a middle sort of Deities between God and us, which the Scripture is ignorant
of, on that very account I am bound to reject them all. Although I think it
very possible to find out the difference between true miracles and them in the
manner and circumstances of their operation; but this, as it is of more
curiosity, so of less necessity; for if the doctrine of the Scriptures was
confirmed by miracles infinitely above these, I am bound to adhere to that, and
not to believe any other doctrine though an Angel from heaven should preach it,
much less, although some Popish Priests may boast much of miracles to confirm a
doctrine opposite to the Gospel: which I know not how far God may in judgment
give those images power to work, or others faith to believe, because they would
not receive the truth in the love of it: and these are now those (...) lying
wonders which the Scripture forewarns 2 These. 2. 9.
us that we should not believe, viz. such as lead men to the belief of lies, or
of doctrines contrary to that of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Where miracles are true and Divine, there the effects which Sect. 7. 3.
follow them upon the minds of those who believe them, are true and Divine, i.
e. the effect of believing of them is, the drawing of men from sin unto God.
This the Primitive Christians insisted much upon, as an undoubted evidence that
the miracles of Christ were wrought by a Divine power, because the effect which
followed them, was the work of conversion of souls from sin and Idols to God
and Christ, and all true piety and virtue. As the effect of the miracles of
Moses was the drawing a people off from Superstition and Idolatry to the
worship of the true God; so the effect which followed the belief of the
miracles of Christ in the world was the purging men's souls from all sin and
wickedness to make them new creatures, and to live in all exactness and
holiness of conversation. And Lib. 2. c. Cells.
thereby Origin discovers the great difference between the miracles of Christ
and Antichrist, that the intent of all Antichrists wonders was to bring men
(...) to the deceivableness of unrighteousness whereby to destroy them; but the
intent of the miracles of Christ was (...), not the deceiving but the saving of
the souls. (...); who can with any probability say that reformation of life and
daily progress from evil to good should be the effect of mere deceit? And
therefore he says, Christ told his Disciples that they should do greater works
then he had done; because by their Preaching and miracles, the eyes of blind
souls are opened, and the ears of such as were deaf to all goodness are opened
so far as to hearken to the Precepts and Promises of the Gospel: and the feet
of those who were lame in their inward man, are so healed as to delight to run
in the way of Gods Commandments. Now is it possible that these should be the
effects of any evil spirit? But on the contrary we see the effects of all
impostures and pretended miracles wrought by Diabolical power was to bring men
off from God to sin, and to dissolve that strict obligation to duty which was
laid upon men by the Gospel of Christ. Thus it was in that early ape of the
Apostles, Simon Magus, who far out-went Apollonius Tyaneus or any other Heathen
in his pretended miracles, according to the report which is given of him by the
Primitive Christians; but we see the intent of his miracles was to raise V.
Grot. in 2 These. 29. in opusc.
an admiration of himself, and to bring men off from all holiness of
conversation, by afferting among other damnable heresies, that God did not at
all regard what men did, but only what they believed: wherein the Gnostics
were his followers. Now when miracles are wrought to be Patrons of sin, we may
easily know from whom they come.

Those miracles are wrought by a Divine power which tend to the overthrow of
the Kingdom of Satan in the world. This Sect. 8 4.
is evident from hence, because all such things as are out of man's power to
effect, must either be done by a power Divine or Diabolical: For as our Savior
argues, Every Kingdom Matthew. 12* 25, 26.
divided against its self is brought to desolation, and every City or house
divided against its self cannot stand; and if Satan cast out Satan, he is
divided against himself: how shall then his Kingdom stand? Now Christ by his
miracles did not only dispossess Satan out of men's bodies, but out of his
Temples too, as has been shown already. And besides the doctrine of Christ
which was confirmed by those miracles, was in every thing directly contrary to
the Devils design in the world. For, 1. The Devils design was to conceal
himself among those who worshipped him; the design of the Gospel was to
discover him whom the Gentiles worshipped, to be an evil and malignant spirit,
that designed nothing but their ruin. Now it appears in the whole history of
Gentilism, the grand mystery of State which the Devil used among the Heathens,
was to make himself to be ^^en and worshipp^d for God, and to make them believ^
(...) (...) ^^ns were very good and benign spirits; (...) (...) (...)
^^^onists and other Philosopher^ ^o much (...) against the Primiti^^
Christians, when th^^ (...) their Demons to be nothing ^he but in^^^al and
wicked spirits which sought the destruction of souls.

2. The Devils great design was to draw men to the practice of the greatest
wickedness under a pretense of religion; as is very observable in all the
Heathen mysteries, which the more recondite and hidden they were, the greater
wickedness lay at the bottom of them, and so were to purpose mysteries of
iniquity; but now the design of the Gospel was to promote the greatest purity
both of heart and life; There being in no other religion in the world, either
such incomparable Precepts of holiness, or such encouraging Promises to the
practice of it (from eternal life hereafter as the reward, and the assistance
of Gods spirit to help men here) or such prevailing motives to persuade men to
it, from the love of God in Christ to the world, the undertakings of Christ for
us in his death and sufferings, the excellent pattern we have to follow in our
Saviors own example; now these things make it plain that the design of Christ
and the Devil are diametrically opposite to each other. 3. The design of the
Devil is to set God and mankind at the greatest distance from each other; the
design of Christ in the Gospel is to bring them nearer together. The Devil
first tempts to sin, and then for sin; he makes men presume to sin, and to
despair because they have sinned. Christ first keeps men from sin by his
Precepts and threatenings, and then supposing sin encourages them to repent
with hopes of pardon procured by himself for all truly penitent and believing
sinners. Thus in every thing the design of Christ and the Devil are contrary,
which makes it evident that the miracles wrought in confirmation of the
doctrine of Christ could be from no evil spirit, and therefore must be from a
truly Divine power.

True and Divine miracles may be known and distinguished from false and
diabolical, from the circumstances, or the manner Sect. 9. 5.
of their operation. There were some peculiar signatures on the miracles of
Christ which are not to be found in any wrought by a power less then Divine.
Which Arnobius Arnob. c. gentes l. 1. page 25, 26, etc.
well expresses in these words to the Heathens; Potestis aliquem nobis
designare, monstrare ex omnibus illis Magis qui unquam fuere per secula,
consimile aliquid Christo millesima ex part qui fecerit? qui sine ulla vi
car^^inum, sine herbarum aut graminum succis, sine ulla aliqua observatione
sollicita sacrorum, libaminum, temporum? -- Atqui constitit Christum sine ullis
adminiculis rerum, sine ullius ritus observatione, vel lege, omnia illa quae
fecit, nominis sui possibilitate fecisse, and quod proprium, consentaneum, Deo
dignum fuerat vero, nihil nocens aut noxium, sed opiferum, sed salutare, sed
auxiliaribus plenum bonis potestatis munificae liberalitate donasse? He
challenges the Heathens to produce any one of all their Magicians who did the
thousand part of what our Savior did: who made use of none of their Magical
rites and observations in what ever he did; and what ever he did was merely by
his own power, and was withal most becoming God; and most beneficial to the
world. And thence he proceeds to answer the Heathens about the miracles wrought
by their Gods, which fell short of those of Christ in three main particulars,
the manner of their working, and the number of them, and the quality of the
things done.

1. The manner of their working; what they did was with a great deal of pomp
and ceremony; what Christ did, was with a word speaking, and sometimes without
it by the touch of his garment: non inquiro, non exigo, says he, quis Deus,
aut quo tempore, cui fuerit auxiliatus, aut quem fractum restituerit sanitati;
illud solum audire desidero, an sine ullius adjunctione materiae, i. e.
medicaminis alicujus ad tactum morbos jusserit abhominibus evolare,
imperaverit, fecerit, and emori valetudinum causam, and debilium corpora ad
suas remeare naturas. Omitting all other circumstances, name me, says he, but
which of your Gods ever cured a disease without any adjoined matter, some
prescriptions or other; or which of them ever commanded diseases out of bodies
by their mere touch, and quite removed the cause of the distempers.
Aesculapius, he says, cured diseases, but in the way that ordinary Physicians
do by prescribing something, or other to be done by the patients. Nulla autem
virtus est medicaminibus amovere quae noceant; beneficia ista rerum, non sunt
curantium potestates. To cure diseases by prescriptions argues no power at all
in the prescriber, but virtue in the Medicine.

2. In the number of the persons cured: they were very few which were cured in
the Heathen Temples; Christ cured whole multitudes, and that not in the
revestryes of the Temples where fraud and imposture might be easily suspected,
but in the presence of the people who brought to him all manner of persons sick
of all sorts of diseases which were cured by him; and these so numerous, that
the Evangelist who records many of Christ's miracles which had been omitted by
the others, yet tells us at last, the miracles of Christ were so many that the
whole world would not contain them. But now Arnobius tells the Heathens, Quid
prodest ostendere Joh. 21. 25.
tinum aut alterum fortasse curatos, cum tot millibus subvenerit nemo, and
plena sint omnia miserorum infeliciumque delubra? what matter is it to show one
or two cured, when thousands lie continually in the Temples perishing for want
of cure? yea such as did Aesculapium ipsum precibus fatigare, and invitare
miserrimis votis, that could not beg a cure of Aesculapius with all their
earnestness and importunity.

3. In the quality of the diseases cured; the cures among the Heathens were
some slight things in comparison of those performed by Christ; the most acute,
the most Chronical, the most malignant of diseases cured by a touch, a word, a
Gui. Ader de morbis Evangel.
thought. A learned Physician has undertaken to make it evident from the
circumstances of the story, and from the received principles among the most
authentic Physicians, that the diseases cured by our Savior were all
incurable by the rules of Physic; if so, the greater the power of our Savior,
who cured them with so much facility as he did. And he not only cured all
diseases himself, but gave a power to others, who were not at all versed in
matters of art and subtilty, that they should do miracles likewise, sine fucis
and adminiculis, without any fraud or assistance: quid dicitis o mentes
incredulae, difficiles, durae! alicuine mortalium Jupiter ille Capitolinus
hujusmodi potestatem dedit? when did ever the great Jupiter Capitolinus ever
give a power of working miracles to any; I do not say, says he, of raising the
dead, or curing the blind, or healing the lame, sed ut pustulam, reduviam,
pupulam, aut vocis imperio aut manus contrectatione comprimeret: but to cure a
wart, a pimple, any the most trivial thing, with a word speaking or the touch
of the hand. Upon this Arnobius challenges the most famous of all the Heathen
Magicians, Zoroastres, Armenius, Pamphilus, Apollonius, Damigero, Dardanus,
Velus, Iulianus and Baebulus, or any other renowned Magician to give power to
any one to make the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the blind to see; or bring
life into a dead body. Or if this be too hard, with all their Magical rites and
incantations but to do that, quod a rusticis Christianis jussienibus factitatum
est nudis, which ordinary Christians do by their mere words: So great a
difference was there between the highest that could be done by Magic, and the
least that was done by the Name and Power of Christ.

Where miracles are truly Divine, God makes it evident to Sect. 10. 6,
all impartial judgments that the things do exceed all created power. For
which purpose we are to observe, that though impostures and delusions may go
far, the power of Magicians further when God permits them; yet when God works
miracles to confirm a Divine Testimony he makes it evident that his power does
infinitely exceed them all. This is most conspicuous in the case of Moses and
our blessed Savior. First Moses, he began to do some -miracles in the presence
of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, turning his rod into a Serpent; but we do not
find Pharaoh at all amazed at it, but sends presently for the Magicians to do
the same, who did it (whether really or only in appearance, is not material to
our purpose), but Aarons rod swallowed up theirs. The next time Exodus 8. 10, 12,
the waters are turned into blood by Moses, the Magicians they do so too. After
this Moses brings up Frogs upon the Land, 8. 19, 22.
so do the Magicians. So that here now, is a plain and open contest in the
presence of Pharaoh and his people, between 8. 6, 7.
Moses and the Magicians, and they try for victory over each other; so that if
Moses do no more then they, they would look upon him but as a Magician; but if
Moses do that which by the acknowledgement of these Magicians themselves could
be only by Divine Power, then it is demonstrably evident that his power was as
far above the power of Magic as God is above the Devil. Accordingly we find
it in the very next miracle in turning the dust into Ciniphes, (which we
render) lice, the Magicians are non-plust, and give 8. 19.
out saying in plain terms, This is the finger of God. And what greater
acknowledgement can there be of Divine Power then the confession of those who
seemed to contest with it, and to imitate it as much as possible? After this we
find not the Magicians offering to contest with Moses, and in the plague of
boyles we particularly read that they could not stand before 9. 11.
Moses. Thus we see in the case of Moses how evident it was that there was a
power above all power of Magic which did appear in Moses. And so likewise in
the case of our blessed Savior; for although Simon Magus, Apollonius or others
might do some small things, or make some great show and noise by what they did;
yet none of them ever came near the doing things of the same kind which our
Savior did, curing the born blind, restoring the dead to life after four
days, and so as to live a considerable time after; or in the manner he did
them, with a word, a touch, with that frequency and openness before his
greatest enemies as well as followers, and in such an uncontrouled manner, that
neither Jews or Heathens ever questioned the truth of them. And after all
these, when he was laid in the grave after his crucifixion, exactly according
to his own prediction, he rose again the third day, appeared frequently among
his Disciples for forty days together. After which, in their presence, he
ascended up to heaven, and soon after, made good his promise to them, by
sending his holy Spirit upon them, by which they spoke with tongues, wrought
miracles, went up and down Preaching the Gospel of Christ with great boldness,
cheerfulness, and constancy, and after undergoing a great deal of hardship in
it, they sealed the truth of all they spoke with their blood, laying down their
lives to give witness to it. Thus abundantly to the satisfaction of the minds
of all good men has God given the highest rational evidence of the truth of
the doctrine which he has revealed to the world. And thus I have finished the
second part of my task, which concerned the rational evidence of the truth of
Divine Revelation from the persons who were employed to deliver Gods mind to
the world: And therein have, I hope, made it evident that both Moses and the
Prophets, our Savior and his Apostles did come with sufficient rational
evidence to convince the world that they were persons immediately sent from God.

BOOK. III.
CHAP. I. Of the Being of God.
The Principles of all Religion lie in the Being of God and immortality of the
soul: from them the necessity of a particular Divine revelation rationally
deduced; the method laid down for proving the Divine authority of the
Scriptures. Why Moses does not prove the Being of God, but suppose it. The
notion of a Deity very consonant to reason. Of the nature of Idea's, and
particularly of the Idea of God. How we can form an Idea of an infinite Being.
How far such an Idea argues existence. The great unreasonableness of Atheism
demonstrated. Of the Hypotheses of the Aristotelian and Epicurean Atheists. The
Atheists pretenses examined and refuted. Of the nature of the arguments whereby
we prove there is a God. Of universal consent and the evidence of that to prove
a Deity and immortality of souls. Of necessity of existence employed in the
notion of God, and how far that proves the Being of God. The order of the world
and usefulness of the parts of it, and especially of man's body an argument of a
Deity. Some higher principle proved to be in the world then matter and motion.
The nature of the soul, and possibility of its subsisting after death. Strange
appearances in nature not solvable by the power of imagination.

HAving in the precedent book largely given a rational Sect. 1.
account of the grounds of our faith, as to the persons whom God imployes to
reveal his mind to the world; if we can now make it appear that those sacred
records which we embrace as Divinely inspired, contain in them nothing unworthy
of so great a name, or unbecoming persons sent from God to deliver; there will
be nothing wanting to justify our Religion in point of reason to be true, and
of revelation to be Divine. For the Scriptures themselves coming to us in the
name of God, we are bound to believe them to be such as they pretend to be,
unless we have ground to question the general foundations of all religion as
uncertain, or this particular way of religion as not suitable to those general
foundations. The foundations of all religion lie in two things; that there is a
God who rules the world, and that the souls of men are capable of subsisting
after death; for he that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of Heb. 11. 6.
them that seek him; so that if these things be not supposed as most agreeable
to humane reason, we cannot imagine upon what grounds mankind should embrace
any way of religion at all. For if there be not a God whom I am to serve and
obey, and if I have not a soul of an immortal nature, there can be no
sufficient obligation to religion, nor motive inducing to it: For all
obligation to obedience must suppose the existence of such a Being which has
power to command me; and by reason of the promis^uous scatterings of good and
evil in this life, the motives engaging men to the practice of religion, must
suppose the certainty of a future State. If these things be sure and the
foundations of religion in general thereby firmly established, it will
presently follow as a matter most agreeable to reason, that the God whom we are
to serve should himself prescribe the way of his own worship; and if the right
of donation of that happiness which men's souls are capab^e of be alone in
himself, that he alone should declare the terms on which it may be expected;
For man being a creature endued with a free principle of acting, which he is
conscious to himself of, and therefore not being carried to his end by
necessity of nature or external violence, without the concurrence of his own
reason and choice, we must suppose this happiness to depend upon the
performance of some conditions on man's part, whereby he may demonstrate that it
is the matter of his free choice, and that he freely quits all other interests
that he might obtain the enjoyment of it. Which conditions to be performed
being expressions of man's obedience toward God as his Creator and Governor,
and of his gratitude for the tenders of so great a happiness which is the free
gift of his Maker, we cannot suppose any one to have power to prescribe these
conditions, but he that has power likewise to deprive the soul of her
happiness upon nonperformance, and that must be God himself. But in order to
man's understanding his duty and his obligation to obedience, it is necessary
that these conditions must not be locked up in the Cabinet Council of Heaven,
but mu^^ be so far declared and revealed, that he may be fully acqua^ted with
those terms which his happiness depends upon; else his neglect of them would be
excusable, and his misery unavoidable. Had man indeed remained without
offending his Maker, he might still have stood in his favor upon the general
terms of obedience due from the creature to his Creator, and to all such
particular precepts which should bear the impress of his Makers will upon them,
beside which, the whole volume of the Creation without, and his own reason
within would have been sufficient directors to him in the performance of his
duty. But he abusing his liberty, and being thereby guilty of A^ostacy from God
(as is evident by a continued propensity to sin, and the strangeness between
God and the souls of men) a particular revelation is now become necessary, that
mankind may thereby understand on what terms God will be pleased again, and by
what means they may be restored into his favor. And lastly, it not agreeing
with the free and communicative nature of Divine goodness (which was the first
original of the worlds Creation) to suffer all mankind to perish in their own
folly, we must suppose this way for man's recovery to be somewhere prescribed,
and the revelation of it to be somewhere extant in the world. So that from the
general principles of the existence of God and immortality of the soul, we have
deduced by clear and evident reason the necessity of some particular Divine
revelation, as the Standard and measure of religion. And according to these
principles we must examine what ever pretends to be of Divine revelation; for
it must be suitable to that Divine nature from whom it is supposed to come, and
it must be agreeable to the conditions of the souls of men; and therefore that
which carries with it the greatest evidence of Divine revelation, is, a
faithful representation of the State of the case between God and the souls of
men, and a Divine discovery of those ways whereby men's souls may be fitted for
eternal happiness. A Divine revelation then must be faithful and true in all
its narrations; it must be excellent and becoming God in all its discoveries.
And therefore all that can with any reason be desired for proof of the Divine
authority of the Scriptures will lie in these three things. First, That the
foundations of religion are of undoubted certainty, or that there ie a God, and
that men's souls are immortal. Secondly, That the Scriptures do most faithfully
relate the matters of greatest antiquity therein contained (which do most
concern the history of the breach between God and man.) Thirdly, That the
Scriptures are the only authentic records of those Terms on which happiness
may be expected in another world.

I begin with the first of them, which concerns the existence Sect. 2.
of God and immortality of the soul; both which seem to be supposed as general
Prolepses in the writings of Moses, and as things so consonant to humane
nature, that none to whom his writings should come could be supposed to
question them. And therefore he spends no time in the operose proving of either
of these, knowing to how little purpose his writings would be to such who
denied these first principles of all religion. But beside this there may be
these accounts given, why these main foundations of all religion are no more
insisted on in the first books of the Scripture which contain the originals of
the world. First, Because these were in the time of the writing of them
believed with an universal consent of mankind. In those more early days of the
world, when the tradition of the first ages of it was more fresh and entire, it
is scarce imaginable that men should question the Being of a God, when the
history of the flood and the propagation of the world after it by the Sons of
Noah, and the burning of Sodom and Gomorrab were so fresh in their memories, as
having been done so few Generations before them. And by what remains of any
history of other Nations in those elder times men were so far from Atheism,
that Polytheism and Idolatry were the common practice of the world, as is most
evident in all relations of the ancient Chaldeans, Egyptians, Phaenicians, and
other Nations, who all supposed these two principles, as well as those who
served the true God. And in all probability as men are apt to run from one
extreme to another, Polytheism was the first occasion of Atheism, and Idolatry
of irreligion. And thence we find the first appearance of Atheists to be in
the most blind and superstitious age of Greece, when the obscene Poets had so
debauched the common understandings of the people, as to make them believe such
things concerning their Gods which were so incongruous to humane nature, that
all who had any sense of goodness left, could not but loath and abhor such
Deities. And therefore we find all the flouts and jears of the reputed
Atheists among them, such as Dionysius, Diagoras, Theodorus, Euhemerus,
Messenius and others, were cast upon their venerable Deities, which they so
solemnly worshipped: who had been before as Euhemerus plainly told them, poor
mortal men, and those not of the best reputation neither: and therefore as the
Epicurean in Tully well says, omnis eorum cultus esset De Not. Deor. l. 1^
cap. 38.
in luctu, the most suitable devotion for them had been lamenting their death.
Now when these common Deities were so much derided by intelligent men, and yet
the order of the world seemed to tell them there was really a God, though those
were none; those who had Philosophical wits, such as Democritus and Epicurus,
set themselves to work to see if they could solve the Phenomenon of nature
without a Deity, and therefore asserted the origin of the universe to be only
by a fortuitous concourse of infinite little particles; but herein they
befooled themselves and their greedy followers, who were glad to be rid of
those anxieties of mind which the thoughts of a Deity and an immortal soul did
cause within them. And although Lucretius in a bravado tells us of his Master,
that when men's minds were sunk under the burden of religion, Humana ante oculos
faede cum vita jaceret De rerum Not. lib. 1.

In terris oppressa gravi sub religione:
Primum Graius homo mortalis tollere contr^
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere contra.
that Epicurus was the first true Giant who durst encounter the Gods, and if we
believe him, overthrew them in open field; Quare religio pedibus subjecta
vicissim
Obteritur, nos exaequat victoria caelo.
Yet Cotta in Tully reports the issue of this battle quite otherwise; for
although the greatest triumph in this victory had been only to become like the
beasts that perish; yet if we believe Cotta, Epicurus was so far from gaining
any of his beloved case and pleasure by his sentiments, that never was
Schoolboy more afraid of a rod, nor did any enemy more dread a Conqueror, then
Epicurus did the thoughts of a God and death. Nec quenquam vidi qui magis ea
quae timenda esse negaret, timeret; mortem dico and Deos. So hard it is for De
Not. D^or. lib. 1^. cap. 86.
an Epicurean even after he has prostituted his conscience, to silence it; but
(whatever there be in the air) there is an Elactical power in conscience that
will bear its self up notwithstanding the weight that is laid upon it. And yet
after all the labors of Epicurus, he knew it was to no purpose to endeavor to
root out wholly the belief of a Deity out of the world, because of the
unanimous consent of the world in it; and therefore he admits of it as a
necessary Prolepsis or Anticip^tion of humane nature, quod in omnium animis
deorum notionem impressisset ipsa natura, that nature its self had stamped a^
Idea of God upon the minds of men; cum enim De Not. Deor. lib. ^. cap. 44.
non instituto aliquo, aut more aut lege sit opinio constituta, manet at que ad
unum omnium firma consensio, intelligi necesse est Deos esse, quoniam insitas
eorum, vel potius innatas cognitiones habeamus; de quo autem omnium natura
consentit, id verum esse necesse est, as Velleius the Epicurean argues. Since
the belief of a Deity neither rise from custom nor was enacted by Law, yet is
unanimously assented to by all mankind; it necessarily follows that there must
be a Deity, because the Idea of it is so natural to us. If it were thus
acknowledged in the Philosophical age of Greece, when men bent their wits to
unsettle the belief of such things as tended to religion; how much more might
it be esteemed a general principle of humane nature in those elder times, when
not so much as one dissenter appeared that we read of among the more ancient
Nations? But Secondly, it was less needsul for Moses to insist much on the
proof a Deity in his writings, when his very employment and the history he
wrote, was the greatest evidence that there was one. Could any of them
question, whether there were a God or no, who had heard his voice at mount
Sinai, and had received a Law from him, who had been present at so many
miracles which were done by Moses in Egypt and the Wilderness? What more
evident demonstration of God could be desired, then those many unparalleld
miracles, which were wrought among them? And those who would not be convinced
by them that there was a God, would certainly be convinced by nothing. Thirdly,
It was unsuitable to the purpose of Moses to go about to prove any thing he
delivered by the mere force of humane reason, because he writ as a person
employed by God; and therefore by the arguments on which they were to believe
his Testimony in what ever he writ, they could not but believe there was a God
that employed him. And from hence it is that Moses with so much Majesty and
Authority begins the History of the Creation with In the beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth. There could be no greater evidence that there was an
infinitely wise, good, and powerful God, then that the Universe was produced
out of nothing by him, and what reason could there be to distrust his Testimony
who relates it, who manifested not only that there was a God, but that he was
employed by him, by the miracles which he wrought: so that all our former
discourse concerning the evidences of Divine revelation, are a most palpable
demonstration of a Deity; for if there be such a power which can alter the
course of nature when he please, the Being wherein it is, must needs be
infinite; which is the same which we mean by God.

But yet for those whose minds are so coy and squeamish as Sect. 3.
to any thing of Divine revelation, we want not sufficient evidence in point of
reason to prove to them the existence of a Deity. In order to which, I shall
clear these following propositions.

1. That the true notion of a Deity is most agreeable to the faculties of men's
souls, and most consonant to reason and the light of nature.

2. That those who will not believe that there is a God, do believe other
things on far less reason, and must by their own principles deny some things
which are apparently true.

3. That we have as certain evidence that there is a God, as it is possible for
us to have, considering his nature.

That the true notion of God is most agreeable to the faculties Prop. 1.
of men's souls, and most consonant to reason and the light of nature: i. e.
that the Idea of God, (or that which we conceive in our minds when we think of
God) is so far from being any ways repugnant to any principle of reason within
us, that it is hard to pitch on any other notion which has sewer entanglements
in it, to a mind so far Metaphysical as to abstract from sense and prejudice. I
grant it very difficult, nay impossible, for those to have any true settled
notion of a God, who search for an Idea of him in their fancies, and were never
conscious to themselves of any higher faculty in their souls then mere
imagination. Such may have imaginem Iovis or galeatae Minerva, as he in Tully
speaks, some Idea of an Idol in their minds, but none of a true God. For we may
as soon come by the sight of colors to understand the nature of sounds, as by
any corporal phantasmes come to have a true Idea of God. And although sometimes
an Idea be taken for that impression of things which is lodged in the P
hantasie, yet here we take it in a more general sense, as it contains the
representation of any thing in the mind; as it is commonly said in the Schools,
that the Divine Intellect does understand things by their Idea's, which are
nothing else but the things themselves as they are objectively represented to
the understanding. So that an Idea in its general sense in which we take it, is
nothing else but the objective being of a thing as it terminates the
understanding; and is the form of the act of Intellection: that which is then
immediately represented to the mind in its perception of things, is the Idea or
notion of it. Now such an Idea as this is, may be either true or false. For
better understanding of which we must consider that an Idea in the soul may be
considered two ways. 1. As it is a mode of cogitation or the act of the soul
apprehending an object; now this way no Idea can be false; for as it is an act
of the mind, every Idea has its truth; for whether I imagine a golden mountain
or another, it matters not here; for the one Idea is as true as the other,
considering it merely as an act of the mind. For the mind is as really employed
about the one as the other; as the will is about an object whether it be
feasible or no. 2. The Idea may be considered in regard of its objective
reality, or as it represents some outward object; now the truth or falsehood of
the Idea lies in the understanding passing judgment concerning the outward
object as existent which does correspond to the Idea which is in the mind. And
the proneness of the understandings error in this case arises from the
different nature of those things which are represented to the mind; for some of
them are general and abstracted things, and do not at all suppose existence, as
the nature of truth, of a Being, of cogitation; other Idea's depend upon
existence supposed, as the Idea of the Sun, which I apprehend in my mind
because I have seen it; but besides these there are other Idea's in the mind
which the understanding forms within its self by its own power as it is a
principle of cogitation; such are those which are called entiarationis, and
have no other existence at all but only in the understanding, as Chimaera's,
Centaures, etc. Now as to these, we are to observe, that although the
composition of these things together by the understanding, be that which makes
these Idea's to be only fictitious, yet the understanding would not be able to
compound such things, were they not severally represented to the mind; as
unless we had known what a horse and a man had been, our minds could not have
conjoined them together in its apprehension. So that in these which are the
most fictitious Idea's, we see, that although the Idea its self be a mere
creature of the understanding, yet the mind could not form such an Idea but
upon praeexistent matter, and some objective reality must be supposed in order
to the intellectual conception of these Anomalous entityes. By which we see
that that strange kind of omnipotency which some have attributed to the
understanding, lies not in a power of conceiving things wholly impossible, or
fancying Idea's of absolute non-entityes, but in a kind of African copulation
of such species of things together, which in nature seem wholly incompossible,
(as the Schools speak) or have no congruity at all in the order of the
universe. So that had there never been any such things in the world as matter
and motion, it is very hard to conceive, how the understanding could have
formed within its self the variety of the species of such things, which are the
results of those two grand principles of the Universe. But because it is so
impossible for minds not very contemplative and Metaphysical to abstract from
matter, thence it is we are apt to imagine such a power in the understanding,
whereby it may form Idea's of such things which have no objective reality at
all. I grant those we call entia rationis have no external reality as they are
such; but yet I say, the existence of matter in the world, and the corporeal
phantasmes of outward beings, are the foundation of the souls conception of
those entityes, which have no existence beyond the humane Intellect.

The great enquiry then is, how far this Plastic power of Sect. 4.
the understanding, may extend its self in its forming an Idea of God. That
there is such a one in the minds of men, is evident to every one that consults
his own faculties, and enquires of them, whether they cannot apprehend a settled
and consistent notion of a Being which is absolutely perfect. For that is all
we understand by the Idea of God; not that there is any such connate Idea in
the soul, in the sense which connate Idea's are commonly understood; but that
there is a faculty in the soul, whereby upon the free use of reason it can form
within its self a settled notion of such a Being, which is as perfect as it is
possible for us to conceive a Being to be. If any difficulty be made concerning
the forming such a notion in ones mind, let the person who scruples it, only
enquire of himself, whether he judges all Beings in the world equal; whether a
mushrome has in it all the perfections which man has? which I suppose none,
who have a mind within them can question. If then it be granted that man has
some perfections in him above inferior creatures, it will be no matter of
difficulty to show wherein man exceeds other inferior Beings. For is not life
a greater perfection then the want of it? is not reason and knowledge, a
perfection above sense? and so let us proceed to those things, wherein one man
differs from another; for it is evident, that all men are not of equal
accomplishments; is not then forecast and prudence above incogitancy and folly?
is not the knowledge of causes of things better then stupidity and ignorance?
is not beneficence and liberality more noble then parsimony and narrowness of
spirit? is not true goodness far above debauchery and intemperance? and are not
all these far better, when they are joined with such a power as has no limits
or bounds at all? Now then is it not possible for a man's mind, proceeding in
its ordinary way of intellection, to form a notion of such a Being, which has
wisdom, goodness and power in it, without any limits and bounds at all, or any
of those abatements which any of these perfections are found with in man? For
it is unconceivable, that the mind of man can attribute to its self absolute
perfection, when it cannot but see its own defects in those things it excells
other creatures in; and supposing it had power, goodness, and knowledge far
above what it has; yet it cannot but say, that these perfections would be
greater if it were always possessed of them, and it were impossible that it
should ever cease to be, or not have been. So that now joining infinite
goodness, wisdom and power, with eternity and necessity of existence, the
result is the notion of a Being absolutely perfect. So that now who ever
questions the suitableness of such a notion or Idea to the faculties of men's
souls, must question the truth of his own faculties, and the method they
proceed in, in their clearest conceptions and ratioeinations. And the mind of
man may as well question the truth of any Idea it has within its self, as of
this we now discourse of. Nay it may be far sooner puzzled in any of those
Idea's, which are transmitted into the Fantasy by the impressions of
corporeal Beings upon the Organs of sense, then in this more intellectual and
abstracted Idea, which depends wholly upon the mind.

All the difficulty now is, whether this Idea of such an absolutely Sect. 5.
perfect Being, be any thing else but the understandings Plastic power,
whereby it can unite all these perfections together in one conception, or does
it necessarily imply, that there must be such a Being really existent, or else
I could never have formed such a settled notion of him in my mind? To this I
answer, 1. It is as much as I desire at present, that the forming of such an
Idea in the mind, is as suitable and agreeable to our faculties, as the forming
the conception of any other Being in the world. For hereby it is most evident,
that the notion of a God imports nothing incongruous to reason, or repugnant to
the faculties of our souls; but that the mind will form as settled and clear a
notion of God, as of any thing which in the judgment of Epicurus, his
infallible senses did the most assure him of. So that there can be no shadow of
a pretense, why any should reject the Being of a God, because of the
impossibility to conceive any such Being as God is. If to this it be objected,
that such things are employed in this Idea, which make it unconceivable, in that
all the perfections in this Being are supposed to be infinite, and infinity
transcends our capacity of apprehension. To this I answer, 1. That those who
deny infinity in God, must necessarily attribute it to something else, as to
infinite space, infinity of successions of ages and persons, if the world were
eternal; and therefore it is most unreasonable to reject any notion for that,
which it is impossible, but if I deny that, I must attribute it to some thing
else, to whose Idea it is far less proper then it is to Gods. 2. Least I should
rather seek to avoid the argument then to satisfy it, I say, that though
infinite as infinite cannot be comprehended, yet we may clearly and distinctly
apprehend a Being to be of that nature, that no limits can be assigned to it,
as to its power or presence; which is as much as to understand it to be
infinite. The ratio formalis of infinity may not be understood clearly and
distinctly, but yet the Being which is infinite may be. Infinity its self
cannot be on this account, because how ever positive we apprehend it, yet we
always apprehend it in a negative way, because we conceive it by denying all
limitations and bounds to it; but the Being which is infinite we apprehend in a
positive manner, although not adaequately, because we cannot comprehend all
which is in it. As we may clearly and distinctly see the Sea, though we cannot
discover the bounds of it; so may we clearly and distinctly apprehend some
perfections of God when we fix our minds on them, although we are not able to
grasp them all together in our narrow and confined intellects, because they are
Infinite. Thus we see that Gods Infinity does not at all abate the clearness
and distinctness of the notion which we have of God; so that though the
perfections of God are without bounds or limits, yet it bears no repugnancy at
all to men's natural faculties to have a settled Idea of a Being Infinitely
perfect in their minds.

To the Question I answer, It seems highly probable and far more consonant to
reason then the contrary, that this Idea of Sect. 6.
God upon the mind of man, is no merely fictitious Idea, but that it is really
imprinted there by that God whose Idea it is, and therefore does suppose a
reality in the thing correspondent to that objective reality which is in the
understanding. For although I am not so well satisfied that the mere objective
reality of the Idea of God does exceed the efficiency of the mind, as that Idea
is nakedly considered in its self, because of the unlimited power of the
understanding in conception: Yet I say, considering that Idea in all the
circumstances of it, it seems highly probable that it is no mere ens rationis,
or figment of the understanding; and that will appear on these considerations.
1. This Idea is of such a nature as could not be formed from the understandings
consideration of any corporeal phantasms. Because whatever has any thing of
matter in it, involves of necessity many imperfections along with it; for every
part of matter is divisible into more parts. Now it is a thing evident to
natural light, that it is a greater perfection not to be divisible then to be
so. Besides, corporeal phantasms are so far from helping us. in forming this
Idea, that they alone hinder us from a distinct conception of it, while we
attend to them; because these bear no proportion at all to such a being. So
that this Idea however must be a pure act of Intellection, and therefore
supposing there were no other faculty in man but imagination, it would bear the
greatest repugnancy to our conceptions, and it would be according to the
principles of Epicurus and some modern Philosophers, a thing wholly impossible
to form an Idea of God, unless with Epicurus we imagine him to be corporeal,
which is to say he is no God. Which was the reason that Tully said Epicurus did
only nomine poncre, re tollere Deos, because such a notion of God is repugnant
to natural light. So that if this Idea does wholly abstract from corporeal
phantasms, it thereby appears that there is a higher faculty in man's soul then
mere imagination, and it is hardly conceivable whence a faculty which thus
extends its self to an infinite object, should come but from an infinite Being:
especially if we consider, 2. That the understanding in forming this Idea of
God, does not by distinct acts, first collect one perfection, and then another,
and at last unite these together, but the simplicity and unity of all these
perfections is as necessarily conceived as any of them. Granting then that the
understanding by the observing of several perfections in the world, might be
able to abstract these severally from each being wherein they were, yet whence
should the Idea of the unity and inseparability of all these perfections come?
The mind may, it is true, knit some things together in fictitious Idea's, but
then those are so far from unity with each other, that in themselves they speak
mutual repugnancy to one another, which makes them proper entia rationis; but
these several perfections are so far from speaking repugnancy to each other,
that the unity and inseparability of them is as necessary to the forming of
this Idea, as any other perfection whatsoever. So that from hence it appears
that the consideration of the perfections which are in the creatures, is only
an occasion given to the mind to help it in its Idea of God, and not that the
Idea its self depends upon those perfections as the causes of it; as in the
clearest Mathematical truths the manner of demonstration may be necessary to
help the understanding to its clearer assent, though the things in themselves
be undoubtedly true. For all minds are not equally capable of the same truths;
some are of quicker apprehension then others are; now although to slower
apprehensions a more particular way of demonstrating things be necessary, yet
the truths in themselves are equal, though they have not equal evidence to
several persons.

3. It appears that this is no mere fictitious Idea from the uniformity of it
in all persons who have freed themselves from the entanglements of corporeal
phantasms. Those we call entia rationis, we find by experienee in our minds,
that they are formed ad placitum; we may imagine them as many ways as we
please; but we see it is quite otherwise in this Idea of God; for in those
attributes or perfections which by the light of nature we attribute to God,
there is an uniform consent in all those who have divested their minds of
corporeal phantasms in their conceptions of God. For while men have agreed that
the object of their Idea is a being absolutely perfect, there has been no
dissent in the perfections which have been attributed to it; none have
questioned but infinite wisdom, goodness, and power, joined with necessity of
existence, have been all employed in this Idea. So that it is scarce p^ssible to
instance in any one Idea, no not of those things which are most obvious to our
senses, wherein there has been so great an uniformity of men's conceptions as
in this Idea of God. And the most gross corporeal Idea of the most sensible
matter has been more liable to heats and disputes among Philosophers, then
this Idea of a being Infinite and purely spiritual. Which strongly proves my
present proposition, that this Idea of God is very consonant to natural light;
for it is hardly conceivable that there should be so universal a consent of
minds in this Idea, were it not a natural result from the free use of our
reason and faculties. And that which adds further weight t^ this argument, is,
that although Infinity be so necessarily employed in this Idea of God, yet men
do not attribute all kind of Infinite things to God; for there being
conceivable Infinite number, Infinite longitude, as well as infinite power and
knowledge, our minds readily attribute the latter to God, and as readily
abstract the other from his nature, which is an argument this Idea is not
fictitious, but argues reality in the thing correspondent to our conception of
it. So much may suffice to clear the first proposition, viz. that the notion of
a God is very suitable to the faculties of men's souls, and to that light of
nature which they proceed by in forming the conceptions of things.

Those who deny that there is a God, do assert other things Sect. 7. Prop. 2.
on far less evidence of reason, and must by their own principles deny some
things which are apparently true. One would expect that such persons who are
apt to condemn the whole world of folly in believing the truth of Religion, and
would fain be admired as men of a deeper reach, and greater wit and sagacity
then others, would when they have exploded a Deity, at least give us some more
rational and consistent account of things, then we can give that there is a
God. But on the contrary we find the reasons on which they reject a Deity so
lamentably weak, and so easily retorted upon themselves, and the hypotheses
they substitute instead of a Deity so precarious, obscure and uncertain, that
we need no other argument to evince the reasonableness of Religion, then from
the manifest folly as well as impiety of those who oppose it. Which we shall
make evident by these two things. 1. That while they deny a Deity, they assert
other things on far less reason. 2. That by those principles on which they deny
a Deity, they must deny some things which are apparently true.

1. That they assert some things on far less reason then we do that there is a
God. For if there be not an infinitely powerful God who produced the world out
of nothing, it must necessarily follow according to the different principles of
the Aristotelian and Epicurean Atheists, that either the world was as it is
from all eternity, or else that it was at first made by the fortuitous
concourse of Atoms. Now I appeal to the reason of any person who has the free
use of it, Whether either of these two Hypotheses, urged with the same or
greater difficulties, etc. be not far more weakly proved, then the existence of
a Deity is, or the production of the world by him.

1. They run themselves into the same difficulties which they would avoid in
the belief of a Deity; and nothing can be a greater evidence of an entangled
mind then this is: To deny a thing because of some difficulty in it, and
instead of it to assert another thing which is chargeable with the very same
difficulty in a higher degree. Thus when they reject a Deity, because they
cannot understand what infinity means; both these Hypotheses are liable to the
same intricacy in apprehending the nature of something Infinite. For according
to the Epicureans, there must be an Infinite space, and what greater ease to
the mind is there in conceiving an Idea of that then of an Infinite Being. And
if the world be eternal, there must have been past an Infinite succession of
ages, and is not the understanding as easily lost in this, as in an eternal
Being which created the world? For if the course of Generations in the world
had no beginning at all, (which necessarily follows upon the eternity of the
world) then an infinite number of successions are already past, and if past
then at an end, and so we find an Infinite which has had an end, which is a
consequence becoming one who avoids the belief of a Deity, because Infinity is
an unconceivable thing. Besides if the number of Generations has been
Infinite, these two consequences will unavoidably follow, which the reason of
any one but an Atheist would startle at, that one Infinite may be greater then
another, and that the part is equal to the whole. For let him fix where he
please in the course of Generations, I demand whether in the
Great-grand-fathers time the succession of Generations was finite or Infinite;
if finite, then it had a beginning; and so the world not eternal; if infinite,
then I ask, Whether there were not a longer succession of Generations in the
time of his great grandchildren, and so there must be a number greater then
that which was infinite; for the former succession was infinite, and this has
more Generations in it then that had; but if it be said that they were equal,
because both infinite, then the succession of Generations to the Grandfather,
being but a part of that which extends to his grandchildren and posterity, the
part is equal to the whole. And is not now the notion of an Infinite Being
enough to stumble an Atheists reason, when it can so nimbly leap over so
apparent contradictions? I insist not on this as an evident demonstration to
prove a Deity, which possibly it may not amount to, because it may only
demonstrate the impossibility of our understandings comprehending the nature of
Infinity. But however it does most evidently demonstrate the folly and
unreasonableness of the Atheist who rejects the Being of God on the account of
his Infinity, when his understanding is more lost in apprehending an infinite
succession of Generations which follows from his supposition of the eternity of
the world. If then it be impossible, as it is, upon any principles whatsoever,
to avoid the conception of somewhat infinite and eternal, either matter or
space, or some Being, let any one appeal to his own reason whether it be not
more agreeable to that, to attribute these perfections to such a Being to whose
Idea they necessarily belong, then to attribute them to this world in whose
conception they are not at all employed; but on the contrary they do far more
puzzle our understandings then when we conceive them to be in God. If somewhat
must have a continued duration, and be of an unbounded nature, how much more
rational is it to conceive wisdom, power, and goodness to be conjoined with
eternity and infinity, then to bestow these attributes upon an empty space, or
upon dull and unactive matter? It cannot be reason then, but some more base and
unworthy principle which makes the Atheist question the Being of God, because
his perfections are unconceivable, when according to his own principles the
most puzzling attributes of God return upon him with more force and violence,
and that in a more inexplieable manner.

As the Atheist must admit those things himself which he rejects the Being of
God for, so he admits them upon far Sect. 8. 2.
weaker grounds then we do attribute them to God. If any thing may be made
evident to man's natural reason concerning the existence of a Being so infinite
as God is, we doubt not but to make it appear that we have great assurance of
the Being of God; but how far must the Atheist go, how heartily must he beg
before his Hypothesis either of the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, or eternity
of the world will be granted to him. For if we stay till he proves either of
these by evident and demonstrative reasons, the world may have an end before he
proves his Atoms could give it a beginning; and we may find it eternal, a part
post, before he can prove it was so a part ante. For the proof of a Deity, we
appeal to his own faculties, reason and conscience; we make use of arguments
before his eyes: we bring the universal sense of mankind along with us: But for
his principles, we must wholly alter the present stage of the world, and
crumble the whole Universe into little particles; we must grind the Sun to
powder, and by a new way of interrment turn the earth into dust and ashes,
before we can so much as imagine how the world could be framed. And when we
have thus far begged leave to imagine things to be what they never were, we
must then stand by in some infinite space to behold the friskings and dancings
about of these little particles of matter, till by their frequent rancounters
and justlings one upon another, they at last link themselves together, and run
so long in a round till they make whirl-pools enough for Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and all the bodies of the Universe to emerge out of. But what was it which at
first set these little particles of matter in motion? Whence came so great
variety in them to produce such wonderful diversities in bodies as there are in
the world? How came these casual motions to hit so luckily into such admirable
contrivances as are in the Universe? When once I see a thousand blind men run
the point of a sword in at a keyhole without one missing; when I find them all
frisking together in a spacious field, and exactly meeting all at last in the
very middle of it; when I once find as Tully speaks, the Annals of Ennius
fairly written in a heap of sand, and as Keplers wife told him, a room full of
herbs moving up and down, fall down into the exact order of sallets, I may then
think the Atomical Hypothesis probable, and not before. But what evidence of
reason, or demonstration have we that the great bodies of the world did result
from such a motion of these small particles? It is possible to be so, says
Epicurus; what if we grant it possible? can no things in the world be, which it
is possible might have been otherwise? What else thinks Epicurus of the
Generations of things now? they are such certainly as the world now is, and yet
he believes it was once otherwise: Must therefore a bare possibility of the
contrary make us deny our reason, silence conscience, contradict the universal
sense of mankind by excluding a Deity out of the world? But whence does it
appear possible? Did we ever find any thing of the same nature with the world
produced in such a manner by such a concourse of Atoms? Or is it because we
find in natural beings, how much these particles of matter serve to solve the
Phoenomena of nature? But does it at all follow, because now under Divine
providence which wisely orders the world, and things in it, that these
particles with their several affections and motion, may give us a tolerable
account of many appearances as to bodies, that therefore the Universe had its
original merely by a concretion of these without any Divine hand to order and
direct their motion? But of this more, when we come to the creation of the
world; our design now is only to compare the notion of a Deity, and of the
Atheists Hypothesis in point of perspicuity and evidence of reason: of which
let any one who has reason judge. Thus we see how the Atheist in denying a
Deity, must assert something else instead of it, which is pressed with the
same, if not greater difficulties, and proved by far less reason.

The Atheist by the same principles on which he denies a God, Sect. 9. 2.
must deny some things which are apparently true. Which will be evident by our
running over the most plausible pretenses which he insists upon.

1. Because the Being of God cannot be demonstrated. But how does the Atheist
mean it? is it because God cannot be demonstrated to sense, that we cannot
digito monstrari and dieier hic est, point at him with our fingers? It is a
sign there is little of reason left, where sense is made the only Umpire of all
kinds of Beings. Must all Intellectual Beings be proscribed out of the order of
Nature, because they cannot pass the scrutiny of sense? And by the same reason
all colors shall be dashed out because they cannot be heard; all noises
silenced because they cannot be seen; for why may not one sense be set to judge
of all objects of sense with far more reason, then sense its self be set as
judge over intellectual Beings? But yet it is wisely done of the Atheist to
make sense his judge; for if we once appeal to this, he knows our cause is
lost; for as he said of a Physician when one asked him, whether he had any
experience of him, no said he, Si periculum fecissem, non viverem; If I had
tried him, I had been dead ere now; so here, If God were to be tried by the
judgment of sense, he must cease to be God; for how can an infinite and
spiritual Being be discerned by the judgment of sense, and if he be not an
infinite and spiritual Being, he is not God. But it may be the Atheists meaning
is not so gross, but he intends such a demonstration to reason as that two and
two make four, or that the whole is greater then the parts; with such a
demonstration he would sit down contented. But will no less then this serve
him? what becomes then of the worlds being made by a sortuitous concourse of
Atoms? is this as evident, as that two and two make four? And will the
Philosophical Atheist really believe nothing in nature, but what is as evident
to him in material Beings, as that the whole is greater then the parts? By any
means let Atheists then write Philosophy, that at last the clocks in London may
strike together and the Philosophers agree; for I suppose none of them question
that. But yet it is possible the Atheist may in a good humor abate some thing
of this, and mean by demonstration such a proof as takes away all difficulties.
If he means as to the ground of assent, we undertake it; if as to the object
ap^rehended, we reject it as unreasonable, because it is impossible a Being
infinite should be comprehended by us; for if it could, it were no longer
infinite. But let us try this principle by other things, and how evident is it,
that on this account some things must be denied which himself will confess to
be true? for instance, that osprobrium Philosophorum, the divisibility of
quantity, or extended matter into finite and infinite parts; let him take which
side he please, and see whether by the force of the arguments on either side,
if he hold to this principle, he must not be forced to deny that there is any
such thing as matter in the world: and then we may well have an infinite empty
space, when by the force of this one Principle, both God and matter are
banished quite out of the world. But if the Atheist will but come one step
lower, and by his demonstration intend nothing else but such a sufficient proof
of it, as the nature of the thing is capable of, he will not only speak most
consonantly to reason, but may be in some hopes of gaining satisfaction. For it
is most evident, that all things are not capable of the like way of proof, and
that in some cases the possibility of the contrary must be no hindrance to an
undoubted assent. What these proofs are, will appear afterward. I come to the
next ground of the Atheists opinion, which is,

2. The weakness of some arguments brought to prove a Deity. But let us grant
that some arguments will not do it, does it therefore follow that none can do
it? What if some have proved the Sun to be the center of the world, and the
motion of the earth, by very weak arguments, will the Atheist therefore
question it? what if Epicurus has proved his Atomical hypothesis by some silly
Sophismes, will the Atheist therefore rather believe the creation of the world
then it? What if the Atheist may make himself sport at some stories of
apparitions insisted on to prove a D^ity, does it therefore follow there is no
God, because some persons have been overcredulous? What if some having more
zeal then knowledge may attribute such things to Gods immediate hand, which may
be produced by natural causes, does it thence follow that God has no hand in
governing the world at all? What if fears, and hopes, and perswasi^ns, may
depend much on principles of education, must conscience then be resolved wholly
into these? What if some devont melancholist may embrace the issues of his own
imagination for the impressions of the Divine Spirit, does it therefore follow,
that religion is nothing but strength of fancy improved by principles of
education? what if some of the numerous proofs of a Deity were cut off, and
only those made use of, which are of greatest force, would the truth suffer at
all by that? I grant advantage is often taken against a thing more by one weak
argument brought for it, then for it by the strongest proofs: but I say it is
unreasonable it should be so; and were men rational and ingenuous it would not
be so. Many times arguments may be good in their order, but they are misplaced;
some may prove the thing rational, which may not prove it true; some may show
the absurdity of the adversaries rejecting the thing, which may be not
sufficient to prove it; now when men number and not weigh their arguments, but
give them in the lump to the main question, without fitting them to their
several places, they do more disservice to the main of the battle by the
disorder of their forces, then they can advantage it by the number of them.

3. Another great pretense the Atheist has, is, that religion is only an
invention of Politicians, which they aw people with as they please, and
therefore tell them of a God and another world, as Mothers send young children
to school to keep them in better order, that they may govern them with the
greater ease. To this I answer, 1. Religion I grant has a great influence upon
the well-governing the world, nay so great, that were the Atheists opinion
true, and the world persuaded of it, it were impossible the world could be well
governed. For the Government of the world in civil societies, depends not so
much on force, as the sacred bonds of duty and allegiance, which hold a Nation
that owns religion as true, in far surer obligations to endeavor the peace and
welfare of a Nation then ever violence can do. For in this case only an
opportunity is watched for to shake off that which they account a yoke upon
their necks; whereas when men's minds are possessed with a sense of duty and
obligation to obedience out of conscience, the rains may be held with greater
ease; and yet the people be better managed by them, then by such as only gall
and inrage them. So that I grant true religion to be the most serviceable
principle for the governing of civil societies; but withal I say, 2. It were
impossible religion should be so much made use of for the governing of people,
were there not a real propensity and inclination to religion imprinted on the
minds of men. For as, did not men love themselves and their children, their
estates and interests, it were impossible to keep them in obedience to Laws;
but does it follow, because Magistrates persuade people to obedience by suiting
Laws to the general interest of men, that therefore the Magistrates first made
them love themselves and their own concerns? So it is in religion, the
Magistrate may make use of this propensity to religion in men for civil ends,
but his making use of it does suppose it and not instill it. For were religion
nothing else in the world but a design only of Politicians, it would be
impossible to keep that design from being discovered at one time or other, and
when once it came to be known, it would hurry the whole world into confusion;
and the people would make no scruple of all oaths and obligations, but every
one would seek to do others what mischief he could if he had opportunity, and
obey no further then fear and force constrained him. Therefore no principle can
be so dangerous to a state as Atheism, nor any thing more promote its peace
then true religion; and the more men are persuaded of the truth of religion,
they will be the better subjects, and the more useful in civil societies. As
well then may an Atheist say there is no such thing as good nature in the world
because that is apt to be abused, nor any such thing as love because that may
be cheated, as that religion is nothing but a design, because men may make it
stalk to their private ends. Thus we see how the Atheist by the force of those
principles on which he denies a God, must be forced to deny other things, which
yet by his own confession are apparently true.

So I come to the third Proposition, which is, That we have Sect. 10. Prop. 3.
as certain evidence that there is a God, as we can have considering his
nature. When we demand the proof of a thing, our first eye must be to the
nature of the thing which we desire may be proved; For things equally true, are
not capable of equal evidence, nor have like manners of probation. There is no
demonstration in Euclide will serve to prove that there are such places as the
Indies: we cannot prove the earth is round by the judgment of sense; nor that
the soul is immortal by corporeal phantasmes. Every distinct kind of Being has
its peculiar way of probation; and therefore it ought not to be at all wondered
at, if the Supreme and infinite Being have his peculiar way of demonstrating
himself to the minds of men. If then we have as evident proofs of the existence
of God, as we can have considering the infinity of his nature, it is all which
in reason we can desire; and of that kind of proofs we have these following,
For, 1. If God has stamped an universal character of himself upon the minds of
men. 2. If the things in the world are the manifest effects of infinite
wisdom, goodness and power. 3. If there be such things in the world which are
unaccountable without a Deity; then we may with safety and assurance conclude
that there is a God.

1. That God has imprinted an universal character of himself on the minds of
men; and that may be known by two things. 1. If it be such as bears the same
importance among all persons. 2. If it be such as cannot be mistaken for the
character of any thing else.

1. I begin with the first, whereby I shall prove this character to be
universal, because the whole world has consented in it. This argument we may
rely on with the greater security, because it was the only argument which
retained the Deity in the ancient School of Epicurus; which could he have
thought of as easy way of evading it, as he thought he had found out as to the
Origin of the universe, he was no such great friend to the very name of a God,
as to have retained it as an Anticipation or Prolepsis of humane nature. And
this argument from the universal consent of the world, was that which bore the
greatest sway among the Philosophers, who went by nothing but dictates of
natural light, which they could not so clearly discover in any things, as in
those which all mankind did unanimously consent in. Two things I shall make out
this by. 1. That no sufficient account can be given of so universal a consent,
unless it be supposed to be the voice of nature. 2. That the dissent of any
particular persons is not sufficient to control so universal an agreement.

1. That no sufficient account of it can be given, but only by asserting it to
be a dictate of nature. In so strange a dissent as there has been in the world
concerning most of those things which relate to mankind in common, as the
models of government, the Laws they are ruled by, the particular rites and
customs of worship; we have the greatest reason to judge that those common
principles which were the foundations on which all these several different
customs were built, were not the effect of any positive Laws, nor the mere
force of principles of education, but something which had a deeper root and
foundation in the principles of nature its self. A common and universal effect
must flow from some common and universal cause. So the Stoic argues in Tully,
If there were no God, De Not. Deor. l. 2.
non tam stabilis opinio permaneret, nec confirmaretur diuturnitate remporis,
nec una cum seculis aetatibusque hominum inveterare potuisset. It is strange to
think that mankind in so many ages of the world should not grow wise enough to
rid its self of so troublesome an opinion as that was, of the Being of God, had
it not been true.

We see in all the alterations of the world, other vain opinions have been
detected, refuted and shaken off; if this had been such, how comes it to remain
the same in all ages and Nations of the world? Opinionum commenta delet dies,
naturae judicia confirmat. It is a great discredit to Time to make it like a
river in that sense, that it bears up only lighter things, when matters of
greatest weight are sunk to the bottom and past recovery; This may pass for a
handsome allusion, as to the opinions and writings of particular persons, but
cannot be understood of such things which are founded on the universal consent
of the world; for these common notions of humane nature are so suited to the
temper of the world, that they pass down the strong current of Time with the
same facility that a well built ship, though of good burden, does furrow the
Ocean. So that if we must adhere to the Allegory, it is easily replied, that it
is not the weight of things which makes them sink, but the unsuitableness of
their superficies to that of the water; so we see a small piece of wood will
sink, when a stately ship is born up; so such things which have not that
agreeableness in them to the dictates of nature may soon be lost, but such as
lie so even upon the superficies of the soul, will still float above the water,
and never be lost in the swiftest current of Time. Thus we assert this
universal consent of mankind, as to the existence of a Deity, to be a thing so
consonant to our natural reason, that as long as there are men in the world it
will continue.

But now it is hardly conceivable, according to the Principles of Epicurus, how
mankind should universally agree in Sect. 11.
some common sentiments; much less how it should have such an anticipation as
himself grants of the Being of God. For if the soul be nothing else but some
more active and vigorous particles of matter (as Diogenes Laertius tells us,
that his opinion was that the soul was nothing else but a Systeme Lib. 10. in
v. Epic. v. Gassend. To. 2. l. 3. sect 3.
(...), of the most smooth and round atoms) if so, it is very hard apprehending
how any such things as anticipations or commctions can be lodged in the soul?
For if our souls be nothing else but some small sphaericall corpuscles which
move up and down the body, as the Epicurean Philosophy supposes, then all our
knowledge and perception must depend on motion, which motion must be by the
impression of external objects: which Lucretius acknowledges and contends for.
Invenies primis a sensibus esse creatam
Notitiam very. Lib. 4.

If then our knowledge of truth comes in by our senses, and sensation does
wholly depend upon the impression of outward objects, what becomes of all
common notions and of the Prolepsis of a Deity? unless we suppose the knowledge
of a Deity came in by sense, which Epicurus himself denies when he attributes
to the Deity not corpus, but quasi corpus, as De Not. Deor. lib. 1.
Tully tells us, and therefore he is not a proper object of sense. So that it
is impossible there should be any such thing as a natural notion which may be
the ground of universal consent among men, according to the doctrine of
Epicurus. And therefore it stands to all reason in the world, that if our
senses be the only competent Judges of truth, men should differ about nothing
more then such things which cannot be tried by the judgment of sense; Such as
the notion of a God is; (for where should men be more uncertain in their
judgments, then in such thing which they have no rule at all to go by in the
judging of?) but we are so far from finding it so, that men are nothing so much
agreed about the objects of sense, as they are about the existence of a Deity;
and therefore we see this universal consent of mankind concerning a God, cannot
be salved by the principles of those who deny it; according to which no account
at all can be given of any such things as universal or common notions.

Neither can this universal consent of mankind be enervated Sect. 12.
with any greater probability by those Atheists who assert the eternity of the
world, and resolve this consent wholly into mere tradition, such as the Fables
of Poets were conveyed in from one to another. For I demand concerning this
tradition, Whether ever it had any beginning or no? If it had no beginning, it
could be no tradition; for that must run up to some persons from whom it first
came; again, if it had no beginning, it was necessary that it should always
be, on the same accounts on which they make the world eternal. And if it be
necessary, it must be antecedent to any free act of man's will which tradition
supposes; and so some false opinion would be found to be as necessary as the
worlds being eternal, (and by consequence, the worlds being eternal may be a
necessary false opinion) but if any false opinion be once granted necessary, it
then follows that our faculties are not true, and that nature is a necessary
cause of some notorious falsity, which is the highest impeachment the Atheist
could have laid upon his only adored nature; which must then have done that,
(which Aristotle was ashamed to think ever nature should be guilty of) which is
something in vain; for to what purpose should man have rational faculties, if
he be under an unavoidable necessity of being deceived? If then it be granted
that this tradition had once a beginning, either it began with humane nature,
or humane nature did exist long before it; if it began with mankind, then
mankind had a beginning, and so the world was not eternal; if mankind did exist
before this tradition, I then enquire in what time, and by what means came this
tradition first to be embraced, if it does not supppse the existence of a
Deity? Can any age be mentioned in history, wherein this tradition was not
universally received? and which is most to our purpose, the further we go back
in history, the fuller the world was of Deities, if we believe the Heathen
histories; but however no age can be instanced in, wherein this tradition began
first to be believed in the world; we can trace the Poetic Fables to their
true original, by the testimonies of those who believed them; we know the
particular Authors of them, and what course they took in divulging of them; we
find great diversities among themselves in the meaning of them, and many
nations that never heard of them. But all things are quite otherwise in this
tradition; we have none to fix on as the first Authors of it; if the world were
eternal, and the belief of a Deity fabulous, we cannot understand by what
artifice a fabulous tradition could come to be so universally received in the
world, that no Nation of old could be instanced in by the inquisitive
Philosophers, but however rude and barbarous it was, yet it owned a Deity. How
could such a tradition be spread so far, but either by force or fraud? it could
not be by force, because embraced by an unanimous consent where no force at all
has been used, and has been so rooted in the very natures of those people who
have been most tender of their liberties, that they have resented no indignity
so highly, as any affronts they conceived to be offered to their gods. Nay, and
where any persons would seem to quit the belief of a Deity, we find what force
and violence they have used to their own reason and conscience to bring
themselves to Atheism, which they could not subdue their minds to any longer
then the will could command the understanding, which when it gained but a
little liberty to examine it self, or view the world, or was alarumed with
thunder, earthquakes, or violent sickness, did bring back again the sense of a
Deity with greater force and power then they had endeavored to shake it off
with. Now had this tradition come by force into the world, there would have
been a secret exultation of mind to be freed from it, as we see nature
rejoices to shake off every thing which is violent, and to settle every thing
according to its due order. It is only fraud then which can be with any reason
imagined in this case; and how unreasonable it is to imagine it here, will
appear to any one who does consider how extremely jealous the world is of being
imposed upon by the subtilty of such who are thought to be the greatest
Politicians. For the very opinion of their subtilty makes men apt to suspect a
design in every thing they speak or do, so that nothing does more generally
hinder the entertaining of any motion so much among vulgar people, as that it
comes from a person reputed very politic. So that the most politic way of
gaining upon the apprehensions of the vulgar, is by taking upon one the
greatest appearance of simplicity and integrity; and this now could not be done
by such Politicians which we now speak of, but by accommodating themselves to
such things in the people which were so consonant to their natures, that they
could suspect no design at all in the matters propounded to them. And thus I
assert it to have been in the present case, in all those Politic Governors
who at first brought the world into both civil and Religious Societies, after
they were grown rude and barbarous; for as it had been impossible to have
brought them into civil Societies, unless there had been supposed an
inclination to Society in them, so it had been equally impossible to have
brought them to embrace any particular way of Religion, unless there had been a
natural propensity to Religion implanted in them, and founded in the general
belief of the existence of a Deity. And therefore we never find any of the
ancient founders of Commonwealths go about to persuade the people, that there
was a God, but this they supposed and made their advantage of it, the better to
draw the people on to embrace that way of worship which they delivered to them,
as most suitable to their own design. And this is plainly evident in the vast
difference of designs and interests which were carried on in the Heathen world
upon this general apprehension of a Deity. How came the world to be so easily
abused into Religions of all shapes and fashions, had not there been a natural
inclination in men's souls to Religion, and an Indeleble Idea of a Deity on the
minds of men? Were then this propensity groundless, and this Idea fictitious,
it were the greatest slurr imaginable which could be cast upon nature, that
when the instincts of irrational agents argue something real in them; only man,
the most noble being of the visible world, must be fatally carried to the
belief of that which never was. Which yet has so great a force and awe upon
man, that nothing creates so great anxieties in his life as this does; nothing
lays him more open to the designs of any who have an intent to abuse him. But
yet further, these Politicians who first abused the world in telling them there
was a God, did they themselves believe there was a God or no? If they did, then
they had no such end as abusing the world into such a belief. If they did not,
upon what accounts did they believe there was none, when the people were so
ready, to believe there was one? Was that as certain a tradition before that
there was no God, as afterward they made it to be that there was? If so, then
all those people whom they persuaded to believe there was a God, did before,
all believe there was none; and how can it possibly enter into the reason of
any man to think, that people who had been brought up in the belief that there
was no God at all, nor any state after this life, should all unanimously quit
the principles of education which tended so much to their ease and pleasure
here, to believe there was a God and another life, and thereby to fill
themselves full of fears and disquietments; merely because their Rulers told
them so? Again, if these Rulers themselves were so wise as not to believe a
Deity, can we imagine there ever was such an age of the world wherein it fell
out so happily, that only the Rulers were wise, and all the subjects fools?
But it may be, it will be said, that all who were wise themselves did not
believe a Deity, but yet consented to the practice of Religion, because it was
so useful for the Government of mankind; but, can it be thought that all these
wise men which we must suppose of several ranks and degrees, (for
Philosophers are not alvvayes Statesmen, nor Statesmen Philosophers) should
so readily concur in such a thing which tended most to the Interest of the
Prince, and to the abuse of the world? Would none of them be ready to assert
the truth, though it were but to make a party of their own, and discover to the
people, that it was only the ambition and design of their Governors which
sought to bring the people to slavery by the belief of such things which were
contrary to the tradition of their forefathers, and would make their lives, if
they believed them, continually troublesome and unquiet? Or if we could suppose
things should hit thus in one Nation, what is this to the whole world which the
Atheist here supposes eternal? What, did all the Rulers of the world exactly
agree in one moment of time, or at least in one age thus to abuse the world?
Did the designs of Governors and the credulity of all people fall out to be so
suitable together? But on the contrary, we do not find that Governors can have
the judgments of people so at their command, that they can make them to
believe what they please; if it were so, we may well say with that Atheistical
Pope, Heu quam minimo regitur mundus; What a twine thread will rule the world!
But granting these things, (which any but an Atheist will say are impossible)
yet whence should it come to pass that the world which is generally led more by
the opinions of their forefathers then by reason, should so cancel that former
tradition that there was no God, that no remaining footsteps of it can be
traced in any history of those times? Or did the Governors all consent to
abolish all records of it? Public and written I grant they might, but not
those out of men's minds and memories; which would have been for the ease of the
minds of their posterity conveyed in some secret Cabala from Fathers to their
Children. It may be it will be said, so it was, but men durst not profess it
for fear of the Laws; but, it is not evident that the Laws of all the ancient
Commonwealths were so severe against Atheism; and withal how came some of the
wisest and most Philosophical men of Greece and Rome to embrace the existence
of a Deity as a thing far more consonant to reason then the contrary opinion,
and established their belief on such evidences from nature its self, that none
of their Antagonists were able to answer them? It was not certainly the fear of
Laws which made men rational and inquisitive into the natures and causes of
things; and yet those who were such amidst the great Idolatries of the heathen,
and being destitute of divine revelation, yet freely and firmly assented to the
existence of a Deity. Had it been only fraud and imposture which brought men to
believe a God, whence came it to pass that this fraud was not discovered by
these Philosophers who were far better able by their nearness to those eldest
times, and much converse abroad in other Nations (for some traveled into
Egypt, Chaldea, Persia, India, merely to gain knowledge) to have found out
such an imposture, had it been such, then any of our modern Atheists? Whence
come these now in this almost decrepite age of the world to be the first
smellers out of so great a design? By what means, what tokens and evidence came
such an imposture to their knowledge? Because, forsooth, the world is still apt
to be abused by a pretense of Religion; but he that does not see how silly and
ridiculous a Sophism that is, either by his own reason, or by what has gone
before, has wit and reason little enough to be an Atheist. Some therefore who
would seem a little wiser then the vulgar sort of Atheists (for it seems there
is a vulgus among them too, I wish it be more for their meanness then
multitude) are so far convinced of the unreasonablenss of judging that the
belief of a Deity came in by fraud, that finding it so general and universal,
they attribute it to as general and universal a cause which is the Influence of
the Stars. So true still is that of the Poet, Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia;
for by what imaginable influence come the stars to plant opinions in men's minds
so deeply and universally? But yet further, is this opinion which is thus
caused by the Stars, true or false? if the opinion be true, we have what we
desire; if false, what malignant influence is this of the Stars so powerfully
to sway men to the belief of a falsity? How far are the Stars then from doing
good to mankind, when they are so influential to deceive the world; but then by
what peculiar influence come some men to be freed from this general imposture?
If the cause be so universal, the effect must be universal too. But if only the
Nativity and continuance of some particular religions may be calculated by the
Stars, (as Cardan and Vaninus Atheistically suppose) whence then comes the
general propensity and inclination to Religion in all ages and Nations of the
World? If it be then caused by the Heavens in general, it must be produced
necessarily and universally, and so to be an Atheist, were impossible; if it be
caused by the influence of some particular Stars, then when that influence
cease, the world would universally relapse into Atheism. So that there is no
possible way of avoiding this universal consent of mankind, as an argument that
there is a God, when all the pretenses of the Atheist against it are so weak,
ridiculous, and impertinent.

The only thing then left for him, is to deny the truth of the thing, viz. that
there is such an universal consent; because Sect. 13.
some persons have been found in the world who have not agreed with the rest of
mankind in this opinion. To this I answer, (which was the second particular for
clearing this argument) that the dissent of these persons is not sufficient to
manifest 2.
the consent not to be universal, and to arise from a dictate of nature. For I
demand of the greatest Atheist, Whether it be sufficient to say, that it is not
natural for men to have two legs, because some have been born with one, or that
it is not natural for men to desire life, (which the Atheist loves so dearly)
because there have been so many who have taken away their own lives? If it be
said that these are Monsters and Anomalyes in nature, and therefore not to be
reckoned in the regular account of things, the same I may with as great reason
say of Atheists, that they are to be dispunged out of the Census of such who
act upon free principles of reason; because there may be some peculiar reasons
given of their dissent from the rest of mankind in the denial of a Deity. We
see by the old Philosophers how far the affectation of Novelty, and ambition of
being cried up for no vulgar wits, may carry men to deny such things which are
most common and obvious in the world. Is there any thing more plain and evident
to reason, then that it implies a contradiction for the same thing to be and
not to be at the same time? and yet if we believe Aristotle, who largely
disputes against them, (...). Metaphys. lib. 4. c. 4.
There were some who affirmed that a thing might be and not be at the same
time. What so evident in nature as motion, yet the Philosopher is well known
who disputed against it, and thought himself subtle in doing so too? What are
men more assured of, then that they live, and yet (if it be not too dogmatical,
even in that to believe the Scepticks) it was a thing none could be assured of?
What are our senses more assured of then that the snow is white, yet all the
Philosophers were not of that opinion? Is this then sufficient reason on which
to deny an universal consent, because some Philosophers opposed it, when it is
most undoubtedly true which Tully sharply speaks of the ancient Philosophers,
Nihil tam absurdum quod non dixerit aliquis Philosophorum; there was no
absurdity so great, but it found a De Not. Deor. l. 3.
Philosopher to vouch it! But in this case those Philosophers who questioned
the existence of a Deity, though they were not for number to be compared with
those who asserted it, yet were not so inexcusable therein, as our modern
Atheists; because they then knew no other way of Religion, but that which was
joined with horrible superstition and ridiculous rites of worship; they were
strangers to any thing of divine revelation, or to any real miracles wrought to
confirm it, and to such a way of serving God which is most agreeable to the
Divine nature, most suitable to our reason, most effectual for advancing true
goodness in the world. And although this most excellent Religion, viz. the
Christian, be subject to many scandals by reason of the corruptions which have
been mixed with it by those who have professed it, yet the Religion its self is
clear and untainted, being with great integrity preserved in the sacred records
of it. So that now Athcism has far less to plead for its self, then it had in
the midst of the ignorance and superstition of the Heathen Idolatries. But, if
we should grant the Athcist more then he can prove, that the number of such who
denied a Deity has been great in all ages of the world; is it probable they
should speak the sense of nature, whose opinion if it were embraced, would
dissolve all ties and obligations whatsoever, would let the world loose to the
highest licentiousness without check or control, and would in time overturn
all civil Societies? For as Tully has De Not. D^or. l. 1. and De Legibus lib.
2.
largely shown, Take away the being and providence of God out of the world, and
there follows nothing but perturbation and confusion in it; not only all
sanctity, piety and devotion is destroyed, but all faith, virtue, and humane
Societies too; which are impossible to be upheld without Religion, as not only
he, but Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarch have fully demonstrated. Shall such
persons then who hold an opinion so contrary to all other dictates of nature,
rather speak the sense of nature then they who have asserted the Belief of a
Deity, which tends so much to advance nature, to regulate the world, and to
reform the lives of men? Certainly if it were not a dictate of nature that
there was a God, it is impossible to conceive the world should be so constant
in the belief of him, when the thoughts of him breed so many anxicties in men's
minds, and withal since God is neither obvious to sense, nor his nature
comprehensible by humane reason. Which is a stronger evidence it is a character
of himself which God has imprinted on the minds of men, which makes them so
unanimously agree that he is, when they can neither see him, nor yet fully
comprehend him. For any whole Nation, which have consented in the denial of a
Deity, we have no evidence at all; some suspicions it is true there were at
first concerning some very barbarous people in America, but it is since evident
though they are grossly mistaken as to the nature of God, yet they worship
something in stead of him, such as the Toupinambors, Caribes, Patagons, Tapuiae
and others; of the last of which Vossius from one Christophorus Arcissewski a
Polonian Addend. ad lib. 1. De Idol. p. 2.
Gentleman who was among them, has given a large account of their Religion,
and the manner of their worshipping of their gods, both good and bad. And that
which among these Indians much confirms our present argument, is, that only
those who have been the most barbarous and savage Nations, have been suspected
of irreligion, but the more civilized they have been, the more evident their
sense of Religion. The Peruvians worship one chief God, whom they call
Viracocha, and Pachacamak, which is as much as the Creator v. Acost^m lib. 5.
c. 3. Lips. Monit. and exempl. Politic.
of heaven and earth. And of the Religion of the Mexicans, Lipsius and others
speak. So that the nearer any have approached to civility and knowledge, the
more ready they have been to own a Deity, and none have had so little sense of
it, as they who are almost degenerated to Brutes; and whether of these two now
comes nearer to reason, let any one who has it judge.

Another great evidence that God has imprinted a character or Idea of himself
on the minds of men is, because such Sect. 14. 2.
things are contained in this Idea of God which do necessarily imply his
existence. The main force of this argument lies in this, That which we do
clearly and distinctly perceive to belong to the nature and essence of a thing,
may be with truth affirmed of the thing; not that it may be affirmed with truth
to belong to the nature of the thing, for that were an empty Tautology, but it
may be affirmed with truth of the thing its self, as if I clearly perceive upon
exact enquiry, that to be an animal does belong to the nature of man, I may
with truth affirm that man is a living creature; if I find it demonstrably true
that a Triangle has three angles equal to two right ones, then I may truly
affirm it of any Triangle; but now we assume, that upon the most exact search
and enquiry, I clearly perceive that necessary existence does immutably belong
to the nature of God; therefore, I may with as much truth affirm that God
exists, as that man is a living creature, or a Triangle has three angles equal
to two right ones. But because many are so apt to suspect some kind of Sophism
in this argument, when it is managed from the Idea in men's minds, because that
seems to imply only an objective reality in the mind, and that nothing can be
thence interred as to the existence of the thing whose Idea it is, I therefore
shall endeavor to manifest more clearly the force of this argument, by proving
severally the suppositions which it stands upon, which are these three. 1. That
clear and distinct perception of the mind is the greatest evidence we can have
of the truth of any thing. 2. That we have this clear perception that necessary
existence does belong to the nature of God. 3. That if necessary existence does
belong to Gods nature, it unavoidably follows that he does exist. Nothing can
be desired more plain or full to demonstrate the force of this argument, then
by proving every one of these.

1. That the greatest evidence we can have of the truth of a thing, is, a clear
and distinct perception of it in our minds. For otherwise the rational
faculties of man's soul would be wholly useless, as being not fitted for any end
at all, if upon a right use of them, men were still liable to be deceived. I
grant the imperfection of our minds in this present state is very great, which
makes us so obnoxious to error and mistake; but then that imperfection lies in
the pr^neness in man's mind to be led by interest and prejudice in the judgment
of things; but in such things as are purely speculative and rational, if the
mind cannot be certain it is not deceived in them, it can have no certainty at
all of any Mathematical demonstrations. Now we find in our own minds a clear
and conv^ncing evidence in some things, as soon as they are propounded to our
understandings, as that a thing cannot be and not be at the same time; that, a
nonentity can have no proper attributes; that, while I reason and discourse, I
am; these are so clear, that no man does suspect himself deceived at all in
them. Besides, if we had no ground of certainty at all in our judging things,
to what purpose is there an Idea of true and false in our minds, if it be
impossible to know the one from the other? But I say not, that in all
perceptions of the mind we have certain evidence of truth, but only in such as
are clear and distinct; that is, when upon the greatest consideration of the
nature of a thing, there appears no ground or reason at all to doubt concerning
it; and this must suppose the minds abstraction wholly from the senses; for we
plainly find that while we attend to them, we may judge our selves very certain
and yet be deceived, as those who have an Icterism in their eyes, may judge
with much confidence that they see things as clearly and distinctly as any
other does. Besides, there are many things taken for granted by men, which have
no evidence of reason at all in them; Now if men will judge of the truth of
things by such principles, no wonder if they be deceived. But when we speak of
clear and distinct perception, we suppose the mind to proceed upon evident
principles of reason, or to have such notions of things, which as far as we can
perceive by the light of reason, do agree with the natures of the things we
apprehend; if in such things then there be no ground of certainty, it is as
much as to say our Faculties are to no purpose; which highly reflects either
upon God or nature. It is a noble question, as any is in Philosophy, What is
the certain (...) of the truth of things, or what ground of certainty the mind
has to proceed upon in its judgment of the truth of such objects as are
represented to it? Nothing can render the Philosophy of Epicurus more justly
suspected to any ^ational and inquisitive mind, then his making the senses the
only certain conveyers of the truth of things to the mind. The senses I grant
do not in themselves deceive any, but if I make the impressions of sense to be
the only rule for the mind to judge by of the truth of things, I make way for
the greatest impostures, and the most erring judgments. For if my mind affirms
every thing to be in its proper nature according to that Idea which the
imagination has received from the impressions upon the Organs of sense, it
will be impossible for me ever to understand the right natures of things.
Because the natures of things may remain the same, when all those things in
them which affect the Organs of sense may be altered; and because the various
motion and configuration of the particles of matter may make such an impression
upon the senses, which may cause an Idea in us of that in the things
themselves, which yet may be only in the manner of sensation; As some
Philosophers suppose it to be in heat and cold. Now if the mind judges of the
nature of things according; to those Idea's which come from the impressions
made upon the Organs of sense; how is it possible it should ever come to a
right judgment of the natures of things? So that in reference even to the
grossest material beings, it must be the perception only of the mind which can
truly inform us of their proper nature and essence. Besides there are many
Idea's of things in the mind of man which are capable to have properties
demonstrated of them, which never owed their original to our senses, and were
never imported to the mind at the Keys of the senses. Such are most
Mathematical figures which have their peculiar properties and demonstrations;
such are all the mutual respects of things to each other, which may be as
certain and evident to the mind as its self is; now it is plain by this, that
all certainty of knowledge is not conveyed by the senses; but our truest way of
certain understanding the nature of any thing, is by the clear and distinct
perception of the mind, which is founded on the Truth of our faculties; and
that however we may be deceived when we do not make a right use of our reason,
because of the imperfection of our present state; yet if we say our mind may be
deceived when things are evident and clear to them upon plain principles of
reason, it is highly to reslect upon that God who gave men rational faculties,
and made them capable of discerning Truth from falsehood.

2. That we have clear and distinct perception that necessity of existence does
belong to the nature of God. For which we are to consider the vast difference
which there is in our notion of the nature of God, and of the nature of any
other being. In all other beings, I grant we may abstract essence and existance
from each other; now if I can make it appear, that there is evident reason, ex
part rei, why I cannot do it in the notion of God, then it will be more plain
that necessity of existence does immutably belong to his nature. It is manifest
to our reason, that in all other beings which we apprehend the natures of,
nothing else can be employed in the natures of them beyond bare possibility of
existence; no, although the things which do apprehend, do really exist, because
in forming an Idea of a thing, we abstract from every thing which is not
employed in the very nature of the thing; now existence being only contingent
and possible, as to any other being, it cannot be any ingredient of its Idea,
because it does not belong to its essence; for we may fully apprehend the
nature of the thing, without attributing existence to it. But now in our
conception of a Being absolutely perfect, bare possibility or contingency of
existence speaks a direct repugnancy to the Idea of kim; for how can we
conceive that Being absolutely perfect, which may want that which gives life to
all other perfections, which is existence? The only scruple, which men's minds
are subject to in apprehending the force of this argument lies in this, Whether
this necessary existence does really belong to the nature of that being whose
Idea it is, or else it be only a Mode of our conception in apprehending God?
For clearing of this, we must consider by what certain rules we can know when
the composition of things together in the understanding, does depend upon the
mere operation of the mind, and when they do belong to the things themselves
and their immutable nature. For which we have no rule so certain and evident as
this is, that in those things which depend merely on the act of the mind
joining together, the understanding cannot only abstract one thing from
another, but may really divide them in its conceptions from each other: but in
such things which cannot be divided from each other, but the essence of the
thing is quite altered, it is a certain evidence that those things were not
conjoined by the mere act of the mind, but do immutably belong to the natures
of the things themselves. As for instance, when I conceive a Triangle inscribed
in a square, a man walking, a horse with wings, it is evident I may understand
the natures of all these things without these affections of them, because I can
fully apprehend the nature of a Triangle without imagining a square, a man
without walking, a horse without wings; thence it necessarily follows, that the
joining of these things together was merely an act of the mind; but now I
cannot conceive a Triangle not to have three angles equal to two right ones,
nor a man that has not rationality belonging to him; for if I divide these
attributes from them, I destroy their natures; and therefore the joining of
these together is not any mere act of the mind, but these are such things as
are employed in the very notion of them, and therefore immutably belongs to
them. So now, when I conceive the notion of a body, I can imagine all
perfections belonging to it, without conceiving it necessarily to exist; for it
may be a body still, though it has not its being from its self; but when I
conceive a Being absolutely perfect, it is impossible to imagine it should have
its being from any other; and if it be from its self, it must of necessity
exist. For though the mind still be apt to doubt, whether existence in this
Idea be only a mode of cogitation; yet that doubt may be easily removed, if the
mind does but attend to this, that at least possibility of existence does
belong to all those Beings which we have a clear Idea of in our minds; and the
reason why we attribute bare possibility to them, is because we apprehend some
reason in our minds which keeps us from attributing necessity of existence to
them, as that it is not employed in its nature, or that it does depend on some
other being, or that it wants infinite power, etc. Now all these reasons which
make us attribute bare possibility of existence to any being, are taken away
when we conceive a being absolutely perfect; for then existence is employed
among the number of perfections, and this being is dependent upon all others,
and infinitely powerful; so that nothing can hinder its existence; and
therefore we must conclude that necessity of existence does immutably belong to
the nature and notion of God, and is not any mode only of our conception;
because if we take away necessity of existence from God, we lose the notion of
a Being absolutely perfect.

The third thing, that if necessary existence belongs to the nature of God, he
does exist, not only follows as a necessary conclusion from the other two, as
the premises, but is in it vid. Des Carts Metaphys. Medi^. and Resp. ad Object.

D. H. More Antidote against Atheism, lib. 1. chapter 8.

Append. chapter 5, 6, 7.


self evident to any ones reason; for it implies no less then a contradiction
for a being to exist necessarily, and yet it be questionable, Whether he does
exist or no? Thus much I suppose may suffice here to explain and enforce this
argument; if any are yet unsatisfied, I referr them to those judicious Authors,
who have made it their peculiar business to manage it, and vindicate it from
all objections: Which falls in only here as an evidence that God has imprinted
a character of himself on the minds of men, seeing we have so clear and
distinct an Idea of such a being, from whom, if we take away necessity of
existence, we destroy that notion which our minds have or an absolutely perfect
Being. This is the first way whereby we ^an conceive an Infinite Being may make
himself known to mankind, by imprinting an Indelible character of himself upon
the soul, which can be attributed to none besides himself, without doing
manifest violence to our own faculties, and suspecting our selves deceived in
things which are most clear and evident to us.

I come to the second evidence which God has given us of Sect. 15.
his own existence, which is the mark and impression which he has left of an
Infinite Wisdom and Counsel in the appearances which are in nature. There needs
no great Criticism to find out the true Author of all the works of nature; the
works themselves show the Author as plainly, as if his effigies were drawn upon
them. If the great curiosity and contrivance of any artificial engine speak the
excellency of the Mechanical wit of the framer of it; what ridiculous folly
will it be to impute that rare mechanism of the works of nature to the blind
and fortuitous motion of some particles of matter? Suppose a multitude of
letters casually thrown together, should fall so handsomely in order, that we
might read in them the names of Troja, Juno, Aeneas, Dido, Turnus, Ascanius, or
the like; is it possible for any to imagine that ever they should reach the
grandeur, style, matter and accuracy of the whole books of the Aeneids? So
granting, that now matter being set in motion by a divine power, may by its
continual agitation, at last produce some of the appearances of nature; yet
what is this to the whole Universe, or the admirable contrivance of any one
part in it? If these things had been the result of mere matter and motion, when
once the particles of matter had been so united and settled together, as to
produce any one species of animals in the world, (which it is almost
unconceivable they should) yet we cannot think that if there had been but
symmetry of parts enough for it merely to subsist its self, and propagate more,
there could have been any further attempt made by those Atoms which had been
once settled in a determinate figure. How came it then to pass that there is
not any one species of animals in the world, but what has such an order,
symmetry and contrivance of parts which speaks more then mere necessity of
subsistence; and therefore speaks them to be the effects or a suprenm Governor
of the world, and not the products of mere matter? Is it possible that any, who
is not before hand resolved to exclude a Deity, should imagine that any
particles of matter should fall into the exact form, order, motion, and
serviceableness to the world which the Heavenly bodies are in, without divine
counsel and wisdom disposing of them? Tully tells us of a speech of Aristotle
to this purpose; If we could suppose De Not. Dcor. l. 2. c. 95.
persons to have lived in some caverns of the earth, and to have enjoyed every
thing there of pleasure, and riches, or whatever it is which we think makes
men's lives happy, and had never been abroad upon the surface of the earth, but
had only had some obscure report of an Infinite power and Being; and that
afterward these persons should by an opening of the caverns wherein they were,
come abroad into these parts of the world, and should suddenly behold the
earth, Sea, and the Heavens, and observe the vastness of the clouds and
violence of winds, and behold the bigness, beauty, and influence of the Sun,
and how the day depended upon his presence, and upon his withdrawing should
view the face of the heavens again, (as it were the second course of nature)
the order, and ornament of the Stars, the varieties of the light of the moon,
their rising and setting, and their fixed, and immovable courses, they could
not hold from believing there was a Deity, and that these were the effects of
his power. So vastly different are the free and natural emanations of our
souls, from that which we force and strain out of our selves, by distorting and
wringing those free principles of reason which God has given us. When a few
sorry experiments and some arbitrarious Hypotheses, must make us form other
conceptions of things, then the Majesty, order and beauty of them do naturally
suggest to us: We see when once we can but abstract our minds from those
prejudices which continual conversation with the world brings upon us, by that
speech of Aristotle, how readily our minds will frame an excellent commentary
upon those words of the royal Psalmist, The Heavens declare the glory of God,
and the Firmament shows his bandy-work. To which purpose likewise those words
of the excellent Orator himself in another place are very observeable; Quid est
enim verius quam neminem esse oportere tam De Legilus lib. 2.
stulte arrogantem, ut in se mentem and rationem putet inesse, in coelo
mundoque non putet? aut ea quae vix summa ingenii ratione comprehendat, nulla
ratione moveri putat? quem verb astrorum ordines, quem dierum noctiumque
vicissitudines, quem mensium temperatio, quemque ea quae gignuntur nobis ad
fruexdum, non gratume esse cogant, hunc hominem omnino numerare qui decet? What
monstrous arrogance would it be in any man to think there is a mind and reason
in himself, and that there is none in the world? Or to think those things are
moved without reason and understanding, which all that he has is scarce able
to comprehend? Neither can he deserve the name of a man, from whom the
observation of the courses of the stars, the succession and order of seasons,
and the innumerable benefits which he enjoyes in the world, does not extort
gratitude toward that Being which ordered all these things. What a low opinion
then had those more resined and generous spirits who went only upon principles
of pure and undistorted reason, of those mean and ignoble souls which were
inclined to Atheism; especially then, when Religion was so abused, that it was
true of the wisest of them, what one said of Erasmus, Magis habuit quid fugeret
quam quid sequeretur, they knew what to avoid, but not what they should
embrace? And vet when they saw so much into the folly and superstition of
Heathen worship, they saw the greatest reason still to adhere to the belief of
a Deity, as may be clearly seen, especially in the second of those excellent
Dialogues of Tully, de natura Deorum. Where this particular argument to prove a
Deity from the admirable contrivance of the works of nature, is managed with a
great deal of ^loguence and reason, and by particular enumeration of most
considerable parts of the Universe. So unbecoming a late Philosopher was that
reason of his, why he waved the argument from the consideration of the world,
to infer a Deity, because the ends of God are unsearchable, as flowing from
his Infinite wisdom. For what though God may conceal some things from men,
which he intends, and are of no concernment for man to know, must therefore of
necessity those ends of his be unsearchable in his works of Creation, which
referr so immediately to the advantage of lfe, and tend so much to the
veneration of the Deity?

Nay the peculiar use and serviceableness of many parts of Sect. 16.
the Universe, especially of Animals, and chiefly of man, is so evident, that
this has been the main argument which has induced some, otherwise Atheistical
enough, to acknowledge and adore a Deity. And although the Epicureans be
lamentably puzzled to give any tolerable account of many other appearances in
nature, yet they nowhere discover so much weakness and ignorance, as when they
come to discourse De usu partium, about the contrivance of the parts of man's
body. Whose opinion is thus briefly delivered by Lucretius, Nil ideo quoniam
natum'st in corpore ut uti
Possemus; sed quodnatum'st id procreat usum. Lucret. l. 4.

i. e. that no-parts of man's body were designed for that use which they are
employed for, but the parts by chance fell into that form they are in, and men
by degrees brought them to their present use and serviceableness. An opinion at
first view so strangely unreasonable, that we cannot think Epicurus should have
ever embraced it, had it not unavoidably followed upon his Hypothesis of all
things in the Universe resulting only from a fortuitous concourse of Atoms:
According to which he supposed in man a different configuration of parts would
happen, from the various agitation and concretion of those little particles
which at first run together in the fashion of a man; and because that man had
in him a more florid and vivacious spirit, made up of the most subtle and
moveable Atoms, thence motion came into the several parts, suitable to the
different conformation of them. And because those Atoms of which the soul is
composed, are capable of sensation, thence it comes to pass, that it sees in
the eye, hears in the ear, and smells in the nostrills. This is the most which
is made of the opinion of Epicurus by the late sedulous vindicator of him,
which yet himself calls intoleranda opinio; and it will appear to be so, not
only as contradicting what God himself has delivered concerning man, but what
reason its self will easily suggest from the consideration of the several parts
of man's body. It must be confessed there were some Philosophers elder then
Epicurus who were much inclined to this opinion, as Democritus, Empedocles,
Anaxagoras and others; yet we find those who more narrowly searched into the
natures of living creatures, were thereby brought to acknowledge a divine
providence which with a great deal of wisdom did order the several parts of
animals, and adapted them to their peculiar uses. And although Aristotle in his
books de partibus animalium, has said enough to refute the fond opinion of
those Philosophers; yet none has handled this argument with more exactness and
accuracy, and with a more peculiar reflection on Epicurus, then Galen has done
in his excellent piece De usu partium. Which Gassendus thinks Galen writ with a
kind of Enthusiasm upon him, (adeo totum opus videtur Gassend. To. 2. lib 2.
sect. 3.
conscriptum (...)) and so that all those seventeen books of his on that
subject, are a kind of 119. Psalm in Philosophy, or a perpetual Hymn upon the
praise of the great Creator, or a just Commentary on those words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made; mavelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well. In the entrance of those books,
Galen first shows the great variety of parts which is in several animals
suitable to their several natures; the horse because of his swiftness and
pride; has the strongest hoofs and most curled main; the Lion because of his
fierceness and courage has his strength lying in his teeth and paws; the Bull
in his horns; the Boar in his tusks; the Heart and Hare being timorous
creatures, their parts are made fittest for flight: but man, because he has a
principle of reason in him, has no defensive or offensive weapons in his body,
but he has hands to make use of both; which being joined with and employed by
his reason, far exceed all those advantages which any other creatures have,
being employed not only to defend himself, but to build houses, make clothes,
arms, nets, whatever is useful for himself, or hurtful to those creatures which
he has command over; but because man was made for society and civil converse,
therefore his hands were not only employed to defend himself or hurt other
creatures, but for the mutual benefit and advantage of mankind; for by these
were Laws written, Temples built, all instruments of Arts framed; by them we
enjoy the benefit of others wits, we can discourse with Plato, Aristotle,
Hippocrates, and other ancients, though at such a dist^nce from us. Now that
the configuration of parts is not the cause of the use of them afterward; as
the Lions paw, of his courage, the Bulls horns of his fierceness, or the
slenderness of the Heart of its fearfulness, appears by this, because the young
ones of the several kinds of animals, before their parts are grown up, strive
to make the same use of them which the others do. As Galen says, he had often
seen a Bullcalf pushing with his head before any horns were grown out, and a
Colt kicking when his hoofs were yet tender, and a young Boar defending himself
with his jaws before he had any tusks; which is an evident argument that the
parts were designed for the use, and not the use follow the parts. So, says
he, take three eggs, one of an Eagle, another of a Duck, and a third of a
Serpent, and after they are hatched through a moderate heat, we shall find when
they are but newly hatched, the two first will be striving to fly before they
have wings, and the third endeavoring to creep away on its belly; and if you
breed them up to greater perfection, and bring them into the open air, you will
presently see the young Eagle mounting into the air, the Duck quoddling into a
pool, and the Serpent creep under ground. Afterward he comes particularly to
handle the several parts of man's body, and first begins with the Hand, and
shows in each part that it were impossible to have framed them with greater
convenience for their several uses then they have. The use of the hand is to
take hold of any thing which man can use; now there being things of such
different sizes which men may use, it had been impossible for the hand, if it
had been one entire thing and undivided, that it could have held things greater
or lesser then its self, but it must have been equal to it. But now as the
fingers are placed and divided, they are equally fit for laying hold of objects
of any size or quantity; For the least things, as a Barley corn, are taken up
with the forefinger and the thumb, things somewhat bigger are taken up by the
same, but not by the extremities of them as before; things somewhat bigger then
these, with the thumb, forefinger and middle-finger, and so on by degrees,
till at last the whole hand is used; so that the division of the hand into
fingers is necessary. Neither were this enough, but the very position of the
fingers as they are, is necessary too; for they had been useless if they had
been all divided in a right line; for the firmest hold is either circular or at
least in two opposite points; but now this is provided for, by the position of
the thumb which may equally join with any of the fingers in taking hold of any
thing. After this, he largely shows the patticular necessity of the softness,
roundness of the flesh, and nails on the tops of the fingers; and the special
usefulness of these; and then comes to the bones of the fingers, how necessary
they are for firm hold, and if there had been but one bone in each finger, they
would have served only for those things which we take up when they are
extended; but now seeing they have three several joints, they are fitted for
all kinds of things; for when we bow our fingers we use them as though they had
no bones at all, and when we stretch them out, as though they were all but one
entire bone; and the several inflections of the joints serve for all kind of
figures: and then he shows the necessity of the flesh within the fingers, and
on either side of them, and upon them; and so with wonderful accuracy handles
the magnitude, number, figure of the bones, and nature of the joints of the
fingers, and then the tendons and muscles belonging to the several fingers,
which after he has discoursed on through his first Book, he concludes it with
the manifest inconveniency which would follow in the hand, were not every thing
in it in that exact magnitude, position, and figure in which it is. With the
same exactness he goes through all the parts of the body, handling in the
second Book all that belongs to the arm, in the third the legs, in the fourth
and fifth the Organs of nutrition, in the sixth and seventh the lungs, in the
eighth and ninth the Head, in the tenth the peculiar and admirable fabric of
the eyes, in the eleventh the other parts of the face, in the twelfth the parts
of the back, and so in the thirteenth, in the fourteenth and fifteenth the
genitals, in the sixteenth the arteryes, veins, and nerves, and in the last the
peculiar disposition and figure of all these parts, and the usefulness of the
whole design: Which is as great as can be in any work whatsoever, which is for
us to take notice of the admirable wisdom of God in contriving the several
parts of the body of man: So that, that whole book contains in it a most full
and pregnant demonstration of a Deity, which every man carries about with him
in the structure of his body, on which account men need not go out of
themselves to find proof of a Deity, whether they consider their minds or their
bodies, of which it may be more truly said, then Heraclitus of old did of his
Stove, Etiam hic Dii sunt. So that of all persons, I should A^^sto^. de part.
A^im. l. 4.
most wonder at those whose employment particularly leads them to the
understanding the parts and nature of man's body, if the proverb be not a great
injury to them, since they have fuller insight into this demonstration of a
Deity in the Fabric of man's body, then many others who converse only with some
jejune and sapless writings. And certainly, whatever is imagined to the
contrary by men of weak understandings, the best way to cure the world of
Atheism is true Philosophy, or a search into the natures of things; which the
more deep and profound it is, the more impossible will it be found to explicate
all the phenomenon of nature by mere matter and Motion. It was wisely observed
of a great person and Philosopher, that a narrow and slight inspection into
nature, inclined men of weak heads to Atheism; but a more through -insight into
the causes of things, made them more evidently see the necessary dependence of
things on the great and wise Creator of them. A little knowledge of Philosophy
is apt to make men's heads dizzy, and then in danger of falling into the gulf of
Atheism; but a more careful and diligent view of it, brings them into sobriety
and their right wits again. Such a slight inspection had the followers of
Epicurus into the nature of things; for when they found how in the present
state of the world the various motion and configuration of the particles of
matter would handsomely salve many appearances of nature, they drunk with the
success, reel presently into an Infinite space, and there imagine they behold
infinite worlds made of the concretion of Atoms, and ever since their eyes have
been so dusted with these little Atoms, that they could see nothing else in the
world but them. Which how gross and unreasonable it is, will appear, from our
present subject; for who but Lucretius or Epicurus could ever think that our
nostrils were at first fashioned as they are merely by the violent impulse of
the air within, which would force its self a passage out? But how came the air
into the body before it was forced out? did it first break open the lips, make
all that round cavity in the mouth, for a passage through the aspera arteria?
but if when it was in, it would come out again, was not the mouth wide enough
to let it go? or did the first man shut his mouth on purpose to find another
vent for the air? if so, how chance the force of the air did not carry away the
epiglottis? or if it got safely up to the nose, how came it not to force a
passage out about the eyes rather then to go down so low first? But if we
believe these rare contrivers of man's body, all the inward vessels of the body
were made by the course of water, as channels are; but how is it possible, to
imagine that the Oesophagus and the stomach should be so curiously contrived by
the mere force of water? and that all the Intestines should be made only as
channels to let it out again when it was once in? but how comes then such a
kind of reciprocation and Peristactick motion in those vessels? how come the
several coats of them to be so firm? if it had been only a forced passage, it
would have been direct and through the substance of the parts, as we find it
to be in all forced passages in the body of the earth. Besides, if the water
received into the stomach forced the passage through the guts, how comes it not
to run in the channel it had made for its self? or did it not like that passage
when other things came into it, and therefore found out a more secret one into
the bladder? but if that were made by the water, how came it to be so full of
membranes, and so subject to dilatation? Thus ridiculous will men make
themselves, rather then show themselves men in owning and adoring that
infinitely wise and powerful God, who orders all things in the world according
to the counsel of his Will. What can be more plain and evident then the
peculiar usefulness of the several parts of man's body is? What other intent can
be imagined that man is formed with a mouth, but only for taking in of
nourishment, and for receiving and letting forth of air? or that an infant is
so ready to open his mouth, but that there are breasts and milk for him to suck
in order to his nourishment? Why should the Oesophagus be so hollow and the
stomach so wide, but that one was provided for the better conveyance of the
meat down, and the other for the fermentation of it? whence come all the other
vessels to be so conveniently placed, were it not for the distribution of
nourishment into the several parts, or for conveying away the excrements of it?
Can any one think that the several muscles and tendons should be placed in the
more solid parts for any other end then for the better motion of them? or that
the nerves should be derived from the brain into the several parts of the body
for any other design then to be the instruments of sense and motion? or that
the continual motion of the heart should be for any other purpose, then for
receiving and distribution of the blood through the arteries into the parts of
the body? or that the eye with all its curious fabric should be only
accidentally employed in seeing? These things are so plain, that however the
Epicureans may more easily lose themselves and deceive others in explaining the
appearances of nature in some inanimate beings, yet when they come with their
blind concourse of Atoms to give an account of the parts of animals, they
miserably befool themselves and expose themselves only to contempt and pity.
It were easy to multiply examples in this kind, but I shall only mention one
thing more, which is, if all the parts of man's body have no higher original
then the concourse of Atoms in the first man and woman, by what were the
umbilical vessels formed, whereby the Child in the womb receives its
nourishment? by what atoms was the passage of the succus nutritious framed from
the mother to the child? how come those vessels to close up so naturally upon
the birth of the child, and it to seek its nourishment in quite another way?
Will the particles of matter which by their concretion formed the first pair,
salve this too? Thus still we see how impossible it is (to go no further then
our selves) to give any tolerable account of things without an infinite power
and Being which produced all these things, and has left so plain an
inscription of himself upon the works of nature, that none but those who shut
their eyes can abstain from seeing it.

I come now to the third evidence of a Deity, which is, that Sect. 17. 3.
there are some beings in the world which cannot depend upon matter or motion,
i. e. that there are some spiritual and immaterial substances or Beings (for if
the thing be acknowledged, it is unbecoming a man to contend about words) the
consequence of this for the proving a Deity, neither has been nor I suppose
will be denied by such who question an infinite Being, the same principles
leading to the denying and the proof of both, and immaterial Beings being the
strongest proof that there is something above matter in the world. If there be
then such things in the world which matter and motion cannot be the causes of,
then there are certainly spiritual and immaterial Beings, and that I shall make
appear both as to the minds of men, and to some extraordinary effects which are
produced in the world.

1. I begin with the nature of the soul of man. And herein I must confine my
self to those arguments which directly prove my present purpose, and on that
account must quit all those common arguments to prove the souls immortality
from the attributes of God; for all these do suppose the existence of a Deity
as already evident; neither can I rely with safety on the way which some have
taken to prove the immortality of the soul merely from the phoenomena of
sensation, which they endeavor to prove cannot be performed by mere matter and
motion; for granting all this, yet the utmost that can be proved by it is no
greater immort^lity in our souls then in the souls of Brutes; and in the sense
in which that is admitted, I suppose an Epicurean will not deny the soul of man
to be immortal as Demonax in Lucian said, when he was asked whether the soul
were immortal or no, it is (said he) but as all things else are; for those who
make the soul to be nothing but some more subtle and active particles of
matter, do not think that upon death they are annihilated, but that only they
are dispersed and dissipated, or in the Platonists phrase, may return to the
soul of the world. These ways I cannot think to be sufficient probations of
such a spiritual and immaterial Being in man which we now enquire for, much
less can I make use of so precarious and infirm an hypothesis as praeexistence,
which makes men apt to suspect the cogency of such reasons which tend to prove
the immortality of the soul, which are linked with a supposition, not only
inevident either to sense or reason, but likewise needless and impertinent. For
I know no one argument which does directly prove the immateriality of the soul
that does in the least infer any necessity of praeexistence, but on the same
accounts it will prove the souls eternity. Being therefore thus at liberty to
enquire into the nature of the soul considered in her self, our only way must
be to find out such peculiar properties in the soul of man, which cannot be
salved on supposition there were nothing else but matter and motion in the
world. Supposing then that all sensation in man does arise from corporeal
motion which is so strongly asserted by the modern Philosophers, and that the
highest conceptions which depend on sense can amount no higher then
imagination, which is evident; if it can then be proved that there is a
principle of action in man which proceeds in a different way of operation then
sensation does, and that there are such operations of the soul which are not
imaginations, it will be then clear that there is a principle in man higher
then matter and motion. Now although it be a task sufficiently difficult to
explain the manner of sensation its self in a mere mechanical way, supposing no
higher principle then mere matter, yet it will appear far more difficult, nay
impossible without a spiritual or immaterial Being to salve such appearances in
man which transcend the power of imagination; which will appear by these
following operations of the mind which every one who has it, may find within
himself.

1. Correcting the errors of imagination. For if all our perceptions were
nothing else but the images of corporeal things left in the brain, the
judgment of the mind must of necessity be according to the impressions which
are made upon the organs of sense. But now if our minds can and do form
apprehensions of things quite different from those which are conveyed by sense,
there must be a higher principle of knowledge in man then imagination is. For
which the common instance of the just magnitude of the Sun is very plain; If we
judge according to the image which is conveyed to the brain by our eyes, we can
never imagine the Sun to be bigger then he seems to us to be; nay though the
sight be advantaged by the help of Telescopes, it cannot receive such an image
or Idea of the Sun which answers to its just magnitude, viz that it is 160.
times bigger then the earth. From whence now comes this apprehension of the
bigness of the Sun above that proportion which can possibly come in at our
senses? If it be said, that by the observation of the lessening of objects
according to the proportion of distance, the mind may come to understand how
much bigger the Sun may be then he seems, I grant it; but withal enquire how
the imagination comes to have proportions and distances which are me^r
respects, and can have no corporeal phantasmes whereby to be represented to it;
so that by this very way of ratiocination it is evident, that there is some
principle in man beyond imagination. Again when the mind by ratiocination has
proceeded thus far and sindes the Sun to be so great, what Idea is there of
this magnitude in the mind? the mind cannot six its self on any thing but it
must have an Idea of it; from whence comes this Idea? not from corporeal
phantasmes; for none of them could ever convey the cue magnitude of the Sun to
the mind, and therefore the forming of this Idea must be a pure act of
Intellection which corrects the errors of imagination, and is a principle above
it. So in the sight of a stick, when under water, the representation of it by
the sense to imagination is as crooked, for corporeal motion carries things to
the eye without any judgment upon them; the eye conveyes the image to the
brain, and according to the rules of corporeal perception must presently take
every thing for true which is conveyed thither; now from what principle is it
that this error of our senses is correctea? So in many other things wherein our
imaginations are quite puzzled, and when we go according to them, it is
impossible to apprehend things as our reason tells us they are; thus as to the
Antipodes, our imaginations are wholly of the mind of the ancients, that the
Antipodes to us must needs be in danger of knocking their heads against the
Stars, and if they go upon any thing, it must be their heads, and that that
part of the Heavens which is in the other Hemisphere is below us; these are
pertinacious srrors of imagination while we adhere to that, and are only
corrigible by our reason which makes it evident to be otherwise. Besides, there
are many things our reason and understanding inform us that they may be, and
yet our imaginations can form no Idea of them; let an Epicurean Philosopher try
the power of his imagination in his Inane or Infinite empty space, and he will
soon find, that as strong as his Fancy is, it will soon tire and retreat as
not being able to course through so unimaginable a Space. So for eternal
duration our reason tells us the thing is possible, but when our imaginations
begin to fardle up some conceptions of it, they are presently tying both ends
together; which will make a strange Idea of eternity; the case is the same in
the infinite divisibility of quantity, which Epicurus was somewhat aware of
when he denied the thing. But how many Mathematical Problems are there which
will jade our imaginations presently, and yet our reason stands still and
assures us of the possibility of the things, as in two lines coming nearer
still to each other, and yet never meeting, and in many other things, which
most clearly evidence that there is a higher faculty in man which exceeds
matter and motion, when it is able thus to correct the faults and to supply the
defects of imagination.

2. Reflex acts of the mind upon its self argue a higher principle then
imagination. That there are such things are Sect. 18.
evident to any one who has any use of cogitation; and if any one doubt of it,
his very doubting argues he has reflex acts; for he could not doubt whether he
had or no, but by reflection upon himself. Now that reflex acts should be
caused through matter and motion, or through mere imagination, is
unconceivable. For we see no matter can act upon its self; indeed one part of
extended matter may act upon another, but not purely upon its self; the
extremities of the fingers can never feel themselves, though they may touch
each other; neither can imagination reflect on its self; for that proceeding
upon corporeal images, must have such a representation from the senses of what
it acts upon; now what image of its self can be conveyed to the imagination
through the external organs of sense? The eye may see through the motion of the
objects of sight pressing upon it; but how can it see that it sees? so the
imagination receives the images conveyed to the brain; but what shop has it to
make new ones in of its self, and so be guilty of the greatest Idolatry of
worshipping its own Image? But though the imagination cannot thus reflect, yet
we find such a principle within us that is very apt to retire into its self,
and recollect things which could never have been conserved so long in that shop
of shadows the imagination. For if imagination be nothing else but as a modern
Philosopher defines it, conception remaining, and a little and little decaying
from and after the act of sense, like the motion of water after a Hobbs Hu^
man. nature chapter 3. sect. 1.
stone is thrown into it, how is it possible that at so great a distance of
years, as we commonly find, the image of a thing may be retrieved with as much
facility and freshness as to circumstances, as if it were but new done? and
that account which he gives of remembrance is very weak and insufficient when
he tells us, that remembrance is nothing else but the missing of parts, which
every man expects should succeed after Sect. 7.
they have a conception of the whole. For according to this, it is impossible
for the mind to retrieve any object without mutilation of it; and so there
cannot possibly be a recollecting of all circumstances, when an object is once
passed, and the motion begins to decay. But all this while, we understand
nothing by what means this decaying motion should continue so long as our
memory can fetch things back, or by what means an object when once passed, can
be recovered again if memory be nothing else but decaying motion. Such
perplexities must needs arise, when men will undertake to salve the inward
operations of the soul by mere motion; but is it not evident that many times
when the mind is employed about other things, some phantasmes of things long
ago past will come and present themselves to the mind, with as much clearness
as if new done? whereas if memory were decaying motion, the longer past, the
more impossible would it be to recover any thing; but, do we not find that
many old men will better remember the circumstances of many things they did in
their Childhood then a year or two before? Besides we see what quickness and
vivacity there is in our intellectual faculties above corporeal motion, with
what facility the mind turns it self from one object to another, how suddenly
it rangeth the whole world, how it trips over mountains, crosses the ocean,
mounts to the skies and at last quarryes upon its self, and all in the
twinkling of an Intellectual eye? As quick as the eye of the body is, the mind
far exceeds it, and can withdraw the imagination from attending the organs of
sense; thus do men who have their minds much fixed, fix their eyes too; and yet
afterward can scarce tell themselves what they have looked on all that while.
Sometimes the mind sits and compares phantasmes together, and sports its self
in sorting them into several ranks and orders, and making matches between such
things which are sure to have no affinity with each other, which are thence
called entia rationis or the creatures of the mind. And can all these and many
other such operations which men are conscious to themselves of, be nothing else
but the motion of some phlegmatic matter, the reaction of the brain, and the
mere effects of imagination?

3. The profound speculations of the mind argue a power far above imagination
and corporeal motion. I wonder how Epicurus his soul, when if we believe him,
it was made up of Atoms, could ever imagine an Infinite Vacuity? Could mere
Atoms ever dispute whether they were Atoms or no? For I doubt not but Epicurus
was fain to argue much against himself, before he could persuade himself to so
stupendous a piece of folly? Were there nothing in man but mere corporeal
motion, whence came the dispute, whether the soul were corporeal or no? Can
Atoms frame Syllogismes in mood and figure? and mere matter argue pro and con,
whether it be matter or something else? What kind of aereal particles were
their souls compounded of, who first fancied themselves to be immaterial? What
strange agitations of matter were those which first made men think of an
eternal state? which thoughts have ever since so stuck upon these little
sphaerical bodies, that they could never yet disburden themselves of them:
Whence come such amazing fears, such dreadful apprehensions, such sinking
thoughts of their future condition in minds that would fain ease themselves by
believing that death would put a period both to soul and body? whence on the
other side come such encouraging hopes, such confident expectations, such
comfortable prepossessions of their future state in the souls of good men, when
their bodies are nearest to the grave? Seneca who was somewhat dubious
sometimes as to the future condition of the soul, yet could tell his dear
Lucilius with what pleasure he could think of it; and could elsewhere say of
the soul, E^ hoc habet argumentum Pres. ad Quaest. Nature.
divinitatis suae quod illum divina delectant, nec ut alienis interest sed ut
suis: the soul had that mark of Divinity in it, that it was most pleased with
Divine speculations, and conversed with them as with matters which nearly
concerned it. And when it has once viewed the dimensions of the heavens,
contemnit domicilii prioris angustias, it was ashamed of the cottage it dwelt
in; nay were it not for these speculations, non fuerat operae pr^tium nasci, it
had not been worth while for the soul to have been in the body; and as he goes
on, detrahe hoc inaestimabile bonum, non est vita tanti ut sudem, ut aestuem.
Could there be now so great an Epicurisme in contemplation, were the soul of
man of Epicurus his mould, a mere complexion of Atoms? would dull and heavy
matter ever have delighted to have searched so much into the causes of things,
to have gone over the world in its speculations, and found more sweetness in
knowledge, then the little Epicure the Be tastes in his choicest flowers?
Epicurus his own Philosophy is a demonstration against himself; if his soul had
not been of a purer nature then he fancied, he would never have made his study
of Philosophy a part of his Epicurisme? Had his soul been such Atoms, as he
fancied, when his brain had been well heated at his study, those more vivid and
spirituous particles, like the spirits of wine had been in danger of
evaporation, and leaving the more lumpish matter to complete his work. Of all
persons, I most admire that Philosophers who make so much use of their
understandings, should so ungratefully requite them, and serve them like old
horses, when they have made them do all the service they could, turn them into
the highwayes and let them dye in a ditch. But yet all Philosophers have not
been so unthankful; some have understood the worth of their souls and asserted
it, if they have not used too high, i. e. Platonical expressions of it, making
it a particle not of matter, but of the Divine nature its self, a little Deity
in a Cottage, that stays here a while and returns to that upper region from
whence it came. As Manilius speaks, An dubium est habitare Deum sub pectore
nostro,
In coelum que redire animas, caeloque venire? Manil. l 4.

And while the soul is here in its cage, it is continually fluttering up and
down, and delighting to look out now at this part, and then at another, to take
a view by degrees of the whole Universe; as the same Poet goes on Quid mirum
noscere mundum
Si possunt homines, quibus est and mundus in ip sis:
Exemplumque Dei quisque est in imagine parva?
The soul has nothing more delightful to it then knowledge, and no knowledge
so pleasing and satisfactory as of him whose image and superscription it bears,
who makes himself most known to such as enquire after him; Seque ipsum inculcat
and offert
Ut been cognosci possit.
I conclude this with that of Seneca in that excellent Preface to his natural
questions; O quam contempta res est homo nisi supra humana se erexerit! What a
pitiful thing is man, were it not that his soul was apt to soar above these
earthly things? And by this aptness to soar so high above these terrene
objects, and to converse with so much freedom with spiritual Beings, as well
as abstracted notions, we may certainly infer that our rational souls are of a
far more noble and refined nature, then that more feculent principle of
imagination which always converses in faece Romuli, and can go no further then
our senses carry it. And thus I have made good the first proof, that there is
something above matter and motion in the world, which is from that immaterial
Being which is in man. Sect. 19. 2.


The next evidence which we have of a Being above matter and motion, is from
the extraordinary eff^cts which have been in nature. I speak not now merely of
such things which by their natures and effects are manifested to proceed from
some Beings which bear ill will to mankind, multitudes of which are related by
men Philosophical and inquisitive, with such enumerations of circumstances, and
particular evidences, that they are not mere impostures, that one may on the
same grounds question any matter of fact which himself did not see, as such
relations which are delivered by persons without interest or design, and such
as were able to judge of the truth of circumstances; such are both ancient and
modern Philosophers, Physicians, Statesmen and others. Neither shall I insist
on such prodigies which ofttimes presage revolutions in states, if we believe
Machiavel himself, who in a whole chapter designedly proves it; and professes
himself utterly Disput l. 1. cap. 56.
to seek for the causes of them, unless they may be attributed to some spi^its
and Intelligences in the air which give the world notice of such things to
come. But those things which I suppose have the most clear and undoubted
evidence of true and undoubted miracles, (the matters of fact being affirmed by
eyewitnesses who sealed the truth of them with their lives) are those recorded
in the Holy Scriptures; which there are only two ways to evade, either by
questioning the truth of the things, which I suppose in the precedent book we
have proved with as much rational evidence as any thing of that nature is
capable of, or else that the things therein recorded might be salved without a
Deity. For which only two ways have been excogitated by Atheistical spirits,
either attributing them to the power and influence of the Stars, the
foundations of which fond and absurd opinion have been taken away by those many
writers, who have rationally consuted the whole art of judicial Astrology; or
V. D. H. Mores Mystery of Godl. l. 7. chapter 14, 15, 16, 17.
else that they are done by the mere power of imagination, which is the way of
Avicenna and some other Arabic writers, which is so wild an effect of the
power of imagination, that nothing does so much demonstrate the irregular
motions of it, as such an opinion does; and is sufficiently derided and refuted
by Pomponatius himself. Now then it being an acknowledged principle in nature,
that every thing continues in the course it is in, till something more powerful
put it out, if then such things have been in the world, which have been real
alterations of the course of nature, as the Suns standing still in the time of
Joshua, then there must be something above matter and motion, and consequently
that there is a God.

CHAP. II. Of the Origin of the Universe.
The necessity of the belief of the creation of the world in order to the truth
of Religion. Of the several Hypotheses of the Philosophers who contradict
Moses: with a particular examination of them. The ancient tradition of the
world consonant to Moses: proved from the Ionick Philosophy of Thales, and the
Italick of Pythagoras. The Pythagorick Cabbala rather Egyptian then Mosaic.
Of the fluid matter which was the material principle of the universe. Of the
Hypothesis of the eternity of the world asserted by Ocellus Lucanus, and
Aristotle. The weakness of the foundations on which that opinion is built. Of
the manner of forming principles of Philosophy. The possibility of creation
proved. No arguing from the present state of the world against its beginning
showed from Maimonides. The Platonists arguments from the goodness of God for
the eternity of the world answered. Of the Stoical Hypothesis of the eternity
of matter; whether reconcilable with the text of Moses. Of the opinions of
Plato and Pythagoras concerning the praeexistence of matter to the formation of
the world. The contradiction of the eternity of matter to the nature and
attributes of God. Of the Atomical Hypothesis of the Origin of the Universe.
The World could not be produced by a casual concourse of Atoms proved from the
nature and motion of Epicurus his Atoms, and the Phenomenon of the Universe,
especially the production and nature of Animals. Of the Cartesian Hypothesis,
that it cannot salve the Origin of the Universe without a Deity giving motion
to matter.

THE foundations of religion being thus established in Sect. 1.
the Being of God and the immortality of the soul, we now come to erect our
super structure upon them, by asserting the undoubted truth* and certainty of
that account of the world which is given us in the writings of Moses. Which
beginning with the world its self leads us to a particular consideration of the
Origin of the Universe, the right understanding of which has very great
influence upon our belief of all that follows in the Word of God. For although
we should assert with Epicurus the Being of a Deity, if yet with him we add
that the world was made by a casual concourse of Atoms, all that part of
Religion which lies in obedience to the Will of God is unavoidably destroyed.
All that is left, is only a kind of Veneration of a B^ing more excellent then
our own, which reaches not to the government of men's lives, and so will have
no force at all upon the generality of the world, who are only allured by hopes
or awed by fears, to that which of their choice they would be glad to be freed
from. Besides what expressions of gratitude can be left to God for his goodness
if he interpose not in the affairs of the world? what dependence can there be
on divine goodness, if it be not at all manifested in the world? what
apprehensions can we have of Gods infinite Wisdom and Power, if neither of them
are discernable in the Being of the world? And as the opinion of Epicurus
destroys Religion, so does that of Aristotle which attributes eternity to the
Universe, and a necessary emanation of it from the first cause, as light comes
from the Sun; for if so, as Maimonides well observes, the whole Religion of
Moses is overthrown, all his miracles are but M^e N^-^^^h. p. 2. cap. 25.
impostures, all the hopes which are grounded on the Promises of God, are vain
and fruitless. For if the world did of necessity exist, then God is no free
agent; and if so, then all instituted Religion is to no purpose; nor can there
be any expectation of reward, or fear of punishment from him who has nothing
else to do in the world, but to set the great wheel of the Heavens going. So
much is it our concernment to enquire into the true Original of the world; and
on what evidence of reason those opinions are built, which are so contrary to
that account given of it in the very entrance of the B^oks of Moses. Wherein we
read the true Origin of the world to have been by a production of it by the
omnipotent Will and Word of God. This being then the plain assertion of Moses
we come to compare it in point of reason, with all those several Hypotheses
which are repugnant to it, which have been embraced in several ages by the
Philosophers of greatest esteem in the world. Which may be reduced to these
four: 1. Such as suppose the world to have existed as it is from all eternity.
2. Such as attribute the formation of the world as it is to God: but withal
assert the praeexistence and eternity of matter. 3. Such as deny any eternity
to the world, but assert the Origin of it to have been by a casual concourse
of Atoms. 4. Such as endeav^ur to explain the Origin of the Universe and all
appearances of nature, merely by the Mechanical Laws of the motion of matter.

I begin with those who asserted the eternity of the world as Sect. 2.
it is among whom Aristotle has born the greatest name; who seems to have
arrogated this opinion to himself; for when he enquires into the judgment of
the Philosophers, who had writ-before him, he says of them (...), Aristot. de
Caelo l. 1. cap. 10.
all the Philosophers asserted that the world was made, though some one way,
some another. And were this true which Aristotle-saith, it would be the
strongest prejudice against his opinion; for if the world had been eternal, how
should it come to pass, that the eldest Philosophers should so readily and
unanimously embrace that opinion which asserted the production of the world?
Was it not a strong presumption of the Novity of the Universe, that all Nations
to whom the Philosophers resorted, had memorials left among them of the first
Origin of things? And from hence it is observable, that when the humor of
Philosophizing began to take the Greeks (about the XL. Olympiad when we may
suppose Thales to flourish) the beginning of the world was no matter of
dispute, but taking that for granted, the enquiry was out of what material
principle the Universe was formed; of which Thales thus delivers his opinion in
Tully; aquam De Na^^, Dcor. l. 1. cap. 25.
dixit esse initium rerum, Deum autem eam mentem quae ex aqua cuncta fingeret;
wherein he plainly distinguishes the efficient from the material cause of the
world. The prime efficient was God, the material principle water. It is a
matter of some enquiry, whether the first principles of Philosophy among the
Greeks, were not rather some traditional things conveyed to them from others,
then any certain Theoryes which they had formed from their own experiments and
observations. The former is to me far the more probable on many accounts, but
chiefly on this, that the first principles of the two founders of the chief
sects of Philosophers, viz. the Ionick, and Italick, (for all the other were
but the various issues of these two) did come so near to that which we have the
greatest reason to believe to have been the most certain account of the Origin
of the world. For this opinion of Thales seems to have been part of that
universal tradition which was continued in the world concerning the first
principles of things: For I do not see any reason to aver with so much
confidence, as some do, that those Philosophers who spoke any thing consonantly
to Moses, must presently converse with the Jews, transcribe their opinions out
of the Scriptures, or have it conveyed to them in some secret Cabbala of the
Creation, as it is affirmed of Pythagoras and Plato, and may be with no less
reason of Thales. But this I suppose may be made evident to any considerative
person, that those Philosophers of Greece who conversed most abroad in the
world, did speak far more agreeably to the true account of things, then such
who only endeavored by their own wits to improve or correct those principles
which were delivered by the other Philosophers. Which I impute not so much to
their converse with the Mosaic writings, as to that universal tradition of the
first ages of the world, which was preserved far better among the Phaenicians,
Egyptians, Chaldeans, and others then among the Greeks. For which we have this
evident reason, that Greece was far more barbarous and rude in its elder times
then those other Nations were, which had means of preserving some monuments and
general reports of the first ages of the world when the Graecians wanted them.
And therefore we find that Greece from its beginning shined with a borrowed
light; and saw not by an extromission of rays of knowledge from its self, but
by an intromission of those representations of things which were received from
other Nations. Those who formed Greece first into civil societies, and licked
it into the shape of well ordered Commonwealths, were such who had been traders
for knowledge into sorraign parts. To which purpose Diodorus Siculus informs us
that Lycurgus and Solon, as well as the Poets, Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampus and
Homer, Biblioth. l. 1 V. Eusebius. P^aep. ^vang. l. 10
and the Philosophers, afterward Pythagoras, Plato and others, had gained most
of their knowledge and wisdom out of Egypt; nay, he says in general, (...).
All those who were renowned among the Greeks for wisdom and learning, did in
ancient time resort to Egypt, to be acquainted with their Laws and knowledge.
On this account therefore we are not to seek for the ancient and genuine
tradition of the world from the native and homebred Greeks, such as Aristotle
and Epicurus, but from those who took the pains themselves to search into those
records which were preserved among the elder and more knowing Nations; And
although the Nations they resorted to, sought to advance their own reputation
in the histories of their ancient times, of which we have already given a large
account, yet they were more faithful in the account which they gave of the
Origin of the whole Universe. For it appears from Diogenes Laertius that the
Egyptians did constantly believe, that the world had a beginning, and was
corruptible; that it was sphaerical and the Stars were of the nature of fire;
that the soul was of an immortal Diog. Lacrt. proaem. p. 7.
nature, and did pass up and down the world. Which Lacrtius cites from
Hecataeus and Ariscagoras. So that we need not make Pythagoras acquainted with
such a Cabbala of the Creation, which in all probability neither the Jews nor
he ever dreamt of; we find a fair account may be given of most of the opinions
of Pythagoras, and whence he derived them, without forcing the words of Moses
into such a sense, which the plainness and perspicuity of the writings of Moses
argue them not capable to admit of. But I will not deny from those concurrent
testimonies of Hermippus and Aristobulus, V. Selde^. de jure not. and geat.
apud Ebraeos. l. 1. c. 2.
besides Origin, Porphyrie, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others, that Pythagoras
might have had opportunity of conversing with the Jews, (which it is most
probable was in Chaldea after the Captivity, at which time Pythagoras was there
among them) but that Pythagoras should converse with the successors of Elisha
on mount Carmel, as V^ssius thinks, or that Moschus the Sidonian Philosopher in
Iamblichus should be Moses, as others fancy, or that praeexistence Voss. de
Sectis Philosoph. c. 6. sect. 5.
of souls should be part of the Mosaic Cabbala, or that the Pythagorick
numbers, as they are explained by Nicomachus Gerasenus in Photius, should be
adaequate to the days of the Creation Cabbalistically understood, are fancyes
too extravagant and Pythagorean to be easily embraced. If Pythagoras was
circumcised, it was more for Love of the Egyptians then the Jews, among whom
he spent his twenty two years; if praeexistence of souls be a rational
hypothesis, we may thank the Egyptians for it, and not Moses; if numbers be so
expressive of the work of Creation, we are beholding to the Arithmetical
Hieroglyphics of Egypt for them. But although Pythagoras might not be
acquainted with such a Philosophic V. Math^m. Hieroglyph. Kircheri. To. 3
Occlip. Egypt.
Cabbala of the Creation, which none of the Jews as far as we can find
understood, till one more versed in Plato and Pythagoras then in the learning
of his own Nation, viz. Philo of Alexandria, began first to exercise his wit on
the text of Moses with Platonic notions; yet I shall easily grant that
Pythagoras by means of his great industry and converse with the learned
Nations, might attain to far greater knowledge of many mysterious things in
natural Philosophy, and as to the Origin of the Universe, then any of the
Homebred Philosophers of Grecce, or it may be then any one of the Nations he
resorted to, because he had the advantage of comparing the several accounts of
them together, and extracting out that which he judged the best of them. And
hence Plutarch tells us, that the first principles of the world according to
Pythagoras, were these two, the one was (...) an active and forming Plutarch.
de plac. Philos. l. 1. cap. 3.
principle, and that was God whom he called Mind (as Anaxagoras likewise did)
the other was (...) passive and material, which is, the visible world.

And thus we see these two renowned founders of the Ionick Sect. 3.
and Italick societies of Philosophers, both giving their concurrent Testimony
with Moses as to the true Origin of the world, and not at all differing from
each other; for thus Thales speaks in Diogenes Laertius, (...). V. Thalet.
(...). God is the eldest Being, because unbegotten, the world the most
beautiful, because it is Gods workmanship. To which those expressions of Plato
in his Timaeus come very near (whose Philosophy was for substance the same with
the Pythagorean) when he had before Plato i^ Timaeo. p. 1047. cd. Ficini.
ascribed the production of the world to the goodness of God, which goodness of
his did incline him to make all other things like himself. (...). For the most
excellent Being cannot but produce the most excellent effects. And as to the
material principle out of which the world was made, there appears no great
difference between the (...) of Thales, and the (...) of Plato and Pythagoras;
for Plato, when he tells us what a kind of thing the material principle was, he
describes it thus, (...), which as Chalcidius Chalcid. Timaeus. p. 24. ed.
Meurs.
renders it, is motis importuno fluctuans neque unquam quiescens; it was a
visible corporeal thing ((...)) which was never at rest, but in continual
disorderly motion and agitation: which is a full explication, I suppose, of
what Thales meant by his water, which is the same with that (...) or mixture of
mud and water together, which others speak of as the Principle of the Universe;
as Orphius in Athenagoras, and the Scholiast on Apollonius cited by Grotius and
Aanot. in l. 1. deVerit. Christ. Reli.
others. Which we have the more reason to believe, because the successors of
Thales, Anaximander and Anaxagoras, express themselves to that purpose:
Anaximander called the Sea (...), the remainder of the Primitive moisture: and
Anaxagoras says before the (...) or God set things in their order, (...), all
things were at first confused together: which must needs make that which
Chalcidius tells us Numenius attributes to Pythagoras which his translator
calls Sylvam fludiam, or fluid matter. Chalcid. in Tim. p. 394.
Which is the same likewise with the Phaenicians (...), which as appears by
Eusebius, some call (...), others (...), some mud, or slime, others the
putrefaction of watery Eus^b. Praep. Evang. l. 1. cap. 10.
mixtures, which they say was (...), the seedplot of the Creation and the
Generation of things. Thus we see how Thales with the Phaenicians from whom he
was derived, as Laertius tells us and Pythagoras, with the Egyptians and
others concur with Moses, not only in the production of the world, but in the
manner of it, wherein is expressed a fluid matter which was the material
principle out of which the world was formed, when we are told that the earth
was without form and void, and the Spirit of God moved upon Genesis 1. 2.
the face of the waters, i. e. that all at first was but fluid matter; for P.
Fagius from R. Kimchi renders (...) by (...), which fluid matter was agitated
and moved by the Divine spirit, or the vis plastica mundi, so Chrysostom calls
it (...): and so Drusirts and P. Fagius explain (...) by motion or agitation.
And herein we have likewise the consent of those for^named excellent
Philosophers, who attribute the Origin of particular things in the world to
this agitation or motion of the fluid matter. For Chalcidius speaking not only
of Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, but of Anaximenes, Heraclitus and others, says
thus of them, omnesigitur hi -- in motu positam rerum (...). in T^m. p. 378.
originem censuerunt: they all agreed in this, that the Origin of things was
to be ascribed to the motion of the parts of matter. So the Phaenicians called
this motion of the particles of matter (...), a dark and blustering wind. And
how suitable this explication of the Origin of things from the motion of fluid
matter is to the history of nature, appears by those many experiments by which
mixed bodies are showed to spring from no other material principle then the
particles of fluid matter. Of which you may read a discourle of that ingenious
and learned Gentleman Mr. Boil in his Skeptical Chemist. Only thus much may
here suffice to have made it Skeptical Chemist. p. 115. etc.
appear, that all those Philosophers who were most inquisitive after the
ancient and genuine tradition of the world concerning the first beginning of
things, did not only concur with Moses in the main thing, that its beginning
was from God, but in the particular circumstances of it, as to the fluid matter
and the motion thereof. Concerning which I may yet add; if it be material, the
Testimony of Homer in Plutarch, (...). Iliad. x.
And in Chalcidius: Inque eadem sententia Homerus esse invenitur, cum Oceanum
and Thetim dicat parents esse geniturae; Odyss. x. Chalcid. p. 378.
cumque jusjurandum Deorum constituat aquam, quam quidem ipse appellat Stygem,
antiquitati tribuens reverentiam, and jure V. Meurs. in Chal. p. 37.
jaranao nihil constituens reverentius. To which purpose likewise Aristotle
speaks in his Metaphysics, that the reason Metaphys. l. 1. c. 3.
why Styx was made the oath of the Gods, was because water was supposed to be
the material principle of Things, which he says was (...), a most ancient
tradition concerning the Origin of the Universe. And tells us before, that
some were of opinion (...), that the most ancient and remote persons and first
writers of Theology, held this opinion of water being the first material
principle of things.

Having thus made it appear what a consent there was between the ancient
tradition of the world, and the writings of Sect. 4.
Moses concerning the Origin of the world; I now come to consider upon what
pretense of reason this tradition came to be contradicted, and the eternity of
the world asserted. For which we are to consider that the difference of the
former Philosophers of the Ionick sect, after the time of Thales, as to the
material principle of the world, one substituting air, another fire instead of
water, rendered the tradition its self suspected among other Philosophers,
especially when the humor of innovating in Philosophy was got among them, and
they thought they did nothing unless they contradicted their Masters; thence
came that multiplicity of Sects presently among them, and that Philosophy which
at first went much on the original tradition of the world, was turned into
disputes and altercations, which helped as much to the finding out of Truth, as
the fighting of two Cocks on a dunghill does the finding out the Jewel that lies
there. For which, scraping and searching into the natures of things had been
far more proper, then contentions and wranglings with each other; but by means
of this litigious humor Philosophy from being a design grew to be a mere Art,
and he was accounted the best Philosopher, not that searched further into the
bowels of nature, but that dressed and tricked up the notions he had in the
best posture of defense against all who came to oppose him. From hence those
opinions were most plausible, not which were most true, but which were most
defensible, and which like Descartes his second element, had all the Angles
cut off, on which their adversaries might have an advantage of justling upon
them, and then their opinions were accounted most pure when they were so
sphaerical, as to pass up and down without interruption. From such a degeneracy
of Philosophy as this we have now mentioned, arose the opinion of the eternity
of the world; For the certain tradition of the world being now lost in a crowd
of Philosophers, whose main aim was to set up for themselves, and not to trade
with the common bank, so that there could be no certain and convictive evidence
given to a shuffling Philosopher that things were ever otherwise then they are,
they found it most defensible to assert that the world never had a beginning
nor would have an end, but always did and would continue in the State they
were in. This opinion, though Aristotle seems to make all before him to be of
another mind, yet was hatched as far as we can find at first, under Pythagoras
his successors by Ocellus Lu^anus, as appears by his book still extant (...) of
the nature of the Universe; to whom Aristotle has not been a little beholding,
as Ludov. Nogarola has in part manifested in his notes on Ocellus, although
Aristotle had not the ingenuity of Pliny, agnoscere per quos profecerit. From
Aristotle this opinion, together with his name, spread its self much farther,
and became the opinion most in vogue among the Heathen Philosophers, especially
after the rise of Christianity; for then not only the Peripateticks, but the
modern Platonists, Plotinus, Apuleius, Taurus, Iamblichus, Alcinous, Proclus
and others were all engaged in the defense of the eternity of the world,
thinking thereby the better to overthrow Christianity. Hence came the hot and
eager contests between Proclus, Simplicius, and Philoponus, who undertook to
answer Proclus his eighteen arguments for the eternity of the world, and to
charge Aristotle with self-contradiction in reference to it. But nothing were
they more troubled about then to reconcile the Timaeus of Plato with the
eternity of the world, which they made to be a mere Hypothesis and a kind of
Diagramme to salve providence withal; although the plain words of Pl^to not
only there but elsewhere do express, as far as we can judge by his way of
writing, his real judgment to have been for the production of the world by
God. For which purpose we have this observable Testimony in his Sophista, where
he Platon. Sophist. p. 185. ed. Fic.
divides all manner of productions of things into divine and humane, and
opposes the opinion that conceived all things to be produced by an eternal
power, to the opinion of the vulgar which says he, was (...), that all things
were produced by a blind force of nature without any reason or counsel, to
which he opposes the other opinion, that they are made (...), by a divine
power with infinite reason and wisdom; and when Theaetetus expresses himself
in an Academical way as to either of these opinions, the hospes Eleatensis who
there acts the part of the Philosopher, tells him, if he thought he were
inclinable to the other opinion, (...). He would undertake to make him confess
the contrary by the evidence of reason which he would bring. And we shall see
what great reason there is for this opinion, when we consider what weak and
infirm foundations the contrary is built upon. For all the arguments which
either Ocellus, or Aristotle, or the modern Platonists make use of, are built
on these following suppositions which are all false. 1. That it is
unconceivable that things should ever have been in any other state then they
are. 2. That there is no other way of production but by Generation. 3. That God
is no free agent, but produces the world by necessity of nature.

1. That it is unconceivable that things should ever have been any otherwise
then they are. The reason of which supposition Sect. 5.
was this, that the general conclusions of reason which they proceed upon in
Philosophy, were taken up from the observation of things as they are at present
in the world. Which is evident from the ground of Aristotle's condemning the
opinion of Empedocles who asserted the production of the world, and yet the
incorruptibility of it. (...), which he accounts impossible and gives this as
his reason. (...). Arist. de coelo l. 16. cap. 10.
For, says he, nothing else can be rationally asserted, but what we find to
be in all things or at least in most; now because there could nothing be found
in the world which was produced (i. e. by generation) and yet was
incorruptible, therefore he concludes it impossible it should be so with the
Universe. By which we evidently see what the grand principles of reason among
the Philosophers were: viz. such observations as they had made from the present
course of nature in the order of the Universe. From hence arose that strong
presumption among them, which has been so taken for granted, that it has been
looked on as a common notion of bumane nature, viz. exnihilo nihil fit, which
was the main argument used by them to V. Laert. in vi^. Democriti.
prove the eternity of the world: and by others to prove the praeexistence of
matter. So Ocellus argues against both the dissolution and production of the
world from this principle; if the world be dissolved, says he, it must either
be (...), either into that which is, or into that which is not; it cannot be
dissolved into that which is, because then the Universe cannot be destroyed;
for that which is, is either the Universe or a part of it: neither can it be
dissolved into that which is not, (...). For it is impossible that a thing
should be made out Ocellus Lucanus p. 16. cd. Commel.
of that which is not, or be dissolved into nothing. And Aristotle somewhere
tells us, that it is a principle which all the writers of natural Philosophy
are agreed in ((...)) which is (...), Physi^. l. 4.
that it is impossible for any thing to come out of nothing. But now when we
observe upon what grounds this Principle was took up by these Philosophers, we
have no reason to admit of it as an Universal standard of nature. For we find
by these Naturalists who thus asserted this principle, that when they go about
to prove it, it is only from the course of Generations in the world, or from
the works of art, both which suppose matter praeexistent, and from these short
collections they form this universal Maxim. And from hence when they
discoursed of the manner whereby God did De Not. l. 1.
produce the world, their imaginations ran presently upon that which the
Epicurean in Tully enquires after, quae molitio? quaeferramenta? qui vectes?
quae machinae? qui ministri tanti oper is fuerunt? they apprehend God only as
an Artificer that contrives the world first into a platform, and then uses
instruments to erect it, and consequently still suppose the matter ready for
him to work upon. So true is that of Balbus in Tully when he comes to discourse
of the nature of God; in quo nihil est difficilius quam a consuetudine De Not.
Deor. l. 2.
oculorum aciem mentis abducere; nothing is more difficult then to abstract our
minds from the observations of this visible world when we se^k to apprehend the
nature of the Deity. Thus we see upon what general grounds the Philosophers
proceeded, and from what they took them, and how insufficient any collections
from the present order of the Universe are to determine any thing concerning
its production by. For supposing a production of the world, several things must
of necessity be supposed in it, different from what the present order of the
world is; and it is an unreasonable thing to argue from a thing when it is in
its greatest perfection, to what must always have been in the same thing; for
by this means we must condemn many things for falsities which are apparently
true, and believe many others to be true which are apparently false. For which
Maimonides uses an excellent fim litude. Suppose, says he, one of exquisite
natural parts, whose mother More N^voch. p. 2. c. 17.
dies as soon as he is born, and his Father brings him up in an Island, where he
may have no society with mankind till he be grown up to years of understanding,
and that he never saw any female of either man or beast: Suppose now this
person to enquire of the first man he speaks with how men are born, and how
they come into the world. The other tells him, that every man is bred in the
womb of one of the same kind with our selves, thus and thus formed; and that
while we are in the womb we have a very little body, and there move, and are
nourished, and we grow up by little and little till we come to such a bigness,
and then we come forth into the world, and yet grow still till we come to such
a proportion as we are of. Here presently this young man stops him and
enquires, when we were thus little in the womb and did live, move, and grow,
did we not eat and drink, and breath at our mouth and nostrils as we do now?
did we not ease nature as now we do? If it be answered him, no; them he
presently is ready to deny it, and offers to bring demonstrations that it was
utterly impossible it should be so. For, says he, if either of us, cease
breathing but for an hour, our motion and life is gone; how is it then possible
for one of us though never so little, to live and move in the womb for so many
months, when it is so close and shut up and in the middle of the body? If one
of us, says he, should swallow a little bird, it would resently dye as soon as
it came into the stomach, how much more if it were in the belly? If we should
be but for few days without eating and drinking, we could not live; how can a
child then continue so many months without it? Again if one does eat and not
void the excrements of what he eats, he will be killed with it in few days; how
can it possibly be otherwise with a child? If it be replied that there is a
passage open in the belly at which the child receives his nourishment, he will
presently say that it is as impossible as the other; for if our bellyes were so
open, we should be quickly destroyed. And again if the child bath all its limbs
perfect and sound, how comes it not to open its eyes, use the feet, mouth and
hands as we do? And so concludes it impossible that man should ever be born
after this manner. Much after this way, says that excellent Author, do
Aristotle and others argue against the production of the world; for if the
world were produced, say they, it must have been thus and thus, and it is
impossible that it should have been so: why? because we see things are
otherwise now in the world. Which how infirm a way of arguing, it appears from
the consideration of the former similitude, in which the arguments are as
strong to prove the impossibility of that which we know to be true; as in the
case about which we dispute.

And this now leads us to the second false Hypothesis Sect. 6. 2.
which the opinion of the worlds eternity was founded on, which is, that there
is no other way of production but by Generation. Most of the arguments which
are used by Ocellus and Aristotle against the production of the world, run upon
this supposition, that it must be generated as we see things are in the world.
So Ocellus argues (...) De Nature. Univer. p. 8.
(...). Every thing that comes into being and is subject to dissolution, has
two observable mutations in it; the one is whereby it grows from less to
greater, and from worse to better, and this is called Generation, and the
height of this mutation, perfection; the other begins from better to worse, and
from bigger to less, and the conclusion of this is, corruption and dissolution.
But now, says he, if the world had a beginning, there would be such a mutation
in it, and it would have grown by degrees greater till it had come to its
perfection, and from thence it would sensibly decay till it came to
dissolution; but no body has ever observed such a mutation in the world,
neither is there any appearance of it; (...); but the world is semper idem, it
varyes not nor alters any thing from its self. For which, he particularly
instanceth in the courses, Symmetryes, figures, positions, intervals,
proportions of motion which are in the world, which things are all capable of
such a mutation, yet we see no such thing in the Universe, from whence he
infers that the Universe was always and will be as it is. Upon the same
principle does Aristotle dispute for the eternity of the world from the nature
of his materia prima, because if the first matter were generated it must be
generated of other matter and so in infinitum; and so he argues from the nature
of the Heavens that they are not capable of generation and corruption as other
bodies are. All which arguments signify no more then this, that the world was
not generated as Plants or Animals are; and who ever right in his wits asserted
that it was? But do any of these arguments prove it impossible that God having
infinite power should produce the Universe after another way then any of those
things are produced in, which we observe in the world? For we assert an
infinite and eternal Being which was the efficient cause of the world, who by
his omnipotcut power produced it out of nothing, and continues it in its Being;
which is well expressed by the author of the refutation of Aristotle in Justin
Martyrs works. We assert, says he, one God who is eternal Arislot. dogmat.
evers. p. 111.
himself, that has nothing else coaeval with himself, neither by way of
subjection or opposition, whose power is so great that nothing can hinder it,
by which power he produced the world. (...); which has no other cause, either
of its beginning, or of its being, or continuance, but only his Will. Who sully
answers in a Philosophical manner, the particular Allegations out of Aristotle,
concerning the eternity of the world: his design being, as he says, to show
(...). That the Greek Philosophers in their discourses concerning God and the
creation, were very far from being as good as their word to observe the Laws of
demonstration, but instead of them proceeded only upon opinions and
conjectures. And as to this particular of the possibility of another way of
production, besides that of generation, he proves it from Aristotle's own
opinion, from the equal necessity of the existence of matter, as of God. For,
says he, if God can produce any thing out of matter, which is as necessarily
existent as himself, he may produce something out of nothing. For, the same
repugnancy that there is in that which is absolutely nothing to be produced,
Justin. M^rtyr. op. p. 123.
the same must there be in that which is necessarily existent. How then can God
produce something out of matter, which necessarily exists, and not be able to
produce something out of nothing? For if matter have its original from its
self, how can it be subject to the power of another? And besides, if we
acknowledge God to have his being from himself, and on that account attribute
infinite power to him, by the same reason we must attribute it to matter. But
whatever has infinite power in its self, has a power upon something beyond
its self; but if God and matter have it both, they can never have power upon
each other, or without themselves. Which is a far greater absurdity then the
mere asserting a power to produce something out of nothing, which is employed in
the very notion of infinite power; for if it be confined to any matter, the
power is not infinite, because we cannot but conceive the bounds of it; for it
extends no further then matter does. So that a power of creation is employed in
the very notion of a Deity; and therefore it is a mere Sophism to argue because
the world could not be generated, therefore it could not be produced, unless
any other way of production but by generation, be proved impossible.

A third false hypothesis they proceeded on was this, that the Being of the
world was no effect of Gods will, but of the Sect. 7. 3.
necessity of nature. For although the Philosophers we now speak of, did-assert
a Deity, which in some sense might be called the cause of the world, yet they
withal asserted that the world was Coaeval with God himself, and so though
there might be some priority in order of causes between them, yet there was
none in order of time, or duration, as we see the light, though it flows from
the Sun, yet the Sun is never without light. This Aristotle he proves from the
necessity of motion and time: For, says he, what ever is moved, must be moved
by something else, and cons^quently there must be a running in Infinitum; but
this runs on a false supposition of the necessity of a continual Physical
motion in things, which we deny, since God by his infinite power may give
motion to that which had it not before; and so all that can be proved, is the
necessity of some first cause which we assert, but no necessity at all of his
continual acting, since he may cause motion when he please. And for Time
continually existing, it denotes nothing real in its self existing, but only
our manner of conception of the duration of things, as it is conceived to
belong to motion; and so can argue nothing as to the real existence of things
from all eternity. But the later Platonists look upon these as insufficient
ways of probation, and therefore argue from those attributes of God, which
they conceive most necessary and agreeable to Gods nature; and by which the
world was produced if at all: so that by the same arguments whereby we prove
that the world was made by God, they prove it to have been from all eternity.
It was well and truly said of Plato in his Timaeus, that the goodness of God
was the cause of the production of the world; from which speech the more modern
Platonists gather a necessity of the worlds eternity; for from hence they
infer, that since God was always good, he must always have an object to
exercise his goodness upon; as the Sun disperseth his light as soon as he is
himself. True, were God of the nature of the Sun, it would be so with him; or
were the Sun of the nature of God, it would not be so with it. But there is
this vast difference between them, that though God be essentially and
necessarily good, yet the communications of this goodness are the effect of his
Will, and not merely of his nature; For were not the acts of beneficence and
goodness in God the free acts of his will, man must be made as happy as he was
capable of being, not only upon his first existence in the world, but as long
as it should continue, by mere necessity of nature without any intervention of
the will or actions of men. And so there could be no such difference as that of
good and bad men in the world; for if the lettings forth of Gods goodness to
the world be so necessary, all men must become necessarily good, if Gods
goodness be so great as to be able to make men so; which I suppose will not be
questioned. By this then we see that the communications of Gods goodness to the
world are free, and depend upon the eternal counsels of his will, which is a
depth too great for us to approach, or look into; by what necessity then, if
God be a free Agent, and of Infinite wisdom, as well as goodness, must we
either assert the eternity of the world, or fear to deprive God of his
essential Goodness? Whereas to make the communications of Gods goodness
ad*extra necessary, and therefore to make the world from eternity, that he
might have an object to exercise his goodness on, is to take as much off from
the Infinite perfection and self sufficiency of the divine nature as it would
seem to flatter his goodness. For God cannot be himself without his goodness;
and if his goodness cannot be without some creature to show or display it upon,
God cannot be perfect nor happy without his creatures because these are
necessary issues of his goodness; and consequently we make the Being of the
creatures necessary to his Being God. Which is the highest derogation from the
absolute perfection of the Divine nature. We assert then so much goodness in
God, as none can be imagined greater; we assert, that it was the communication
of this Divine goodness which gave being to the world; but withal we
acknowledge God to be an Agent infinitely wise and free, who dispenses this
goodness of his in such a way and manner as is best pleasing to himself, though
ever agreeable to his Nature. As God is infinitely good in himself, so whatever
he does is suitable to this nature of his; but the particular determinations of
the acts of Gods beneficence belong to the Will of God, as he is a most free
and Independent Agent; so that goodness as it imports the necessary rectitude
of the Divine Nature, implies a perfection inseparable from the true Idea of
God; but as it is taken for the expressions of Divine bounty to somewhat
without, as the object of it, it is not employed in our conception of God, as to
his nature, but belongs to the free determinations of his Will. We cannot then,
neither ought we to determine any thing concerning the particular ways of Gods
bounty toward the whole universe, or any part of it, any further then God
himself has declared it to us. Now we see the world exists, we have cause to
adore that goodness of God, which not only gave a Being to the Universe, but
continually upholds it, and plentifully provides for all the Creatures which he
has made in it. Which the Heathen was so sensible of, that the Stoic in Tully
taking notice of the abundant provision which is made in the world, not only
for De Not. Dcor. l. z.
man's necessity, but for delight and ornament, cries out, ut interdum Pronaea
nostra Epicurea esse videatur: Gods providence does abundantly exceed man's
necessity. We see then from this discourse, how unsafe and unsatisfactory (that
I may not say bold and presumptuous) those arguments are, which are drawn from
a general consideration of the Divine nature and Goodness, without regard had
to the determinations of his Will, as to the existence of things in the world.
It cannot certainly then be an argument of any great force with any candid
enquirers after Truth and Reason, which has been lately pleaded in the behalf
of that Pythagorean hypothesis of the praeexistence of souls, viz. That if it
be good for men's souls to be at all, the sooner they are, the better; but we
are most certain that the Wisdom and Goodness of God will do that which is
best; and therefore if they can enjoy themselves before they come into these
terrestrial bodies (it being better for them to enjoy themselves then not) they
must be before they come into these bodies. Wherefore the praeexistence of
souls is a necessary result of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, who can no more
fail to do that which is best, then he can to understand it. I now seriously
enquire of such who love reason above Plato and Pythagoras, whether if the
eternity of the world were put into the argument instead of the Praeexistence
of souls, this argument would not hold as strongly for that, as it does for
Praeexistence; and if I am bound to believe Praeexistence on this ground, I be
not likewise bound to believe at least the souls of men eternal, if not the
Universe. But how reconcilable the eternity of the world is to the Pythagorick
Cabbala of the Creation, I am yet to understand. But if this Argument does not
at all infer the eternity of the world, as we have showed it does not, much
less does it praeexistence of souls.

We have thus far considered the first hypothesis, which is repugnant to Moses
concerning the Origin of the Universe, Sect. 8.
which is that which asserts the eternity of the world as it is; we come now to
the second, which attributes the Formation of the world as it is, to God as the
efficient cause, but attributes eternity to the matter out of which the world
was framed. I am not ignorant that some who would be taken for the Masters of
reason, are so far from conceiving this Hypothesis to be repugnant to the text
of Moses, that they V^lkelius de vera rel. l. 2. c. 4.
conceive it to be the genuine sense of it, viz. that there was a praeexistent
matter, out of which God formed the World. But I would willingly understand how
Moses would have expressed that matter its self was created, supposing it had
been his intention to have spoken it; for although the word (...) may not of
its self imply necessarily the production of things out of nothing, i. e. out
of no praeexistent matter; yet it is acknowledged by all that no word used by
the Jews is more proper to that then (...) is; and P. Fagius cites it from R.
Nachmani, that the Hebrew Language has no other word to signify such a
production out of nothing but (...). It is therefore a very weak manner of
arguing, that because (...) is sometimes used for no more then (...), therefore
the world was created out of praeexistent matter; all that can rationally be
inferd, is, that from the mere force and importance of that word the contrary
cannot be collected: but if other places of Scripture compared, and the
evidence of reason, do make it clear that there could be no praeexistent matter
which was uncreated, then it will necessarily follow that creation must be
taken in its proper sense. And in this sense it is evident, that not only Jews
and Christians, but even the Heathens themselves understood Moses, as is plain
by Galen, where he compares the opinion Galen de usa part. l. 11.
of Moses with that of Epicurus, and ingenuously confesses that of Moses,
which attributed the production of things to God, to be far more rational and
probable then that of Epicurus which assigned the Origin of things to a mere
casual concourse of Atoms: But withal adds, that he must dissent from both; and
sides with Moses as to the Origin of such things as depend on Generation, but
asserts the praeexistence of matter, and withal that Gods power could not
extendits self beyond the capacity of the matter which it wrought upon. Atque
id est, says he, in quo ratio nostra ac Platonis, tum aliorum qui apud Graecos
de rerum natura recte conscripserunt, a Mose dissidet. How true these words
are, will appear afterward. Chaleidius in his Commentaries on Plato's Timaeus,
where he speaks of the Origin of (...), which in him is still translated
sylva, and enquires into the different opinions of all Philosophers about it,
takes it for granted that according to Moses, this (...) had its production
from God. Hebraei sylvam generatam esse confitentur; quorum Chalcid. in T^m. p.
372.
sapientissimus Moses non humana facundia, sed divina, ut ferunt, inspiratione
vegetatus, in eo libro, qui de genitura mundi censetur, ab exordio sic est
profatus, juxta interpretationem LXX. prudentium; Initio Deus fecit coelum and
terram. Terra autem erat invisibilis and incompta. Ut vero ait Aquila: Caput
rerum condidit Deus coelum and terram; terra porro inanis erat and nihil; vel
nt Symachus; Ab exordio condidit Deus coelum and terram. Terra porro fuit
otiosum quid, confusumque, and inordinatum. Sed Origenes asseverat ita sibi ab
Hebraeis esse persuasum, quod in aliquantum sit a vera proprietate derivata
interpretatio. Fuisse enim in exemplari, Terra autem stupida quadam erat
admiratione. Omnia tamen haec in unum aiunt concurrere, ut and generata sit ^a
quae subjecta est universo corpori, sylva, sermonesque ipsos sic
interpretantur. Where we find by the Testimony of Chalcidius an universal
consent as to the production of the universal corporeal matter by God; for that
is all which is understood by his term of generata est. But this same author
afterward tells us, that by Heavens and Earth in the first verse of Genesis we
are not to understand the visible Heavens and earth: For, says he, the Heavens
which are called the firmament, were created after, and on the third day when
the waters were separated, the dry Land appeared, which was called earth. Qui
tumultuario contenti sunt intellectu, coelum hoc quod videmus, and terram qua
subvehimur, dici putant; porro qui altius indagant, negant, hoc coelum ab
initio factum, sed secundo die. And therefore by the heavens he understands
incorpoream naturam, and by earth (...) or the primigenial matter. And this,
says he, appears by the following words, The earth was invisible, and without
form; i. e. this corporeal matter, before it was brought into order by the
power and wisdom of God, remained a rude and indigested lump; and that which is
so, might well be called invisible, and without form. And therefore it is
called inanis and nihil, because of its capacity of receiving all forms, and
having none of its own. Symmachus calls it otiosa and indigesta; the former
because of its inability to produce any thing of its self: the latter because
it wanted a divine power to bring it into due order. That stupidity and
admiration which Origin attributes to it, he conceives to relate to the Majesty
of God, who was the orderer and contriver of it, siquidem opificis and auctoris
sui majestate capta stuperet. Thus we see that according to Moses, the first
matter of the world was produced by God, which is largely manifested by Origin
against the Marcionists, a fragment of which is extant in his Philocalia; and
by Tertullian against Hermogenes, and Origin. Philoc. cap. 24. Tertul. ad.
Hermog. per tot. Sect. 9.
others, who from the opinion of the praeexistence of matter are called
Materiarii.

Having thus cleared the sense of Moses, it is far more difficult to find out
the true opinions of the ancient Philosophers concerning the production or
eternity of corporeal matter, there having been so great dissensions, not only
about the thing its self, but about the opinions of some about it. For it is
plain by Plutarchs (...), as well as De Animae procreat. ^ Timaeo.
the discourses of the later Platonists, how eager some have been to interpret
Plato's Timaeus in favor of the eternity at least of matter, if not of the
world. But although Plato does assert therein a praeexistence of rude matter
before the formation of the world, yet I see no reason why he should be
otherwise understood then in the same sense that we believe a Chaos to have
gone before the bringing the world into the order it is now in. And in that
sense may those places in Plutarch be interpreted, (...), and so likewise those
following words, (...); for the meaning may be no more then that Plato
conceived that all the productions of the kinds of things which are in the the
world, was out of a Praeexistent Hyle, the one spiritual and intelligible, out
of which he supposed souls to be formed, the other sensible and corporeal, out
of which other Beings which were more gross and material, were produced. So
Chalcidius tells us, that both Pythagoras and Plato looked upon constitutionem
sylvae to be opus providentiae: which I suppose relates not only to the
bringing of matter into form, but to the production of Chalcid. in Tim. p. 377
matter its self. But after this he takes a great deal of pains to search out
the true meaning of Plato concerning the Origin T. 401.
of Hyle, and mentions the great diss^nsions among the Platonists about it, and
the obscurity of the Timaeus in it. To him therefore I refer the Reader: Who
likewise brings in Numenius largely discoursing concerning the opinion of
Pythagoras about it, who condemns all those, as not understanding Pythagoras,
who attribute to him the production of the indeterminate Hyle. These are his
words, Numenius ex Pythagorae magisterio Stoicorum hoc de initiis dogma
refellens, Page 393.
Pythagorae dogmate, cui concinere dicit dogma Platonicum, ait Pythagoram, Deum
quidem singularitatis nominasse Col. nomine appellasse, sylvam vero duitatis.
Quam duitatem indeterminatam quidem, minime genitam, limitatam vero, generatam
esse dicere. Hoc est, antequam exornaretur quidem, formamque and ordinem
nancisceretur, sine ortu and generatione; exornatam vero at que illustratam, a
Digestore Deo esse generatam. Atque it a quia generationis sit fortuna
posterior, inornatum illud minime generatum, aequaevum Deo, a quo est
ordinatum, intelligi debeat. Sed nonnullos Pythagoreos, vim sententiaenon recte
assccutos, putasse, dici etiam illam indeterminatam and immensam duitatem, ab
una singularitate institutam, recedente a natura sua singularitate, and in
duitatis habitum migrante. But however these Pythagoreans might be deceived,
who thought the Unity its self became the Duity; yet it is evident by Numenius,
that he looked on the undetermined and confused matter to have been coaeval
with God himself and not produced by him. And if Numenius be as much to be
credited in this as when he calls Plato Moses Atticus, then the Creation of
Universal matter can be no part of Pythagoras his Philosophic Cabala. But
whatever were the opinions of Plato and Pythagoras concerning the first origin
of matter, we are certain that the Stoics generally asserted the improduction
of matter, and make that to be as necessary a passive principle for the Being
of the world, as God is the active and efficient cause. So Diogenes Laertius
reports of the Stoical principles concerning the Origin of the Universe:
(...). V. Zenon.
They make two principles of the V. Lipsium in Physiol. Sto. l. 1. c. 4.
Universe, one active, and the other passive; the passive, an essence without
quality, called Hyle or confused matter; the active, the reason which acts in
the other, which is God. These two principles Seneca calls causa and materia;
^sse vero debet, says he, aliquid unde fiat; deinde a quo fiat, hoc causa est,
illud Epist. 65.
materia. Although Seneca seems to make a query of it elsewhere; quantum Deus
possit? materiam ipse sibi formet, an Presat. ad Not Quaest. Eclog. Physic.
data utatur? But Zeno is express in Stobaeus, (...). The first essence of all
is matter, which is eternal, and not capable of accession or diminution. To the
same purpose Chalcidius speaks, Stoici ortum sylvae rejiciunt, In Tim. p. 388.
quin potius iosam and Deum, duo totius rei sumunt initia; D^um ut opificem;
Sylvam ut quae operationi subjiciatur. Una quidem essentia praeditos facientem,
and quod fit ac patitur, id corpus esse; diversa vero virtute; quia faciat,
Deum; quia fiat, Sylvam ^sse.

Having now found out the certain assertors among the Sect. 10.
Heathen Philosophers of the eternity and improduction of matter as the passive
principle of things, we come to examine the reason of this Hypothesis, and
whether there were foundation enough for this matter to subsist upon from all
eternity? It might be sufficient prejudice against this opinion, that it was
built on the same infirm conclusions which that of the eternity of the whole
world was, viz. that Maxim which Lipsius attributes to Demoeritus, but was
embraced by all those Philosophers who denied production of matter, (...), that
nothing Physiol. Stoic. l. 2. c. 2.
could be produced out of nothing, nor could return into nothing; which as we
have already said, was only taken up from the established order of the
Universe, and the manner of production of material Beings. But this is not all
we have to charge this Hypothesis with; for,

1. It is repugnant to the natural notion of a Deity, which must imply in it an
omnipotent power; For otherwise we degrade him to the imbecility of finite
creatures, if he cannot produce any thing which does not imply a contradiction:
but what contradiction is there in this, that God should give a Being to that
which had none before? For that is all we understand by Creation, viz. the
producing of something out of nothing, or which had nothing out of which it was
prod^ced. Now what repugnancy is there to any free principle of reason, that a
power infinite should raise an Insect into Being without any passive principle
out of which it was caused; and if an Infinite power can do that, it may as
well produce the world out of nothing, else the power would not be Infinite;
for it would have its bounds set, that thus far it could go and no further. Now
if such a power in God implies no contradiction in its self, I say the
asserting the necessary existence of matter implies a contradiction to this
power. For, 1. A power to produce something out of nothing would be to no
purpose, if a p^ssive principle or praeexistent matter be necessary to the
production of any thing; and so that Being which has a power to produce
something out of nothing, has only a power to produce something out of
something, which is a plain contradiction. 2. If God has a power to produce
something out of nothing, either this power does extend to the production of
this matter, or not; if it does, then it depends on him; if not, his power is
not infinite, and so the same power is infinite and not infinite; which is
another contradiction. So that it is plainly repugnant to the notion of a God
to assert the necessary and eternal existence of matter.

2. If matter be unproduced, then necessary existence must belong to it as well
as to God; and if necessary existence belongs to matter, infinite power must
belong to it too; For what ever necessarily exists, is self-originated; what
ever is selforiginated, could not by any cause whatsoever be hindered from
Being; what cannot by any cause be hindered from Being, has Infinite power;
what has Infinite power, may produce any thing, and is God, and so matter
cannot be a mere passive principle, but must be an active, and so must be God
himself, or else there must be more Gods then one. To an argument something of
this nature Hermogenes in Tertullian replies, that matter would not lose the
name or nature of matter, because of its coeternity with God, neither could it
verse. Hermog. c. 4.
be God merely on that account, unless it had other things that were agreeable
to the nature of God as well as that. But I have already showed that necessary
existence implies other perfections going along with it: which is likewise thus
proved by Tertullian in answer to Hermogenes; the reason of the imperfections
which are to be seen in any creatures, is from hence, that they derive their
Beings from a higher cause, who creates them in what order he pleases; but that
which has its original from its self, must on that account want those
imperfections which other creatures in the world have; and therefore if
necessary existence be of the nature of matter, all other perfections must
belong to it too: and so there can be no superiority and inferiority between
God and matter, because on both sides there will be necessary existence.
Divinitas gradum non habet, utpote unica: and so Cap. 7.
the eternal existence of matter is repugnant to the unity of God.

3. It is repugnant to the Independency of God: for it makes God subject to
matter, and not matter to God. For if God cannot produce any thing without
praeexistent matter, the matter is necessary to his action, and so God must
depend on that which he can do nothing without; and so Gods using matter, is as
Tertullian speaks, ex necessitate mediocritatis suae, to help him in the
production of things. Nemo non subjicitur ci cujus eget ut possit uti, as he
goes on. Thus matter Cap. 8.
at last is crept above the Deity, that God can do nothing without its aid and
concurrence; and so as Tertullian sharply says, God is beholding to matter for
ever being known to the world; grande beneficium Deo contulit ut haberet hodie
per quam Deus cognosceretur, and omnipotens vocaretur, nisi quod jam non
omnipotens, si non and hoc potens ex nihilo omnia proferre. Thus we see how
irreconcilable this Hypothesis is with these Attributes of God.

4. It is repugnant to the immensity of God. For either God did exist separate
from this eternal matter, or was conjoined with it; if conjoined with it, then
both made but one Being, as Maximus, or Orig^n argues; if separate from it,
then there must be something between them, and so there will be Orig. Philoc.
c. 24.
three real improduced things. If it be answered that they are neither
conjoined nor separate, but God is in matter as in his proper place, as the
Stoics asserted, it is easily replied, that either then he is in a part of
matter, or the whole matter; if in a part only, he cannot be immense; if in the
whole as his adaequate place, how could he then ever frame the world? For
either he must then recede from that part in which he was, and contract himself
into a narrower compass that he might fashion that part of the world which he
was about, or else he must likewise frame part of himself with that part of the
world which he was then framing of, which consequence is unavoidable on the
Stoical Hypothesis of Gods being corporeal and confined to the world as his
proper place. And so much for this second Hypothesis concerning the Origin of
the Universe, which supposes the eternity of matter as coexisting with God.

I come now to that which makes most noise in the world, which is the Atomical
or Epicurean Hypothesis, but will appear Sect. 11.
to be as irrational as either of the foregoing, as far as it concerns the
giving an account of the Origin of the Universe. For otherwise supposing a
Deity which produced the world and put it into the order it is now in, and
supremely governs all things in the world, that many of the Phenomenon of the
Universe are far more intelligibly explained by matter and motion then by
substantial forms, and real qualities, few free and unprejudiced minds do now
scruple. But because these little particles of matter may give a tolerable
account of many appearances of nature, that therefore there should be nothing
else but matter and motion in the world, and that the Origin of the Universe
should be from no wiser principle then the casual concourse of these Atoms, is
one of the evidences of the proneness of men's minds to be intoxicated with
those opinions they are once in love with. When they are not content to allow
an Hypothesis its due place and subserviency to. God and providence, but think
these Atoms have no force at all in them unless they can extrude a Deity quite
out of the world. For it is most evident that it was not so much the truth as
the serviceableness of this Hypothesis, which has given it entertainment among
men of Atheistical spirits. Epicurus himself in his Epistle to Pythocles urges
that as a considerable circumstance in his opinion that he brought no God down
upon the stage to put things in order, (...), which his Paraphrast Lucretius
has thus rendered; Apud Diog. Laert. l. 10. Lucret. de Not. l. 5.
Nequaquam nobis divinitus esse paratam
Naturam rerum.
If this opinion then be true, the history of the Creation quite falls to the
ground, on which account we are obliged more particularly to consider the
reason of it. The Hypothesis then of Epicurus is, that before the world was
brought into that form and order it is now in, there was an infinite empty
space in which were an innumerable company of solid particles or Atoms of
different sizes and shapes, which by their weight were in continual motion, and
that by the various occursions of these all the bodies of the Universe were
framed into that order they now are in. Which is fully expressed by Dionysius
in Eusebius, and very agreeably to the sense of Epicurus in his Epistles to
Herodotus and Pythocles, and to what Plutarch Praep. Evang. l. 14 c. 22. p 421
ed. R. St.

De Placitis Phil. l. 1. c. 4 A^not. in Senec. de provid.


reports of the sense of Epicurus, though he names him not (if at least that
book be his which Muretus denies) the words of Dionysius are these concerning
the Epicureans, (...). So that according to this opinion, all the account we
have of the Origin of the world, is from this general Rendes-vous of Atoms in
this infinite space, in which after many encounters and facings about, they
fell into their several troops, and made up that ordered Battalia which now the
world is the Scheme of. It was not imprudently done of Epicurus to make the
worlds infinite, as well as his space and Atoms; for by the same reason that
his Atoms would make one world, they might make a thousand; and who would spare
for worlds, when he might make them so easily? Lucretius gives us in so exact
an account of the several courses the Atoms took up in disposing themselves
into bodies, as though he had been Muster-Master-General at that great
Rendes-vous; for thus he speaks of his Atoms, Quae quia multimodis, multis
mutata per omne
Ex Infinito vexantur percita plagis, De Nut. ret. l. 1.

Omne genus motus and caetus experiundo,
Tandem deveniunt in taleis disposituras,
Qualibus haec rebus consistit summa creata.
And more particularly afterward; Sed quia multa modis multis primordia rerum
L^b. 5.

Ex infinito jam tempore percita plagis,
Ponderibusque suis consuerunt concita ferri,
Omnimodisque coire, atque omnia pertentare,
Quaecunque inter se possunt congressa creare;
Ut non sit mirum, si in taleis disposituras
Deciderunt queque, and in taleis venere meatus,
Qualibus haec rerum ^enitur nunc summa novando.
Thus we see the substance of the Epicurean Hypothesis, that there were an
Infinite number of Atoms, which by their frequent occursions did at last meet
with those of the same nature with them, and these being conjoined together
made up those bodies which we see: so that all the account we are able to give
according to this Hypothesis of all the Phenomenon of the Universe, is from the
fortuitous concourse of the Atoms in the first forming of the world, and the
different contexture of them in bodies. And this was delivered by the ancient
Epicureans not with any doubt or hesitation, but with the greatest confidence
imaginable. So Tully observes of Velleius the Epicurean, beginning his
discourse, fidenter De Not. Deor. l. 1.
sane ut solent isti, nihil tam verens quam ne dubitare de aliqua re videretur;
tanquam modo ex Deorum concilio, and ex Epicuri intermundiis descendisset:
Confidence was the peculiar genius of that sect, which we shall see in them to
be accompanied with very little reason.

For those two things which make any principles in Philosophy Sect. 12.
to be rejected, this Atomical Hypothesis is unavoidably charged with: and
those are, If the principles be taken up without sufficient ground in reason
for them; and if they cannot give any sufficient account of the Phenomenon of
the world. I shall therefore make it appear, that this Hypothesis, as to the
Origin of the Universe, is first, merely precarious, and built on no
sufficient grounds of reason. Secondly, That it cannot give any satisfactory
account of the Origin of things.

1. That it is a precarious Hypothesis, and has no evidence of reason on which
it should be taken up; and that will be proved by two things. 1. It is such an
Hypothesis as the Epicureans themselves could have no certainty of according to
their own principles. 2. That the main principles of the Hypothesis its self
are repugnant to those Catholic Laws of nature which are observed in the
Universe.

1. The Epicureans according to their own principles could have no certainty of
the truth of this Hypothesis. And that 1. Because they could have no certain
evidence of its truth. 2. Because their way of proving it was insufficient.

1. That they could have no certain evidence of the truth of it, I prove from
those criteria, which Epicurus lays down as the only certain rules of judging
the truth of things by; and those were sense, Anticipation and Passion. Let
sense be never so infallible a ruie of judgment, yet it is impossible there
should be any evidence to sense of the truth of this Hypothesis; and let him
extend his (...) as long as he please, which was his great help for correcting
the errors of sense, viz. as it was in the Roman court when the case was not
clear, ampliandum est; So Epicurus would have the object represented every way
it could be before he past his judgment; yet this prudent caution would do him
no good for this Hypothesis, unless he were so wise as to stay till this world
were crumbled into Atoms again, that by that he might judge of the Origin of
it. There is but one way left to find out the truth of things inevident to
sense, (as by Epicurus his own confession all these Atoms are, which are now
the component particles of bodies; much more those which by their fortuitous
concourse gave Being to the world) and that is, if something evident to sense
does apparently prove it, which is his way of proving a Vacuity in nature from
motion; but though that be easily answered by principles different from those
of Epicurus, and more rational; yet that very way of probation fails him in his
present Hypothesis. For what is there evident to sense which proves a
fortuitous concourse of Atoms for the production of things? nay if we grant him
that the composition of bodies is nothing else but the contexture of these
insensible particles, yet this is far from being an evidence to sense, that
these particles without any wise and directing providence should make up such
bodies as we see in the world. And here when we speak of the evidence of sense,
we may well ask as the Stoic in Tully does, whether ever Epicurus found a
Poem made by the casual throwing of letters together; and if a concourse of
Atoms did produce the world, cur porticum, cur templum, cur domum, cur urbem
non potest? why did it never produce D: Not. Dear. l. 2.
a cloister, a temple, a house, a city, which are far easier things then the
world? I know Epicurus will soon reply, that things are otherwise in the world
now then when it was first produced; I grant it, and from thence prove, that
because no such thing ever happens in the world now, as a merely casual
concourse of Atoms to produce any thing, Epicurus could have no evidence from
sense at all to find out the truth of his Hypothesis by. And as little relief
can he find from his second Criterium, viz. Anticipation; for by his own
acknowledgement, all Anticipation depends on the senses, and men have it only
one of these four ways. 1. By V. Gassendum de Logica Epicuri. Op To. 1. c. 7.
Can. 7.
incursion, as the species of a man is preserved by the sight of him. 2. By
proportion, as we can enlarge or contract that species of a man either into a
Giant or Pygmy. 3. By similitude, as we may fancy the image of a City by
resemblance to one which we have seen. 4. By composition, whereby we may join
different images together, as of a horse and man to make a Centaure. Now though
it be very questionable how some of these ways belong to a Criterium of truth,
yet none of them reach our case; for there can be no incursion of insensible
particles as such upon our senses; we may indeed by proportion imagine the
parvitude of them; but what is this to the proving the truth of the Hypothesis?
Similitude can do no good, unless Epicurus had ever seen a world made so; the
only relief must be from composition, and that will prove the Origin of the
world by Atoms to be as true, as that there are Centaures in the world, which
we verily believe. These are the only Criteria by which Epicurus would judge of
the truth of natural things by (for the third, Passion relates wholly to things
Moral and not Physical) and now let any one judge, whether the Hypothesis of
the Origin of the Universe by Atoms can ever be proved true, either by the
judgment of sense, or by Anticipation.

The way they had to prove this Hypothesis was insufficient; Sect. 13. 2.
and that was by proving that the bodies of the world are compounded of such
insensible particles; Now, granting the thing, I deny the consequence; for what
though the composition of bodies be from the contexture of Atoms, does it
therefore follow; that these particles did casually produce these bodies? nay
does it at all follow, that because bodies upon their resolution do fall into
insensible particles of different size, figure and motion, therefore these
particles must be praeexistent to all bodies in the world? For it is plain,
that there is now an Universal lump of matter out of which these insensible
particles arise, and whether they return on the dissolution of bodies; and all
these various corpuscles may be of the same uniform substance only with the
alteration of size, shape and motion; but what then? does this prove, that
because particular bodies do now emerge out of the various configuration and
motion of insensible paerticles of that matter which exists in the world, that
therefore this whole matter was produced by the casual occursions of these
Atoms? It will ask more time and pains then is usually taken by the
Philosophers either ancient or modern, to prove that those things whatsoever
they are, whether elements or particles out of which bodies are supposed to be
compounded, do exist separately from such compounded bodies, and antecedently
to them. We find no Aristotelian elements pure in the world, nor any particles
of matter destitute of such a size, figure and motion as does make some body or
other. From whence then can we infer either the existence of Aristotle's materia
prima, without quiddity, quantity or quality, or the Epicurean Atoms without
such a contexture as make up some bodies in the world? Our profound Naturalist
Dr. Harvey, after his most accurate search into the natures and Generation of
things, delivers this as his experience and judgment concerning the commonly
reputed elements or principles of bodies. For speaking of the different
opinions D^ Generat. Anim. Exercit. 72.
of Empedocles and Hippocrates, and Democritus, and Epicurus, concerning the
composition of bodies, he adds, Ego vero neque in animalium productione, nec
omnino in ulla corporum similarium generatione, (sive ea partium animalium,
sive plantarum, lapidum, mineralium, etc. fuerit) vel congregationem ejusmodi,
vel miscibilia diversa in generation is opere unienda praeexistere, observare
unquam potui. And after explaining the way which he conceived most rational and
consonant to experience in the Generation of things, he concludes his discourse
with these words; Idemque in omni generatione furi crediderim; adeo ut corpora
similaria mista, elementa sua tempore priora non habeant, sed illa potius
element is suis prius existant (nempe Empedoclis atque Aristotel is igne, aqua,
aere, terra, vel Chymicorum sale, sulphur, and Mercurio, aut Democriti Atomis)
utpote natura quoque ipsis perfectiora. Sunt, inquam, mista and composita,
etiam tempore priora element is quibuslibet sic dictis, in quae illa
corrumpuntur and desinunt; dissolvuntur scilicet in ista ratione potius quam
re^psa and actu. Elementa itaque quae dicuntur, non sunt priora is it is rebus,
quae generantur aut oriuntur; sed posteriora potius, and reliquiae mag is quam
principia. N^que Aristoteles ipsemet aut alius quispiam unquam demonstravit,
elementa in rerum natura separati^ existere, au^ principia esse corporum
similarium. If then none of these things which bodies are resolved into, and
are supposed to be compounded of, either have been or can be proved to exist
separate from and antecedent to those bodies which they compound, what then
becomes of all our company of Atoms which are supposed by their concourse in an
Infinite space to be the Origin of the world? I know not where to find them,
unless dancing with the Schoolmens Chimaera's in a Vacuum, or in a space as
empty as the Infinite one, viz. some Epicureans brains. Neither therein will
they be much unlike their great master Epicurus, if we believe the character
which the Stoic in Tully gives of him, who says he was homo sine art, sine
liter is, insultans in omnes, sine acumine ullo, sine auctoritate, sine lepore.
De Not. Deor. l. 2.
But allowing the Stoic some of that passion, (which he disclaimed so much) in
these words; yet we may rather believe what Tully himself elsewhere speaks of
Epicurus his sentiments, that they were none of them handsome or becoming a
man. At ille quid sentit? says he of Epicurus; and soon replies, sentit autem
nihil unquam elegans, nihil decorum; De Divinat. l. 1. De Finibus lib. 1.
and in another place speaking of his Morals, he says, nihil generosum sapit
atque magnificum, there was nothing noble and generous in him. Which censure of
Epicurus, all the pains that P. Gassendus has taken in the vindication of the
life and opinions of Epicurus, has not been able to wipe off. For although we
should yield what that learned man so much contends for, that all the calumnyes
which were cast on Epicurus arise from the Antipathy between Zeno and the
following Stoics, and the School of Epicurus; yet all this will not make
Epicurus to have been comparable with some other Philosophers for parts and
judgment, whose principles have somewhat more generous and venerable in them,
then the Morals of Epicurus had, taking them in their more refined sense.

But it is not the Morality of Epiourus which we now enquire Sect. 14.
after; out business is to see how well he acquits himself in rendering an
account of the Origin of the Universe without a Deity. And so we come to
consider the Hypothesis its self, whether it be rational or no, or consistent
with the Catholic Laws of nature which appear in the world. Two things I shall
here enquire into, which are the main principles of Epicurus, viz. the motion
of these Atoms in the Infinite space, and the manner of the concretion of
bodies by the concourse of these Atoms.

1. I begin with their motion; which Epicurus attributes to his Atoms without
any hesitation, and yet never undertakes to give an account of the Origin of
that motion; which argues his whole Hypothesis to be extremely precarious. The
thing then, (which he must assume as his main principle, without which all his
other do nothing) is, that motion does inseparably belong to the least Atom or
insensible particle; for without this there cannot be imagined any concourse of
Atoms at all, much less any such contexture of bodies out of them. But for one
to say that Atoms move, because it is their nature to move, and give no other
account of it, is so precarious, that it will never give the least satisfaction
to an inquisitive mind. And it will be the least of all pardonable in the
exploders of substantial forms and occult qualities, when the Origin of the
whole world is resolved into an ^ccult quality which gives motion to Atoms. And
herein the Atomists outdo the most credulous Peripateticks, seeing they lay the
prime foundation of the world and of their own Philosophy together in a thing
they can give no rational account of at all, which is, the motion of Atoms in
an Infinite Vacuity. If it be replied, which is all Epicurus has to say, that
the motion of Atoms depends upon their gravity; the question returns upon him
with the same violence, how comes this gravity to belong to these Atoms in such
an empty space, where there can be no impulsion from other bodies, no
attraction from any magnetic particles which are supposed to be the causes of
the descent of heavy bodies? nay, Epicurus himself takes away any center of
that motion of Atoms; and yet attributes a necessary descent to his Atoms by
virtue of their gravity; and if a Philosopher may beg such things as these are,
so repugnant to the Phenomenon of nature, without Physic. s. 1. l 3. c. 7.

De apparent. magnitud. Solis bumilis and sublimis. Sp. 4. sect. 3.

De motu. Physic. s. 1. l. 5. c. 2.

Vep de motu impresse a motore translato. To. 3. op. Sect. 15.


assigning any other reason for them, but that it is their nature, let us never
venture Philosophizing more, but sit down in that contented piece of Ignorance
which attributes the causes of every thing into specific forms and occult
qualityes. For this is so shameful a piece of beggary, that P. Gassendus does
more then once disclaim it, and in his discourse of motion does prove an
impossibility of motion in an Infinite empty space. Might not Epicurus then
have saved his credit better by sitting down with the opinions of his
forefathers, then thus to go a begging for such Hypotheses, which none, who
are not resolved to be ignorant, will be ready to grant him?

But yet this is not all, but according to this fundamental principle of
Epicurus, viz. that there is a principle of motion in every insensible particle
of matter, he plainly overthrows another principle of his, which is the
solidity and different magnitude of these Atoms. These particles are supposed
so solid, that Dionysius in Eusebius tells us the account given why they are
called (...), was (...), because Praep. Evangel. l. 14. c. 22.
of their indissoluble firmness; and the different sizes of these Atoms is so
necessary a principle, that from thence they undertake to resolve many
Phenomenon of the Universe: let us now see how consistent these things are with
the inseparable property of motion belonging to Atoms: For if there be
particles of such different sizes, then it is plain that there are some
particles which may not only be conceived to be bigger then others, but are
really so; and so there must be more parts of matter imagined in this bigger
particle then in another less; and if there be more parts, these parts may be
conceived separate from each other, that this particle may be equal to the
other; now then, I demand, if motion does inseparably belong to the least
particle of matter, how comes one to be bigger then the other? for herein we
see that every particle is not in distinct motion; for there cannot but be more
imaginable particles in an Atome of a bigger size then in a less; and if so,
there must be some union of those imaginable particles in that bigger Atome;
and how could such an union be without rest, and what rest could there be if
motion does inseparably belong to every particle o^ matter? And so it must be
in all those Atoms which are supposed to have angles and hooks, in order to
their better catching hold of each other for the composition of bodies* how
come these hooks and angles to be annexed to this Atom? for an Atom may be
without them; whence comes this union, if such a principle of motion, be in
each particle? if it be answered, that motion did belong to all these
particles, but by degrees the l^sser particles hitting together made up these
angled and hooked particles; I soon reply, that the difficulty returns more
strongly; for if these angled and hooked particles be supposed necessary to the
contexture and union of bodies, how came those least imaginable particles ever
to unite without such hooks and angles? And so the question will return in
Infinitum. If then the solidity and indivisibility of these angled Atoms, does
depend on the union and rest of those lesser imaginable particles joined
together, then it is evident that motion is no inseparable property of all
these particles, but some are capable of union, in order to the making of such
hooks and angles, which are necessary for the contexture of bodies; and where
there is union and solidity, there is rest, which is at least accompanied with
it, if it be not one of the great causes of it. And without which the Atomists
of all other Philosophers will be least able to give an account of firmness in
bodies, when they make bodies to consist of an aggregation of particles, by
which it will be very hard finding a sufficient account of the difference
between fluid and firm bodies, unless it be from the quicker motion and
agitation of the particles of fluid bodies, and the rest of the small and
contiguous parts that make up the firm body, V Des Carts Princip. p. 2. art.
54, 55, 56.
according to that Catholic Law of nature, whereby things continue in the
state they are in till some stronger force puts them out of it. The only thing
which the Epicurean Atomists have left to give any account of the solidity of
particles of such different sizes, is, the want of vacuity; for say they, the
ground of divisibility of bodies is the interspersion of a disseminated Vacuum;
now where there is no vacuity, though the particles be of different siz^, yet
they may be solid and indivisible. But this is taken off by the instance
produced against other persons by that ingenious and Honorable person M. Boil
in his Physiological Essays, which is to this purpose; Suppose History of
Fluid. and Firmness. p. 202.
two of these presumed indivisible particles, both smooth and of a Cubical
figure should happen to lie upon one another, and a third should ch^nce to be
fitly placed upon the upper of the two; what should hinder but that this
Aggregate may by the violent knock of some other corpuscles be broken in the
midst of the whole concretion, and consequently in the middlemost body? For
suppose them as solid as may be, yet since corpuscles as hard as they, can be
made very violently to knock against them, why may not those grate or break the
middlemost corpuscles, or any of the others? And if there be a possibility of a
breaking off these Cubical particles in the middle, then mere want of Vacuity
is no sufficient account of their being indivisible. By this we see how far the
Atomists are from giving any rational account of the Origin of the motion of
the Atoms themselves without a Deity.

2. Supposing this motion to be granted them, yet they cannot give any
satisfactory account of the manner of concretion Sect. 16.
of bodies by the casual occursions of these A^^ms moving in an infinite empty
space. Which appears from those gross and extravagant suppositions of Epicurus,
in order to the making these Atoms of his so hit together that they make up any
bodies by their contexture.

1. He supposes as it were two regions, a superior and inferior in an infinite
empty space, which has no center at all in it, nor any body, from which to
measure those respects of above and below; as appears by his Epistle to
Herodotus, wherein he says, these terms of (...) and (...), or upwards and
downwards, must be conceived without any bounds or limits at all. So that
though we conceive something superior, we must imagine nothing supreme, and so
on the contrary. Whereby it is evident as Gass^ndus confesses, that Epicurus
thought the surface of the earth to be a plain, and this plain to be continued
Physic. s. 1. l. 3. c. 7.
up in a level superficies to the heavens, and so to all that immense space of
the Universe. So that all those heavy bodies which should fall downwards in any
parts of the widest distance on the earth, as in Europe, Asia, and Africa,
would never meet (if they continued their motion) in the center of the earth,
but would continue their motion still in a parallel line; and so he imagined
that which is said to be above as to us, was really the upper part of the
world, and so the descent of his Atoms must necessarily be downwards toward
the earth, according to the weight of them. And was not this a worthy
Mathematical supposition, for one who would undertake to give an account of the
Origin of the Universe without a Deity?

This motion of descent by reason of the gravity of Atoms would not serve his
turn; for if the Atoms moved downwards thus in a parallel line, how was it
possible for them ever to meet for the contexture of bodies? Now for this
purpose he invented a motion of declination; for finding the motion ad lineam,
or ad perpendiculum as some call it, could not possibly produce those varieties
of bodies which are in the Universe, he supposed therefore the descent not to
be in a perpendicular right line, but to decline a little, that so seve^al
particles in their descent might make some occursions one upon another. And
this Epicurus added to Democritus; but therein as Tully observes, was very
unhappy, that where he adds to Democritus, ea quae corrig^re vult, mihi quidem
De Fin. l. 1
depravare videatur; that he marred what Democritus had said, by mending of it.
The reason of which motion of declination, is thus given by Lucretius, Quod
nisi declinare solerent, omnia deorsum De rerum not. l. 2.

Imbris uti guttae caderent per Inane profundum;
Nec foret offensus natus, neque plaga creata
Principiis, it a nil unquam natura creasset.
It was obvious to object, that according to the principles of Epicurus, there
could have been no concourse at all of Atoms in an infinite space, on the two
grounds he went on, which were the natural descent of Atoms, and the
aequi-velocity of the motion of all Atoms of what size so ever, which he
likewise asserted (although one would think if gravity were the cause of
motion, then the more gravity, the swister the motion would be) from hence, I
say it were not easy to conceive how the Atoms should embrace each other in a
parallel line, if they fell down as Lucretius expresses it, like drops of
rain; and therefore they saw a necessity to make their motion decline a little,
that so they might justle and hit one upon another. But this oblique motion of
the Atoms, though it be the only refuge left to salve the Origin of things by
a concourse of Atoms, is yet as precarious and without reason as any other
supposition of theirs whatsoever. Tully charge this motion of declination
with two great faults, futility, and in^fficacy, quae cum res tota ficta sit
pueriliter, tum ne efficit De Fin. bon. et mal. lib. 1.
quidem quod vult. It is a childish fancy and to no purpose: For first, it is
asserted without any reason at all given for it, which is unworthy a
Philosopher; neither is it to any purpose; for if all Atoms, says he, decline
in their motion, then none of them will stick together; if some decline, and
others do not, th^s is as precarious as any thing can be imagined, to assign a
diversity of motion in indivisible particles, which yet have all the same
velocity of motion; and as Tully says, Hoc erit quasi provincias atomis dare,
quae recte, quae oblique f^rantur: as though Epicurus were the General at this
Rendesvous of Atoms, who stands ready to appoint every one his task and motion.
This Plutarch tells us was the great charge against Epicurus (...), because he
introduced such a motion of declination out of nothing De Animae procreat. ^
Timaeo.

Tu^nebus in Ciceron. de Fato.


upon no pretense of reason. And Turnebus tells us, that the ground why they
desired so small a declination, was because they were conscious to themselves,
that it was founded upon no ground of reason; Et Epicurei sibi conscii culpae,
timide eam ponebant, and minimam sibi post ulabant. To which purpose Turnebus
cites those verses of Lucretius, Quare etiam at que etiam paulum inclinare
necesse est
Corpora, nec plusquam minimum, ne fingere motus Lib. 2.

Obliquos videamur, and id res vera refutet.
Namque hoc in promptu manifest unique esse videmus
Pondera quantum in se est, non posse obliqua meare
Esupero cum praecipitant, quod cernere possis.
Sed nihil omnino recta regione viai
Declinare, quis est qui possit cernere sese?
But this argument of Lucretius will hold if at all, further then this little
declination (for it is no more they desire then as little as may be imagined,
quo nihil possit fieri minus, Tully expresses it) but if they may decline a
little, why not a great deal more? nay it is impossible to conceive, but a
little oblique motion at first will in an infinite space grow to be very
oblique; for there is nothing to hinder the motion which way it bends; now if
there be never so little motion of declination, the Atom will be inclined that
way; and what then should hinder, but that the obliquity in a motion through a
great space should at last come to be very great; there being no center at all
to guide the motion toward, and the gravity not hindering this little
declination? Therefore Tully asks that question, Cur declinet uno minimo, non
declinet duobus aut tribus? why only it declines one minime, and not two or
Lib. de Fato.
three; for, says he, it is no impulsion from any other Atom which makes it
decline that one minime; neither is there any impediment in the space to hinder
it from declining more; so that, as he well says, optare hoc quidem est, non
disputare, this is to beg Hypotheses and not to prove them, which is the thing
we have proved Epicurus to do. Which was the first thing promised, viz. that
this Hypothesis of Epicurus was very precarious, and is built on no foundation
of reason.

2. It is unsatisfactory and insufficient, as well as precarious; for should we
grant his two main principles, Atoms and his Sect. 17.
infinite empty space; yet we deny that ever his Atoms with all their
occursions would ever produce those things which are in the Universe. To run
through the noted Phenomenon of the Universe, and to show how insufficient an
account the Epicureans are able to give of them, from a fortuitous concourse of
Atoms, is a task too large to be here undertaken. There are only three things
which I shall rather suggest, then insist upon, to see what miserable shifts
the Epicureans are driven to for the salving of them, and shall then leave it
with the reader to judge, what unmeasurable confidence it is in any to reject
the Creation of the World for the sake of the Epicurean Hypothesis; and whether
it be not the height of credulity, as well as infidelity, to believe the world
ever to have been made by a fortuitous concourse of Atoms?

1. The great varieiy of appearances in nature, which are attributed to
particles of the same nature, only with the alteration of size, shape, and
motion. That some things in the world, should have no other reason given of
them, may not only be tolerable, but rational, as in the objects and operations
on the organs of sense, those affections which are mistaken for real qualities,
etc. But that all those effects which are seen in nature should have no other
cause but the different configuration and motion of Atoms, is the height of
folly as well as impi^ty, to imagine that the particles of matter, as they are
in men, should be capable of sensation, memory, Intell^ction, volition, etc.
merely because of a diff^rent shape, size and motion from what they have in a
piece of wood, is a riddle that requires a new configuration of Atoms in us to
make us understand. May it not be hoped, that at least one time or other by
this casual concourse of Atoms, the particles may light to be of such a nature
in stones, as to make them flic; in plants, to make them all sensitive; and in
beasts to make them reason and discourse? What may hinder such a configuration
or motion of particles, if all these eff^cts are to be imputed to no higher
principle? We see in other bodies what different appearances are caused by a
sudden alteration of the particles of the matter of which they are compounded;
why may it not fall out so in the things mentioned? neither can this be
unreasonable to demand. 1. Because the motion of these particles of matter is
casual still according to them; and who knows what chance may do? for the
seminal principles themselves are, I suppose, according to them of the same
uniform matter with the rest of the world, and so are liable to different
motion and configuration. 2. Because all particles of matter are supposed to be
in continual motion, because of that disseminated Vacuity, which is presumed to
be in the world, and because a Coacervate vacuity is not only asserted as
possible, but as probably existent: I assume only then (that which is insisted
on as probable) viz. that that space which lies between our Atmosphere and the
Stars is empty of any other thing, but only the rays of the Stars which pass
through it; I then supposing it a vacuity, whether would not the particles of
those bodies which lie contiguous to that space presently dislodge from the
bodies wherein they are, and begin a new Rendezvous of Atoms there? for all
Atoms are supposed to be in perpetual motion; and the cause assigned, why in
solid bodies they do not fly away, is, because of the repercussion of other
Atoms, that when they once begin to stir, they receive such knocks as make them
quiet in their places. Now this cannot hold in the bodies contiguous to this
space; for both those bodies are more fluid, and so there is no such knocking
of particles to keep them at rest; but which is more, those which are
contiguous have nothing at all to hinder them from motion, and so those
particles will necessarily remove into that empty space where there is no
impediment of their motion, and so the next Atoms to those must remove, because
that space wherein the other were is made empty by their removal; and so the
next, and so on, till not only the air, but the whole mass of the earth w^ll on
supposition of such a vacuity be dissolved into its first particles, which will
all mutiny in the several bodies wherein they are, and never rest till they
come to that empty space, where they may again Rendezvous together. So
dangerous is the news of Liberty, or of an empty space to these Democratical
particles of the Universe. Neither can I see how a disseminated vacuity can
salve the difficulty; for those particles of the most solid bodies, being in
continual motion, and the ground of their union being reperc^ssion, it thence
follows that toward that part where the disseminated vacuum is, the particles
meeting with no such strokes may sairly take their leaves of the bodies they
are in, and so one succeed in the place of another, till the configuration of
the whole be altered, and consequently different appearances and effects may be
caused in the same bodies, though it results from seminal principles. So that
according to the Atomical principles, no rational account can be given of those
effects which are seen in nature. This Dionysius in Eusebius urges against the
Atomists, that Prap. Evang. l. 14. c. 24.
from the same principles without evident reason given for it, they make of the
same uniform matter some things conspicuous to sense, others not, some
short-lived, others extremely long-lived. (...) (...); What ground can there be
assigned of so vast a difference between things if they be all of the same
nature, and differ only in size and shape? says that excellent person, who
there with a great deal of eloquence lays open ^he folly of the Atomical
Philosophy, (...). It is a rare Democraty of Atoms, says he, where the
friendly Atoms meet and embr^ce each other, and from thenceforward live in the
closest society together.

2. Not only the variety, but the exact order and beauty of the world is a
thing unaccountable by the Atomical hypothesis. Were the whole world still a
Hesiods Chaos (from the consideration of which Diogenes Laertius tells us
Epicurus Laert. l. 10.
began to Philosophize) we might probably believe an agitation of particles
(supposing matter created) might settle it in such a confused manner; but that
there should be nothing else but a blind impetus of Atoms to produce those vast
and most regular motions of the heavenly bodies, to order the passage of the
Sun for so great convenience of nature, and for the alternate succession of the
seasons of the year, which should cut such channels for the Ocean, and keep
that vast body of the water (whose surface is higher then the earth) from
overflowing it, which should furnish the earth with such seminal and prolifick
principles, as to provide food and nourishment for those Animals which live
upon it, and furnish out every thing necessary for the comfort and delight of
man's life; to believe, I say, that all th^se things came only from a blind and
fortuitous concourse of Atoms, is the most prodigious piece of credulity and
folly, that humane nature is subject to. But this part which concerns the order
and beauty of the parts of the Universe, and the argument thence, that it could
be no blind fortuitous principle, but an Infinitely wise God, has been so
fully and D. H. More Antid. against Atheism, part 2.
judiciously handled by a learned Person already, that I shall rather choose to
refer the Reader to his discourse then insist any more upon it.

3. The production of mankind is a thing which the Atomists are most shamefully
puzzled with, as well as the Formation of the internal parts of man's body, of
which I have already spoken in the precedent Chapter. It would pity one to see
what lamentable shifts the Atomists are put to, to find out a way for the
production of mankind, viz. That our teeming mother the earth, at last cast
forth some kind of bags like wombs upon the surface of the earth, and these by
degrees breaking, at last came out children, which were nourished by a kind of
juice of the earth like milk, by which they were brought up till they came to
be men. Oh what will not Atheists believe rather then a Deity and Providence!
But least we should seem to wrong the Atomists, hear what Censorinus says of
Epicurus; Is enim credidit limo calefactos uteros nescio quos, radicihus terrae
cohaerentes, primum increvisse, Censor. de die Not. c. ^.
and infantibus ex seeditis ingenitum lactis humorem, natura ministrante
praebuisse; quos it a educatos and adultos, genus humanum propagasse. But
because Lucretius may be thought to speak more impartially in the case, how
rarely does he describe it?

Crescebant uteri terrae radicibus apti,
Quos ubi tempore maturo patefecerit aetas
Infantum, fugiens humorem, aurasque petissens,
Convertebat ibi natura foramina terrae,
Et succum venis cogebat fundere apertis
Consimilem lactis; sicut nunc foemina quaeque
Quum peperit dulci repletur lacte, quodomnis
Impetus in mammas convert itur ille alimenti:
Terracibum pueris, vestem vapor, herbacubile
Praebebat, multa and molli lanugine abundans.
Had Lucretius been only a Poet, this might have passed for a handsomely
described Fable; but to deliver it for a piece of Philosophy makes it the
greater Mythologie; that man's body was formed out of the earth we believe,
because we have reason so to do; but that the earth should cast forth such
folliculi as he expresses it, and that men should be brought up in such a way
as he describes, deserves a place among the most incredible of Poetic Fables.
But if Poets must be credited, how much more like a man did he speak, who told
us, Natus homo est; sive hunc divino semine fecit
Ille opifex rerum, Mundi melioris crigo,
Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli;
Quam satus Iapeto mistam fluvialibus undis,
Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta Deorum.


Thus have we considered the Epicurean Hypothesis, both as to the Principles on
which it stands, and the suitableness of it to the Phenomenon of the Universe;
and I suppose now there cannot be the least shadow of reason found from the
Atomical Philosophy to make us at all Question that account of the Origin of
the Universe, which ascribes it not to the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, but
to the Infinite wisdom of a Deity. I conclude then this discourse of the
Epicurean Hypothesis with the words of Automedon in the Greek Epigram.

(...) Antholog. l. 1. c. 15.

(...).
Learn to be wise; let Epicurus chase
To find his Atoms, and his empty space.
I come now to the last Hypothesis mentioned, which undertakes to give an
account of the Origin of the Universe Sect. 18.
from the mere Mechanical Laws of motion and matter. Which is the Hypothesis of
the late famous French Philosopher Mr. Des Carts. For although there be as
much reason as charity to believe that he never intended his Hypothesis as a
foundation of Atheism, having made it so much his business to assert the
existence of a Deity and immateriality of the soul; yet because it is apt to be
abused to that end by persons Atheistically disposed, because of his ascribing
so much to the power of matter; we shall therefore so far consider it as it
undertakes to give an account of the Origin of the Universe without a Deity.
His Hypothesis therefore is briefly this. He Princip. p. 3. Art. 46. etc.
takes it for granted, that all the matter of the world was at first of one
Uniform nature, divisible into innumerable parts, and divided into many, which
were all in motion, from hence he supposes. 1. That all this matter of which
the Universe is composed, was at first divided into equal particles of an
indifferent size, and that they had all such a motion as is now found in the
wo^ld. 2. That all these particles were not at first Sphaerical, because many
such little Globes joined together will not fill up a continued space, but that
of what ever figure they were at first, they would by continued motion become
sphaerical, because they would have various circular motions; for seeing that
at first they were moved with so great force that one particle would be
disjoined from the other, the same force continuing would serve to cut off all
angles which are supposed in them, by their frequent occursions against each
other; and so when the angles were cut off, they would become sphaerical. 3. He
supposes that no space is left empty, but when those round particles being
joined, leave some intervals between them, there are some more subtle
particles of matter, which are ready to fill up those void spaces, which arise
from those angles which were cut ^ff from the other particles to make them
sphaerical; which fragments of particles are so little, and acquire thereby
such a celerity of motion, that by the force of that, they will be d^vided into
i^numerable little fragments, and so will fill up all those spaces which other
particles could not enter in at. 4. That those particles which sill up the
intervals between the sphaerical ones, have not all of them the same celerity
of motion, because some of them are more undivided then others are, which
filled up the space between three Globular particles when their angles were cut
off, and therefore those particles must necessarily have very angular figures,
which are unfit for motion, and thence it comes to pass that such particles
easily stick together, and transfer the greatest part of their motion upon
those other particles which are less, and therefore have a swifter motion; and
because these particles are to pass through such triangular spaces which lie in
the midst of three Globular particles touching each other, therefore he
supposes them as to their breadth and depth to be of a triangular figure, but
because these particles are somewhat long; and the gl^bular particles through
which they pass with so swift motion have their rotation about the poles of the
heavens, thence he supposes that those triangular particles come to be
wreathed. Now from these things being thus supposed, Des Carts has
ingeniously and consonantly to his principles undertaken to give an account of
the most noted Phenomenon of the world, and those three sorts of particles
mentioned he makes to be his three elements; the first is that subtle matter
which was supposed to arise from the cuttings off the angles of the greater
particles; and of this he tells us the Sun and fixed Stars consill, as those
particles of that subtle matter being in continual ^o^ion have made those
several vortices or ethereal whirlpools. The second element confists of the
sphaerical particles themselves, which make up the Heavens; out of the third
element which are those wreathed particles, he gives an account of the
formation of the earth, and Planets, and Comets; and from all of them by the
help of those common affections of matter, size, figure, motion, etc. he
undertakes to give an account of the Phenomenon of the world. How far his
principles do conduce to the giving men's minds satisfaction, as to the
particular Phenomenon of nature, is not here our business to enquire, but only
how far these principles can give an account of the Origin of the Universe
without a Deity? And that it cannot give a satisfactory account how the world
was framed without a Deity, appears by the two grand suppositions on which all
his elements depend, both which cannot be from any other principle but God.
Those are, 1. The existence of matter in the world which we have already proved
cannot be independent on God, and necessarily existent, and therefore supposing
that matter existent and put into motion, would grind its self into those
several particles by him supposed, yet this cannot give any account of the
Origin of the Universe Antidote. b. 2. chapter 1.

Immortality of the soul. b. 1. c. 11. s. 3. etc. Ep. 3 ad C^rtes. p. ^8


without a Deity. 2. The motion of the particles of matter suppose a Deity; for
matter is no self-moving principle, as has been fully demonstrated in several
places by that judicious Philosopher Dr. H. More, who plainly manifests that if
motion did necessarily belong to matter, it were impossible there should be
Sun, or Stars, or Earth, or Man in the World; for the matter being uniform, it
must have equal motion in all its particles, if motion does belong to it. For
motion being supposed to be natural and ^ss^ntial to matter, must be alike
every where in it, and therefore every particle must be supposed in motion to
its utmost capacity, and so every particle is alike and moved alike: and
therefore there being no prevalency at all in any one particle above another in
bigness or motion, it is manifest that this universal matter, to whom motion is
so essential and natural, will be ineffectual for the producing of any variety
of appearances in nature; for nothing could be caused by this thin and subtle
matter, but what would be wholly imperceptible to any of our senses: and what a
strange kind of visible world would this be? From hence then it appears that
there must be an infinitely powerful and wise God, who must both put matter
into motion, and regulate the motion of it, in order to the producing all those
varieties which appear in the world. And this necessity of the motion of matter
by a power given it from God is freely acknowledged by Mr. Des Carts himself
in these words; Considero materiam sibi libere permissam, and nullum aliunde
impulsum suscipientem, ut plane quiescentem; illa Resp. ad. ep. 3. H. Mori. p.
104.
autem impellitur a Deo, tantundem motus five translationis in ea conservante
quantum abinitio posuit. So that this great improver and discoverer of the
Mechanical power of matter, does freely confess the necessity not only of Gods
giving motion in order to the Origin of the Universe, but of his conserving
motion in it for the upholding it: So that we need not fear from this
Hypothesis the excluding of a Deity from being the prime efficient cause of the
world. All the question then is concerning the particular manner, which was
used by God as the ^fficient cause in giving being to the world. As to which I
shall only in general suggest what Maimonides says of it. Omnia simul creata
^rant, and postea successive ab invicem separata; although I am somewhat
inclinable to that of More Nevoch. l. 2. c. 30.

Physic s. 1. l. 7. c. 6.


Gassendus, majus ^st mundus opus, quam ut ass^qui men's humana illius
molitionem possit: To which I think may be well applied that speech of Solomon;
Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is
done under Eccl. 8. 17.
the Sun; because though a man labor to seck it out, yea further, though a
wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to sinde it.

CHAP. III. Of the Origin of Evil.
Of the Being of Providence. Epieurus his arguments against it refuted. The
nec^ssity of the belief of Providence in order to Religion. Providence proved
from a consideration of the nature of God and the things of the world. Of the
Spirit of nature. The great objections against Providence propounded. The first
concerns the Origin of evil. God cannot be the author of sin if the Scriptures
be true. The account which the Scriptures give of the fall of man, does not
charge God with man's fault. Gods power to govern man by Laws, though he gives
no particular reason of every Positive precept. The reason of Gods creating man
with freedom of will, largely showed from Simplicius; and the true account of
the Origin of evil. Gods permitting the fall makes him not the author of it.
The account which the Scriptures give of the Origin of evil, compared with
that of Heathen Philosophers. The antiquity of the opinion of ascribing the
Origin of evil to an evil principle. Of the judgment of the Per^^ans,
Egyptians and others about it. Of Manichaism. The opinion of the ancient Greek
Philosophers; of Pythagoras, Plato, the Stoics; the Origin of evil not from
the necessity of matter. The remainders of the history of the fall among the
Heathens Of the malignity of Daemon^. Providence vindicated as to the
sufferings of the good, and impunity of bad men. An account of both from
natural light, manifested by Senec^, Plutarch, and others.

IT being now manifest not only that there is a God, but Sect. 1.
that the world had its Being from him; it thence follows by an easy and
rational deduction, that there is a particular band of Divine providence, which
upholds the world in its Being, and wisely disposes all events in it. For it
is a most irrational and absurd opinion to assert a Deity and deny providence:
and in nothing did Epicurus more discover the weakness and puerility of his
judgment then in this. Indeed, if Epicurus had no other design in asserting a
Deity, then (as many ancient Philosophers imagined) to avoid the imputation of
direct Atheism; and yet to take away all foundations of Religion, he must needs
be said to serve his Hypothesis well, though he did assert the Being of an
excellent nature which he called God; while yet he made him sit as it were with
his ^lbows folded up in the heavens, and taking no ^^gniz^nce of humane
actions. For he well knew, that if the belief of Divine providence were once
rooted out of men's minds, the thoughts of an excellent Being above the He^vens,
would have no more aw or power upon the hearts and lives of men, then the
telling men that there are I^wels of inestimable value in the Indies, makes
them more ready to pay taxes to their Princes. For that Philosopher could not
be ignorant, that it is not worth but power, nor speculation but interest that
rules the world. The poor Tenant more regards his petty Landlord, then the
greatest Prince in the world that has nothing to do with him; and he thinks he
has great reason for it; for he neither fears punishment nor hopes for reward
from him; whereas his Landlord may dispossess him of all he has upon
displeasure, and may advantage him the most if he gains his favor: Supposing
then that there were such an excellent Being in the world which was completely
happy in himself, and thought it an impairing of his happiness to trouble
himself with an inspection of the world; Religion might then be indeed derived
a relegendo, but not a religando; there might be some pleasure in contemplating
his nature, but there could be no obligation to obedience. So that Epicurus was
the first sounder of a kind of Philosophical Antinomianism, placing all
Religion in a veneration of the Deity purely for its own ex^^llency without any
such mercenary eye (as those who serve God for their own ends, as they say, are
apt to have) to reward and punishment. And I much doubt that good woman whom
the story goes of, who in an Enthusiastic posture ran up and down the strects
with emblems in her hands, fire in the one as she said to burn up Heaven, and
water in the other to quench Hell, that men might serve God purely for himself,
would if she had compassed her design, soon brought Proselites enough to
Epicurus, and by burning Heaven would have burnt up the cords of Religion, and
in quenching Hell would have extinguished the aw and fear of a Deity in the
world. Indeed the incomparable excellency and perfection which is in the Divine
nature, to spirits advanced to a noble and generous height in Religion, makes
them exceedingly value their choice, while they disregard what ever rivals with
God for it; but were it not for those Magnetical hooks of obedience and eternal
interest, there are few would be drawn to a due consideration of, much less a
delight in so amiable and excell^^nt a nature. And it is impossible to
conceive, why God in the revelation of his Will should ever so much as mention
a future punishment, or promise an eternal reward, were not the consideration
of these things the sinews of Religion.

Which they whose design was to undermine the very foundations on which all
Religion was built, understood far Sect. 2.
better, then those weak pretended advancers of Religion, who while in such a
way they pretend to advance it, do only blow it up. For if men ought not to
have an eye and respect to their own future condition, nor serve God on the
account of his power to make our souls miserable or happy, much less ought men
to serve God with any regard to his Providence, since the matters which
Providence is employed about in this world are of infinitely less moment, then
those which concern our future state. And if we are to have no eye on Divine
providence in the exercise of Religion, we shall scarce be able to understand
for what end God should take so much care of mankind, and manifest so much of
his goodness to them, were it not to quicken them in their search after him,
and excite them to the more cheerful obedience to him. And when once we
question to what end God troubles himself with the world, we are come next door
to Epicurus, and may in few steps more delight in the flowers of his Garden.
For this was his strongest plea against Providence, that it was beneath the
Majesty and excellency of the Divine nature to stoop so low and trouble himself
so far, as to regard what was done on earth. This being one of his Ratae
Sententiae or undoubted Diog. Laer. l. 10.
maxims, (...), The Blessed and Immortal Being, neither has any employment
himself, nor troubles himself with others. Which as Maximus Tyrius well
observes, is rather a description of a Sardanapalus then a Deity; nay of a
worse then a Sardanapalus; for he in the midst of all his softness and
effeminacy Disserl. 29.
would yet entertain some counsels for the safety and good of his Empire; but
Epicurus his D^ity is of so tender a nature, that the least thought of business
would quite spoil his happiness. This opinion of Epicurus made the more
raisedspirited Moralists so far contemn the unworthy apprehensions which he
entertained of the Divine nature, that they degraded him from the very title of
a Philosopher in it, and ranked him beneath the most fabulous Poets, who had
writ such unworthy things of their Gods, as is evident by the censures T^lly de
F^aib. l. 1. De not. D. or^. 2. ^lutarch advers. Co^^t.
which Tully, Plutarch and others pass upon him for this very opinion. And they
tell him that some of their own men were of a more noble and excellent spirit
then Epicurus his Deity, who abhorred softness and idleness, and made it their
greatest delight to do good to their Countries. But Epicurus must needs make his
God of his own humor (the usual flattery which men bear to themselves, to
think that most excellent which they delight in most) as Xenophanes was wont to
say of his horse, if he were to describe a God, it would be with a curled main,
a broad chest, etc. and in every thing like himself. Had E icurus himself so
little of an Athenian in him, as not to make it some part of his delight to
understand the affairs of the world? or at least did he take no pleasure in the
walks of his famous garden, nor to order his trees, and set his flowers, and
contrive every thing for his own delight? Would Epicurus then count this a part
of his happiness? and is it inconsistent with the happiness of the Deity to
take notice of the world and order all things in it for his own glory? Must so
excellent a nature as Gods was, by his own acknowledgment, be presently tired
with business, when the more excellent any nature is, the more active and
vigorous it is, the more able to comprehend and dspatch matters of moment with
the least disturbance to its self? Is it pleasure to a Nurse to fill the child
with her milk? does the Sun rejoice to help the world with his constant light?
and does a Fountain murmur till it be delivered of its streams which may
refresh the ground? and is it no delight to the Divine nature to behold the
effects of his goodness upon the world? We see here then the foundation on
which Epicurus went, viz. that his God must be like himself, or there must be
none; and truly he might more suitably to his principles question his
existence, then supposing his existence deny his Providence on such miserable
accounts as these are, which yet are the chief which either Epicurus or
Lucretius could bring against it, from the consideration of the Divine nature.

The which to any one who considers it, does necessarily infer a peculiar eye
and hand of Providence in the world. Sect. 3.
For can we imagine that a Being of Infinite knowledge should be ignorant of
what is done in the world? and of Infinite power, should stand by and leave
things to chance and fertune? which were at first, contrived and brought into
Being by the contrivance of his Wisdom, and exercise of his Power. And where
the foundation of existence lies wholly and solely in the power of an Infinite
Being producing, the ground of continuance of that existence must lie in the
same power conserving. When men indeed effect any thing, the work may continue,
whatever become of him that did it; but the reason of that is, because what man
does, is out of matter already existent, and his work is only setting materials
together; but now what God effects he absolutely gives a Being to, and
therefore its duration depends on his conservation. What is once in its Being,
I grant, will continue till some greater force then its self put it out of
Being; but withal I add, that Gods withdrawing his Conservation is so great a
force, as must needs put that Being which had its existence from his power, out
of the condition it was in by it. The Light of the Sun continues in the air,
and as long as the Sun communicates it, nothing can extinguish the light, but
what will put out the Sun; but could we suppose the Sun to withdraw his beams,
what becomes of the light then? This is the case of all Beings, which come from
an Infinite power; their subsistence depends on a continual emanation of the
same power which gave them Being; and when once this is withdrawn, all those
Beings which were produced by this power must needs relapse into nothing.
Besides, what dependence is there upon each other in the moments of the
duration of any created Being? The mode of existence in a creature is but
contingent and possible, and nothing is employed in the notion of an existent
creature, beyond mere possibility of existence; what is it then which gives
actual existence to it? that cannot be its self, for it would be necessarily
existent; if another then give existence, this existence must wholly depend
upon him who gave it; for nothing can continue existence to its self, but what
may give it to its self, (for it gives it for the moment it continues it) and
what gives existence to its self, must necessarily exist, which is repugnant to
the very notion of a created Being: So that either we must deny a possibility
of nonexistence, or annihilation in a creature, which follows upon necessity
of existence, or else we must assert that the duration or continuance of a
creature in its Being does immediately depend on Divine providence and
Conservation, which is with as much reason as frequency said to be a continued
Creation. But yet further; was an Infinite Wisdom, and power necessary to put
things into that order they are in? and is not the same necessary for the
Governing of them? I cannot see any reason to think that the power of matter
when set in motion, should either bring things into that exquisite order and
dependence which the parts of the world have upon each other; much less that by
the mere force of that first motion all things should continue in the state
they are in. Perpetual motion is yet one of the desiderata of the world; the
most exquisite Mechanism cannot put an engine beyond the necessity of being
looked after; can we then think this dull, unactive matter, merely by the force
of its first motion should be able still to produce the effects which are seen
in the world, and to keep it from tumbling, at least by degrees, into its
pristine Chaos? It was an Infinite Power, I grant, which gave that first
mo^ion; but that it gave power to continue that motion till the Constagration
of the world, remains yet to be proved. Some therefore finding that in the
present state of the world, matter will not serve for all the noted and common
Phoenomena of the world, have called in the help of a Spirit of Nature, which
may serve instead of a Man-midwife to Matter, to help her in her productions of
things. Or, as though God had a Plurality of worlds to look after, they have
taken care to substitute him a Vicar in this, which is this Spirit of Nature.
But we had rather believe God himself to be perpetually Resident in the world,
and that the power which gives life, and being and motion to every thing in the
world, is nothing else but his own providence; especially since we have learnt
from himself, that it is in him we live and move and have our being. Act. 17. 28


Thus then we see a necessity of asserting Divine Providence, Sect. 4.
whether we consider the Divine nature, or the Phenomenon of the world; but yet
the case is not so clear but there are two grand objections behind, which have
been the continual exercise of the wits of inquisitive men almost in all Ages
of the world. The one concerns the first Origin of evil; the other concerns
the dispensations of providence, whence it comes to pass that good men fare so
hard in the world, when the bad triumph and flourish; if these two can be
cleared with any satisfaction to reason, it will be the highest vindication of
Divine Providence, and a great evidence of the Divinity of the Scriptures,
which gives us such clear light and direction in these profound speculations,
which the dim reason of man was so much to seek in.

I begin with the Origin of evil; for, if there be a hand of providence which
orders all things in the world, how comes evil then into it, without Gods being
the Author of it? Which is a speculation of as great depth as necessity, it
highly concerning us to entertain the highest apprehensions of Gods holiness,
and how far he is from being the author of sin; and it is likewise a matter of
some difficulty so to explain the Origin of evil as to make it appear that God
is not the author of it. I easily then assent to what Origin says on this ^^g.
c. Cells. l. 4. p. 207.
subject, when Celsus upon some mistaken places of Scripture had charged the
Scripture with laying the Origin of evil upon God; (...). If any thing which
calls for our enquiry be of difficult investigation, that which concerns the
Origin of evils is such a thing; and as Simplicius well begins his discourse
on this subject; (...). Comment. in Epictet. c. 34.
The Dispute concerning the nature and origin of evil, not being well stated,
is the cause of great impiety toward God, and perverts the principles of good
life, an^ involves them in innumerable perplexities who are not able to give a
rational account of it. So much then is it our great concernment to fix on sure
grounds in the resolution of this important question, in which I intend not to
lanch out into the depth and intricacyes of it, as it relates to any internal
purposes of Gods will, (which is beyond our present scope) but I shall only
take that account of it which the Scripture plainly gives in relating the fall
of the first man. For the clearing of which I shall proceed in this method:

1. That if the Scriptures be true, God cannot be the author of sin.

2. That the account which the Scripture gives of the Origin of evil, does not
charge it upon God.

3. That no account given by Philosophers of the Origin of evil, is so clear
and rational as this is.

4. That the most material circumstances of this account are attested by the
Heathens themselves.

1. That if the Scriptures be true, God cannot be the author of sin. For if the
Scriptures be true, we are bound without hesitation to yield our assent to them
in their plain and direct affirmations, and there can be no ground of
suspending assent, as to any thing which pretends to be a Divine Truth, but the
want of certain evidence, whether it be of Divine Revelation or no. No doubt it
would be one of the most effectual ways to put an end to the numerous
controversies of the Christian world (especially to those bold disputes
concerning the method and order of Gods decrees) if the plain and undoubted
assertions of Scripture were made the Rule and Standard, whereby we ought to
judge of such things as are more obscure and ambiguous. And could men but rest
contented with those things which concern their eternal happiness, and the
means in order to it (which on that account are written with all imaginable
perspicuity in Scripture) and the moment of all other controversies be judged
by their reference to these, there would be fewer controversies and more
Christians in the world. Now there are two grand principles which concern men's
eternal condition, of which we have the greatest certainty from Scripture, and
on which we may with safety rely, without perplexing our minds about those more
nice and subtle speculations (which it may be are incapable of full and
particular resolution) and those are, That the ruin and destruction of man is
wholly from himself; and that his salvation is from God alone. If then man's
ruin and misery be from himself, which the Scripture does so much inculcate on
all occasions; then without controversy that which is the cause of all the
misery of humane nature, is wholly from himself too, which is, sin. So that if
the main scope and design of the Scripture be true, God cannot be the author of
that, by which (without the intervention of the mercy of God) man's misery
unavoidably falls upon him. For with what authority and Majesty does God in the
Scripture forbid all manner of sin? with what earnestness and importunity does
he woo the sinner to forsake his sin? with what loathing and detestation does
he mention sin? with what justice and severity does he punish sin? with what
wrath and indignation does he threaten contumacious sinners? And is it
possible, (after all this and much more, recorded in the Scriptures, to express
the holiness of Gods nature, his hatred of sin, and his appointing a day of
judgment for the solemn punishment of sinners,) to imagine that the Scriptures
do in the least ascribe the Origin of evil to God, or make him the Author of
Sin? Shall not the judge of all the world do right? will a God of Infinite
Justice, Purity, and Holiness, punish the sinner for that which himself was the
cause of? Far be such unworthy thoughts from our apprehensions of a Deity, much
more of that God whom we believe to have declared his mind so much to the
contrary, that we cannot believe that and the Scriptures to be true together.

Taking it then for granted in the general, that God cannot be the author of
sin, we come to enquire, whether the account Sect. 5. 2.
which the Scripture gives of the Origin of evil, does any way charge it upon
God? There are only two ways, which according to the history of the fall of
man recorded in Scripture, whereby men may have any ground to question whether
God were the cause of man's fall? either first, by the giving him that positive
Law, which was the occasion of his fall; or secondly, by leaving him to the
liberty of his own will. First, The giving of that positive Law cannot be the
least ground of laying man's fault on God; because, 1. It was most suitable to
the nature of a rational creature to be governed by Laws, or declarations of
the Will of his Maker; For considering man as a free agent, there can be no way
imagined so consonant to the nature of man as this was, because thereby he
might declare his obedience to God to be the matter of his free choice. For
where there is a capacity of reward, and punishment, and acting in the
consideration of them, there must be a declaration of the will of the
Lawgiver, according to which man may expect either his reward or punishment.
If it were suitable to Gods nature to promise life to man upon obedience, it
was not unsuitable to it to expect obedience to every declaration of his will;
considering the absolute sovereignty and Dominion which God had over man as
being his creature, and the indispensable obligation which was in the nature of
man to obey whatever his M^ker did command him. So that God had full and
absolute right to require from man, what he did as to the Law which he gave him
to obey; and in the general we cannot conceive, how there should be a testimony
of man's obedience toward h^s Creator, without some declaration of his Creators
Will. Secondly, God had full power and authority, not only to govern man by
Laws, but to determine man's general obligation to obedience to that particular
positive precept by the breach of which man fell. If Gods power over man was
universal and unlimited, what reason can there be to imagine it should not
extend to such a positive Law? Was it, because the matter of this Law seemed
too low for God to command his creature? but whatever the matter of the Law
was, obedience to God was the great end of it, which man had testified as much
in that Instance of it as in any other whatsoever; and in the violation of it
were employed the highest aggravations of disobedience; for Gods power and
authority was as much contemned, his goodness slighted, his Truth and
faithfulness questioned, his Name dishonored, his Majesty affronted in the
breach of that as of any other Law whatsoever it had been. If the Law were
easy to be observed, the greater was the sin of disobedience; if the weight of
the matter was not so great in its self, yet Gods authority added the greatest
weight to it; and the ground of obedience is not to be fetched from the nature
of the thing required, but from the authority of the Legislator. Or was it then
because God concealed from man his counsel in giving of that positive precept?
Has not then a Legislator power to require any thing, but what he satisfies
every one of his reason in commanding it? if so, what becomes of obedience and
subjection? it will be impossible to make any probative precepts on this
account; and the Legislator must be charged with the disobedience of his
subjects, where he does not give a particular account of every thing which he
requires; which as it concerns humane Legislators (who have not that absolute
power and authority which God has) is contrary to all Laws of Policy and the
general sense of the world. This Plutarch gives a good account of, De his qui
sero puniuntur a numine.
when he discourses ^o rationally of the sobriety which men ought to use in
their inquiries into the grounds and reasons of Gods actions; for, says he,
Physicians will give prescriptions without giving the patient a particular
reason of every circumstance in them: (...). Neither have humane Laws always
apparent reason for them, nay some of them are to appearance ridiculous; for
which he instanceth in that Law of the Lacedaemonian Ephori (...), to which no
other reason was annexed but this, (...): they commanded every Magistrate at
the entrance of his office to ^have himself, and gave this reason for it, that
they might learn to obey Laws themselves. He further instanceth, in the Roman
custom of manumission, their Laws about testaments, Solons Law against
neutrality in seditions, and concludes thence (...). Any one would easily find
many absurdities in Laws, who does not consider the intention of the
Legislator, or the ground of what he requires. (...), says he, (...). What
wonder is it if we are so puzzled to give an account of the actions of men, that
we should be to seek as to those of the Deity? This cannot be then any ground
on the account of mere reason, to lay the charge of man's disobedience upon God,
because he required from him the observance of that positive command of not
eating of the forbidden fruit.

The only thing then left is, whether God be not liable to this Sect. 6.
charge as he left man to the liberty of his will: And that may be grounded on
two things, either that God did not create man in such a condition, in which it
had been impossible for him to have sinned, or that knowing his temptation he
did not give him power to resist it. If neither of these will lay any
Imputation of the Origin of evil upon God, then God will appear to be wholly
free from it. First, concerning man's being created a free agent; if the
determination of the Schools be good that possibility of ^inning is employed in
the very notion of a creature, and consequently that impeccability is repugnant
to the nature of a created Being; then we see a Vid. Thom. 1. p. q. 63. art. 1.

Estium in sentent. l. 2, did. 7. Sect. 9.


necessary reason, why man was created in a state of liberty; but endeavoring
to show that the grounds of our Religion are not repugnant to natural reason, I
shall rather make use of the Testimony of such who professed to be followers of
nothing else but reason and Philosophy. Among whom I shall make choice of
Simplicius both ^or the reason he produce^h, and because he is farthest from
any suspicion of partiality, by reason of his known opposition to the Mosaic
history of the Creation. He then in his Commentaries on Com. in Epict. cap^ 34.
p. 175.
Epictetus professedly disputes this very subject of the Origin of evil, and
after having rejected that sond opinion of two principles, one of good, and the
other of evil, undertakes to give an account whence evil came into the world,
which because it tends so much to the illustrating our present subject I shall
give an account of. God, says he, who is the ^ountain and principle of all
good, not only produced things which were in themselves good, nor only those
things which were of a middle nature, but the extremes too, which were such
things which were apt to be perverted from that which is according to nature,
to that which we call evil. And that after those bodies which were (as he
supposes) incorruptible, others were produced which are subject to mutation
and corruption; and so after those souls which were immutably fixed in good,
others were produced which were liable to be perverted from it; that so the
riches of Gods goodness might be displayed in making to exist all beings which
were capable of it; and that the Universe might be perfect in having all sorts
of Beings in it. Now, he supposes, that all these Beings which are above this
sublunary world are such as are immutably good, and that the lowest sort of
Beings which are liable to be perverted to evil, are such which are here below.
Therefore, says he, the soul being of a more noble and immutable nature, while
it is by its self, does not partake of evil; but it being of a nature apt to be
joined with these terrestrial bodies (by the providence of the author of the
Universe who produced such souls, that so both extremes might be joined by the
bonds of vital union) thereby it becomes sensible of those evils and pains
which the body is subject to; but th^se things are not properly evils but
rather good, considering our terrestrial bodies as parts of the Universe which
is upheld by the changes and vicissitudes which are in this lower world; W^^ch
he largely discourses on to show that those particular alterations which are in
bodies, do conduce rather to the perfection and beauty of the Universe, then
are any real evils in it. But now, says he, for the origin of those things
which are properly evils, viz. moral evils, which are (...) the lapses and
errors of the humane soul, we are to consider, that there are souls of a more
excellent nature then ours are, which are immutally good; and the souls of
brutes are of a lower kind then ours are, and yet are middle between the
rational and vegetative, having something in them parallel both to the
appetites and evils which are in men, which will therefore be understood by an
account of the other. (...). Page 180. ed. Salonasii.
The soul of man is nexus utriusque mundi, in the middle between those more
excellent Beings which perpetually remain above, with which it partakes in the
sublimity of its nature and understanding, and those inferior terrestrical
Beings with which it communicates through the vital union which it has with
the body, and by reason of that freedom and indifferency which it has, it
sometimes is assimilated to the one, sometimes to the other of these extremes.
So that while it approaches to the nature of the superior Beings, it keeps it
self free from evil, but because of its freedom it may sometimes sink down into
these lower things; and so he calls, the cause of all evil in the soul (...),
its voluntary descent into this lower world, and immersing its self in the
faeculency of terrestrial matter. (...). For though the soul be of a kind of
Amphibious nature, yet it is not forced either upwards or downwards, but acts
either way according to its internal liberty. But, says he, while the rational
soul keeps that power which it has in its hands over the body, and makes use
of it only as an instrument for its own good, so long it keeps pure and free
from any stain of evil; but when it once forgets the similitude it has with
the more excellent Being, and throws away the Scepter of its power, and drowns
it self in the body and brutish affections (preferring the pleasure of sense
above that of reason) when it so far degenerates below the principles of
reason, that in stead of commanding the brutish faculties it becomes a slave to
them, then it conceives and brings forth evil; but this it does not through any
coaction or necessity, but through the abuse of that power and liberty which it
has; For the choice is a proper action of the soul its self; which he proves
from hence, because God and the Laws, and all good men, do not measure the good
and evil of actions so much by the event, as by the will and intention of the
person; and that punishment and reward have chiefly a respect to these. And
therefore men are pardoned for what they do out of constraint and force, and
the fault is ascribed, (...), not to him that did it, but to him that forced
him to the doing of it. And so from hence he concludes, that because of the
freedom of the will of man, nothing else can be said to be the author of evil
properly, but the soul of man; and concludes that discourse with this excellent
speech, (...). Having thus found out the true Origin of evil, let us cry out
with a loud voice, that God is not the author of sin, because the soul freely
does that which is evil, and not God; for if the soul were forced to do what it
does, one might justly lay the blame on God, who permits such a force to be
offered it, neither could it be properly evil which the soul was constrained
to; but since it acted freely, and out of choice, the soul must alone be
accounted the author and cause of evil. Thus we see that God cannot with any
shadow of reason be accounted the author of evil, because he gave the soul of
man a principle of internal freedom, when the very freedom of acting which the
soul had, put it into a capacity of standing as well as falling. And certainly,
he can never be said to be the cause of the breaking of a person, who gave him
a stock to set up with, and supposed him able to manage it when he gave it him;
indeed had not man had this freedom of will, he could not have fallen; but then
neither had he been a rational Agent, which supposing no corruption, does speak
freedom of action. So that while we enquire after the Origin of evil we have
no other cause to assign it to but man's abuse of that free power of acting
which he had; but if we will be so curious as to enquire further, why God did
create man with such a freedom of will, and not rather fix his soul immutably
on good; if the order of beings be no satisfactory reason for it, we can give
no other then that why he made man, or the world at all, which was the good
pleasure of his Will.

But secondly, supposing Gods giving man this freedom of will, does not entitle
him to be the author of evil; does not Sect. 7.
his leaving man to this liberty of his in the temptation, make him the cause
of sin? I answer no, and that on these accounts.

1. Because man stood then upon such terms, that he could not fall but by his
own free and voluntary act; he had a power to stand, in that there was no
principle of corruption at all in his faculties, but he had a pure and
undefiled soul which could not be polluted without its own consent: Now it had
been repugnant to the terms on which man stood (which were the trial of his
obedience to his Creator) had he been irresistibly determined any way.
Simplicius puts this question after the former discourse, Whether God may not
be called the author of sin, because he permits the soul to use her liberty?
but, says he, he that says God should not have permitted this use of its
freedom to the soul, must say one of these two things, ^ither that the soul
being of such a nature as is indifferent to good or evil, it should have been
wholly kept from the choosing evil, or else that it should have been made of
such a nature that it should not have had a power of choosing evil. The first
is irrational and absurd; for what freedom and liberty had that been where
there was no choice, and what choice could there have been where the mind was
necessitated only to one part. For the second we are to consider, says he,
that no evil is in its self desirable, or to be chosen; but withal, if this
power of determining its self ^ither way must be taken away, it must be either
as something not good, or as some great evil; and who^ver says so, does not
consider, how many things in the world there are, which are accounted good and
desirable things, yet are no ways comparable with this freedom of Will. For it
excells all sublunary Beings; and there is none would rather desire to be a
Brute or Plant then man; if God then showed his goodness in giving to inferior
beings such perfecti^^s which are far below this, is it any ways incongruous to
Gods nature and goodness to give man the freedom of his actions, and a self
determining power, th^ugh he permi^ted him the free use of it. Besides, as that
author reason^, had God to prevent man's sin taken away the Liberty of his will,
he had likewise destroyed the foundation of all virtue, and the very nature of
man; for virtue would not have been such, had there been no possibility of
acting contrary; and man's nature would have been divine, because impeccable.
Therefore, says ^e, though we attribute this self-determining power to God as
the author of it, which was so necessary in the order of the Universe, we have
no reason to attribute the Origin of that evil to God which comes by the abuse
of that liberty. For, as he further adds, God does not at all cause that
aversion from Good, which is in the soul when it sins, but only gave such a
power to the soul, whereby it might turn its self to evil, out of which God
might afterward produce so much good, which could not otherwise have been
without it. So consonantly Page 186. 187^
to the Scripture does that Philosopher speak on this subject.

2. God cannot be said to be the author of sin, though he did not prevent the
fall of man, because he did not withdraw before his fall any grace or
assistance, which was necessary for his standing. Had there been indeed a
necessity of supernatural grace to be communicated to man for every moment to
continue him in his Innocence, and had God before man's fall withdrawn such
assistance from him, without which it were impossible for him to ^ave stood, it
would be very difficult freeing God from being the cause of the Fall of man.
But we are not put to such difficulties for acquitting God from being the
author of sin; for there appears no necessity at all for asserting any
distinction of sufficient and efficacious grace in man before his Fall; that
the one should belong only to a radical power of standing, the other to every
act of good which Adam did; For if God made man upright, he certainly gave him
such a power as might be brought into act without the necessity of any
supervenient act of grace, to elicite that habitual power into particular
actions. If the other were sufficient, it was sufficient for its end; and how
could it be sufficient for its end, if notwithstanding that, there were no
possibility of standing, unless efficacious help were superadded to it? God
would not certainly require any thing from the creature in his integrity, but
what he had a power to obey; and if there were necessary further grace to bring
the power into act, then the substracting of this grace must be by way of
punishment to man, which it is hard to conceive for what it should be, before
man had sinned, or e^se God must substract this grace on purpose that man might
^all, which would necessarily follow on this supposition, in which case Man
would be necessitated to fall, veluti cum subductis columnis dom us necessario
corruit, as one expresses it, as a house must needs fall when the pillars on
which it stood are taken away from it. But now if God withdrew not any
effectual grace from man, whereby he must necessarily fall, then though God
permit man to use his liberty, yet he cannot be said to be any ways the author
of evil, because man had still a posse si vellet, a power of standing, if he
had made right use of his Liberty, and God never took from man his adjutorium
quo potuit stare, and sine quo non potuit, as Divines call it, man enjoying
still his power, though by the abuse of his Liberty he fell into sin; so that
granting God ^o leave man to the use of his Liberty, yet we see God cannot in
the l^ast be charged with being the Author of sin, or of the Origin of evil,
by the History of the fall of man in Scripture: which was the thing to be
cleared.

We come now in the third place to compare that account given of the Origin of
evil in Scripture, with that which Sect. 8.
was embraced by Heathen Philosophers, in point of reason and evidence. There
was no one inquiry whatsoever in which those who had nothing but natural light
to guide them, were more to seek for satisfaction in, then this concerning the
Origin of evil. They saw by continual experience how great a Torrent of both
sorts of evils, of sin and punishment, did over flow the world; but they were
like the Egyptians, who had sufficient evidence of the overflowing their banks
by the River Nile, but could not find out the spring or the head of it. The
reason was, as corruption increased in the world, so the means of instruction
and knowledge decayed; and so as the Phoenomena grew greater, the reason of
them was less understood; the knowledge of the History of the first Ages of the
world, through which they could alone come to the full understanding of the
true cause of evil, insensibly decaying in the several Nations: Insomuch that
those who were not at all acquainted with that History of the world which was
preserved in Sacred Records among the Jews, had nothing but their own uncertain
conjectures to go by, and some kind of obscure traditions which were preserved
among them, which while they sought to rectify by their interpretations, they
made them more obscure and false then they found them. They were certain of
nothing but that mankind was in a low and degenerate condition, and subject to
continual miseries and calamities; they who cried up the most the (...), or the
self-determining power of the soul, could not certainly but strangely wonder,
that a Principle indifferent to be carried either way, should be so almost
fatally inclined to the worst of them. It was very strange that since Reason
ought to have the command of Passions by their own acknowledgement, the brutish
part of the soul should so master and enslave the rational, and the beast
should still cast the rider in man, the sensitive appetite should throw off the
power of the (...) of that faculty of the soul which was designed for the
Government of all the rest. The Philosophers could not be ignorant what slaves
they were themselves to this terrestrial Hyle, how easily their most mettalsom
souls were mired in the dirt, how deep they were sunk into corporeal pleasures,
that it was past the power of their reason to help them out. Nay when the soul
begins to be fledged again, after (...), or moulting at her entrance into the
body, which Plato speaks of, and strives to raise her self above his lower
world, she then feels the weight of such Plummets hanging at her feet, that
they bring her down again to her former fluttering up and down in her Cage of
earth. So Hierocles complains, that when reason begins to carry the soul to the
perception of the most noble objects, the soul with a generous flight ^ierocl:
in aurea Carmina. p. 77.
would soar above this world, (...), were it not horn down to that which is
evil by the force of passions, which hang like leads upon the souls feet. What
a strange unaccountable thing must this needs be to those who beheld the
constancy of the effect, but were to seek for the cause of it? it could not but
be clear to them that the (...) they were wont to extol so high, was (in the
state man was now in) but a more noble name for slavery; when themselves could
not but confess the (...), or inclination in the soul, was so strong to the
evil; and could that be an even balance, where there was so much down-weight in
one of the scales? unless they made, as some of them did, the voluntary
inclinations of the soul to evil, an evidence of her liberty in this most
degenerate condition, as though it were any argument that the prisoner was the
freer, because he delighted himself in the noise of his shackles. Neither was
this disorder alone at home in the soul, where there was still a Xantippe
scolding with Socrates, passion striving with reason; but when they looked
abroad in the world, they could not but observe some strange irregularities in
the Converse among men. What debaucheries, contentions, rapines, fightings, and
destroying each other, and that with the greatest cruelty, and that frequently
among Countrymen, Friends, nay relations, and kindreds! and could this
hostility between those of the same nature, and under the most sacred bonds of
union, be the result of nature, when even beasts of prey are not such to those
of their own kind? Besides all this when they summed up the life of man
together, and took an account of the weaknesses and follies of Childhood, the
heats and extravagancies of youth, the passions, disquietments, and
disappointments of men in their strength and height of business, the
inquietude, aches, and infirmities of old age, besides the miseries which
through every one of these all men are subject to, and few escape, into how
small a sum will the solid pleasure and contentment of the life of man be
reduced? Nay if we take those things in the world which men please themselves
the most in enjoyment of, and consider but with what care they are got, with
what fear they are kept, and with what certainty they must be lost, and how
much the possession of any thing fails of the expectation of it, and how near
men are upon the top of Tenariff to fall into the depth of the Sea, how often
they are precipitated from the height of prosperity into the depth of
adversity, we shall find yet much less that by the greatest Chymistrie can be
extracted of real satisfaction out of these things. Whence then should it come
that men's souls should so delight to seed on these husks, and to embrace these
clouds and shadows instead of that real good which is the true object of the
souls desire? They could easily see there was no pure, unmixed good in the
world, but there was a contemperation of both together according to that of
Euripides: (...),
(...).


There is a kind of continual mixture of good and evil in the world, which
Socrates observed upon the rubbing of his thigh where the fetters made it itch,
(...). Plat. in Pbaed.
What a strange thing is that which men are wont to call pleasure, how near of
kin is it to that which seems so contrary to it, pain?

Now the observing the strange and sudden vicissitudes of these things, and
what near neighbors pain and pleasure Sect. 9.
were to each other, (so that there is frequently a passage out of one into the
other) did yet more entangle them to give a clear account of the Origin of
both these. Those who believed there was a God, who produced the world and
ordered all things in it, did easily attribute whatever was good in the world
to the Fountain of all goodness; but that any evil should come from him they
thought it repugnant to the very notion of a Deity; which they were so far
right in, as it concerned the evil of sin, which we have already showed God
could not be the author of; but therein they showed their ignorance of the true
cause of evil, that they did no^ look upon the miseries of life as effects of
Gods Justice upon the world for the evil of sin. And therefore that they might
set the Origin of evil far enough off from God, they made two different
Principles of things, the one of good, and the other of evil; this Plutarch
tells us was the most ancient and universal account which he could meet with of
the origin of good and evil. To which purpose we have this ample Testimony of
his in his learned discourse, de Iside and Osiride, Plutarch. de Isid. and
Osir. p. 369. ed. Fr.
(...). Which words I have the more largely cited because they give us the most
full account of the antiquity, universality and reason of that opinion which
asserts two different principles of good and evil. It is a Tradition (says he)
of great antiquity derived down from the ancient Masters of Divine knowledge,
and Formers of Commonwealths, to the Poets and Philosophers, whose first author
cannot be found, and yet has met with firm and unshaken belief, not only in
ordinary discourses and reports, but was spread into the mysteries and
sacrifices both of Greeks and others, that the Universe did not depend on
chance, and was destitute of a mind and reason to govern it; neither was there
one only reason which sat at the stern, or held the reins, whereby he did
order and govern the world; but since there is so much confusion and mixture of
good and evil in the world, that nature does not produce any pure untainted
good; there is not any one who like a Drawer takes the liquor out of two
several vessels, and mixeth them together, and after distributes them; but
there are two principles and powers contrary to each other, whereof one draoes
us to the right hand, and directs us straight forward, the other pulls us back,
and turns us the other way; since we see the life of man so mixed as it is; and
not only that, but the world too, at least so much as is sublunary and
terrestrial, which is subject to many varieties, irregularities, and changes.
For if nothing he without a cause, and good cannot be the cause of evil, it
necessarily follows, that as there is a peculiar nature and principle, which is
the cause of good, so there must be another, which is the cause of evil.

But least we should think it was only a Sect of a kind of Heathen Manichees
which held this opinion; he tells us to prevent that (...), it was the opinion
of the most, and wisest, of the Heathen. Now these two principles some (says
he) call two opposite Gods, whereof the one is the cause of good, and the other
of evil; him they call (...); this (...): By this one would imagine that this
very ancient Tradition was nothing else, but the true account of the Origin of
evil, a little disguised. For the Scripture making the Devil the first author
of evil himself, and the first solicitor and tempter of man to it; who when
God directed him straight forward, pulled man back, and put him quite out of
his way, by which means all the miseries of the world came into it. For while
man kept close to his Maker, his integrity and obedience were to him what the
vasa umbilicalia are to the child in the Womb; by them he received what ever
tended to his subsistence and comfort; but sin cut those vessels asunder, and
proved the Midwife of misery, bringing man forth into a world of sorrow and
sufferings: Now, I say, the Scripture taking such especial notice of one, as
the chief of Devils, through whose means evil came into the world, this gave
occasion to the Heathens when length of time had made the original Tradition
more obscure, to make these two, God and the Demon, as two Anti-gods, and so
to be the causes, the one of all good, and the other of all evil. Which at last
came to that (which was the Devils great design in thus corrupting the
tradition) that both these Anti-gods should have solemn worship by Sacrifices,
the one by way of impetration for bestowing of good, the other by way of
Deprecation for averting of evil. Such Plutarch there tells us were the
Oromasdes and Arimanius of Zoroastres which were worshipped by the Persians,
the one for doing good, and the other for avoiding evil; the one they resembled
to light (or fire) the other to darkness and ignorance; what animals were good
and useful they ascribed to Oromasdes, and all venomous and noxious ones to
Arimanius, whom Plutarch elsewhere calls (...), the evil Demon of the
Persians. The same Diogenes Laertius relates of the Magi, the Philosophers of
Persia, that they made two distinct principles, Plut. in Alex.

Diog. Lac^tius pro. em. ad vit. Philosoph.


(...), a good and bad Demon; for which he quotes Dinon, Aristotle, Hermippus,
Eudoxus, and others. The same Plutarch makes to be the opinion of the ancient
Greeks, who attribute the good to Jupiter Olympius, the bad to Hades; the
Chald^ans, says he, make the Planets their Gods, of which two they suppose the
cause of good; two more of only a malignant influence, and other three to be
indifferent to either. The same he affirms of the Egyptians, that whatever was
evil, and irregular, they ascribed to Typho; what was good, comely and useful,
they attributed to Isis, and Osiris; to Isis as the passive, Osiris as the
active principle.

Thus we see how large a spread this opinion of the Origin of evil had in the
Gentile world; neither did it expire with Sect. 10.
Heathenism; but Manes retained so much of the Religion of his Country being a
Persian, that he made a strange medley of the Persian and Christian doctrine
together. For that was his famous opinion of which St. Austin tells us; Is^e
duo principia inter se diversa at que adversa, cade^que aeterna, and eterna hoc
est, semper fuisse composuit; du^sque naturas at que substantias, boni scilicet
and mali, sequens alios antiquos haereticos, opinatus est. St. Austin thinks
that Manes had h^s opinion concerning two principles from the ancient (...). de
Here Is. c. 46.
Heretics, by whom I suppose he means the Marcicnists and Valentinians; but it
seems more probable that Manes had his doctrine immediately from h^s
Countrymen, though it be generally thought that Scythianus and Buddas were his
masters i^ it. But from whomsoever it came, the opinion was me^rly Heathen, and
not more contrary to Scripture then it is to reason; the former I medd^^ not
with, that opinion being now extinct in the Christian world; I only briefly
consider the unreasonableness of it, to show what a far better account of the
Origin of evil the Scriptures give us, then was discovered by the Heathen
Philosophers. For on both sides that opinion is repugnant to the notion of a
Deity, so that while they would make two such Gods, they make none at all. For
how can the principle of good be God, if he has not Infinite power, as well as
goodness? and how can he have infinite power, if he has not the management of
things in the world? and how can he have the management of things, if they be
liable to evil, which the other God which is the principle of evil may lay upon
it; from which according to this supposition, the principle of good cannot
rescue it? So that they who hold this opinion cannot, as Sim^licius tells us,
give God (...), the half of that infinite power which belongs to him; for
neither can he keep the good creatures which he makes from the power of the
evil Demon, and therefore, if he loves them, must be in continual fears of the
power of the contrary principle, neither can he free them from the evil which
the other lays upon them; for then Gods power would be far greater then the
evil Demons, and so he could be no Anti-god. And on the other side the notion
or Idea of an Infinitely evil Being, is in its self an inconsistent Idea; for
it is an Infinite nonentity, if we suppose his very Being to lie in Being evil,
which is only a privation of goodness; and besides if he be Infinitely evil, he
must be infinitely contrary to the good Principle, and how can he be infinitely
contrary which enjoys several of the same perfections which the other has,
which are infinity of essence and necessity of existence? Now if this Principle
of evil be absolutely contrary to the other, it must be contrary in all his
perfections; for whatever is a perfection, belongs to that which is good; and
now if it be contrary in every perfection, Infinity of essence, and necessity
of existence, being two, it must be as contrary as is imaginable to them, by
which this evil Principle must be infinitely defective in Being and existence,
and so it will be an infinite non entity which yet exists, which is the height
of contradiction. Again, if there be such a contrary principle, which is the
cause of all evil, then all evil falls out unavoidably, and by the power of
this Infinitely evil principle, by which means not only all Religion, but all
virtue and goodness will be taken out of the world, if this evil principle be
infinite; and if not infinite, no Anti-god: and not only so, but all difference
of good and evil will be taken away (and then what need making two such
contrary principles to give an account of the Origin of evil?) for when once
evil becomes thus necessary, it loses its nature as a moral evil; for a moral
evil implies in it a voluntary breach of some known Law; but how can that
breach be voluntary, which was caused by an Infinite power in the most proper
way of efficiency? and thus if all freedom of will be destroyed (as it is
necessarily by this supposition) then no Government of the world by Laws can be
supposed, and consequently no reward or punishment, which suppose liberty of
action, and by this means all Religion, Laws, and Providence are banished out
of the world, and so this evil Demon will get all into his own hands, and
instead of two contrary principles, there will be but one infinitely evil
Demon. Which that there is not, appears by this, that notwithstanding all the
evil in the world there is so much good left in it, of which there would be
none, if th^s evil Demon had Infinite power. By this we see there cannot be a
principle infinitely evil; for while they go about to make two such contrary
principles infinite, they make neither of them so, and so while they make two
Gods, they take away any at all. So that this opinion of the Origin of evil,
is manifestly absurd, irrational, and contradictions.

But all the Heathen Philosophers were not so gross as to Sect. 11.
imagine two such Anti-Gods with infinitely active power; but yet those who
would not in terms assert it, might be driven to it by the consequence of their
opinion concerning the Origin of evil, which did suppose a necessity of it in
nature, as flowing from that passive principle out of which the world was
produced. Hence it was that Heraclitus as Plutarch tells us, attributed the
Origin of all things to discord De Isid. and Osiride.
and antipathy, and was wont to say, that when Homer wished (...). that all
contention were banished out of the world, that he did secretly curse the
Origin of things and wished the ruin of the world. So Empedocles called the
active principle which did good Harmony and Friendship, but the other (...). by
which he makes it to be a quarrelsome, pernicious, and bloody principle. The
same Plutarch tells us of those two renowned Philosophers, Pythagoras and
Plato. Thence he tells us the Pythagoreans called the principle of good (...).
Unity, finite, quiescent, straight, uneven number, square, right and splendid;
the principle of evil, they called (...). The Binary, Infinite, moving,
crooked, even, long of one side, unequal, left, obscure. The opinion of Plato
he tells us is very obscure, it being his purpose to conceal it; but he says
in his old age in his book de Legibus, (...), without any if's or and's, he
asserts the world to be moved by more then one principle, by two at the least,
(...). The one of a good and benign nature, the other contrary to it both in
its nature and operations. Numenius Chalcid. in Timae. p. 394.
in Chalcidius thus delivers the opinions of Pythagoras and Plato de originibus
as he speaks; Igitur Pythagoras quoque, inquit Numenius, fluidam and sine
qualitate sylvam esse censet; nec tamen ut Stoici naturae mediae, interque
malorum bonorumque viciniam, sed plane noxiam; Deum quippe esse (ut etiam
Platoni videtur) initium and causam bonorum, sylvam malorum: so that according
to Numenius, both Plato and Pythagoras attributed the origin of evil to the
malignity of matter, and so they make evils to be necessarily consequent upon
the Being of things. For thus he delivers expressly the opinion of Pythagoras;
qui ait, existente providentia, mala quoque necessario substitisse; propterea
quod sylva sit, and eadem sit malitia praedita: Platonemque idem Numenius
laudat, quod duas mundi ^^mas autumet. Unam beneficentissimam; malignam
alteram, sc. Sylvam. Igitur juxta Platonem mundo bona sua Dei, tanquam Patris
liberalitate collata sunt; mala vero, matris sylvae vitio cohaeserunt. But
Plutarch De Anim^ procreat. c Timae ^.
will by no means admit, that Plato attributes the Origin of evil merely to
matter; but he makes the principle of evil to be something distinct from
matter, which he calls (...), a confused, infinite, self-moving, stirring
principle; which (says he) he else where calls Necessity, and in his de
Legibus plainly, (...), a disorderly and malignant Soul, which cannot be
understood of mere matter, when he makes his Hyle (...), Without form or
figure, and destitute of all qualities and power of operation: and it is
impossible (says he) that that which is of its self such an inert principle as
matter is, should by Plato be supposed to be the cause and principle of evil,
which he elsewhere calls (...), Necessity which often resisted God and cast off
his reins. So that according to Plutarch Plato acquits both God and Hyle from
being the Origin of evil, (...), and therefore attributes it to that malignant
spirit which moves the matter, and is the cause of all the disorderly motions
in the world. But what this spirit should be, neither he nor any one else could
ever understand; what darkness and ignorance then was there among the wisest of
Philosophers concerning the Origin of evil, when they were so consused and
obscure in the account which they gave of it, that their greatest admirers
could not understand them!

But though Plato seemed so ambiguous in his judgment of the Origin of evil,
whether he should attribute it to the Sect. 12.
Hyle, or some malignant spirit in it, the Stoics were more dogmatical, and
plainly imputed the cause of evil to the perversity of matter. So Chalcidius
tells us, that the Stoics made matter not to be evil in its self as
Pythagoras, but that it was indifferent to either; perrogati igitur unde mala?
Chalcid. in Tim. p. 39^.
perversitatem seminarium malorum causati sunt: they made the perversity of
matter the Origin of evil; but as he well observes, nec expediunt adhu^
unde^^psa perversitas cum juxta ipsos duo sint initia rerum, D^^^^ and sylva.
Deus summum and praecellens bonum; sylva, ut censent, nec bonum nec malum. They
give no rational account whence this perversity of matter should arise, when
according to the Stoics, there are but two principles of things, God and
matter, whereof the one is perfectly good, the other neither good nor evil. But
this perversity they tell us is something necessarily consequent upon the
Generation of things. (...), these are affections, (viz. the disorders in the
world) which follow the Generation of things, as rust comes upon brass, and
filth upon the body, as the counterfeit Trismegistus speaks; so Maximus Tyrius
says that evils in the world are (...), not any works of art, but the
affections of M^xim. Tyrius Sermon. 25. Seneca de Provid c. 5.
matter. Non potest artifex mutare materiam, says Seneca, when he is giving an
account why God suffers evils in the world: and elsewhere gives th^s account
why evils came into he world, non quia cessat ars, sed quia id in quo exercetur
Prasat. ad nature. quaest.
inobsequens arti est. So that the Origin of evil by this account of it lies
wholly upon the perversity of matter, which it seems was incapable of being put
into better order by that God who produced the world out of that matter which
the Stoics supposed to be eternal. And the truth is, the avoiding the
attributing the cause of evil to God, seems to have been the great reason, why
they rather chose to make it matter necessary and coexistent with God, and this
was the only plausible pretense which Hermogenes had for following the
Platonists and Stoics in this opinion, that he might set God far enough off
from being the author of sin; but I cannot s^e what advantage comes at all by
this Hypothesis, but it is chargeable with as many difficulties as any other.
For, 1. It either destroys Gods omnipotency, or else makes him the 1.
approver of evil, so that if he be not auctor, he must be assentator mali, as
Tertullian speaks against Hermogenes, because he suffered evil to be in matter;
for, as he argues, aut Tertul. ad:. Hermog. c. 10.
enim potuit emendare sed noluit. aut voluit quidem, verum non potuit infirmus
Deus; si potuit and noluit, malus and ipse quia mal^ savit; and fic jam habetur
ejus licet non instituerit, quia tamen si noluisset illud ess^, non esset; ipse
jam fecit esse, quod noluit non esse, quo quid ^st ^urpius? si voluit esse quod
ipse noluit fecisse, adversum semetipsum egit, cum and voluit esse quod noluit
fecisse, and noluit fecisse quod voluit esse. So that little advantage is
gained for the clearing the true origin of evil by this opinion; for either
God could have taken away evil out of matter but would not, or else would but
could not; this latter destroys Gods omnipotency, the former his good-ness;
for by that means evil is in the world by his consent and approbation; for if
God would not remove it when he might, the Being of it will come from him; when
if he would have hindered it, it would not have been, and so God by not rooting
out of evil, will be found an assertor of it; male si per voluntatem; turpiter
si per necessitatem, aut famulus erit mali Deus, aut amicus; if Gods will were
the cause why sin was, it reflects on his goodness; if Gods power could not
hinder it, it destroys his omnipotency. So that by this opinion God must
either be a slave or a friend to evil. 2. This principle 2.
overturns the foundations of Religion, and all transactions between God and
men's souls in order to their welfare, because it makes evil to be necessarily
existent in the world; which appears from hence in that evil does result from
the Being of matter, and so it must necessarily be, as matter is supposed to
be; for whatever results from the Being of a thing, must be coexistent with it;
and so what flows from what does necessarily exist, must have the same mode of
existence which the Being its self has; as is evident in all the attributes of
God, which have the same immutability with his nature: now then if evil did
exist from eternity together with matter, it must necessarily exist as matter
does, and so evil will be invincible and unavoidable in the world; which if
once granted, renders Religion useless, makes Gods commands unrighteous, and
destroys the foundation of Gods proceedings in the day of judgment. 3. This
opinion makes God not to be the author of good, while it denies him to be the
Author of evil. 3.
For either there was nothing else but evil in this eternal matter, or there
was a mixture of good and evil; if nothing else but evil which did necessarily
exist, it were as impossible for God to produce good out of it, as to
annihilate the necessarily existent matter. If th^re were a mixture of good and
evil, they were both there either necessarily or contingently; how could either
of them be contingently in that which is supposed to be necessarily existent,
and no free agent? If they be both there necessarily, 1. It is hard conce^ving
how two such contrary things as good and evil, should both necessarily be in
the same uniform matter. 2. Then God is no more the Author of good then of evil
in the world; for he is said not to be the Auth^r of evil because it comes from
matter; and so it appears good does too, and so God according to this opinion,
is no more the Author of good then he is of evil. But if it be said, that good
is not in matter, but God produced that out of nothing: Then I reply, 1. If God
did produce good out of nothing, why did he not produce matter out of nothing
too; i^ he were so powerful as to do the one, there could be no de ect of power
as to the other. What insufficiency is there in Gods nature for producing all
things out of nothing, if he can produce any thing out of nothing? 2. If God
did produce good out of evil, why could he not have removed all evil out of
matter? for good could not be produced, but by the removing of some evil which
was before that good, and so God might have removed all evil out of matter. And
so by not doing it when he might, this opinion gives not the least satisfaction
in point of reason for acquitting God from being the Author of sin, nor for
clearing the true Origin of evil.

Thus we have now compared the account given of it in Scripture, with that
given by the Heathen Philosophers, and Sect. 13*
find it in every thing more clear, rational and satisfactory then theirs is.
Which doubtless is the reason, why the more modern Philosophers such as
Hierocles, Porphyrie, Simplicius and others, though otherwise great opposers of
Christianity, did yet in this side with the Scriptures and attribute the
original of evil, not to matter but to the Will of man. And whoever is
seriously conversant with the writings of those Philosophers, who were (...) of
the sacred succ^ssion, out of the School of Ammonius at Alexandria, such as
Plotinus, Porphyrius, Iamblichus and Hierocles, will find them wri^^ in a
higher strain concerning many weighty and importan^ (...), as of the degeneracy
of men's souls from God, and the way of the souls returning to him, then the
most sublime of the ancient Philosophers had done. Which speculations of theirs
no doubt arose not so much from the School of Plato, and Pythagoras, as of that
great restorer o^ Philosophy Ammonius of Alexandria; whose S^bolars Her^nnius*
Origin and Plotinus were. Who living and dying a ^hristian, as Eusebius and
Hierom assure us, whateve^ Porphyrius suggests to the contrary, did Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. l. 6. c^p. 19.

H^rony. de Script. Eccl. De vit. and Script. Porphyr. c. 6.


communicate to his S^holars the sublimer mysteries of Divine rev^l^tion,
together w^^h the speculations of the ancien^ Philo^ophers: which Holstenius
conceives he did with an adjuration o^ secrecy, which he tells us Porphyrius
himself acknowledges, that those three Scholars of Ammonius, Herennius, Origin
and Pl^tinus were under an obligation to each other not to reveal and discover,
though it were after violated by them. It is an easy matter to conceive what
an excellent improvement might be made of the ancient Platonic Philosophy by
the advantage of the Scriptures, by one who was so well versed in both of them
as Ammonius is supposed to have been; and how agreeable and becoming would that
Philosophy seem which had only its rise from Plato, but its height and
improvement from those rich and truly divine Truths which were inlaid with
them? The want of observing this, viz. whence it was that those excellent
discourses in the later Platonists had their true original, has given occasion
to several mistakes among learned men: as first the over valuing of the
Platonic Philosophy, as though in many of the discourses and notions of it, it
seemed to some (who were more in Love with Philosophy then the Scriptures) to
outgo what is discovered therein concerning the same things. A most groundless
and unworthy censure! when it is more then probable (and might be largely
manifested, were it here a fit opportunity) that whatever is truly generous and
noble in the sublimist discourses of the Platonists, had not only its primitive
rise, but its accession and improvement from the Scriptures, wherein it is
still contained in its native luster and beauty, without those paintings and
impure mixtures which the su^^^mest truths are corrupted with in the Platonic
writi^^. The reason of which is, though these Philosophers grew ^^ddenly rich
through the spoils they had taken out of the Scriptures, yet they were loath to
be known from whence they had them, and would seem to have had that out of
their own gardens which was only transplanted from the Sacred writings.
Therefore we find them not mentioning the Scriptures and the Christian doctrine
without some contempt of its meanness and simplicity; and what ever improvement
they had gained by them, they would have it less taken notice of by professing
their opposition to the Christians, as is notorious in those great
Philosophers, Porphyrius, Iamblichus, Hierocles, Simplicius and others. It
being their design to take so much and no more out of the Christian doctrine as
they could well suite with their Plat^nick notions, by which means they so
disguised the faces of the Truths they stole, that it were hard for the right
owners of them to know them again. Which was the grand artifice of their great
Master Plato, who doubtless by means of his abode and acquaintance in Egypt
about the time when the Jews began to flock thither, had more certain knowledge
of many truths of grand importance, concerning the Deity, the nature of the
soul, the Origin of the world, then many other Greek Philosophers had; but yet
therein lay his great fault, that he wrapped up and disguised his notions in such
a fabulous and ambiguous manner, that partly it might be less known from whence
he had them, and that they might find better entertainment among the Greeks,
then they were ever like to do in their plain and native dress. Which Plato
himself seems somewhere to intimate, when he says, that what the Greeks
received from the Barbarians, (...), they put it into Plato in Epinom.
a better fashion, i. e. they disguise it, alter and change it as they please,
and put it into a Greek habit, that it might never be suspected to have been a
Forraigner. Thence Tertullian speaks with a great deal of truth and freedom of
such Philosophers who did ingenii sitim de prophetarum font irrigare (as he
expresses it) that quenched their thirst after knowledge with the waters of
Jordan (though they did not like Apol. c. 47.
Naaman, cure the lepro^ic of the head by washing in them) for as Tertullian
says, the^ came only ex negotio curiositatis, more to please the i tch o^
their curiosity then to cure it.

And wherein they seemed most to agree with the Scriptures, their difference
was beyond their agreement. Siquidem Tertul. de A^^ma cap. 2.
vera quaeque and consonantia Prophetis aut aliunde commendant, aut aliorsum
subornant, cum maxima injuria veritatis quam efficient aut adjuvari falsis aut
patrocinari. Whatever the Philosophers speak agreeable to the Scriptures,
either they do not own whence they had it, or turn it quite another way,
whereby they have done the truth a great deal of injury by mixing it with their
corruptions of it, and making that little truth a plea for the rest of their
errors. Neither was this only among the ancient Philosophers, but the Primitive
Christians began to discern the underhand workings of such, who sought to blend
Philosophy and Christianity together; for Tertullian himself takes great notice
of such, who did, Veritatis dogmata ad Philosophicas sententias adulterare,
suborn Christianity to maintain Philosophy; which makes him cry out, Viderint
qui Stoicum and Platonicum, and Dialecticum Christianismum protulerunt; by
which we see what tampering there was betimes rather to bring Christianity De
Proscript. advers. haeret. cap. 7.
down to Philosophy, rather then to make Philosophy truckle under the truth and
simplicity of the Scriptures. Whether Ammonius himself, and some others of the
School of Alexandria, might be guilty in this kind, is not here a place to
enquire, though it be too evident in the writings of some, that they rather
seek to accommodate the Scriptures to the Sentiments of the School of Plato,
then to reform that by the Scriptures; but I say, however it were with those
who were Christians, yet those who were not, but only Philosophers, made their
great advantage by it. For when they found what was reconcilable with the
doctrine of Plato in the Scriptures, done already to their hands, by the
endeavors chiefly of Ammonius and Origin, they greedily embrace those
improvements of their Philosophy, which would tend so much to the credit of it,
and as contemptuously reject what they found irreconcilable with the dictates
of their Philosophy. Now what an unreasonable thing is it, when what ever was
noble and excellent in the Heathen Philosophy was derivative from(...)
Scriptures, as the sacred Fount^in of it, that the meeting with such things
should in the least redound to the prejudice of the Scriptures from whence it
was originally derived? when on the other side it should be a great
confirmation to our faith as to the Scriptures, that they who were professed
Philosophers and admirers only of reason, did so readily embrace some of those
grand Truths which are contained in the word of God.

For which we need no other instance, then that before Sect. 14.
us, concerning the Origin of evil, the making out of which will tend to the
clearing the last thing mentioned concerning it, which was that the most
material things in it are attested by the Heathens themselves. And this honey
which is gained out of the Lions mouth, must needs taste sweeter then any other
does. For it is a weak and groundless mistake on the other side, which is the
second (which arises from meeting things consonant to the Scriptures in the
writings of Philosophers) presently to conclude from such things that they were
Christians (as it is said some have lately done in the behalf of Hierocles.)
For there being such clear accounts given in Scripture of the grand
difficulties and perplexities which the minds of men were troubled with, when
these came to the knowledge of such who were of Philosophic and inquisitive
heads, we cannot but think they would meet with acceptance among them,
especially if they might be made consistent with their former speculations.
Thus it was in our present case concerning the Origin of evil, we have already
beheld the lamentable perplexities the ancient Philosophers were in about it,
what Maeanders they were lost in for want of a clue to guide them through them;
now it pleased God after the coming of Christ in the flesh ^o declare to the
world the only way for the recovery(...) souls and their eternal salvation, the
news of which being spread so far that it soon got among the Philosophers,
could not but make them more inquisitive concerning the state and condition of
their souls, and when they had searched what the Philosophers had formerly
discovered of it, their curiosity would presently prompt them to see what
account of things concerning the souls of(...)delivered by the preachers of
this New Doctrine. B^(...)they could not but presently understand that they
declared all men's souls to be in a most degenerate and low condition, by being
so continually under the power of the most unreasonable and unruly passions,
that they were estranged from God, and prone to fix on things very unsuitable
to their nature, as to all which, their own inward sense and experience could
but tell them that these things were notoriously true; and therefore, they
enquire further how these things came to be so; which they receive a full
account of in Scripture, that man's soul was at first created pure and holy and
in perfect friendship with God, that God dealt bountifully and favorably with
man; only expected obedience to his Laws; that man being a free agent did abuse
his liberty, and disobeyed his Maker; and thence came the true (...), the
feathers of the soul whereby it soared up to heaven, moulted away, and the soul
sunk below its self into a degenerate and apostate condition, out of which it
is impossible to be recovered without some extraordinary expression of Divine
Favor. Now what is there in all this account, but what is hugely suitable to
principles of reason, and to the general experience of the world, as to those
things which were capable of being tried by it? And those Philosophers who were
any thing ingenu^us and lovers of truth, could not but confess the truth of
those things which we are now speaking of, viz. That men's souls are in a very
degenerate condition; That the most rational account of it is, that man by the
act of his own will brought himself into it; and that in order to the happiness
of men's souls, there was a necessity of recovery out of this condition.

As to the degeneracy of the souls of men; This was the common complaint of
those Philosophers, who minded the Sect. 15. 1.
government of themselves, and the practice of virtue, especially of the
Platon^sts and Stoics. Seneca in all his moral Discourses, especially in his
Epistles, may speak sufficiently in behalf of the Stoics, how much they
lamented the degeneracy of the world. And the Platonists all complain of the
slavery of the soul in the body, and that it is here by way o^ punishment for
something which was done before; which makes me somewhat incurable to think,
that Plato knew more of the lapse of (...), then he would openly discover; and
for that end disguised it after his usual manner in that hypothesis of
prae-existence, which taking it Cabbalistically (for I rather think the opinion
of prae existence is so to be taken then the history of the Fall of man) may
import only this. That men's souls might be justly supposed to be created happy,
but by reason of the Apostasy of man's soul from God, all souls now come into
their bodies as into a kind of prison, they being enslaved to the brutish part
within them, there having been such a true (...), the soul being now deprived
of her chiefest perfections in this her low and degenerate condition. And it
seems far more rational to me to interpret those persons opinions to a
Cabbalistical, or an Allegorical sense, who are known to have designedly writ
in a way obscure and ambiguous, then to force those men's expressions to
Cabbala's, who profess to write a plain History, and that with the greatest
simplicity and perspicuity; But it cannot but seem very strange that an
hypothesis capable of being reconciled to the plain literal sense of the
Scriptures (delivered by a person who uses great artifice and cunning to
disguise his opinions, and sueh a person withal, who (by such persons
themselves who make use of this opinion to that end) is supposed to have been
very conversant with the writings of Moses) should be taken in its literal
sense, as it really imports prae-existence of each particular soul in the
g^ossest manner; and this should be made to be a part of the Philosophic
Cabbala of the writings of such a person, who uses not the least artifice to
disguise his sense, nor gives us anywhere the least intimation that he left
behind him such plaited pictures in his History of the beginning of the world,
that if you look straight forward, you may see a literal Cabbala, on the one
side a Philosophical, and on the other a Moral. But now if we remove the
Cabbala from Moses to Plato, we may find no incongruity or repugnancy at all
either as to Plato his way of writing, or the consonancy of the opinion so
interpreted to the plain genuine sense of Moses, if by Plato his opinion of the
Prae-existence and descent of souls, be understood by the former the happy
state of the soul of man in conjunct^^^ with God, and by the latter, the low
and degenerate condi^^on which the soul is in, after Apostasy from him. Which
^he later Platonists are so large and eloquent in expressing; Porphyrie where
he speaks of somethings he counsels men to do, has these words, But if we
cannot do them, let us at least do that which was so much lamented of old,
(...), which is (...). De Abstinent. lib 3. Sect. 27.
Let us at least join with our Forefathers in lamenting this, that we are
compounded of such disagreeing and contrary principles, that we are not able to
preserve divine, pure and unspotted Innocence. And Hierocles fully expresses
his sense of the degeneracy of mankind Hierocl. in Pythag. Carm. p. 261.
in these words: (...). The most of men in the world are bad, and under the
command of their passions, and grown impotent through their propensity to
earth; which great evil they have brought upon themselves, by their wilful
Apostasy from God, and withdrawing themselves from that society with him, which
they once enjoyed in pure light: which departure of men's souls from God, which
is so hurtful to the minds of men, is evident by their strong inclination to
the things of this world. The same Author mentions, with much approbation, that
speech of Heraclitus, speaking of those souls which are (...), which I cannot
better render, then undeclinably good, he says, (...): We live their death,
and die their life. (...). for man is now fallen down from that blessed Region,
and as Empedocles the Pythagorean speaks, (...)
(...).
Which words cannot be better rendered, then in the words the Scripture uses
concerning Cain, and he went from the presence of the Lord, and
was(...)fugitive in the earth, and under continual perplexiti^s. For the soul
of man, having left (...) (it is Hierocles his own expression) the pleasant
meadow of truth (a fit description Hierocles in Pythag. p. 254.
of Paradise) (...). Through the violence of her moulting, or deplumation, she
comes into this earthly body, deprived of that blessed life, which she before
enjoyed. Which he tells us is very consonant to Plato's sen^e o^ the (...), or
descent of souls, that when by reason of their impotency of fixing wholly ^on
God they suffer (...) some great loss, and a deprivation of former perf^ctions
(which I su^pose is me^nt by the (...), the ^^uls impotency of flying up above
this earthly world) then they lapse into these terrestrial and mortal bodies.
So Hierocles concludes with this excellent and Divine speech, (...). As
therefore by Apostasy from God, and the moulting of those feathers of our
souls, whereby we may be raised up above this world, we have fallen into this
place of mortals which is compassed about with evils: So by the casting off
carnal affections, and by the growth of virtues like new Feathers to the Soul,
we shall ascend to the place of pure and perfect good, and to the enjoyment of
a divine life. So much more becoming Christians do these excellent Philosophers
speak of the degeneracy of men's souls, and the consequents of it, then some who
would be accounted the followers of reason as well as of Christ, who make it so
much of their business to extenuate the fall of man. Which we find those who
were mere Philosophers, far more rational and ingenuous in, then those who
pretend so highly to reason; but I think with as little of it as any, supposing
the Scriptures to be of Divine authority. But it is not here our business to
consider the opinions of those who pretend to Christianity, but only of such
who pretending only to reason, have yet consented with the doctrine of the
Scriptures as the (...) of the Souls of men, that it lies in an Apostasy from
(...) and have lost those perfections which they had before.

That man's will is the cause of his Apostasy; this we have already manifested
at large from the testimony and reason Sect. 16. 2.
of Simplicius, and Hierocles is as large and clear in it as the other, with
expressions much of the same nature. (...). In aur. Carm. p. 258.
Man's nature lying between those beings which perpetually cont^mplate G^a, and
those which are incapable of it it sometimes ascends to those, and sometimes
descends to these, according as it observes or rejects the dictates of reason,
and so by reason of the Indiff^rency of the will is liable to take upon it the
si^ ilitu^e of God or a be^^st. (...). And whoever thoroughly considers this,
will easily understand, how men are the causes of their own evils, and become
unhappy and miserable through their own choice and self wills. Which he brings
in by way of explication of that truly golden Pythagorean verse, (...)
(...).
Men are grown miserable through their ownfault. And afterward Hierocles
excellently describes the nature of evil in these words, (...). Both our
natural and contracted pravity, is nothing els^ but the unnatural motion of our
free wills: according to which says he, (...). We dare to contradict the Laws
of God ^et being sensible how much we injure our selves when we ^o it and only
look at this that we are able to cast off the reins of(...)Laws from our necks.
And he truly says, that it is the greatest abuse of liberty to offend God,
^^en we either do what he forbids, or neglect what be(...)(...). (...) (...).
So that on both sides men bring misery upon themselves, by transgr^ssing the
divine Law, both by not doing what they are commanded, and by doing what they
are forbidden. So that he tully ascribes the Origin of evil to the (...), as
he calls it, the irregular motion of the will of man, which we have already
showed to be the doctrine of the Scriptures.

As to the necessity of the souls recovery from this condition in order to her
felicity, we have these Philosophers 3.
expressing their consent with the Scriptures; Porphyrius as St. Austin tells
us in the end of his first book De regressu August de Civit. D^i l. 10. c. 33.
animae, does acknowledge the necessity of a way of recovering souls, which
should be universal. Cum autem dicit Porphyrius, nondum receptam unam quandam
sectam, quae universalem viam animae contineat liberandae, -- nondumque in suam
notitiam eandem viam historiali cognitione perlatam, proculdubio confitetur
esse aliquam, sed nondum in suam venisse notitiam. But the necessity of the
purgation of the soul in order to its felicity, is so largely and fully
discoursed of by all the Platonists and Pythagoreans, that it will be needless
to insist upon it. Thus far then we find the account given of the Origin of
evil in Scripture to be embraced by the sublimest of the Heathen Philosophers,
as most rational and satisfactory; which was the thing to be proved.

Neither do we sind only the main of this account acknowledged as rational, but
we may trace some not obscure Sect. 17.
footsteps of the truth of the particular circumstances which concern the fall
of man: among the Heathens such as the Devils envying of man's happiness, his
disguising himself under the form of a serpent, and man's being thrown out of
Paradise upon his fall.

1. The Devils envying the happiness of man. It has been truly observed by a
learned man, that the original of that D. Casaubon Original of Temporal evils.
very ancient opinion among the Heathen de invidia Daemonis had its rise from
the history of the fall of man, which he has made out so fully, that I shall
the less need to prove it. And that there was an undoubted tradition of some
malignant spirits which envyed the(...)of mankind, appears by that ample
Testimony of (...) in his Dio mentioned by the same Author; (...). Plutarch was
much troubled to give an account of the apparitions which Brutus and Dio who
were learned and Philosophical men were haunted withal; and doubts he can give
no just account of it, unless he embraced that very ancient tradition (which
yet seemed absurd and incredible,) viz. that there are certain wicked and
malignant Demons, which envy good men, and withstand their enterprises, by
raising fears and troubles to them, that so they might hinder them in their
pursuit of virtue; lest if they continue steadfast and unmovable in good, they
should be at last partakers of greater felicity then they enjoy. There being
then so ancient a tradition of such (...) (as the learned man mentioned has
more fully showed in his notes on this place of Plutarch,) gives a great
confirmation to the truth of what the Scripture reports concerning the Devils
being so great an instrument in procuring the fall of man. To him therefore I
refer the inquisitive reader, and shall only add to the Testimonies of him
cited, that of Xenocrates in Plutarch de I side and Osiride, where he says
that the calamities of life and misfortunes men meet with, do not Plutarch. de
Isid. and Osi^. p. 361.
agree with that veneration which we have for the Deity and good spirits,
(...). But that there are in the air some great and potent Beings, which are of
a surly and malignant nature, and rejoice to do men all the mischief they can.
Iamblichus in his answer to Porphyrius concerning the Egyptian mysteries,
undertakes to give an account Jamblichus de myster. p. 105.
of these evil Spirits or Demons, and that from them the Origin of evil in
the world is; for thus he speaks, (as he is translated by Ficinus) Si verum est
quod de Idolis dicebamus, improbisque Daemonibus, hinc sane exoritur multiplex
origo malorum. Simulant enim Deorum praesentiam, daemonumque bonorum,
ideoque(...)suum jubent esse justum, ut ipsi videantur boni, sici^(...)Dii;
quoniam vero natura sunt mali, rogati mala infer, libenter inferunt, atque
nobis ad injusta conducunt. Hi sunt omnino qui and in oraculis mentiuntur and
fallunt, and turpia consulunt atque peragunt. By which we see he acknowledges
some spirits who^e natures are wicked, and help men to do evil, and that these
very spirits may sometimes command that which is good, lest they should be
suspected to be what they are, of a wicked and malignant nature, which only
design the ruin of men. By which we have a good account of whatever was
commendable delivered by the Heathen oracles, which yet might come from the
Devil still, by this confession of Iamblichus himself.

For the Devils appearing under the form of a serpent, It is very probably
conjectured, that from hence it was that the Sect. 18. 2.
Prince of those who contended with Saturn, was by that aenigmatical writer
Pher^cydes Syrius called (...). Celsus who had so little ^kill in antiquity as
to think that the history of Moses was as to many passages of it taken out of
Heathen Fables, insists on this very story of Ophioneus as the groundw^rk of
that relation in Genesis concerning the Fall. But Origin well answers him,
(...). Orig c. Cells. lib. 6.
See therefore if this rare Antiquary who charg^^h us with impi^^y in
corrupting and alt^^ing the Heathen Fables, be not himself ^er^ justly
chargeable with the same fault, not understanding the far greater antiquity of
the writings of Mo^es, then either of Heraclitus or Pherecydes, or Homer
himself which reports the story of that evil one which fell from heaven. (...)
((...)) (...). For the Serpent (from which O hioneus in Pherecydes derived his
name) which was the cause why man was cast forth of Paradise, does intimate
some such thing* while under a pretense of Divinity, and of
a(...)condition(...)fi st deceived the woman, and by her means(...)man. C^lius
Rhodiginus c^lls this Ophioneus Daemonicum Serpentem, qui antesignanus fu^rit
Antiq. lect. l. 2. c 7.

Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. l. 1* cap. 10.


agminis a Divinae mentis placito deficientis. This Pherecydes as appears by
Eusebius, had much converse with the Phaenicians; where he purposely speaks
concerning this Ophioneus. Now the Phaenicians as Eusebius likewise tells us,
worshipped their God under the Form of a Serpent; which probably might be
occasioned by the Devils ambition and Tyranny over men, that he would be
worshipped among them in that very Form wherein he had done so much mischief to
the world. It was very early in the world, when the Phaenicians and Egyptians
did begin to adore their Gods under the Form of Serpents, for the beginning of
it is attributed to Taautus by Eusebius, (...). Neither was this only among the
Phaenicians and Egyptians, but wherever the Devil reigned, the Serpent was
had in some peculiar veneration: thence Justin Martyr says, (...); the Serpent
was the Symbol of Apolog. 2.
adoration among them; and was the proper Indicium or note of a consecrated
place as is evident by that of Persius, Pinge duos angues; pueri sacer est
locus. Satyr. 1.
Thence the Scholiast on Aristophanes on that place in Plutus (...), observes
(...), so that where ever any God or Hero was to be worshipped, there were
Serpents painted to denote so much. So Orus Apollo says of the Egyptians,
(...), they were wont to Heins. Aristarch. p. 18. ed. 1627.
put the form of a golden basilisk to their Gods. Heinsius conceives that the
first worship of Apollo at Delphi was under the form of a Serpent, whether
Nonnus tells us that Cadmus the Phaenician went upon his first coming into
Baeotia, and from hence he derives the name Pytho from the Hebrew (...) which
signifies a Serpent. Ut non dubitandum sit, says he, quin Pythius Apollo, hoc
est, Spurcus ille spiritus, quem Hebraei Ob and Abaddon, Hellenist^^ ad verbum
(...), caeteri (...) dixerunt, sub hac(...)qua miseriam humano generi invexit,
primo cultus sit in Graecia. And which is further observable, the Devil was
always ambitious to have the world think that the knowledge of good and evil
was to come by the Serpent still; thence the famous oracle of Apollo here at
Delphi; thence came the use of Serpents so much in Divination, thence (...)
signifies to divine from (...) a Serpent; and so among the Greeks (...) is
taken in the same sense, from (...) a Serpent. So that excellent Glossographer
Hesychius; (...). The Serpent was reckoned among the pedestria auspicia by the
Romans; and Homer tells in that solemn divination concerning the Greeks success
at Troy there appears, (...). ^^^d. B.
Which says Heinsius, is an exact description of the Nachas; whom they would
have so called from the marks on h^s back, which they accurately observed in
divination. Thus we see how careful the Devil was to advance his honor in the
world under that Form, wherein he had deceived mankind into so much folly and
misery.

We meet with some remainders of man's being cast out of Paradise upon his fall
among the Heathens. Origin 3.
thinks that Plato by his converse with the Jews in Egypt, Origin. c. Cells. l.
4. p. 189.
did understand the history of the fall of man, which he after his way
aenigmatically describes in his Symposiacks. Where he brings in Porus the God
of plenty feasting with the rest of the Gods; after supper Penia comes a
begging to the door; Porus being drunk with Nectar, goes into Jupiters garden,
and there falls asleep; Penia observing it steals to him, and by this deceit
conceived by him. In this Fable of Plato, Origin takes notice what a near
resemblance the garden of Jupiter has to Paradise, Penia to the Serpent which
circumvented Adam, and Porus to man who was deceived by the Serpent. Which he
conceives more probable because of Plato his custom, (...), to wrap up those
excellent things he knew under some fables because of the v^gar; for which he
after speaks of his custom in altering and disguising what he had from the
Jews, lest he should too much displease the fabulous Greeks, if he should
adhere too close to the Jews, who were so infamous among them. Some have
thought the story of Paradise was preserved among the Heathens in the fable of
the gardens of Adonis which comes near that of Eden; but what footsteps may be
gathered of the truth of Scripture history in the Heathen Mythology, will
appear afterward. Thus much here then may serve to have manifested the account
which the Scripture gives of the Origin of evil by the fall of man to be in
its self rational, and attested by the consent of such persons who cannot be
suspected of any partiality to the Scriptures.

We come now to consider the other grand difficulty which Sect. 20.
concerns the Origin of evil and the truth of Divine providence together.
Which is, that if sin be the cause of misery, and there be a God which governs
the world; whence comes it to pass that the worst of men do so frequently
escape sufferings, and the best do so commonly undergo them? This has been in
all ages of the world where men have been Philosophical and inquisitive, one of
the great inquiries which the minds of men have been perplexed about. The true
and full resolution of which question, depends much upon those grounds and
principles which are discovered to us by Divine revelation in the Scriptures,
concerning the grounds of Gods patience toward wicked men, the nature and end
of sufferings which good men are exercised with. And certainly this should very
much commend the Scriptures to all sober and inquisitive persons, that they
contain in them the most clear and certain grounds of satisfaction to the minds
of men, in such things, wherein they are otherwise so irresolved: But of that
afterward; Our present business is to give an account of this difficulty from
natural reason, which will be most satisfactorily done by the producing those
grounds, from which they have resolved this question, cur malisben^, and bonis
male, who either have not had, or at least owned any thing of Divine
revelation. I begin with that which does concern the prosperity and impunity of
wicked men, which men have with mo^^ confidence insisted on, o^ this account,
because all men could not but understand a general reason of sufferings, by
reason there were none whose consciences could wholly acquit them of evil
actions; but why persons notoriously wicked should live in impunity, when
others suffer, that they were unable to give an account of. And this was the
common pretense of Atheism, as Simplicius tells us, (...) Comment in Epictet. c.
38. p. 223.
(...),
(...).


It comes to pass, that such who have no grounded belief of a Deity, when they
observe the miseries of good men, and the tranquillity and felicity of bad men,
they regard not the common notions they have of a Deity, and are ready to cry
out with the Tragaedian (or rather of Aristophanes in his Plutus) Shall I not
dare to say there are no Gods,
When those do prosper who have injured me?


And it is observable; that the most of those who have taken occasion among the
Heathens to question providence, have done it upon some remarkable injury which
they have conceived to be done to themselves, and so we have ground to think
that it was more passion and interest, then any clear reason which was the
inducement to it. So Diagoras resolves to set up for an Atheist, because the
perjured person was not struck dead in the place.

And Jason in Seneca when he sees Medea fly away after killing his children,
cries out, Testare nullos esse qua veheris Deos.
Thou tell the world there are no Gods that way
Where thou do fly.


And so Claudian, who largely reasons the case on both sides, for Providence
and against it, at last tells us what it was which was the main cause of his
doubts: viz. the long impunity of Rufinus, Abstulit hunc tandem Rufini poena
tumultum
Absolvitque Deos.
Rufinus death does clear the Gods, and set
My mind at ease.


But because some carry it higher, as Cotta in Tully, who Tully l. 3. de Not.
Deor.
reasons the most (as became a Statesman) in reference to such persons who had
been useful or hurtful to Common wealths, we may suppose there might be
somewhat more of reason then interest in such argumentations; and yet even in
those discourses we may still find that the main original of this quarrel
against Providence was an over-high esteem of themselves, that they thought
they deserved better from the Gods then to receive such injuries, or undergo
such calamities. Therefore Cotta cries out on Providence, because such persons
who were useful to the Roman Commonwealth were destroyed when the enemies to
it escaped, as though Providence had been only a Tutelar Deity of Rome, and had
nothing to do elsewhere. Thence he cries out, if there be Providence, why were
the two Scipio's destroyed in Spain by the Carthaginians? Why was Maximus
killed by Hannibal? Why were the Romans with Paulus ruined at Cannae? Why did
Regulus undergo so much cruelty by the Carthaginians? Why did not Africanus die
in his own bed? Nay, says he, to come nearer home, why is my Uncle Rutilius in
banishment? Why was my friend Drusus killed in his own house? On the otherside,
why did Marius die in peace, and the most cruel Cinna enjoy so long
tranquillity? with many other instances of both sorts. But this is it which I
take notice of these for, because we hereby see how common it is for men to
questi^^ providence, more out of Passion and Interest, then ou^ of any solid
grounds of reason.

Let us therefore appeal from persons who were particularly Sect. 21.
engaged by some private interest in those passages, from whence they would
infer that there was no providence, to such who stood by unconcerned, and made
use of the free dictates of their reason in these cases. And such persons when
they come to reason the case like Philosophers, and men out of passion, have
given satisfactory and rational accounts why God in his wise Providence may
sometimes suffer the worst of men, to go on in impunity, when good men may go
through the troubles of this world. As,

1. God forbears wicked men, to propound the example of his goodness to their
imitation, to teach them not to revenge their injuries too greedily on each
other. This Plutarch, in that admirable discourse of his on this subject,
insists on as Plutarch. de his qui sero pu^iuntur a numine p. 550. ed. Fr.
his first reason, why God does not presently punish wicked men. For, says he
out of Plato, God has set forth himself in the midst of the world for our
imitation; and true virtue is nothing else but an imitation of the Divine
nature. And therefore God, says Plato, gave man the use of fight, that by the
sight of the heavenly bodies, and the exact motions which are in them, men
should learn (...), that which was comely and orderly, and hate all disorderly
and irregular motions; For as he excellently speaks: (...). There is no greater
benefit man can receive from God, then to attain true virtue by the imitation
and pursuit of those perfections which are in him. And thence, says Plutarch,
God forbears to punish wicked men presently, not least if he should punish them
he might do that he would repent of afterward, (...), but that he might take
away the fury and violence of men in revenging their injuries on each other,
that they should not do it in wrath and anger, with as much eagerness as they
satisfy their hunger and thirst, whereby they do, (...), leap upon them who
have injured them, with as much sury as a wild beast upon his prey; but men
should learn to imitate (...), Gods gentleness and patience, whereby he gives
the offender time to consider with himself what he has done, before he does
severely punish him. As Plato when his Boy had angered him, stood still a while
without striking him, (...), as he said, punishing himself first for his anger,
before he would chastise the Boy for his fault; and Archytas when he saw how
negligent his workmen had been, and began to be very angry with them, told
them, (...), It is well for you that I am angry with you. Now says Plutarch,
if the consideration of this forbearance in men should tend to moderate men's
heat and violence, how much more should the consideration of the leni^y and
patience of God do it (...), and to account gentleness and forbearance to be an
imitation of divine perfections. Now what can be more rational and agreeable to
our apprchensions of a divine nature then this is, that he should show his
goodness to all, and by his forbearance of so many, teach the world more
meekness and gentleness toward each other? For if offenses rise by the quality
of the person against whom they are committed, no injuries can be so great in
one man to another, as those affronts are men put upon God by their continual
provocations of him: And if God then be of so infinite patience to forbear such
who have offended him, what justice and reason is there but that men should
express more lenity and patience toward each other? So Hieroc^^^ excellently
speaks, (...). A good man imitates God in the measures of friendship, who hates
no man, and extends his loving kindness to all mankind. Of which Seneca
likewise somewhere speaks. Ne Deos quidem immortales ab hac tam effusa
benignitate sacrilegi negligentesque little deterrent; utuntur natura sua, and
cuncta, interque illa, ipsos munerum suorum malos interpretes juvant. The
Divine Benignity extends its self to all, even to such as affront and dishonor
them and abuse the gifts they bestow upon them. And since, there is so much
truth and reason in that of Plato, (...), It is the height of goodness to be
like to God, we see what excellent reason there is for tha^ command of our
Savior, Love your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again;
and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Luke 6. 35, 36.
children of the highest; for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil.
Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father is merciful.

2. God forbears presently to punish wicked men, to give them time to become
better. This the same excellent Moralist gives as another account of Gods
patience, that thereby he gives them (...), a space to repent as Plutarch. p.
551. Rev. 2. 21.
the Scripture calls it. For men, says Plutarch, in their punishments look at
nothing further then mere satisfying their revenge and malice, and that makes
them pursue those that have offended them with so much rage and eagerness; but
God, says he, aims at the cure of those who are not utterly incurable. To such
he gives, (...), a time to reform in. Here he brings in the examples of such
who were bad at first, and came afterward to be changed from what they were;
for which he instanceth in Cecrops, who was thence called (...), because from a
cruel severe Prince, he became gentle and mild; and so Gelon and Hieron of
Sicily, and Pisistratus the son of Hippocrates, who from being Usurpers became
excellent Princes. If Miltiades, says he, had been cut off while he acted the
part of a Tyrant, or Cimon in his Incest, or Themistocles in his debaucheries,
what had become of Marathon, Eurymedon, Dianium, by which the Athenians got so
great glory and liberty? and as he well observes, (...), Great Spirits do
nothing mean; (...). That sharp and active spirit that is in them can never lie
at rest by reason of its vigor, but they are tossed up and down, as it were in
a Tempest, till they come to a settled composed life. But as the multitudes of
weeds argues the richness and softness of the ground, though for the sake of
those weeds one not skild in husbandry would not account such ground worth
looking after; so, says he, (...); great spirits usually bring forth no
commenaable fruits at first; which we considering the danger and hurtfulness
of, are presently for cutting them down; but one that more wisely considers the
generous nature which may lie under this ill fruit, waits time and leisure,
till reason and age begins to master these headstrong passions. And therefore
according to the prudent Law of the Egyptians, the woman with child must be
reprieved till the time of her delivery.

3. God spares some wicked men from punishment to make them instruments of his
justice in punishing others. Ev^ol^ (...), as Plutarch goes on, God spares some
from punishment that by them he might punish others. Which he supposes to be
the case of all Tyrants; and thereby Cotta's difficulty concerning Marius,
Cinna, Sylla and those other cruel and Tyrannical persons, who had usurped
authority among them, is clearly taken off: For Divine Providence might let
those trees grow from whence he intended to take his rods to scourge others
with all. God makes the same use of Tyrants (says Plutarch) to commonwealths,
that Physicians do of the gall of a Hyaena and other hurtful creatures, which
may be good for curing some dangerous diseases; so may the Tyrannical severity
and sharpness of such persons be continued (...), till the diseases of the
Political body be cured by these sharp Medicines. Such a one was Phalaris to
the Agrigentines, and Marius to the Romans: and the Oracle told the Sicyonians
in express terms, (...); the City wanted some severe discipline. Thence
Totilas, when he found what strange success he had in his enterprises, called
himself Flagellum Dei, and thought God raised him up on purpose to be a scourge
for the sins of the world. And no doubt those strange passages of the Roman
Commonwealth (which made Cato at least dispute providence, and say res divinas
multum habere caliginis, when he saw Pompey successful as long as he served his
ambition, but presently overthrown when he stood for the Commonwealth) these
things, I say, had a higher end then they looked at, which was to make both
Pompey and Caesar the instruments of Divine justice to punish the Romans for
their lusts, ambition and cruelty, which were never greater then in that age.
Now then if God may justly punish offenders, why may he not spare some to make
them his instruments in the punishing of others, especially since after he has
used his rods he may cast them into the fire too? as was evident in the
instance of Caesar, who after all his slaughters and triumphs was murdered in
the Senate, and that by some who had been as active as any for him. And herein
divine justice, both as to the punishment of the persons and the means of it,
has been very remarkable in multitudes of instances, which every ones reading
may afford him.

4. Therefore, another account why God may spare wicked men a great while, is,
That divine providence might more remarkably be observed in the manner of their
punishment afterward. Plutarch tells us of Callippus, who was stabd by his
enemies with the samd Dagger with which he had killed Dion under a pretense of
friendship. And when Mitius the Argive was killed in a tumult, afterward upon
the day of a solemn show, a brass statue in the market place fell upon his
murderer and killed him there. But most remarkable is the story of Belsus
recorded by the same author, who having killed his Father and a long time
concealed it, goes one night to supper to some Friends, and while he was there,
thrusts up his spear into a swallows nest and pulls it down and kills the young
ones; his Friends asking him the reason of so strange an action: (...); Do not
you bear, says he, how they falsely accuse me, and cry out that I have killed my
Father? Which being by the persons present carried to the King, and the truth
of it found out, he was executed for it. Such strange ways does providence
sometimes use to show how vigilant it is, even when we think it sleeps the most.

5. Though God spares the persons of wicked men, he does not defer their
punishment, when the thoughts of their evil actions is the greatest torment to
them; Maxima peccat^ pena est, peccasse, as Seneca speaks. Sin bears its own
punishment along with it. Wickedness is (...) the most exquisite contriver of
misery, which fills the minds of those who commit it with continual
consternations, anxieties and perplexities of mind. But as that often and
deservedly cited author on this subject, Plutarch tells us, most men are in
this like Children, who when they behold malefactors in the Theaters in their
cloth of gold and purple robes, with their crowns on their heads dancing about,
they admire them, and imagine them to be most happy men, till they see them
lashed and beaten, and fire come out from their brave apparel; so says he, as
long as men see others in their pomp and grandeur, they think them far from
punishment, till they behold their execution, which says he, is not so much
the entrance of their punishment as the perfection of it. So that the longer
the time of their lives is, the longer is the time of their punishment here;
(...); they are not punished when they grow old, but they are grown old in
punishments. Cannot we say a person is punished while he is in prison and has
his fetters upon him, till his execution comes? nor that one that has drunk
poison, is a dying while he walks about till the cold comes to his heart and
kills him? if we deny, says he, that all the inquietudes, horrors and
anxieties of mind which wicked men have, are no part of their punishment, we
may as well say that a fish which bath swallowed the hook is not taken, because
he is not fried, or cut in pieces. So it is with every wicked man, he has
swallowed the hook when he has committed an evil action ((...)) and his
conscience within him, as he expresses it, (...). Which in the Prophets
expression is, the wicked are like a troubled sea which casts forth nothing but
mire and dirt. As Isa. 57. 31.
Apollodorus dreamt, that he was flead, and boiled by the Scythians, and that
his heart spoke to him out of the Cauldron, (...), I am the cause of all this.
God deals by wicked men as Caligula was wont to say of those he commanded to be
executed, ferit ut sentiant se mori, he so punishes them as to make them
sensible of their punishments. And as Tacitus speaks of cruel and wicked
persons, quorum mentes si recludantur poss^nt aspici laniatus and ictus; quando
ut corpora verberibus, ita saevitia, libidine, malis consult is animus
dilaceretur. Wiekedness is the only fury which continually haunts and lashes
those who delight in it, and leaves still behind it (...), loathsome and
terrible perturbations, secret gripings of conscience and self condemning
thoughts for their folly and wickedness; like Lysimachus, who for extreme
thirst offered his Kingdom to the Getae to quench it, which when he had done,
(...). What a wretch was I (says he) to lose such a Kingdom for so short a
pleasure! And though wicked men be not sensible of the loss of a far more
glorious Kingdom then this of Lysimachus, viz. that of heaven, yet they cannot
but be sensible how much they have lost that Kingdom which every good man has
in the tranquillity of his spirit, and the command of his passions.

6. The time that God spares wicked men, is not so long as we think for. It is
all one, as Plutarch says, as if we should complain, that the malefactor was
punished in the evening and not in the morning; Gods forbearance is but for a
very little time, compared with his own duration. We measure God by the short
hourglass of our own time, when we are so ready to confine him to our
measures. The time seems long to us, but it is as nothing in its self: (...),
the whole life of man compared with eternity is nothing. Besides all this time
God suffers wicked men to live here, he has them under safe custody; he does
but let them take the air within the prison-walls, or it may be they may play
and sport themselves there, but there is no possibility of escaping out of the
hands of Divine justice.

7. God forbears wicked men here, because the time is to come wherein God
intends to punish them. This is the highest vindication of Divine Providence as
to the present impunity of wicked men in the world, because this is not the
proper season for the open execution of Justice. There are but few in
comparison whom Justice causes to be executed in the ^rison, of what are
reserved for the general Assizes; God reserves them for a fair and open trial,
for the greater vindication of his honor and manifestation of his Justice to
the world. And although Gods judgments even in this world be sometimes so
remarkable, that we cannot but see a hand of Providence in them, yet they are
but few whom God does so remarkably punish here to make us more firmly believe
a day of judgment to come. Which though it be most clearly and fully revealed
in Scripture, yet the Heathens themselves from mere reason have had such a
persuasion of it, that they have given this as another great reason, why God
did forbear to punish wicked men here, because he did reserve them for future
punishment. For as the same Moralist speaks in the same discourse concerning
the soul, (...), this present life is the place of the souls Plut. p. 561.
combat, which when it has finished, it then receives according to its
performance of it. And as he before speaks, (...). The same reason which
confirms providence, does likewise confirm the immortality of the soul; and if
one be taken away, the other follows. (...). And if the soul does subsist after
death, it stands to the greatest reason that it should there receive either
reward or punishment. Thus we see how far natural light and moral reason will
carry men in the vindicating Divine Providence as to the present impunity of
wicked men.

The other part which concerns the sufferings of good men is not of so great
difficulty, because there are none so good Sect. 22.
as not to have a mixture of evil in them, and as they have a mixture of evil,
so they have but a mixture of punishment; none lying under so great miseries
here but withal they have some share in the comforts of this life. And
therefore it is less wonder, that this part of Divine Providence which concerns
the sufferings of good men, has not wanted some among the Heathen Moralists
who have made it their design to vindicate it; which setting aside what
Simplicius on Epictetus and many others have done, is fully performed by Seneca
in his tract on this very s^^^^ct, ^^ur bonis male sit, cum sit Providentia,
(as Muretu^^ restores the title of that book) wherein these following accounts
are given of it.

1. God brings them up as his children under sharp discipline for their future
benefit. A good man in Seneca's language, is discipulus Dei, aemulatorque, and
vera progenies: which in the language of the Scripture is one taught of God, a
follower of Senec. de Provid. c. 1
God, and one born of him. Now says he, Parens ille magnificus, virtutum non
lenis exactor, sicut severi patres, durius educat. God who is the great Father
of good men, keeps them under discipline while under age, and by hardship fits
them for the practice of virtue. Thence he bids us take notice of the different
indulgence of Fathers and Mothers to their Children; the Father he hastens them
to school, suffers them not to be idle on their playdayes, makes them toil and
sometimes cry; the Mother she is all for holding them in her lap, keeping them
out of the Sun, and from catching cold, would not willingly have them either
cry or take pains. Patrium habet Deus adversus bonos animum, and illos fortius
amat. God bears the indulgence of a Father toward his children and loves them
with greater severity.

2. Good men receive benefit by their sufferings; quicquid evenit in suum
colorem trahit, says Seneca of a good man, which in the language of the
Apostle is, every thing works together for his good. The sea loses nothing,
says he, of its saltness by the rivers running into it, neither does a good
man by the current of his sufferings. And of all benefits which he receives,
that of the exercise and trial of his virtue and patience is most discernable.
Marcet sine adversario virtus; as soon as Carthage was destroyed, Rome fell to
Luxury: True wrestlers desire to have some to try their strength upon them; cui
non industrio otium poena est? an active spirit hates idleness and cowardice;
for etiamsi ceciderit, de genu pugnat, though his legs be cut off, he will
fight on his knees.

3. It redounds to Gods honor when good men bear up under sufferings. Ecce par
Deo dignum vir fortis cum mala fortuna compositus. It is a spectacle God
delights to see, a good man combat with calamities. God does in Seneca's phrase
quosdam fastidio transire* passes them by in a slight; an old wrestler scorns
to contend with a coward, one who is vinci paratus, ready to yield up
presently. Calamitates sub jugum mittere proprium magni viri est, It argues a
noble spirit to be able to subdue miseries.

4. It tends to the trial and increase of their strength Seneca highly extols
that speech of the Philosopher Demetrius, Nihil infelicius eo cui nihil unquam
evenit adversi; non licuit enim illi se experiri. He is the most unhappy man
who never knew what misery meant; for he could never know what he was able to
bear. And, as he says, to pass ones life away sine morsu animi, without any
trouble, it is ignorare rerum naturae alteram partem, not to know what is upon
the reverse of nature. Idem licet fecerint qui integri revertuntur ex acie,
magis spectatur qui sancius redit. Though he that comes home sound might fight
as well as he that is wounded, yet the wounded person has the more pity, and
is most cried up for his valor. The Pilot is seen in a tempest, a Soldier in
battle, and a good man in sufferings. God does by such, as Masters do by
Scholars, qui plus laboris ab his exigunt, quibus certior spes est: who set the
best wits the hardest tasks.

5. God exercises good men with sufferings, to discover the indifferency of
those things which men value so much in the world, when he denies them to good
men. Blindness would be hateful, if none were blind but such whose eyes were
put out; and therefore Appius and Metellus were blind. Riches are no good
things, therefore the worst as well as the best have them. Nullo modo magis
potest Deus concupita traducere, quam si illa ad turpissimos defert, ab optimis
abigit. God could not traduce or defame those things more which men desire so
much, then by taking them away from the best of men, and giving them to the
worst.

6. That they might be examples to others of patience and constancy; For as
Seneca concludes, nati sunt in exemplar, they are born to be patterns to
others. If to these things we add what the Word of God discovers concerning the
nature, grounds, and ends of afflictions, and that glory which shall be
revealed, in comparison with which exceeding weight of glory these light and
momentany afflictions are not at all to be valued, then we have a clear and
full vindication of Divine Providence, as to the sufferings of good men, as
well as to the Impunity of such as are wicked. But how ever from hence we see
how far the mere light of reason has carried men in resolving these
difficulties concerning Gods Providence in the world, and what a rational
account may be given of them, supposing evil of punishment to arise from sin,
and that there is a God in the world, who is ready to punish the wicked and to
reward the good: Which was the thing to be showed.

CHAP. IV. Of the Origin of Nations.
All mankind derived from Adam, if the Scriptures be true. The contrary
supposition an introduction to Atheism. The truth of the history of the flood.
The possibility of an universal deluge proved. The flood universal as to
mankind, whether universal as to the earth and animals; no necessity of
asserting either. Yet supposing the possibility of it demonstrated without
creation of new waters. Of the fountains of the deep. The proportion which the
height of mountains bears to the Diameter of the earth. No mountains much above
three mile perpendicular. Of the Origin of fountains. The opinion of Aristotle
and others concerning it discussed. The true account of them from the vapors
arising from the mass of subterraneous waters. Of the capacity of the Ark for
receiving the Animals from Buteo and others. The truth of the deluge from the
Testimony of Heathen Nations. Of the propagation of Nations from Noah's
posterity. Of the beginning of the Assyrian Empire. The multiplication of
mankind after the flood. Of the Chronology of the LXX. Of the time between the
flood and Abraham, and the advantages of it. Of the pretense of such Nations,
who called themselves Aborigines. A discourse concerning the first plantation
of Greece, the common opinion propounded and rejected. The Hellens not the
first inhabitants of Greece, but the Pelasgi. The large spread of them over the
parts of Greece; Of their language different from the Greeks. Whence these
Pelasgi came; that Phaleg was the Pelasgus of Greece, and the leader of that
Colony proved from Epiphanius: the language of the Pelasgi in Greece Oriental:
thence an account given of the many Hebrew words in the Greek language, and the
remainders of the Eastern languages in the Islands of Greece, both which not
from the Phaenicians as Bochartus thinks, but from the old Pelasgi. Of the
ground of the affinity between the Jews and Lacedaemonians. Of the peopling of
Amercia.

THE next thing we proceed to give a rational account Sect 1.
of, in the history of the fi^^t ages of the world contained in Scripture, is
the peopling of the world from Adam. Which is of great consequence for us to
understand, not only for the satisfaction of our curiosity as to the true
Origin of Nations, but also in order to our believing the truth of the
Scriptures, and the universal effects of the fall of man. Neither of which can
be sufficiently cleared without this. For as it is hard to conceive how the
effects of man's fall should extend to all mankind, unless all mankind were
propagated from Adam; so it is unconceivable how the account of things given in
Scripture should be true, if there were persons existent in the world long
before Adam was. Since the Scripture does so plainly affirm, that God has made
of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the earth; Some
Greek copyes read it (...), leaving Act. 17. 26.
out (...) which the vulgar Latin follows: the Arabic version to explain both,
reads it ex homine, or as De Dieu renders it ex Adamo uno, there being but the
difference of one letter in the Eastern languages between (...) and (...) the
one denoting blood, and the other man. But if we take it as our more ordinary
copyes read it (...), yet thereby it is plain, that the meaning is not, that
all mankind was made of the same uniform matter, as the author of the
Prae-Adamites weakly imagined (for by that reason, not only mankind, but the
whole world might be said to be (...) of the same blood, since all things in
the world were at first formed out of the same matter) but (...) is taken there
in the sense in which it occurs in the best Greek authors for the stock out of
which men come: So Homer, (...). Odyss. v.
Thence those who are near relations, are called in Sophocles, (...); thence
the name of Consanguinity for nearness of relation; and Virgil uses sanguis in
the same sense, Trojano a sanguine duci. So that the Apostles meaning is, that
however men now are so dispersed in their habitations, and differ so much in
language and customs from each other, yet they all were originally of the same
stock, and did derive their succession from that first man whom God created.
Neither can it be conceived on what account Adam in the Scripture is called the
first man, and that he was made a living soul, and of the 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47.
earth, earthy; unless it were to denote that he was absolutely the first of
his kind, and so was to be the standard and measure of all that follows. And
when our Savior would reduce all things to the beginning, he instanceth in
those words which were pronounced after Eve was formed, But from the beginning
of the creation God made them male and Mark 10. 6, 7.
female; for this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and cleave unto his
Wife. Now nothing can be more plain and easy then from hence to argue thus;
those of whom those words were spoken, were the first male and female which
were made in the beginning of the Creation; but it is evident these words were
spoken of Adam and Eve: And Adam said, this is now bone of my bone, and flesh
of my flesh: Genesis 2. 23. 24.
therefore shall a man leave his Father and his Mother and shall cleave unto
his Wife. If the Scriptures then of the New Testament be true, it is most plain
and evident that all mankind is descended from Adam; and no less conspicuous is
it from the history of the Creation as delivered by Moses.

For how necessary had it been for Moses, when he was Sect. 2.
giving an account of the Origin of things, to have discovered by whom the
world was first planted, if there had been any such plantation before Adam; but
to say that all the design of Moses was only to give an account of the Origin
and history of the Jewish Nation, and that Adam was only the first of that
stock, is manifestly ridiculous, it being so clear, that not only from Adam and
Noah, but from Sem, Abraham, and Isaac came other Nations besides that of Jews.
And by the same reason that it is said, that Moses only speaks of the Origin
of the Jewish Nation in the history of Adam, it may as well be said that Moses
speaks only of the making of Canaan, and that part of the heavens which was
over it, when he describes the Creation of the world in the six days work. For
why may not the earth in the second ver. of Genesis be as well understood of
the Land of Judea, and the light and production of animals and vegetables refer
only to that, as to understand it so in reference to the flood, and in many
other passages relating to those eldest times? But the Author of that
Hypothesis answers, That the first Chapter of Genesis may relate to the true
Origin of the world and the first peopling of it, but in the second Moses
begins to give an account of the first man and woman of the Jewish Nation. Very
probable! but if this be not a putting asunder those which God has joined
together, nothing is. For does not Moses plainly at first give an account of
the formation of things in the first six days, and of his rest on the seventh?
but how could he be said to have rested then from the works of Creation, if
after this followed the formation of Adam and Eve in the second Chapter?
Besides if the forming of man mentioned, Genesis 2. 7. be distinct from that
mentioned. Genesis 1. 27. then by all parity of reason, (...) the Generations of
Heaven and earth mentioned, Genesis 2. 4. must be distinct from the Creation of
the heaven and earth mentioned, Genesis 1. 1. And so if there were another
Creation of heaven and earth belonging to the Jews in Genesis 2. we may likewise
believe that there was a new Creation of man and woman in that Chapter distinct
from that mentioned in the former. Again further, if there had been any such
persons in the world before Adam, no doubt Adam himself was ignorant of them;
or else it had been a false and ridiculous account which he gives of the name
of his wife (...) because she was (...) the mother of all living. Not of all
living things, for that Genesis 3. 20.
had been a more proper description of a Ceres, or Magna Matter, or Diana
multimammia, of our Grandmother the earth, but certainly it extends to all of
the kind, that all living creatures that are of humane nature came from her. So
the Chalde^ Paraphrast understands it, she was called Hava, because she was
(...) the mother of all the sons of men. And so the Arabic version, quia ipsa
fuit matter omnis viventis rationalis. To which Seldom. de jure nature. and gent.
l. 1. c. ^. p. 65
purpose our Learned Seldom cites the version of the Mauritanian Jews, and the
Persick of Tawasius.

But what ever the credit or authority of these versions be, this is most
certain, that Adam had no reason at all to have given this name to his wife, as
being the mother of all living, if there had been any of mankind existing in
the world from other mothers, which had been long before Eve was formed. So
that we find it plain and clear, that if the report given of things in
Scripture be true, the hypothesis of Prae-Adamites is undoubtedly false. And
certainly who ever seriously considers the frequent reflections on the
authority of the Scriptures which were cast by the author of that Fiction, and
his endeavoring on all occasions to derogate from the miracles recorded in it,
may easily suspect the design of that Author was not to gain any credit to his
opinion from those arguments from Scripture, which he makes show of (which are
pitifully weak and ridiculous) but having by the help of such arguments made
his opinion more plausible, his hope was that his opinion would in time
undermine the Scriptures themselves. When he had made it appear that the
account given in the Scriptures of the plantation of the world was
unsatisfactory, since there were men before Adam, which the Scriptures to
please the Jewish Nation, take no notice of. So that after he had attempted to
prostitute the Scriptures to his opinion, his next work had been to have turned
them out of doors, as not of credit to be relied on by any when they were so
common to every opinion. But how impious, absurd and rude that attempt was upon
the sacred and inviolable authority of the Scriptures, has been so fully
discovered by his very many not unlearned adversaries, that it might seem
needless so much as to have taken notice of so weakly grounded, and infirmly
proved an opinion, had it not thus far lain in my way in order to the clearing
the true Origin of Nations according to the Scriptures. The main foundations
of which fabulous opinion lying chiefly in the pretended antiquities of the
Chaldaeans, Egyptians, and others, have been fully taken away in our first
bsok, where our whole design was to manifest the want of credibility in those
accounts of ancient times, which are delivered by Heathen Nations in opposition
to the Scriptures. There is nothing at all in Scripture from the Creation of
Adam to the flood which seems to give any countenance to that figment, but only
what may be easily resolved from the consideration of the great conciseness of
the Mosaic History, in reporting that long interval of time which was between
the fall of Adam, and the Flood; By means of which conciseness such things are
reported as speedily done, because immediately succeeding in the story, which
asked a very considerable time before they could be effected, and besides all
things which were done before the Flood, being all quite obliterated by it, and
all the numerous posterity of Adam being then destroyed (only Noah and his
Family excepted) to what purpose had it been any further to have reported the
passages before the Flood, otherwise then thereby to let us understand the
certainty of the succession of persons from Adam, and such actions in those
times which might be remarkable discoveries of Gods providence and man's
wickedness in it, which being most apparent at first in Cain and his posteriry,
did by degrees so spread its self over the face of the then inhabited world,
that the just God was thereby provoked to send a Deluge among them to sweep
away the present inhabitants to make room for another Generation to succeed
them.

This therefore we now come to consider, viz. the History of the flood, and the
certainty of the propagation of the world Sect. 3.
from the posterity of Noah after the Flood. I begin with the History of the
Flood its self, as to which two things will be sufficient to demonstrate the
truth of it. 1. If there be nothing in it repugnant to reason. 2. If we have
sufficient evidence of the truth of it, from such who yet have not believed the
Scriptures. There are only two things which seem questionable to reason
concerning the flood; the first, is, concerning the possibility of the flood
its self; the other is, concerning the capacity of the Ark for preserving all
kinds of Animals. The only ground of questioning the possibility of such a
Flood, as that is related in Scripture, has been from hence, that some have
supposed it impossible, that all the water which is contained in the air,
supposing it to fall down, should raise the surface of water upon the earth a
foot and a balf in height; so that either new waters must be created to
overflow the earth, or else there must be supposed a rarefaction of the water
contained in the Sea and all Rivers, so that it must take up at least fifteen
times the space that now it does; but then, they say, if the water had been
thus rarefied, it could neithe^ have destroyed man nor beast, neither could
Noabs Ark have been born up by it any more then by liquid air. To this
therefore, I answer.

First, I cannot see any urgent necessity from the Scripture to assert, that
the Flood did spread its self over all the surface of the earth. That all
mankind (those in the Ark excepted) were destroyed by it, is most certain
according to the Scriptures. When the occasion of the Flood is thus expressed,
And God saw that the wickedness of man was great Genesis 6. 5, 7. ^
upon earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually. And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created
from the face of the earth. It could not be then any particular deluge of so
small a Country as Palestine, which is here expressed, as some have
ridiculously imagined; for we find an universal corruption in the earth
mentioned as the cause; an universal threatening upon all men for this cause;
and afterward an universal destruction expressed, as the effect of this Flood.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, and every man. And every living
substance was destroyed which was upon the face Genesis 7. 21.
of the ground, both man and cattle, and the creeping things, 23.
and the fowl of the Heaven, and they were destroyed from the earth, and Noah
only remained alive, and they that were with him in the Ark. So then it is
evident that the Flood was universal as to mankind, but from thence follows no
necessity at all of asserting the universality of it as to the Globe of the
earth, unless it be sufficiently proved that the whole earth was peopled before
the Flood: which I despair of ever seeing proved. And what reason can there be
to extend the Flood beyond the occasion of it, which was the corruption of
mankind? And it seems very strange that in so short an Interval, in comparison
as that was from Adam to the flood, according to the ordinary computation, viz.
1656. years, and not much above two thousand, according to the largest, the
world should then be fully peopled, when in so much longer a space of time
since the flood to this day, the earth is capable of receiving far more
inhabitants, then now it has. The only probability then left for asserting the
universality of the Flood, as to the Globe of the earth, is from the
destruction of all living creatures together with man; now though men might not
have spread themselves over the whole surface of the earth, yet beasts and
creeping things might which were all destroyed with the Flood: For it is said,
That all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl and of cattle, and
of beast, and of every creeping thing, that creeps upon the earth, and every
man. To what end should there be not only a note of universality added, but
such a particular enumeration of the several kinds of beasts, creeping things,
and fowls, if they were not all destroyed? To this I answer. I grant as far as
the Flood extended, all these were destroyed; but I see no reason to extend the
destruction of these beyond that compass and space of earth where men
inhabited: Because the punishment upon the beasts was occasioned by, and could
not but be concomitant with the destruction of mankind, but (the occasion of
the deluge being the sin of man, who was punished in the beasts, that were
destroyed for his sake, as well as in himself) where the occasion was not, as
where there were animals, and no men, there seems no necessity of extending the
Flood thither. But to what end then it will be replied, Did God command Noah
with so much care to take of all kind of beasts, and birds, and creeping things
into the ark with him, if all these living creatures were not destroyed by the
Flood? I answer, because all those things were destroyed where ever the Flood
was; suppose then the whole Continent of Asia was peopled before the Flood,
which is as much as we may in reason suppose, I say, all the living creatures
in that Continent were all destroyed; or if we may suppose it to have extended
over our whole Continent of the anciently known world; what reason would there
be that in the opposite part of the globe, viz. America, which we suppose to be
unpeopled then, all the living creatures should there be destroyed because men
had sinned in this? And would there not on this ^^p^osition have been a
sufficient reason to preserve living Creatures in the Ark for future
propagation, when all other living creatures extant had been in such remote
places as would not have been accessible by them in many generations, and those
beasts growing wild for want of Inhabitants, would not have proved presently
serviceable for the use of men after the Flood? which was certainly the main
thing looked at in the preservation of them in the ark, that men might have all
of them ready for their use presently after the Flood, which could not have
been, had not the several kinds been preserved in the Ark, although we suppose
them not destroyed in all parts of the world.

All this proceeds on supposition that Animals were propagated Sect. 4.
much further in the world then men were, before the Flood. Which I confess
seems very probable to me, on this account because the production of Animals is
parallel in Genesis with that of Fishes, and both of them different from man;
For God says, Let the waters bring forth every Genesis 1, 20, 21.
moving creature that hathlife; viz. Fish, and Fowl; and accordingly it is
said, that the waters brought forth abundantly every living creature after
their kind, and every Fowl after his kind. Accordingly in the production of
beasts, we read, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind,
cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind, and it was
so: But in the production of man, It is Ver. 24.
said, Let us make man in our own likeness. From hence I Ver. 26.
observe this difference between the production of animals, and of man, that in
the one God gave a prolifick power to the earth and waters for production of
the several living creatures which came from them; so that the seminal
principles of them were contained in the matter out of which they were
produced, which was otherwise in man, who was made by a peculiar hand of the
great Creator himself, who thence is said to have formed Man of the dust of the
ground. Genesis 2. 6.
Now therefore although there were but one Male and Female of mankind at
first^ which had a special formation by God himself; yet there is no reason we
should conceive it to be so as to the production of other living creatures,
whether Fish, or Fowl, or Beasts; b^t the prolifick virtue being by Gods power
given to that material principle out of which they were formed, it may very
well be supposed that many of the same kind were at first produced. For it
seems very strange to imagine that in the whole Ocean there should be only two
of a kind produced; but Fish and Fowl both arising from the water, we may have
just reason to think, that the waters being separated before this prolifick
virtue was communicated to the whole mass of waters, might in the several
parts of the globe of the earth, bring forth both fish and fowl after their
kinds. The same I say of the production of Animals in the sixth days work,
which are ranked into three sorts, Cattle, creeping things, and beasts of the
earth after their kinds; now God saying, Let the earth bring forth her living
creatures (and that after the waters had divided some parts of the earth from
other, so that there could be no passage for the cattle, creeping things, and
beasts out of one part into another, without the help of man) it seems very
probable that at least those parts of the earth which were thus divided from
each other, did bring forth these several living creatures after their kinds,
which did after propagate in those parts without being brought thither by the
help of man. If now this supposition be embraced, by it we presently clear our
selves of many difficulties concerning the propagation of animals in the world,
and their conservation in the Ark, which many have been so much to seek for
satisfaction in. As how the unknown kind of Serpents in Brasil, the
slow-bellied creature of the Indies, and all those strange species of animals
seen in the West Indies should either come into the Ark of Noah, or be conveyed
out of it into those Countries which are divided from that Continent where the
Flood was by so vast an Ocean on the one side, and at least so large a tract of
Land on the other (supposing any passage but of one Continent into another,
which yet has not been discovered.) Besides some kind of Animals cannot live
out of that particular Clime wherein they are; and there are many sorts of
animals discovered in America, and the adjoining Islands, which have left no
remainders of themselves in these parts of the world. And it seems very strange
that these, should propagate into those remote parts of the world from the
place of the Flood, and leave none at all of their number behind them in those
parts from whence they were propagated. These things at least make that opinion
very probable which extends the production of animals beyond that of mankind
in the old world, and that the Flood though it destroyed all mankind, and
every living creature within that compass wherein mankind inhabited, yet might
not extend its self to those parts, and the animals therein, in which men had
never inhabited. And by this means we need not make so many miracles as some
are fain to do about the slood; and all those difficulties concerning the
propagation of animals do of themselves vanish and fail to the ground. This is
the first way of resolving the difficulty concerning the possibility of the
Flood, by asserting it not to have been over the whole globe of the earth, but
only over those parts where mankind inhabited.

Secondly, Suppose the Flood to have been over the whole globe of the earth,
yet there might have been water enough Sect. 5.
to have overwhelmed it to the height mentioned in Scripture. For which we are
to consider that many causes concurred to the making of this Deluge; first, the
air was condensed into clouds, and those fell down with continued force and
violence, not breaking into drops, but all in a body (which Sir Walter Rawleigh
parallels with the spouts of the Hist. of the World. 1 B. c. 7. sect. 6.
West Indies) which are thence called the Cataracts or Floodgates of heaven,
God loosening (as he expresses it) the power retentive which was in the
clouds, and so the waters must needs fall in abundance, according to the
expression in Job, Behold he withholdeth the waters, and they Job 12 15.
dry up, also he sends them out, and they overturn the earth. Now, I say,
although these waters falling down with so much fury and violence, as well as
in so great abundance, might quickly destroy all living creatures; yet this was
not all for God who held in the Ocean within its bounds, whereby he says to
it, Thus far it shall go, and no farther, might then give it Commission to
execute his justice upon the sinful world: and to all this, we have another
cause of the Deluge, which was, That the Fountains of the great Deep were
broken up. By which Vatablus, most probably Genesis 7. 11.
understands, Immensam illam and profundam aquarum copiam quae est subter
terram: That vast body of waters which lies in the bowels of the earth; now
when all these fountains were broken up, and the waters within the earth rush
out with violence and impetuosity upon it, it must needs cause an inundation so
great as that is mentioned in the Scripture. For as that judicious Historian
Sir W. Rawleigh observes, Let us consider that the earth had above ^^id.
21000. miles compass, the Diameter of the earth according to that Circle 7000.
mile, and then from the Superficies to the Center 3500. mile; take then the
highest mountain of the world, Caucasus, Taurus, Tenariff, or any other, and I
do not find, says he, that the highest exceeds thirty miles in height: It is
not then impossible, answering reason with reason, that all those waters mixed
within the earth, 3500. miles deep, should be able to cover the space of 30.
miles in height, which 30. miles upright being found in the depths of the earth
116. times; for the fountains of the great Deep were broken, and the waters
drawn out of the bowels of the earth. But then withal, says he, if we
consider the proportion which the earth bears to the air about it, we may
easily understand the possibility of the Flood, without any new Creation of
waters; for supposing so much air to be condensed, and so turned into water
which does encompass the earth, it will not seem strange to men of judgment,
yea but of ordinary understanding, that the earth (God so pleasing) was covered
over with waters, without any new Creation. But this will yet appear more
probable if the height of the highest mountains does bear no greater a
proportion to the Diameter of the earth, then of the 1670. part to the whole,
supposing the Diameter of the earth to be 8355. miles, as P. Gassendus computes
both. And it is more (...). 2. ^p. Phys. sect. 3. ^1.
then probable, that men have been exceedingly mistaken, as to the height of
mountains, which comes so far short of what Sir Walter Rawleigh allows to them,
that the highest mountain in the world will not be found to be five direct
miles in height taking the altitude of them from the plain they stand upon.
Olympus whose height is so extold by the Poets and ancient Greeks, that it is
said to exceed the clouds, yet Plutarch tells us that Xenagoras measured Plut.
in Aemil^n. Plin. l. 2. c. 65.
it and sound it not to exceed a mile and a half perpendicular and about 70.
paces. Much about the same height Pliny says that Dicaearchus found the
mountain Pelion to be. The mount Athos is supposed of extraordinary height,
because it cast its shadow into the Isle of Lemnos, which according to Pliny
was 87. miles. yet Gassendus allows it but two miles in height; but Isaac
Vossius in a learned discourse concerning the height of mountains in his notes
on Pomponius Mela, does not Voss. in Pomp. Mela^ l. 2. c. 2. p. 115. etc.
allow above 10. or 11. furlongs at most to the height of mount Athos. Caucasus
by Ricciolus is said to be 51. miles in height: Gassendus allowing it to be
higher then Athos or Olympus, yet conceives it not above three or four miles at
most; but Vossius will not yield it above two miles perpendicular, for which he
gives this very good reason; Polybius affirms there is no mountain in Greece
which may not be ascended in a days time, and makes the highest mountain there
not to exceed ten furlongs; which says Vossius, it is scarce possible for any
one to reach unless he be a mountainer born; any other will scarce be able to
ascend above six furlongs perpendicular; for in the ascent of a mountain every
pace does reach but to an hand breadth perpendicular; but if we do allow eight
furlongs to a days ascent, yet thereby it will appear that the highest
mountains in the world are not above twenty four furlongs in height, since they
may be ascended in three days time: and it is affirmed of the top of mount
Caucasus, that it may be ascended in less then the compass of three days, and
therefore cannot be much above two miles in height. Which may be the easier
believed of any other mountain, when that which is reputed the highest of the
world, viz. the Pike of Teneriffe which the inhabitants call Pica de Terraria,
may be ascended in that compass of time, viz. three days: for in the months of
July and August (which are the only months in which men can ascend it, because
all other times of the year snow lies upon it, although neither in the Isle of
Teneriffe nor any other of the V. Varenium Geogr. General. l. 1 c. 10 prop. 3
Canary Islands there be snow ever seen) the inhabitants then ascend to the top
of it in three days time, which top of it is not Pyramidal but plain, from
whence they gather some sulphurous stones which are carried in great
quantities into Spain. So that according to the proportion of eight furlongs to
a days journey, this Pike of Teneriffe will not exceed the height of a German
mile perpendicular, as Varenius confesses, then which he thinks likewise, that
no mountain in the world is higher. For what Pliny speaks of the Alps being
fifty miles in height, must be understood not perpendicular, but in regard of
the obliquity of the ascent of it; so that he might account so much from the
foot of the Alps to the top of them, and yet the Alps in a perpendicular line
not come near the height of a German mile. If then the highest mountains do not
exceed much above three miles in height (for the Spaniards themselves affirm,
that those lofty mountains of Peru, in comparison of which they say the Alps
are but like Cottages, may be ascended in four days compass) we see from hence
then far greater probability, how the waters in the time of the general flood
might overtop the highest mountains.

Especially if it be made evident that there is so great an Abyss of
subterraneous waters, that the breaking open of Sect. 6.
the fountains of it may so much increase the inundation arising from the
clouds, and from the breaking in of the Ocean upon the main Land. And that
there is such a mass of waters in the body of the earth is evident from the
Origin of Fountains; for the opinion of Aristotle imputing them to the
condensation of air in the caverns of the earth, and that of other
Philosophers ascribing them to the fall of rainwater received into such
cisterns in the earth which are capable of receiving it, are both equally
unsatisfactory, unless we suppose a mass of waters in the bowels of the earth,
which may be as the common stock to supply those Fountains with. For it is very
hard, conceiving how mere air should be so far condensed, as to cause not only
such a number of Fountains, but so great a quantity of water as runs into the
sea by those rivers which come from them, (as the river Volga is supposed to
empty so much water in a years time into the Caspian Sea, as might suffi^e to
cover the whole earth) by which likewise it is most eviden^ that there must be
some subterranean passages in the Sea, or else of necessity, by that abundance
of water which continually runs into it from the rivers, it would overflow and
drown the world. And from this multitude of waters which comes from Fountains,
it is likewise evident, that the Origin of Fountains cannot be merely from
such water which falls from the clouds, which would never suffice to maintain
so full and uninterrupted a stream as many Fountains have: Especially if that
be true which some assert, that rainwater does never moisten the earth above
ten foot deep, for of far greater profundity many Fountains are. And besides
the rainwater runs most upon the surface of the earth, and so does rather
swell the rivers which thereby run with greater force in their passage to the
Ocean, and does not lodge it self presently in the earth, especially if it
descends in a greater quantity which alone is able to fill such Cisterns
supposed to be in the earth, especially in mountains, which may keep a stream
continually running. Although therefore we may acknowledge that the fall of
rain may much conduce to the overflowing and continuance of Fountains, as is
evident by the greater force of springs after continued rains, and by the decay
of many of them in hot and dry weather (which yet I had rather impute to the
Suns exhaling by his continued heat those moist vapors in the earth, which
should continually supply the springs, then merely to the want of rain) and by
the rise of most great rivers from such Fountains which came from the foot of
mountains; where the ground is supposed to be of so hard and consistent a
substance, as stone, or chalk, or something of like nature which might help to
the conservation of water there, from whence it after ran in streams to the
Ocean (which was the great argument of the famous Peireskius for this opinion)
although I say, these things may argue thus far, that rainwater does much
conduce to the V. Gassend. vit. Pereskii l. 3. p. 292.
preservation of springs, yet it cannot give a sufficient account of the
Origin of them: Which with the greatest reason and probability is imputed to
those subterraneous waters which pass up and down through the bowels of the
earth. Some have fancyed the earth to be as one great animal, whose
subterraneous passage's were like veins in the body which received water out of
the Sea, as the veins do blood out of the Liver; and that there are some kind
of hot vapors in the earth which supply the place of vital spirits, which are
diffused up and down the body through the arteries. And that as in an animal
there are some parts which upon the least prick do send forth blood, and others
are more callous where the incision must be deeper before any blood appears; so
it is in the earth; when it is opened in a right vein we find presently a
spring of water; but if we chance to hit on a wrong place, we go deep and may
find none; not that water is wanting, but we have not hit on the veins through
which it runs. And thence as the blood with equal freedom and velocity ascends
into the head as it runs into the legs, because it is equally dispersed into
all the parts from the center of it; so in the body of the earth it is as
natural for the water to ascend into the tops of mountains, as it is to fall
down into the center of the earth. And that it is no more wonder to see springs
issue out of mountains, then it is to see a man bleed in the veins of his
forehead when he is let blood there. So in all places of the earth the parts of
it are not disposed for apertion; for some of them are so hard and compact,
that there seems to be no passage through them (which is the most probable
reason, why there is no rain neither in those places, because there is no such
exsudation of those moist vapors through the surface of the earth, which may
yield matter for rain, as it is in many of the sandy places of Africa, but
usually mountainous Countries have more large, and as it were Temple-veins
through which the moist vapors have a free and open passage, and thence there
are not only more frequent springs there, but clouds and rains too.) Now if
this account of the Origin of springs in the earth be as rational as it is
ingenious and handsome (and there is not much can be said against it, but only
that then all fountains should be salt as the water is from whence they come)
then we easily understand how the earth might be overflowed in the universal
deluge; for then the fountains of the deep were broken up, or there was an
universal opening of the veins of the earth, whereby all the water contained in
them would presently run upon the surface of the earth, and must needs
according to its proportion advance its self to a considerable height. But
because the salving the difference of the water in springs from what it is in
the Sea is so considerable a phenomenon in our present case, I therefore
rather take this following as the most rational account of the Origin of
fountains. viz. That there are great cavityes in the earth, which are capable
of receiving a considerable quantity of water, which continually runs into them
from the Sea (which as it continually receives fresh supplies from the rivers
which empty themselves into it, so it dispatcheth away a like quantity through
those spongy parts of the earth under the Ocean, which are most apt to suck in
and convey away the surplusage of water) so that by this means the Sea never
swells by the water conveyed into it by the rivers, there being as continual a
circulation in the body of the earth of the water which passes out of the
Ocean into the subterraneous cavernes, and from thence to the mountains, and
thence into the Sea again; as there is a circulation of blood in man's body from
the heart by the arteryes into the exterior parts, and returning back again by
the veins into the heart. According to which we may imagine such a place in the
heart of the earth like Plato's Barathrum, (...), As Plato in his Phaedrus
describes it out of Homer, a long and deep subterraneous cavity. (...). Into
which cavity all the rivers at last flow, and from which they again disperse
themselves abroad. Now this Cavity of the earth thus filled with water supplies
the place of the heart in the body of the earth, from which all those several
aquaeducts which are in the earth have their continual supply; but that which
makes those passages of water which we call springs and fountains properly, I
suppose, is thus generated; from those Cavityes filled with water in the earth
by reason of the hot streams which are in the body of the earth, there are
continually rising some vapors or little particles of water, which are
disjoined from each other by the heat, by reason of which they attain a greater
celerity of motion, and so pass through the inner pores of the earth till they
come near the superficies of it. Which when they have approached to, they are
beat back again by the cold which environs the surface of the earth, or at
least are so arrested by the cold and condensed by it, that they lose the form
of vapors and become perfect water again. Which water being now more gross,
then while it was a mere vapor, cannot descend again through the same pores
through which it ascended before, because these are not now capable of
receiving it: And therefore it seeks out some wider passages near the surface
of the earth, by which means it moves in an oblique manner, and is ready to
embrace any other vapors which are arrested in the same manner; now when these
are grown to a considerable body in the surface of a mountain, or a plain, and
find a vent fit for them, there appears a proper fountain whose streams are
still maintained by the same condensation of vapors, which when they are once
come abroad are in continual motion whereby rivers are made, which are still
finding a passage through the declivity of the surface of the earth, whereby
they may return to the Ocean again. Now according to this account, that grand
Phenomenon of the freshness of fountain water when the water of the Sea is
salt, whence it originally comes, is sufficiently resolved. For mere
transcolation may by degrees take away that which the Chemists call the fixed
salt; and for the Volatile salt of it (which being a more spirituous thing, is
not removable by distillation, and so neither can it be by transcolation) yet
such an evaporation as that mentioned, may serve to do it, because it is
evident that fresh water will fall from the clouds which has risen from those
vapors which have come out of the Sea; and besides these vapors or small
particles of water in their passage through the earth (especially when they
come near the surface of it) do incorporate with other sweet vapors as those
which come from rain and others, by which means they insensibly lose their
former acidity and sharpness. But those fountains which do retain their former
saltness, as there are many such in the world, may very probably ^^ supposed
not to have come from these vapors condensed, but to be a kind of a breaking
of vein in which the salt water was conveyed up and down the body of the earth.
Now then considering that mass of waters and multitude of vapors arising
thence which are in the earth, how easy is it for us to understand what the
breaking open the fountains of the deep means in Scripture, and how by that
means together with the falling down of the Cataracts of the clouds, and the
letting loose of the Ocean, the whole earth might be overspread with an
universal deluge. The possibility of which was the thing to be showed.

The next thing we come to concerning the flood, is, the capacity of the Ark
for receiving the several animals which Sect. 7.
were to propagate the world afterward. Concerning which, two things are
necessary to be understood, what the measure of the Ark was, and what the
number of animals contained in it. The measure of the Ark must be determined by
the proportion of the cubit, which there is no reason at all to suppose either
with Origin and others to have been the Geometrical cubit, which contains six
ordinary cubits or nine feet, both because we find no mention at all of any
such cubit in Scripture, and because the Fabric of the Ark would have been of
too vast a proportion; Neither yet is it probable, which Sir W. Rawlegh
supposes, that this cubit must be of a proportion as much exceeding ours as
the stature of a Giant does ours, both because there is no certain evidence,
either from Scripture or reason, that the proportion of men then did generally
exceed what is now; and besides this tends not in the least to make the thing
more plain. For according to that proportion, we must then have imagined beasts
to have been as well as men; for the horse must have been proportionably as
great to have been serviceable to men of that stature, and so the Animals would
have taken up as much more room in the Ark as the cubit is supposed to be
bigger. I suppose then that Moses speaks of the cubit most in use in his own
time, (for he writ so that they for whose use he writ might be easily able to
understand him) now this cubit by the consent of writers contained a foot and a
half in length; according to which proportion, supposing the Ark by Moses his
description to have 300. cubits in length, 50. in breadth, and 30. in height,
Genesis 6. 15.
the whole capacity of the Ark according to the computation of Ioh. Bute^ comes
to 450000. solid cubits. For the length of 300. cubts being multiplied into the
breadth of 50. Buteo de arca Noe.
cubits, and the product by the height of 30. cubits makes the whole Concavity
450000. Which Matthaeus Hostus reducing to the German measure, makes the
longitude of the Ark to p. 93. Ho^tus de fabrica Arcae Noab^^. 66.
be 31. perches, 4. cubits, 5. fingers; the latitude 5 perches, 2. cubits, and
11. fingers; the altitude 3 perches, 1. cubit, 9. fingers; allowing to every
perch 15. Roman feet. So that if we take a perch to contain 10. Hebrew cubits,
which exceeds the former 11. fingers, the whole capacity of the Ark will be
450. cubical perches. And as he says, Hujusmodi sane aedificii amplitudo
capacissima est, and quamlibet magno animantium numero haud dubie sufficere pot
uit, the Ark of so large a capacity might easily contain the several kinds of
animals in it. Which will be easily understood, if according to our former
supposition, only the animals of the inhabited part of the world were preserved
in the Ark; but admitting that all kinds of animals were there, there would be
room enough for them and for provision for them. For which Sir W. Rawlegh gives
a prudent caution, that men ought not to take animals of a mixed nature, as
Mules and Hyaena's, nor such as differ in size and shape from each other, as
the eat of Europe and Ownce of India, into the several species of animals. Sir
W. Rawlegh following Buteo reckons 89. or least any be omitted, a 100. several
kinds of beasts, and undertakes to demonstrate from a triple proportion of all
beasts to the Ox, Wolf, and Sheep, that there was sufficient capacity for them
in the Ark. Hostus allows 150. several kinds of animals, yet questions not the
caepacity of the Ark, but these things are so particularly made out by those
learned Authors, especially by Buteo, that I shall rather refer the reader for
further satisfaction to the Authors themselves, then take the pains to
transcribe them.

I come now therefore to the evidence of the truth and Sect. 8.
certainty of this universal deluge, of which we have most clear and concurring
Testimonies of most ancient Nations of the world. For which purpose Grotius and
others have at V. Grot. Annot. in l. 1. deVerit. r lig Christ. Vo^. Isago.
Chronolog. dissert. 4. c. 2. and 3.

Bochart. Geogr sacr. l. 1. c. 4.

August. de Civit. Dei. l. 18 c. 12. and ibi. Lud. Viv. Eusebius. Chr. p. 5. cd. 2.

Scaliger. If. Voss. epist. ad Colvium. page 409.

Martin. hist. Sinic. l. 1. p. 12.

Joh. de Lact. de orig. gent. American. l. 1. p. 115.


large produced the testimony of Berosus the Chaldean out of Josephus,
concerning the flood and the Ark in which Noah was preserved, of Abydenus out
of Cyrill and Eusebius concerning Xisuthrus, or Noah's sending out of the birds
to see if the flood were assuaged, and of Alexander Polyhistor concerning the
preservation of animals in the Ark, of Plutarch concerning the sending out of
the Dove, of Lucian de D^a Syria concerning the whole story, and so of Molon
and Nicolaus Damascenus. Besides it is manifested by others, how among the
Chaldeans the memory of Noah was preserved under the Fable of Oannes, which had
part of a fish and part of a man, as is evident from the fragments of
Apollodorus, Abydenus, and Alexander Polyhistor preserved in Eusebius his Greek
Chronica; among the Chinese under the name of Puoncuus, who by them is said to
have escaped alone with his Family out of the universal Deluge, says Isaac
Vossius, who supposes Pu or Pi to be only a Prefix to the name, and so that
Puoncuus is the same with (...). Martinius tells us, de diluvio mul^a est apud
Sinicos Scriptores mentio, that the ancient writers of the Sinick history speak
much of the flood. Johannes de Lact tells out of Lescharbotus how constant the
tradition of the flood is among the Indians, both in new France, Peru, and
other parts. This being therefore so fully attested by the evident and apparent
consent of so many writers and historians, which did not own the authority of
the Scriptures, I shall suppose this sufficiently proved, and proceed to the
main thing which concerns the Origin of Nations, which is, the certainty of
the propagation of mankind from the posterity of Noah. Of which there is this
strong and convincing evidence, that in all that account which the Scripture
gives of the propagation of Nations from the Sons of Noah, there is some
remainder in the history of that Nation to justify the reason of the
imposition of the name from the names of the Nations themselves, which have
preserved the original name of their founder in their own, as the Medes from
Madai, the Thracians from Thiras, the Ionians from Iavan, the Sidonians from
Sidon, the Philistines from Pelisthim, ^the Arcaeans, Aradians, Elymaeans,
Assyrians, Lydians, from Arki, Arrad, Elam, Gro. Annot. ad l. 1. de Verit. Ari.
Montan. Phaleg. Junius in Genesis 10. Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. p. 1.
Assure and Lud, and many others produced by Grotius, Montanus, Iunius, and
especially Bochartus, who with admirable industry and learning has cleared all
this part of sacred history, which concerns the reason of the imposition of the
names of the people which were propagated from the posterity of Noah, and given
a full and satisfactory account of the several places where the posterity of
Noah seated themselves after the deluge. In stead of that therefore, I shall
consider the pretenses which can be brought against it, which are chiefly these
three. 1. That the Chaldean Empire seems to have greater antiquity then can be
attributed to it by the history of Moses. 2. That the most learned Heathen
Nations pretend to be self-originated, and that they came not from any other
Country. 3. That no certain account is given from whence America should be
peopled.

1. The History of the Assyrian Empire seems inconsistent Sect. 9.
with the propagation of the world from the sons of Noah; for the reign of
Ninus and Semiramis is placed by many Chronologers within the first Century
after the flood, which seems a manifest inconsistency with the propagation of
mankind from the Sons of Noah; for it seems utterly impossible that the
foundations of so great an Empire should be laid in so small a compass of time
by the posterity of three persons; and besides Ninus and Semiramis were not the
first who began the Assyrian Empire; for Belus not only reigned fifty five
years before Ninus, but according to the Chaldean Antiquities from Evechous,
who they say first reigned among them, are reckoned 495. years. But admit that
the beginning of the Assyrian Empire be placed so low as Petavius and other
Chronologers would have it, viz. in the year Petav. de doctr. temp. l. 9 c 14.
Tom. 2.
after the Flood, 153. yet the difficulty is only somewhat abated, but not
removed; for it seems yet unconceivable that from three persons in 150. years,
such multitudes should spring, as to make so large an Empire as that of Ninus,
and that within an hundred years after the Flood there should be such vast
multitudes for the building the tower of Babel and dispersion up and down the
world, so that according to the Hebrew computation, in the compass of 300.
years, viz. about Abraham's time, the world was so fully peopled, that we read
of several Kings encountering one another, by which it is evident the world had
been peopled sometime before, or else there could not have been such potent
Kings as some of them were at that time. This being the grand difficulty, to it
I answer these things.

1. There is no such certainty of the beginning of the Assyrian Empire, as for
the sake of that, to question the truth of the propagation of the world by the
sons of Noah. I havealready largely manifested the want of credibility in the
Chronology of the ancient Chaldeans, and that we have no certain grounds to
rely upon in reference to it. Especially as to those seven first Babylonian
Kings, which are cited out of Africanus by Eusebius, and Georgius Syncellus,
viz. Evechous, Chomasbolus, Porus, Nechubes, Abius, Oniballus, Chinzirus, who
are said to reign 225. years, two months; and alike fabulous, I suppose, is
the other Dynasty of six Arabian Kings, whose Empire is said to have stood 215.
years to the time of Belus, who expelled the Arabians and took the power to
himself; And it is much more agreeable to reason to reject these two Dynastyes,
which have no record of them left in any History of the Assyrian Empire, but
only in Berosus, whose authority in this case has been discussed already, then
to follow our late excellent Primate of Armagh, who punctually sets down the
reign of the Kings of these two Dynastyes, but cuts off at least eight Ages in
the time of the Assyrian Empire from Ninus to Sardanapalus, which time he
confines to 496. years, and places Ninus in the 2737. year of the world,
according to the Vsser. Annals Vet. Test. A. M. 2737.
Hebrew computation, and so to live in the time of the Judges, and be
cotemporary with Deborah: Which he builds only on a place in Herodotus, which
relates not to the time between Ninias and Sardanapalus, but to the time of the
defection of the Medes from the Assyrian Empire, as Isaac Vossius has already
showed. We cannot then find any certainty Castigat. adv. Hornium. c. 10. Genesis
91.
in the beginning of the Assyrian Empire, which may give us cause to question
the propagation of the world from the posterity of Noah.

2. We have reason to think that there was a more then ordinary multiplication
of the world from the sons of Noah after the Flood. For as God had before
punished the world by destroying mankind in it by an extraordinary manner; so
after the Flood, he does in a particular manner bless Noah and his Sons, and
said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, which may
well be thought to have then had an extraordinary effect. Several ways have
been attempted by learned men to make appear, to what a vast number the
posterity of Noah would increase in the space of two of three hundred years
after the Flood. Petavius supposes that the posterity of Noah might beget
children Petav. de doctrine. temp. l. 9. c 14.
at seventeen, and that each of Noah's sons might have eight children in the
eighth year after the flood, and that every one of these eight might beget
eight more; by this means in only one Family as of Iaph^t in the year after the
Flood 238. he makes a Diagramme, consisting of almost an innumerable company of
men. Johannes Temporarius, as Usser. Chronol. Sacr. c. 5.
our most learned Primate tells us, takes this way, that all of the posterity of
Noah when they attained twenty years of Age had every year twins, on which
supposition by Arithmetical progression, he undertakes to make it appear, that
in the 102. year after the flood, there would be of males and Females 1554420,
but taking away the one half, because of the groundless supposition of twins,
yet then in that time there would be 388605. males besides Females. Others
suppose that each of the sons of Noah had ten sons, and by that proportion, in
few Generations, it would amount to many thousands within a Century. Others
insist on the parallel between the multiplication of the children of Israel in
Egypt; that if from 72. men in the space of 215. years there are procreated
600000. how many will be born of three men in the space of an hundred years?
some have said above 23000. but with what success in their Arithmetic I shall
not determine. But whether all or any of these ways Horn. desens. dissert. de
aet. mundi. 6. 26.
be sufficient, and satisfactory, we have yet cause to believe that there was a
more then ordinary multiplication in the posterity of Noah after the flood.

3. If we embrace the account of those copies, which the Septuagint followed in
their version, all this difficulty is then ceased. For that account does very
much enlarge the times, and makes almost a thousand years between the Flood and
Abraham, by which means there will be sufficient space given for the
propagation of mankind, the building the Tower of Babel, the dispersion of
Nations, the founding the Assyrian Empire, the plantation of Egypt, China, and
other places, all which seem to have been in that time, and to concur with that
computation, as well as Josephus does, and the whole Primitive Church before
Hierome, which certainly ought in no case to be disregarded.

The whole controversy concerning this part of the Chronology of the world
comes at last to this, whether it be more probable that the Jews, who lived
under the second Temple (who then were the Trustees to whom were committed the
oracles of God) whom the LXX. followed in their version, had the true reading,
or the Talmudick Jews after their dispersion and banishment from their Country,
when they were discarded by God himself from being his people, when he broke up
house among them at the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple. But if the
reader desire further satisfaction concerning this difference of the Chronology
of the LXX. from that of the present Hebrew copyes, he may consult the learned
dissertation of the late learned Bishop of Proleg. ad bibl. Polyglot. cap. 9.
s. 58, 63, etc.

Isaac Vossius de LXX. I^^^rp. and (...). History of the World. p. 1. b. 2. c.
1. s^ct. 7.


Chester upon the LXX. and the later discourses of Isaac Vossius on this
subject. Seting a side then the controversy between the present Hebrew copyes
and the LXX. in point of integrity and incorruption which I meddle not with, I
cannot but subscribe to the judgment of our judicious historian, Sir W.
Rawleigh: That if we look over all, and do not hastily satisfy our
understanding with the first things offered, and thereby being satiated do
slothfully and drowsily sit down, we shall find it more agreeable rather to
follow the reckoning of the LXX. who according to some editions make it above
1072. years between the flood and Abraham's birth, then to take away any part of
those 352. years given. For if we advisedly consider the state and ceuntenance
of the world such as it was in Abraham's time, yea before Abraham was born, we
shall find that it were very ill done of us by following opinion without the
guide of reason, to pare the time over deeply between Abraham and the flood;
because in cutting them too near the quick, the reputation of the whole story
might perchance bleed thereby, were not the Testimony of the Scriptures supreme
so as no objection can approach it; And that we did not follow withal this
precept of St. Austin, that wheresoever any one place in the Scriptures may be
conceived disagreeing to the whole, the same is by ignorance of
misinterpretation understood. For in Abraham's time all the then known parts of
the world were peopled: all regions and countries had their Kings. Egypt had
many magnificent Cities, and so had Palestine and all bordering Countries; yea
all that part of the world be sides as far as India: and those not built with
sticks, but of hewn stones, and defended with walls and rampires, which
magnificence needed a parent of more antiquity then those other men have
supposed. And therefore where the Scriptures are plainest and best agreeing
with reason and nature, to what end should we labor to beget doubts and
scruples, or draw all things into wonders and marvails? giving also strength
thereby to common cavillers, and to those men's apish brains, who only bend
their wits to find impossibilities and monsters in the story of the world and
mankind. Thus far that excellent Historian, whose words deserve consideration.
Thus much for the first objection.

The second is, From the great pretense of several nations that they were
self-originated, or came not from any other Sect. 10. 2.
place. This was the pretense of the Egyptians, Graecians, ancient inhabitants
of Italy, and others. But how little reason we have to give credit to these
pretenses, will appear on these accounts. 1. The impossibility in nature that
mankind should be produced in such a way as they imagined, which we have
manifested already in our discourse of the Origin of the universe. 2. That the
Nations which pretended this, were never able to give sufficient evidence of it
to any other Nation which demanded it; which is manifest: by their want of any
certain records of their ancient times, which is fully proved in our discourse
in the first book of the want of credibility in Heathen histories. 3. The only
probable reason, which induced these Nations to make themselves Aborigines,
was, because they supposed themselves to be the first inhabitants of the
Countries they lived in, which although I may allow to the Egyptians and some
other ancient Nations, yet I cannot do it to the Hellens or Greeks, who most
vainly and arrogantly pretended to it. Which because it may give more light
into the greatest antiquities of Greece and some other Nations then has been
yet discovered or taken notice of, and because it may further tend to clear the
truth of the Scriptures as to the Origin of Nations, I shall more particularly
enquire into the first Plantation of Greece. That it was first inhabited by
some of Noah's posterity, is out of question with all those who prefer the most
ancient and undoubted records of Scripture before the fabulous impostures of
men's brains. But by whose immediate posterity the Country of Greece was first
inhabited, is not yet so clear as it has been generally presumed to be, by
most who had rather follow the dictates of others then spend time in such
enquiries themselves: Which yet certainly are so far from being unworthy men's
labor and industry, that nothing tends more clearly to advance the truth of
Scripture-history, then the reconciling the antiquities of the elder Nations to
what we find delivered of the plantation of the world from the posterity of
Noah. As to this particular therefore of the first plantation of Greece, I
shall first propound the opinion generally embraced among learned men, and then
show how far it is defective, and what other more true account may be given of
it. It is evident from Moses, Genesis 10. 5. that the posterity of Iaphet took
possession of the Isles of the Gentiles, i. e. according to the Hebrew Idiome,
not only such as are properly so called, but all those Countries which lay much
upon the Sea, being at any distance from Palestine, especially such as lay
between the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea; and so both Greece and Italy come
under the name of the Isles of the Gentiles. Among the sons of Iaphet none is
conceived so probable to have first peopled Greece, as he whose name was
preserved among the inhabitants of Greece with very little alteration. And so
as the Medes from Madai, the Assyrians from Assure, the Thracians from Thiras,
by the like Analogy the Ionians from Iavan. From which it is observable that
although among the Greeks themselves, the Ionians were but as one division of
that people which inhabited Greece, yet other Nations comprehended all under
the name of Ionians. For which we have sufficient evidence from Hesychius and
the Scholiast on Aristophanes. (...), says Hesychius; and more to this purpose
the Scholiast (...)(...)(...). Schol.(...)Arist. Acharn^ns.
speaks. (...). For (...) with the Insertion of the Aeolick Digamma, (which is
always done when two vowels meet) is (...), i. e. Iavones, and Stephanus
Byhantius tells us, that from (...) comes (...), and so Homer, Stephanus de
(...). v. (...). Hom. l. u.
(...). And Dionysius Periegetes reckons up (...) as one of the rivers of
Arcadia, (...). Dio^^^^u. 416.
And which much confirms this opinion, the Hebrew word for Iavan before the
points added by the Masorites, viz.(...)bears a perfect Analogy with the Greck
(...); and (...) in Scripture is taken for Greece; and so Dan. 8. 21. Alexander
is called (...) which the LXX. render (...), and Joel 3. 6. You have sold my
sons (...) to the sons of Iavan, i. e. to the Greeks as it is generally
understood. But as Iavan cannot be supposed to have come into these parts
without his family, so it is generally presumed that there are no obscure
footsteps left of Iavans eldest son, Elisha's seating himself in Greece. For
from him Josephus derives the name (...), with whom the Jerusalem Paraphrast
concurs. Montanus from thence derives the name Elis, from whence he supposes
the Greeks are called (...). Ar. Montan. Phaleg. ^. 24.
Bochartus finds the clearest remainders of Elisha in Elis the same with
Pelopponesus, one part of which by Homer is called Alisium; thence Ezekiel. 27. 7.
we read of the purple and searlet from the Isles of Elisha, which makes it most
probable to be that part of Greece w^^ch lay upon the Jonian Sea, Bochart.
Phal^g. l. 3. cap. 10.
where the best purple next to the Tyrian was found, as the learned Bochartus
has demonstrated from several Authors. This is now the substance of the
generally received account concerning the plantation of Greece from the
posterity of Noah. Which if it be taken as to that people which did at length
possess Greece, I see no reason to disapprove it; but if it be extended to the
first plantation of Greece, I see as little to embrace it. That we may
therefore judge more freely of the first inhabitants of Greece, it is requisite
we take an account of it from those who prosess themselves most versed in their
own Antiquities, who may in a matter of this nature which is attested by the
common consent of the most learned Antiquari^s of Greece, be the more credited,
in that what they thus deliver, may be supposed to come from an ancient and
undoubted Tradition.

It is evident therefore, from the judgment of the most Sect. 11.
learned and judicious even of the Greeks themselves, that Greece was first
inhabited by a people by them called Barbarous, i. e. a people different from
them in Language and manners. So Ephorus whom Poly^ius commends as the best
writer of the Greek Antiquities, says that Greece was inhabited by a barbarous
people before the Hell^ns came into it. And (...) Mil^sius cited by Str^o
concerning Pelo^ponesus, (...), which Strabo himself not only believes of
Pelopponesus but of all Greece that it was (...), anci^ntly a Plantation of
Barbarians; the same is affirmed by Aristotle writing of the Geogr. l. 7. V.
cho isst. in Apollonium l. 4. v. 262.
Commonwealth of the Tegeates concerning Arcadia, that before its being
possessed by the Arcadians i^ was inhabited by a barbarous people, who because
they were expulsed their Country, before moon rising, the Arcadians called
themselves (...). Whether that be the ground of that vainglorious boast (of
which many reasons are given by learned men) I here dispute not; it is
sufficient that we find the Grecians were not the first who peopled any of
these several places; which is likewise attested by Herodotus, Thucydides and
others, whose testimonies we shall afterward produce. It being then evident
that the Grecians were not the first who inhabited that Country after from them
called Greece, it follows to be inquired what this Barbarous people was and
from whence they came. Strabo has given us in a large Catalogue of the names
of many of them, as the Dryopes, Caucones, Leleges, besides the Aones,
Tembices, Hyantes and many others; but these seem not to have been that ancient
people, but rather some latter Castlings of the Carians, who as Thucydides
tells us, did very often make inroads upon the quarters of Greece. That people
which had the largest spread and greatest Antiquity, was the Pelasgi: thence
Pelopponesus was anciently called (...). Stephanus Byzantius (...) and (...):
and Apollodorus says, that the Pelopponesians were anciently called Pelasgi;
and Euripides, (...)
(...).
And elsewhere, (...). These Pelasgi were not only in Pelopponesus, but in
Attica too, as appears by Strabo, where he says the Nation of the Geogr. l. 9.
Pelasgi did inhabit, and by the Athenians (that is after their mixture) they
were called (...) Storks (...) for their frequent removals from place to place:
and Pausanias mentions their being under the Acronoli at Athens: that they were
in Thessaly, is evident from Hesy^hius. (...); Arcadia seems to have the first
or chief place of their residence; for the Arcadians who were accounted (...),
do vindicate the founder of this Nation, whom they call Pelasgus to themselves,
and say he was an (...) among them, that is, the first who came into that
Country; for all those whose original they knew not they called them Terrae
filios, and genuinos terrae. In Arcad.
Pausanias rightly conjectures that he was the first man among them, not as
though he was alone, but because the Chief Ruler and Commander among them, and
that brought them into the Country; but though they might fix themselves about
Arcadia, it is evident they spread further; for Menecrates Eleates in his book
of the founders of Cities, Strabo. l. 13
affirms that all the Sea coasts of Greece called Ionica beginning from Mycale,
were first inhabited by the Pelasgi; nay we find them yet much higher up in
Epirus, who were as Strabo tells us, the first founders of the famous Oracle of
Lib. 7.
Dodona; for so Ephorus in him says it was (...), and that these were (...):
thence the Poet, (...). And Hesiod, (...). Strabo further makes it evident,
that they were a barbarous people which lived about Dodona, from the
description Homer gives of them, (...)
(...).
Which Philostratus best interprets when he says they were (...), such that
thought In Imag^
the Gods were best pleased with their simplicity and severity of life, and
therein far different from the Grecian humor. Suidas in Thessalicis (cited
likewise by Strabo) says that the Temple of Dodona was removed from Scotusa in
Pelasgia in Thessaly, which is confirmed by Herodotus in Euterpe, where he
largely speaks of the Temple and Oracle at Dodona. These Pelasgi confined not
themselves to Greece neither, but were dispersed into the neighbor Islands, as
Chios, Creet, Lesbos, Lemnos, Imbro, Samos, as will appear afterward; and at
last came into Italy, as is well known, and are thought to be the same with
Tyrrhenians, and by some conceived to be the first founders of Rome. We see
what a large spread the Pelasgi had over Greece, which was divided after the
Hellens began to appear, into (...), as Herodotus witnesses; and so these two
appear to be a very different people from one another, and not the same under
different names as is commonly thought.

Which sufficiently appears from their language, which was Sect. 12.
quite different from one another. So Herodotus (...), they used a barbarous
language: i. e. a language not understood by the Hellens; who at first, had
their chief residence in Thessaly, from whence by degrees they came forwards
into Greece, as Thucydides shows. For although the name of Hellens at last
spread its self over all the people of Greece, yet it was at first peculiar to
that part of Thessaly called Pthiotis, and thence Homer calls them properly
Hellens which followed Achilles from thence; and it appears by Homer that there
was a City there called (...), which as Stephanus de Urbibus tells us was there
built by (...), although he will not have him to be Hellen the son of
Deucalion, but the son of Pthius, wherein he is mistaken; For Thucydides
plainly shows that it was from Hellen the son of Deucalion that the name (...)
came, and this Hellen lived in Pthiotis. But although they were first in
Pthiotis, yet they daily increasing in numbers and power, by degrees they got
all Thessaly into their hands, of which one part was called (...); afterward
under Dorus the son of Hellen they conquered Hestiaectis, that part of Thessaly
which lies under the mountains Ossa and Olympus; from thence they were beaten
back by the Cadmeans into Pindus, where the Greeks were first called (...), as
Herodotus tells us; from hence they went into Dryopis, and thence into
Pelopponesus, and there had the name Dorians; but before their coming hither,
they had first secured themselves of Hellens lying between Thessaly and
Pelopponesus, and there they dispossessed the Pelasgi in all the Attickregion;
who were now forced to submit or to fly; they who submitted, as most of them
did, were incorporated into the Greeks, and became one people with them, and so
by degrees lost that former language which was peculiar to themselves and
wholly distinct from the Greek tongue. That the Hellens did thus gradually come
into Pelopponesus, is evident from the names of people and placts common to
Thessaly and Pelopponesus which came from hence, that though the Greeks left
the Cities behind them, yet they carried most of the names along with them.
Thus the Achaei, Ionians, and Aeolians, and Dorians in Pelopponesus came from
those of the same names in Thessaly; and so likewise the names of these
following regions and Cities were common to both, as Ellopia, Estiaea, Eretria,
and Oropos, Graia, Larissa, Psophis, Iton, Occalia and very many others
Salmasius seems to be of opinion, that the Pelasgi never used any language
distinct De Hellen. p. 315.
from the Hellens; but besides that it is directly contrary to the testimony of
Herodotus, the arguments he produeeth for it are very weak. The first is
because the Pelasgi that went into Italy, did use the Greek tongue, from their
calling Agylla Caere, from (...) a word pronounced from one on the walls; and
because the Arcades used only the Greek language in the Aeolian Dialect, which
Evander carried with him into Italy, and from which most of the old Roman
language was derived. But does not Herodotus expressly say, that after the
mixture between the Greeks and Pelasgi these by degrees lost their own proper
language and made use of the common Greek tongue? Yet afterward too it is
evident from Herodotus in some places, as at Crotona, they did use a language
different from the Greek. His other argument is, that the names of the eldest
persons mentioned were originally Greek; but this is expressly denied by Strabo
who makes the contrary one of his strongest arguments, that the Barbarians did
anciently inhabit Greece; and instanceth in Cecrops, Codrus, Aeoius, Cothus,
Drymas, Crimanus. Thus we have abundantly proved against the common opinion,
that Greece was not first peopled by the Hellens, or the posterity of Elisa,
although these did afterward come to the full possession of Greece.

It remains that we show whence these Pelasgi came, and of whose posterity they
were, and what the language was Sect. 13.
which was used by them. He that gave the name to this people according to the
Grecian fables, was one Pelasgus, which none will wonder at among them, whose
constant custom it was, (partly by reason of their Ignorance of the true
account of their names, and partly by their pride that they might not seem
ignorant of any thing) when they meet with any names of people to find out some
person near it who was the founder of them. Thus Artica from Actaeus, it being
anciently called (...), and Cranae from Cranaus, Aegialea from Aegialeus,
Mauritania from Maurus, S^ythia from one S^ythes, Galataea from Galates, and
thus in multitudes of other names. But from the name Pelasgi we may probably
find out the true founder of the people, allowing that variation which is
usually caused through the Greeks melting the harsher words of the Eastern
languages into a sound fit ^or their more delicate palats, as is evident in the
comparing the names of the Prophets in Ebrew, with what they are in the Greek
version. Thus the Pelasgi may with great probability be derived from (...)
Pheleg; for which we have the concurrent testimony of two learned persons,
Grotius and Salmasius, who are contented to mention it, without bringing much
evidence of reason for it. What they Grot. not. in lib. 1. de jur. b^l. etc.
cap. 3. Sal^de Hellen.
only touch at, we shall endeavor to make out more at large; which we shall do
by removing the great presumptions against it, and laying down the
probabilities for it. The great presumptions lying against it are; for that the
Isles of the Nations tell to the posterity of Iapheth, and that Phaleg lived
with Eber in Chaldea. For the first, it must be acknowledged that the greatest
part of the Countries lying upon the Ocean and Mediterrancan, were in the time
when Moses wrote so inhabited; not that the habitations of the sons of Noah had
their bounds and limits set them either by God or Noah, but that the posterity
of Iaphet did chiefly address themselves to those parts which lay toward
Europe; but yet not so, as to exclude any of the posterity of Sem, if their
necessities for further room made it necessary for them to seek for habitations
further abroad. For we can have no reason to think, that because the chief of
Sems posterity did live together, therefore none of them went further off,
which necessity would put them upon because of their great increase; for we
read of Phaleg and others, that besides those in a direct line to Abraham
(whose Genealogy it was Moses his great design to recount) they begat many
other sons and daughters, which would make it necessary for Genesis 11. 19, 21.
them, to seek their habitations further abroad. And that Phaleg and Ragan did
so, we have the express testimony of Epiphanius, (...). D^ Seyth^s. ep. ad.
(...). and (...).
That from the age of Therah and then^e forward Ph^leg and Ragau diverted
toward the Clime of Europe, to part of Scythia, and were joined with those
Nations from whi^^ the Thracians arose. Several things make this not so
improbable as some have imagined it to be; for first, it is the constant
acknowledgement of all sober inquirers into the original of the Greeks, that
Greece was first peopled from Scythia, and indeed almost all the N^tions in
Europe have come out of that Country: besides there is evidence of it, even in
the Gr^cian Fables; for Prometheus (from whom the Greeks derived themselves) is
fan^yed by them to lie bound in mount Cancasus, which must be suppos^d to be
the Country from whence he came. Again it is evident already that the Hellens
came not into Greece before it was peopled by the Pelasgi, and that these had
different language and customs from one another; now then in all probability,
although the posterity of Elisa might come first down from Scythia into those
parts and seat themselves in Macedonia and Th^ssaly, where they had in
probability more then room enough at first and a Country to their desire; they
might be willing to permit the posterity of Phaleg to pass on further; for in
those first plantations we cannot otherwise conceive, but that the last comers
must be the furthest goers; unless they had strength enough to drive the former
inhabitants out of their seats whereof they were already possessed, as the
Scythians did afterward, and so the H^llens; So then the posterity of Phaleg
being forced to quit their own Country because of the multitude of inhabitants,
must be supposed to take that course, where in probability they might find an
empty seat fit for them to dwell in; thence they come toward Europe; for they
saw how the posterity of Sem did spread it self Eastward already, and Cham
Southward, and coming to part of, that vast Country of Soythia, which was both
already taken up and not so convenient an habitation for them, they draw
downwards toward Thracia, and there the po^^erity of Thiras from whom the
Thracians came had already possessed themselves; passing further into Thessaly,
they find that already planted by some of the posterity of Elisa, but as yet
but scant and thin of inhabitants; therefore they disperse themselves up and
down through some part of Epirus, most part of Ellas, and some pass into
Peloppon^sus, where they six themselves chiefly upon Arcadia, and thence spread
up and down by degrees toward the Seaside; for we cannot but think that the
Maritime parts were the last peopled, partly for fear of another d^luge, partly
for want of convenience of Navigation most of their travels being by Land; and
partly when Navigation grew more in use for fear of Pirates, who drove a great
trade upon the Coasts of Greece in elder times, as is most evident from
Thucydides in the beginning of his history. Thus we have a reasonable account
given of the P^lasgi their first coming into Greece, and how by degrees the
Hellens came to possess their Country, and what a fair pretense the Arcadians
had to boast of the greatest antiquity, their Country being probably first
peopled by the Pelasgi of any part of the whole Chersonese, and the seat of the
leader of the whole company whom they call Pelasgus and the Scriptures Phaleg.

Having thus far cleared the Antiquities of Grecce as to the first planters of
it, whom we have evidenced to have been Sect. 14.
the Pelasgi, and these derived from Peleg, it will be no great difficulty to
resolve what language they brought along with them, which must be supposed to
be the same with that used in the family from whence Peleg or Phaleg came, as
to the substance of it, although it might admit as great variation of Dialact
from it as the Chaldee or Syriack does. But this I will not only suppose, but
offer these probabilities for the proof of it, the first is, the agreement of
the ancient Greek language with the Hebrew in many of its primitive words; and
here we have a most rational and probable account given of it; which is the
Greeks mixing with the Pelasgi, and both coming to be one people, they must
needs retain many of the old words used by the Pelasgi in their Greek language;
which are evidently of an Eastern extraction, the ground of which cannot with
such probability be fetched from Cadmus and the Phoenicians, because it is not
so easy admission of a foreign Language after the perfection of their own,
unless by long tract of time, or great numbers overrunning the former people,
neither of which can be so truly affirmed of Cadmus and his company; for they
were soon driven out of Greece, he himself ending his days in Illyricum;
neither was their spread so large as that of the Pelasgi, who were before
possessors of the Country; and it is continually seen how impossible it is for
any Conquerors, as the Greeks were, to bring their own language so into a
place, where some of the former people are suffered to live, and not to retain
many of their old words among them, and so make the Language mixed of both, as
it is in all Nations conquered by the Romans; the Roman not being purely spoken
by any, but corrupted with a mixture of the sormer Language in use among them.
The second Argument is from the different pronunciation and dialects in use in
the Greek Language; of which no account so likely can be given, as the mixture
with different Language. This is most evident in the Dorick Dialect; for the
Dorians inhabiting probably where most of the Pelasgi had been, their
pronunciation and dialect comes the nearest to the Eastern of any of the
Greeks: For in the Dorick dialect the (...); or broad pronunciation, is most
taken notice of: So he in Theocritus upbraids the Dorians, (...), they speak
every thing very broad; which answers to the pronunciation of the Eastern
Languages; besides, the Dorick dialect delights much in adding a to the end of
words, which besides that it is the custom of Eastern tongues, especially the
Syriack, it does much widen the pronunciation. The third Argument is from the
remainders of the Eastern tongues in those places, especially where the Pelasgi
had been. The Pelasgi are much taken notice of for their frequent removes and
traveling from one place to another; which I suppose was chiefly after the
Hellens had conquered the Country where they dwelt, then they were forced to go
seek better habitations abroad; thence Strabo calls the Nation of the Pelasgi
(...): Lib. 5.
and elsewhere that they were (...), they went up and down to great part of
Europe; Lib. 12.
but we may suppose them to have made their first and chief resort to the
neighbor Islands to Greece; where we shall see what evidence they left of
their language there. The first Island we meet with them in, is Crecte; so
Strabo speaking of them, (...); that a Colony of them lived in Creete, for
which he vouchsafes Lib. 5.
Homers authority: (...), Only (...). 175.

(...),
(...).
It is evident then that the Pelasgi were in Creete. Now most of the Cretan
words are of an Eastern extraction, if we believe the learned Bochartus, who
has promised a discourse on that subject; besides Creete we find the P^lasgi
in De Phoen. Col. l. 1. c. 15.
Chios, (...), says Strabo, the inhabitants of Chios say that the Pelasgi of
Thessaly were their first inhabitants; and here the forenamed learned person
has derived the name Chios, the mountain Pelinaeus, and the wine Arvisium, all
from the Eastern languages. The next we find them in, is Lesbos, (...), Lib. 1.
c. 9.
which from them was called Pelasgia, says Strabo, whose name is likewise
fetched out of the East. By Bochartus further we find them in Lemnos and Geogr.
p. 2. l. 1. c. 12.
Imbros; so Anticlides in Strabo, (...); concerning whose names, see Bochartus
82. I know that learned Author makes the Phoenicians the Authors of all these
names, from no other ground generally, but because they are of an Eastern
derivation; but according to what we have laid down, we may yield to the thing
it self, and upon clearer grounds; for of some of these Islands he ingenuously
confesses he can find no evidence of the Phoenicians being in them Phoenices
in his Insulis habitasse nusquam legimus; but we find it very plain, that in
Lib. 1. c. 9.
those very Islands the Pel^sgi inhabited; and whether account then be more
probable, let the Reader judge. One thing more I shall insist on, which is the
original of the Samothracian Mysteries: That these were as to their names from
the Eastern languages, is now acknowledged by all learned men, the Cabiri being
so evidently derived from (...) which signisies strength and power, i. e. the
Dii potes, so Cabiri is explained by Varro and Tertullian, and the particular
De spect. c. 8.
names of the several Cabiri mentioned by the Scholiast on Apollonius, (...)
and (...), are very handsomely explained by that learned and excellent Lib. 1.
c. 12.
Bochartus from the Eastern languages; only he will needs have them derived
from the Phoenicians, whereas Herodotus expressly tells us that they were from
the P^lasgi, whose words are these; (...): And again, Lib. 2.
(...). We see evidently by this, that the Samothracians derived their
Mysteries from the Pelasgi; and without all question they had their names from
thence, whence they derived their Mysteries: And to this purpose it is further
observable, that as the old Hetrurians were certainly a Colony of the Pelasgi,
upon their removal out of Greece; so Vossius observes that the old Hetruscan
language (fere ^ Syris habet cuncta sacrorum nomina) has almost all the sacred
appellations De Idol. l. 2. c. 57.

A^not. in Mat. 12. 1.


from the Eastern Tongues. For which purpo^e it is further observable, which
Grotius takes notice of, that the jus pontisicum Romanorum was taken(...)great
part from the Hetrusci, and the Hetrurians had it ab H^braeis out of the
Eastern parts.

By all which I cannot conceive but this opinion, notwithstanding its novelty,
is advanced to as high a degree of Sect. 15.
probability, as any that stands on the like foundations; and not only so, but
is an excellent clue to direct us to the Labyrinth of Antiquities, and gives us
a fair account whence the Eastern Tongues came to be so much used among both
the ancient Greeks and Hetrurians. One thing more this will help us to
understand far better then any salvo has been yet used for it; which is the
affinity spoken of by Ari^s King of Lacedaemon, in his Letters to Onias,
between the Jews and Lacedaemonians: (...): which 1 Machab. 12 21.

Antiq. l. 13. c. 9.


is explained by Josephus thus: (...): They had found in a book that the Jews
and Lacedaemonians were of the same stock, from their mutual relation to
Abraham. Vossius thinks the Original of this was from those of the posterity of
Anak, who came into Greece, and peopled Sparta, and would seem to have been of
the posterity De Idol. l. 1. c. 13.
of Abraham; or that they were partly of the posterity of Abraham by Agar or
Cethura, and partly of the Canaanites driven out by Joshua: But how unlikely a
thing is it (supposing Sparta peopled by the Canaanites, which yet is not
evident) that they should give out themselves to be of that stock which they
had been expelled their Country by? And for the true posterity of Abraham
coming thither, as we have no ground for it but the bare assertion, so we have
this strong evidence against it, that all that came from Abraham were
cirucumcised, as the Ishmaelites, Hagarens, etc. which we never read of among
the Lacedaemonians. H. Grotius differs not much from the opinion of Vossius
concerning the ground of this kindred between the Jews and Spartans: For in
his notes on that place in the Maccabees, where it is spoken of, he gives this
account of it. The Dorians, of whom the Spartans were a part, came from the
Pelasgi; the language of the Pelasgi was different from that of the Greeks, as
appears by Herodotus in his Clio: (...). Now the Pelasgi (says he) are (...)
dispersi, a scatterd Nation; thence he supposes these Pelasgi, or banished
people, to have come from the Confines of Arabia and Syria, in which the
posterity of Abraham and Cethura had placed themselves. But 1. it is uncertain
whether the posterity of Abraham by Keturah were placed so near Canaan or no. I
know Iunius endeavors to find the seat of all the sons of Cethurab in Arabia;
but Mercer gives several not improbable reasons why he conceives them placed
not in the East of Canaan, but in the Eastern parts of the world. 2. We have no
evidence at all of any remove of these sons of Abraham by Ceturah out of the
parts of Arabia, supposing them placed there; nor any reason why they should be
banished thence. 3. That which was the badge of Abraham's posterity, was never
that we read of in use among the Spartans, which was Circumcision. Indeed in
much later Ages then this we speak of, we read of a people among the Thracians
who were circumcised, whom the Greeks themselves judged to be Jews. So
Aristophanes brings the Odomantes in. (...) Achar^ens. Act. 1. sc. 4
(says the Scholiast) i. e. (...). Whereby it is plain that Circumcision was
in use among the Thracians; for these Odomantes were (says the Scholiast) a
people of Thrace. (...). It seems it was a tradition among them that they were
Jews. If so, it seems most probable that they were some of the ten Tribes, who
were placed about Colchis, and the adjacent places: For Herodotus in Euterpe
says, that the Syrians that lived about the Rivers Thermodon and Parthenius,
learned Circumcision from the Colchi, of whom he says, (...). Only the Colchi,
and Egyptians, and Ae^hiopians had originally the custom of Circumcision. Or
else these O^omantes might be some of the dispersed Jews in Armenia, where
Strabo mentions a Region called Odomantis, and so they Geogr. l. 11.
retained the name of the place from whence they came, after their removal into
Thrace. But what ever these Odomantes were, they were far enough from the
Spartans, who never were thus suspected of Judaism, nor laughed at for
Circumcision. So that this opinion of Grotius on that account seems not very
probable. Bochartus, who has been so happy in many other conjectures, yet here
gives out, unless it may depend upon the testimony of Claudius Iolaus in
Stephanus De Phoeni^. Col. l. 1. c. 22.
Bizantius, who fabulously derives the Jews from one Iudaeus Sparton, who went
from Thebes along with Bacchus into the Wars; which Sparton they might confound
with another Sparton the Son of Phoroneus, the Founder of Sparta; which yet is
rejected as a Fable by Pausanias in Laconi^is. Surely the Lacedaemonians were
very ambitious of kindred with the Jews, that would claim it upon such grounds
as these, especially at such a time when the people of the Jews were undet
distress, and their kindred might be like to cost them so dear: And if they had
never such a mind to have claimed kindred with the Jews, they would certainly
have done it upon a more plausible testimony then the fable of one Claudius
Iolaus, that had neither sense nor r^ason in it; and yet supposing his Fable
true, it had been nothing to the purpose, without the linking another F^ble to
it, which was so gross, that even the Greeks themselves were ashamed of it, who
were always the most daring forgers of Fables in the world. But let us see
further what the Divine (as some have loved to call him) Ios. Scaliger says to
it: All Canon. 1. sag. p. 332.
that he says, is only a wonder or two at it: Quid mag is mirum quam
Iacedaemonios ab Abraham prognatos ^sse, etc. and a refutation of an absurd
opinion, that Oebalus the Father of Tyndareus, and Grandfather of Castor,
Pollux, and Helen^, was the same with Ebal, mentiond Genesis 10. 28. which there
can be no reason for, since Ebal was the Son of Ioctan, and so of another race
from Abraham; and Ioctans Sons were placed Eastward, but chiefly Oebalus was
within an hundred years before the destruction of Troy; but Phaleg, Uncle to
Ebal, died 664 years before Oebalus in A. M. 1993. Thus far then we cannot find
any plausible account of this claim of kindred; but though it be an endless
task to make good all the claims of kindred in the world, especially to persons
of power and authority, yet there being no visible interest or design which the
Spartans could have in such a claim, especially at that time with a Nation
generally hated and maligned by Heathen Idolaters, we cannot suppose but there
must be some at least plausible ground for such a persuasion among them. What
if we should conjecture that the Spartans might find in the Greck version of
the Pentateuch, which was much spread abroad at that time among the Sons of
Ishma^l, one whose name makes the nearest approach to their Cadmus, from whom
they suppose themselves derived: for the youngest of Ishma^l sons was called
K^demah, Genesis 25. 15 which the Syriack renders Kedem, the very name of Cadmus
in the Eastern Tongues. But this being a light conjecture, I pass it by, and
return to the subject of our discourse, which gives a plausible account of the
ground of this kindred. We have already showed that the Pelasgi were the first
who peopled Greece ((...), is Strabo's expression of that Nation, that it
spread over all Greece) and withal it appears that the chief Seat of the
Pelasgi was in Arcadia, to which next adjoyns Laconica; and therefore in all
probability was peopled by them; and besides, the Dorians sprang from the
Pelasgi, and the Spartans were a part of the Dorians, as appears already out of
Grotius; so that what kindred the Pelasgi had, was derived down to the
Spartans; and we have manifested that these Pelasgi were from Phaleg, and the
Scripture tells us that Phaleg was the son of Genesis 11. ^ 17, 28.
Eber, from whom Abraham came in a direct and lineal succession. And thus the
Jews coming from Abraham, and the Spartans by the Pelasgi from Phaleg, they
both came out of the same stock: For so I^sephus expresses it, not that the
Lacedaemonians came from Abraham, but that the Jews and they were both (...),
out of the same stock; and both had relation to Abraham; the Jews as coming in
a direct line, the Spartans as deriving from Phal^g, from whom Abraham came.
And thus much may now(...)cle^r the first Plantation of Greece, and to show how
consonant it is to sacred Scripture; which I have taken the more pains in,
because of the serviceableness of this discourse to that end, and to show what
use may be made of this kind of Learning, for vindicating the honor of the
sacred Scriptures.

The only thing remaining as to the Origin of Nations, is the peopling of that
vast Continent of America, which I cannot think we have yet sufficient
in^ormation, either concerning the passages thither, especially East and North,
or concerning any records the Indians have among themselves absolutely to
determine any thing in it. It seems most probable that the several parts of it
were peopled at several times, and from several parts, especially North and
East; but to go about absolutely to determine from what Nation, in what Age, by
what means they were first peopled, were a piece of as great confidence as
ignorance, till we have more certain discoveries of it. I choose therefore
rather to refer the Reader to the bandyings of this Controversy in the Vi
Grotium Joh. de La^^, Horn. de Orig. Gent. American.

V. Manass^ Be^ Israel. Spes Israelis. Et Spizzel. dc Israeli^is America^is.


many Writers about it, then to undertake any thing as to the decision of it.
Only in the general it appears from the remaining tradition of the Flood, and
many Rites and Customs used among them, that they had the same original with
us, and that there can be no argument brought against it from themselves, since
some Authors tell us, that the eldest Accounts and Memoires they have, do not
exceed 800. years backward; and therefore their Testimony can be of no validity
in a matter of so great Antiquity, as the Origin of N^tions is.

CHAP. V. Of the Origin of the Heathen Mythology.
That there were some remainders of the ancient history of the world preserved
in the several Nations after the dispersion. How it came to be corrupted: by
decay of knowledge, increase of Idolatry, confusion of languages. An enquiry
into the cause of that. Difficulties against the common opinion that languages
were confounded at Babel. Those difficulties cleared. Of the fabulousness of
Poets. The particular ways whereby the Heathen Mythology arose. Attributing
the general history of the world to their own Nation. The corruption of
Hebraisms. Alteration of names. Ambiguity of sense in the Oriental languages.
Attributing the actions of many to one person, as in Jupiter, Bacchus, etc. The
remainders of Scripture history among the Heathens. The names of God, Chaos,
formation of man among the Phaenicians. Of Adam among the Germans; Egyptians,
Cilicians. Adam under Saturn. Cain among the Phaenicians. Tubalcain and Jubal
under Vulcan and Apollo. Naamah under Minerva. Noah under Saturn, Janus,
Prometheus and Bacchus. Noah's three sons under Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto.
Canaan under Mercury, Nimrod under Bacchus, Magog under Prometheus. Of Abraham
and Isaac among the Phaenicians. Jacobs service under Apollo's. The (...) a
from Bethel. Joseph under Apis* Moses under Bacchus. Joshua under Hercules.
Balaam under the ol^ Siolenus.

THE main particulars contained in the Scriptures concerning the history of
Ancient Times being thus far Sect. 1.
cleared, there remains only that evidence which there is of the truth of the
historical part of those eldest times, in those footsteps of it which are
contained in the Heathen Mythology. For we cannot conceive, that since we have
manifested that all mankind did come from the posterity of Noah, that all those
passages which concerned the history of the world* should be presently
obliterated and extinguished among them, but some kind of tradition would be
still preserved, although by degrees it would be so much altered for want of
certain records to preserve it in, that it would be a hard matter to discover
its original without an exact comparing it with the true history its self from
whence it was first taken. For it fared with this Tradition of the first ages
of the world, as with a person who has a long time traveled in foreign
parts, who by the variety of Climes and Countries may be so far altered from
what he was, that his own relations may not know him upon his return, but only
by some certain marks which he has in his body, by which they are assured,
that however his complexion and visage may be altered, yet the person is the
same still. Thus it was in this original tradition of the world through its
continual passing from one age to another, and the various humors, tempers,
and designs of men, it received strange disguises and alterations as to its
outward favor and complextion; but yet there are some such certain marks
remaining on it, by which we find out its true original. Two things then will
be the main subject of our enquiry here. 1. By what means the original
tradition came to be altered and corrupted. 2. By what marks we may discern its
true original, or what evidences we have of the remainders of Scripture history
in the Heathen Mythology.

1. Concerning the means whereby the Tradition by degrees came to be corrupted.
There may be some more Sect. 2.
general, and others more particular. The general causes of it were.

1. The gradual decay of knowledge and increase of Barbarism in the world;
occasioned by the want of certain records to preserve the ancient history of
the world in. Which we at large discoursed of in our entrance on this subject.
Now Book 1 c 1. Sect. 16.
in the decay of knowledge, there must needs follow a sudden and strange
alteration of the memory of former times, which has then nothing to preserve
it, but the most uncertain report of fame, which alters and disguiseth things
according to the humors, and inclinations, and judgments of those whose hands
it passes through.

2. The gradual increase of Idolatry in the world: which began soon after the
dispersion of Nations, and in whose age, we cannot at so great a distance and
in so great obscurity precisely determine; but as soon as Idolatry came in, all
the ancient tradition was made subservient in order to that end; and those
persons whose memories were preserved in several Nations, by degrees came to be
worshipped under diversities of names; and such things were annexed to the
former traditions as would tend most to advance the greatest superstition in
the world.

3. The Confusion of Languages at Babel, was one great reason of corrupting the
ancient tradition of the world. For in so great variety (as suddenly happened)
of languages in the world, it cannot be conceived but such things which might
be preserved in some uniform manner, had all Nations used the same language,
would through the diversity of Idiomes and properties of several tongues be
strangely altered and disguised, as will appear afterward. This alteratisn of
languages in the world upon the confusion of tongues at Babel, brought as great
a confusion into the original tradition, as it did among those who were the
designers of that work.

And because this subject of the Original and cause of this diversity of
languages among men, does both tend to explain Sect. 3.
the present subject, and to clear the truth of Scripture history, I shall a
little further enquire into it. Chiefly on this account, because it is
pretended that such a confusion is needless which is delivered in Scripture,
for the producing such diversities of languages, which would arise through mere
length of time, and the varieties of Climes and customs in the world. But if we
only speak concerning the sense of Moses about it, the enquiry is of greater
difficulty then at first view it seems to be. For it is pretended that Moses
nowhere speaks of a diversity of languages, as we understand it, but V. Mer.
Casaub. de 4. linguis. p. 3. etc.
only of a confusion of their speech who were at Babel, which might well be
although they all used the same language; that is, there might be a confusion
raised in their minds, that they could not understand one another; their
notions of things being disturbed, so that though they heard one word, they had
different apprehensions of it: some thinking it signified one thing and some
another: as Julius S^aliger tells us that the Jews he had conversed with, did
not understand Exercit. in Cordan. 259. sect. 1.
by it a multiplication of tongues; but only by that confusion their former
notions of things by the same words were altered. As if one called for (...) a
stone, one by that word understands lime, another water, another sand, etc.
this must needs produce a strange confusion among them, and enough to make them
desist from their work. But supposing no such division of languages there, yet
after their dispersion, which might be caused by the former confusion, by the
different Laws, rites, and customs, commerce, and trading, and tract of time,
there would have risen a division of their several tongues. But if there were
such a division of tongues miraculously caused there (that as it is commonly
said, all those who were of the same language, went together in their several
companies) whence comes it to pass, that in their dispersisn we read of several
families dispersed, which used the same language after their dispersion? as all
the sons of Canaan mentioned, Genesis 10. 15, 16, 17, 18. used the Canaanitish
tongue: in Greece, Iavan and Elisa had the same language. In Egypt Misraim and
Pathrusim; in Arabia the sons of Ioctan and Chus; in Chaldaea Aram and Uz the
inhabitants of Syria, Mash of Mesopotamia, Nimrod of Babylon, Assure of Assyria:
whence comes it to pass if their several tongues were the cause of their
dispersion, that these several heads of families should use the same tongue?
Another reason against the common opinion, is this, which seems to have a great
deal of force in it. If tongues were divided at Babel, as it is imagined;
whence was it, that the nearer any Nation lay to those who had the primitive
language the Ebrew, they did participate more of that tongue then those who
were more remote, as is plain in the Chaldeans, Canaanites, Greeks, and others?
whereas if their languages were divided at Babel, they would have retained
their own language as well as others. This very argument prevailed so far with
the learned Is. Casaubon, as appears by his adversaria on this subject
(published by the learned Dr. Diatrib. de L. Heb. p. 17, 18.
his son) as to make him leave the common opinion, and to conclude the several
tongues to be only some variations from the Ebrew, but yet so as many new words
were invented too. Hence he observes that the Asiatick Greeks came nearer to
the Ebrew then the European. And if this opinion hold true, it is the best
foundation for deriving other languages from Page 47.
the Ebrew: a thing attempted by the same learned person, as you may see in the
book forecited, and endeavored by Guichardus, Avenarius and others. Thus we
see there is no agreement in men's minds concerning the division of tongues at
Babel.

But having set down this opinion with its reasons, I shall Sect. 4.
not so leave the received opinion, but shall first see what may be said for
that, and leave the judgment concerning the probability of either to the
understanding reader. And it seems to be grounded on these reasons. 1. That had
it been left to men's own choice, there cannot be a sufficient reason assigned
of the diversity of languages in the world. For there being one language
originally in the world, whereby men did represent their conceptions to one
another; we cannot imagine that men should of themselves introduce so great an
alteration, as whereby to take off that necessary society and converse with
each other, which even nature it self did put men upon. Hence Calvin and others
conclude Aan^t. in Genesis 11. 1, 2.
that prodigii lo^o habenda est linguarum diversitas; because there having been
that freedom of converse among men, it is not to be supposed they should of
themselves cut it off to their mutual disadvantage. But to this it is said,
that the long tract of time and diversity of customs might alter the language.
I grant it much, but not wholly; and they would only therein differ in their
languages, wherein their customs differed; so that there would remain still
such an agreement as whereby they might understand each other; which it will be
hard to find in many of the eldest languages. As for the length of time, though
that does alter much in reference to words and phrases, in which that of Horace
holds true, Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, etc. Yet it will be yet more
difficult to find where mere length of time has brought a whole language out
of use, and another in the room of it. But that which I think deserves well to
be confidered is this, that the greatest alteration of languages in the world
has risen from Colonyes of Nations that used another language; and so by the
mixture of both together the language might be much altered; as the Hebrew by
the Chaldees in Babylon; the Spanish, Italian and others by the Enquiries. cap.
5, 6.
Latin, as Breerwood shows; our own by the Normans and others. So that were
there not a diversity of languages supposed, this enterfereing of people would
bring no considerable alteration along with it, no more then a Colony from New
England would alter our language here. And as for another cause assigned of the
change of languages, the difference of climates, which Bodin gives as the
reason why the Northern people use consonants and aspirates so much, Metned.
hist. cap. 9.
especially the Sax^ns, and those that live by the Baltic sea who pronounce
thus, Per theum ferum pibimus ponum finum. And so R. D. Kimchi observes of the
Ephraimites, Judge. 12. 6. that it was the air was the cause of their lisping,
and calling it Sibboleth, as he there observes of the men of Sarphath, May^r.
P. odr. Chalda^sm. c. 1.
that is the French, that they could not pronounce Schin, but pronounced like
Thau Raphe. But by these examples we see that this would cause only an
alteration as to some letters and syllables, and rather as to the pronunciation
then any variety of the language. So that we see that seting aside the
confusion of languages at Babel, there can be no reason sufficient assigned for
the variety of languages in the world. 2. Though it be granted, that a
confusion in their minds without distinct languages were enough to make them
desist from their work, yet the context in that place, Genesis 11. does infer a
diversity of tongues, as will appear from the ante^dents and consequents; as
from the first verse, where it is not conceivable why it should be there taken
notice of as such a remarkable circumstance, that then they had but one
language before they set upon this work, if there was not a diversity of
tongues caused by the work they went about; but especially ver. 6. where God
takes such notice of this very thing, that they had but one language, wherein
they were so confident to carry on their work: therefore, ver. 7. when he would
destroy their work by confounding their language, it must be by multiplying
that language into many more; for it must be taken in opposition to what is
said in the other verse. And what is there added, their not understanding one
another speech, seems to refer not to the inward conceptions, as though they
did not understand one another minds, but to the outward expressions, as (...)
does apparently relate to them further in ver. 8. this is set down as the cause
of their dispersion, which had the tongue been the same afterward as it was
before, could have been no reason for it. Again some argue from the name Babel
given to the place from (...) which signifies to confound and mingle things of
several kinds together. So used Judge. 19. 21. Esaias 30 24. Job 6. 5. etc. thence
the name (...) for (...) the middle (...) left out, as in Golgotha for
Golgoltha, Kikaltha for Kilkaltha and others of a like nature. Besides, there
seems to be somewhat in what is said, that the families were divided according
to their tongues, Genesis 10. 5, 20, 31. which does at least imply a diversity of
tongues among them, the cause of which must be assigned by them who will not
allow of the confusion and division of languages at Babel. Further, this seems
most agreeable to Gods and in making of them thus leave off their work, that
there might be not only a present judgment upon them, but that which might
remain to post^rity as a note of the folly of their Ancestors. Those who recede
from the common opinion lest they should give advantage to Infidels by
attributing that to a miracle, which might be done without, seem to be more
wary then wise in it. For besides that it is certain that miracles may be in
those things which might be effected otherwise by natural causes; when they are
produced without the help of those causes, and in a space of time impossible to
nature, and that it has not been as yet proved how such diversity of tongues
as is in the world would have been effected without such a miracle; it must be
granted by them that there was a miracle in it; and what greater difficulty
there should be in the variety of languages, then in the signification of the
same words, I understand not. But I see no necessity of asserting that every
one of the families had a distinct language, and the common opinion of 70. or
72. as the Gr. families and as many languages, is now taken for a groundless
fancy by learned men; as is easily proved from the dividing Father and
Children, whose families could not certainly be without ^oca. G^or. l. 1. c. 15.

(...) dia^. sect. 54.

(...). diat. sect. 68.


them; and some supposed to be unborn then as Ioctans 13. Children; especially
if we say as many do, that the Confusion was at the birth of Phaleg, and Ioctan
was his younger brother, as the Jews generally do. To the last objection it may
be replied, that the agreement of languages in some radical words does not
infer the derivation of the one from the other, as is plain in the Persian and
German in which learned men have observed so many words alike. And so by
Busbequius of the inhabitants about ^^ps. cent. 3. ep. 44.

Busbeq. ^p. 24.


Taunche Cheelsonese; and so in most of our modern tongues there may be some
words alike without any such dependence or derivation. Again, though it be
granted that the languages of them who were at Babel were confounded, yet it is
not necessary we should say that all Noah's posterity were there. It is thought
by some that they were chiefly Cham Mayer. Philol. sacr. p. 2. c. 6.
and his company; if so, then Sem and his posterity might retain the language
they had before, only with some variations. But this is very uncertain, unless
we take it for Heber and Peleg, from whose vicinity other bordering Nations
might make use of many of their primitive words; and for the Greeks, it will be
granted that many of their words, especially the old Baeotick had affinity with
the Hebrew; but it was from the Pelasgi at first and Cadmus the Phaenician
afterward; the old Canaanitish language, being if not the pure Hebrew, yet a
dialect of that tongue, as is proved by many learned men. But however these
things be, it is not necessary to say that all Mother tongues so called, were
then existent at that confusion; but the present curse did divide their
languages who were there, and that all division of languages since, is to be
looked upon as the effect of that curse.

It being thus manifested what a strange confusion of languages was caused in
the world, we may thereby easily understand how the ancient tradition came to
be corrupted and altered in the world.

Another reason of the alteration of the ancient tradition, Sect. 5. 4.
was, the fabulousness of the Poets; for these made it their design to disguise
all their ancient stories under Fables, in which they were so lost, that they
could never recover them afterward. For the elder Poets of Greece being men of
greater learning then generally the people were of, and being conversant in
Egypt and other parts, did bring in new reports of the ancient times which
they received from the Nations they went to; and by mixing their own traditions
and others together, and by suiting what was remaining of the ancient tradition
to these, they must needs make a strange confusion of things together, and
leave them much more obscure and fabulous then they found them. And herein all
their cunning and subtilty lay in putting a new face on whatever they borrowed
from other Nations, and making them appear among themselves in a Greek habit,
that the former owners of those traditions could scarce challenge them as
theirs under so strange a Metamorphosis. For those things which were most plain
and historical in the Fountains whence they derived them, they did so (...) as
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks (or as Origin, (...)) Stromat. 6. c. Cells. l. 4.
wrap them up under so great Mythology that the Original Truths can hardly be
discerned, because of that multitude of prodigious fables, with which they have
inlaid them. But as great as their artifice was in the doing this, we may yet
discern apparently many of those particular courses which were taken by them to
disguise and alter the primitive tradition.

1. Attributing what was done by the great Ancestors of mankind to some persons
of their own Nations. Thus the Thessalians make Deucalion to be the person who
escaped the flood, and from whom the world was peopled after it. And whoever
compares the relation of the flood of Deucalion in Apollodorus with that in the
Scripture, might easily render Apollodorus his Greek in the language of the
Scriptures, only changing Greece into the whole earth, and Deucalion Apollod.
bibliot^. lib. 1. p. 19^
into Noah, Parnassus into Ararat, and Jupiter into Iehova. On the same account
the Athenians attribute the flood to Ogyges, not that the flood of Ogyges and
Deucalion were particular and distinct deluges, which many have taken a great
deal of needless pains to place in their several ages: But as Deucalion was of
the eldest memory in Thessaly, so was Ogyges at Athens, and so the flood as
being a matter of remotest antiquity, was on the same account in both places
attributed to both these. Because as mankind was supposed to begin again after
the flood, so they had among them no memory extant of any elder then these two,
from whom on that account they supposed mankind derived. And on the same reason
it may be supposed that the Assyrians attribute the blood to Xisuthrus, whom
they supposed to be a King of Assyria; but the circumstances of the story as
delivered by Alexander, Polyhistor, and Abydenus, are such as Apu l Cyril. c.
Julian. lib. 1.
make it clear to be only a remainder of the universal flood which happened in
the time of Noah. So the Thessalians make Prometheus to be the Protoplast; the
Pelopponesians Phoroneus, as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, whom Phoronides the
Poet calls (...), the Father of mankind. Strom. l. 1.
This may be now the first way of corrupting the ancient tradition, by
supposing all that was conveyed by it to have been acted among themselves.
Which may be imputed partly to their ignorance of the state of their ancient
times, and partly to their pride, lest they should seem to come behind others
in matters of Antiquity.

2. Another fountain of Heathen Mythology, was, the taking the Idiome of the
Oriental languages in a proper sense. For whether we suppose the ancient
traditions were conveyed to them in the ancient Hebrew by the Pelasgi, or were
delivered to them by the Phaenicians, or were fetched out of the Scriptures
themselves (as some suppose, though improbably of Homer and some ancient Poets)
yet all these several ways agreeing in this, that the traditions were
Oriental, we thereby understand how much of their Mythology came by taking the
Hebrew in a proper and literal sense without attending to the Idiome of the
tongue. From hence Bochartus has ingeniously fetched many Heathen Fables. Thus
when Noah is said to be (...) Genesis 9. 20. which in the Idiome of the Hebrew
only signifies a husbandman, they took it in the proper sense for (...), and
thence Saturn who was the same with Noah (as will appear afterward) is made
by Mythologists the husband of Rhea which was the same with the Earth. So the
Giants making war against Heaven, was only a Poetital adumbration of the design
at the building of Babel, whose top in the Scripture is said to reach (...)
which in the Hebrew signifies Genesis 11. 4.
only a great height; but to aggrandize the Story, was taken in the literal
interpretation, that they attempted Heaven. So when they are said to fight
against the Gods, Bochartus thinks it might be taken from that phrase of
Nimrod, that he was a mighty hunter (...) before the Lord we render it, but it
sometimes signifies against the Lord. So what Abyd^nus says of the Giants,
that they were (...), Apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang l 9.
those that came out of the earth, is supposed to be taken from that phrase
Genesis 10. 11. (...) e terra ipsa exiit. But far more likely and probable is that
which learned men are generally agreed in concerning Bacchus his being born of
Jupiters thigh, which is only an expression of that Hebraism (...) wherein
coming out of the thigh Gen 46. 6.
i^ a phrase for ordinary procreation.

3. A third way observable, is, the alteration of the names in the ancient
tradition, and putting names of like importance 3.
to them in their own language. Thus Jupiter, who was the same with Cham, was
called (...), as (...) from (...) fervere, incalescere. (...), says Herodotus,
him whom the Greeks call (...), the Egyptians call Cham. So Iapheth, whose
memory was preserved under Neptune, to whose portion the Islands in the Sea
fell, was called by the Greeks (...), which comes (says Bochartus) from the
Punick (...) which signifies Phal^g. l. 1. cap. 1.
large and broad, which is the very importance of the Hebrew (...) thence in
allusion to the name, it is said, Genesis 9. 27. (...) God shall enlarge Iaphet.
Thence the Epithetes of Neptune are (...), all equally alluding to the name
Iaphet. So (...) in the Greek is of the same importance with the Heb. (...)
Daemen, from (...) to destroy. Thence we read, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. they sacrificed
(...) to Devils. Canaan in the Hebrew signifies a Merchant; thence Mercury,
under whom the memory of Canaan the son of Cham was preserved, is derived by
many from (...) to sell. Ceres, which was the Inventress of Agriculture, from
(...) which imports bread-corn. These and many others are produced by Vossius,
Heinsius, Bochartus, and other learned men, which I insist not on, because my
design is only digitos ad fontes intendere, and to make these handsome and
probable conjectures, argumentative to our purpose, and to bind up those loose
and scattering observations into some order and method, in which they have not
yet appeared, nor been improved to that end which I make use of them for.

4. When the Oriental phrases were ambiguous and equivocal, they omitted that
sense which was plain and obvious, and took that which was more strange and
fabulous. From hence the learned Bochartus has fetchd the Fable of the golden
Fleece, which was nothing else but the robbing the Treasury of the King of
Colchis; but it was disguised under the name of the golden Fleece, because the
Syriack word (...) signifies both a Fleece and a Treasury. So the Bulls and
Dragons which kept it, were nothing but the walls and brass gates; for (...)
signifies both a Bull and a Wall, and (...) Brass and a Dragon. And so the
Fable of the Brass-Bull in the mountain Atabyrius which foretold calamities,
arose from the aequivocation of the Phoenician or Hebrew words (...) which
signify either Doctor augur, or bos ex are, a foreteller of events, or a
brazen-Bull. From the like ambiguity of the word (...) arose the Fable of
Jupiters stealing Europa in the form of a Bull, because the word either
signifies a Ship, in which he c^nveyed her away, or a Bull; or it may be the
Ship had (...) bovis, as the ship St. Paul sailed in had Castor and Pollux, it
being usual to call their Ships by the names of the signs they carried. From
the like aequivocation in the Phoenician language does Bochartus fetch many
other Heathen Fables, in his excellent piece de Phoenicum Coloniis, as
particularly that of Arethusa coming from Alpheus, which was from (...) a Ship,
because Canaan. l. 1. cap. 28.
it was not far from an excellent Haven. And so he makes the Chimaera to be
more then a mere ens rationis; for he takes the Chimaera which Bellerophon
conquered, to be only the people of Solymi, under their three Generals, Aryus,
Trosibis, and Arsalus, (...) that signifies a Lion. Trosibis was (...) the head
of a serpent: Arsalus was (...) Canaan cap. 6.
a young kid, and so the Chimaera consisted of the form of a Lion, a Goat, and
a Serpent. Thus we see how easy a matter it was to advance the Heathen
Mythology from the aequivocation of the Oriental Languages, in which their
Traditions were conveyed to them.

But yet a more prolifick principle of Mythology was by attributing the actions
of several persons to one who was the Sect. 6. 5.
first or the chief of them. Thus it was in their stories of Jupiter, Neptune,
Mars, Mercury, Minerva, Juno, Bacchus, and Hercules, which were a collection of
the actions done by a multitude of persons, which are all attributed to one
person. So Vossius tells us before the time of the Trojan Wars, most of their
Kings, who were renowned and De Idol l. 1.
powerful, were called Jove's. Now when the actions of all these are attributed
to one Jupiter of Cre^te, they must needs swell his story up with abundance of
Fables. Vossius has taken a great deal of pains to digest in an historical
manner the stories of the several Jupiters, whereof he reckons two Argives, a
third the Father of Hercules, a fourth a King of Phrygia, and two more of
Cr^ete; to one of which, without any distinction, the actions of all the rest
were ascribed, and who was worshipped under the name of Jupiter. And so besides
the ancient Neptune, who was the same with Iaphet, they sometimes understood
any Insular Prince, or one that had great power at Sea; but besides these,
there were two famous Neptunes among the Greeks, the one of Athens, the other
the builder of the walls of Troy: Now the stories of all these being mixed
together, must needs make a strange confusion. So for Mars, besides that
ancient one they had by the Oriental tradition, they had a Spartan, Thracian,
and Arcadian Mars. What abundance of Mercuries are we told of by Tully? and of
no less then five Minerva's. Every Cice. o l. 3. de Nature. D.
angry, scornful jealous Queen would fill up the Fables of Juno, who was
equally claimed by the Argives and Samians. What contests were there between
the Greeks and Egyptians concerning the Country of Bacchus, or Liber Pater,
whose story was made up of many patches of the Oriental story, as will appear
afterward. ^he same may be said of Hercules. Now what a strange way was this
to increase the number of Fables? when they had one whose memory was anciently
preserved among them, they attributed the actions of all such to him, who came
near him in that which his memory was most remarkable for: And in those things
which they did retain of the Eastern tradition, it was an usual thing to
confound persons, places, and actions together. So the story of Enoch and
Methuselah is joined together by Stephanus de Urbibus, under the name of (...),
Steph. V. (...).
who is said there to live above 300 years (which agrees with Enoch as the name
does) and that at his death the world should be destroyed by a Flood.; which
agrees with Methuselah. So Abraham by Orpheus is called (...), which belongs to
Isaac his Son; so the actions of Nimrod, Ninus, and Cham, are confounded
together in their Mythology. By these several ways now we understand how the
original tradition was by degrees corrupted and alterd in the Heathen Mythology.

I come now to the footsteps of Scripture-history which not withstanding these
corruptions, may be discerned in the Sect. 7.
Heathen Mythology; which I shall methodically enquire after according to the
series of Scripture-history. That the names given to God in Scripture were
preserved among the Phoenicians, appears sufficiently by the remainders of the
Phoenician Theology, translated by Philo Byblius out of Sanchoniathon; wherein
we read of the God (...), which has V. Scaliger. not. in fr. Graec. Seldom. de
Diis Syris. Bochart. Cana. l. 2. c. 2.
the same letters with (...) besides which there we meet with (...), the same
with (...) the most High, and (...), which is (...) the strong God; Beelsamen,
which is (...) the God of Heaven, and (...), the very name of God used in the
beginning of Genesis so often. Besides, in those fragments we have express
mention of the Chaos, and the evening following it, or the darkness on the face
of the Deep; the Creation of Angels under the (...) those beings which
contemplate the Heavens; and the Creation of mankind (...), i. e. (...) says
Bochartus, the voice of the mouth of God, which is by Gods word and
inspiration, when it is expressed that God said, Let us make man, and that he
breathed into him the breath of life. After we read of (...) and (...), which
properly agree to Adam, who was made out of the Earth. Vossius conceives that
the memory of Adam was preserved among the De Idol. l. 1. cap. 38. Tacit. de
mor. b. German.
old Germans, of whom Tacitus speaks, Celebrant antiquis carminibus Tuistonem
Deum terra editum, and filium Mannum, originem gentis, conditoresque. Either by
Tuisto Adam is understood, who was formed of the Earth, and by Mannus, Noah; or
by Tuisto God may be understood, and by Mannus, Adam; to which conjecture may
be added further, that the same Author reports that some of the Germans
sacrificed to Isis, which Vossius likewise conceives to be a remainder of the
Hebrew Ischa. And so among the Egyptians it is with like probability conceived
that Adam and Ischa were preserved under Osiris and Isis, as they were
historically taken. In Cilicia, the City Adana is thought to have some
remainder of the name of Adam; for the Greeks had no termination in M.
therefore for Adam they pronounced it Adan, and that from (...), and so the
City Adana: Now that (...) by Stephanus de Urbibus, is said to be the Son of
Heaven and Earth. (...). Stephanus V. (...).
This Adanus, he tells us, was otherwise called (...) or Saturn, under whom the
Greeks preserved the memory of Adam; for Diodorus, Thallus, Cassius Severus,
and Cornelius Nepos, do all (as Tertullian says) confess Apolog. c. 10.
Saturn to have been a man; and according to their Fables, he must have been
the first of men. Saturn was the Son of Heaven and Earth, and so was Adam; he
taught men Husbandry, and was not Adam the first that tilled the ground?
Besides, that power which Saturn had, and was deposed from, does fitly set out
the Dominion man had in the Golden Age of Innocence which he lost by his own
folly. And Adams hiding himself from the presence of the Lord, gave occasion to
the name of Saturn, from Satar to hide. We find something of Cain preserved in
the Phoenician antiquities, under the name of (...) or (...), the first
Countryman or Husbandman, who with his brother (...) built houses, and the
first foundation of a City is attributed to Cain: And on that account Vossius
conjectures that the memory of Cains wife was preserved under Vesta, both
because Voss. de Idol. l. 1. cap. 17.
she was the daughter of Saturn, i. e. of Adam, and that she is said (...), to
find out first the way of building houses. That Tubal-Cain gave first occasion
to the name and worship of Vulcan, has been very probably conceived, both from
the very great affinity of the names, and that Tubal-cain is expressly mentiond
to be an Genesis 4. 22.
Instructor of every Artisicer in brass and iron; and as near relation as
Apollo had to Vulcan. Iabal had to Tubal-Cain, who was the Inventer of Music,
or the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, which the Greeks
attribute to 4. 21.
Apollo. And if that be true which Genebrard and others ascribed to Naamah, the
sister of Iubal and Tubal-Cain, viz. that she was the Inventer of spinning and
weaving, then may she come in for Minerva. Thus we see there were some, though
but obscure footsteps preserved, even of that part of Scripture-history which
preceded the Flood.

The memory of the Deluge it self we have already found Sect. 8.
to be preserved in the Heathen Mythology; we come therefore to Noah and his
posterity. Many parcels of Noah's memory were preserved in the scatterd
fragments of many Fables, under Saturn, Ianus, Prometheus, and Bacchus.
Bochartus insists on no fewer then 14 Parallels between Noah Phal^g. l. 1. cap:
^.
and the Heathen Saturn, which he says are so plain, that there is no doubt
but under Saturn Noah was understood in the Heathen Mythology. Saturn was said
to be the common Parent of Mankind, so was Noah; Saturn was a just King, Noah
not only righteous himself, but a Preacher of righteousness: The golden Age of
Saturn was between Noah and the dispersion of Nations. In Noah's time all
mankind had but one Language, which the Heathens extend under Saturn, both to
men and beasts: The plantation of Vines attributed to Saturn by the Heathens,
as to Noah by the Scriptures: The Law of Saturn mentiond by the Poets, that
none should see the nakedness of the Gods without punishment; seems to respect
the fact and curse of Cham, in reference to Noah. Saturn, and Rhea, and those
with them are said to be born of Thetis, or the Oce^n, which plainly alludes to
Noah and his company's escaping the Flood; thence a Ship was the symbol of
Saturn, and that Saturn devoured all his children seems to be nothing else but
the destruction of the old world by Noah's flood. And not only under Saturn, but
under Prometheus too was Noah's memory preserved. Diodorus Biblioth. l. 1
speaks of the great flood under Prometheus; and Prometheus implies one that
has forecast and wisdom, such as Noah had, wher^by he foretold the flood and
was saved in it, when others were Epimetheus's that had not wit to prevent
their own destruction.

And no wonder if Promethus were Noah, that the forming mankind was attributed
to him, when the world was peopled from him. Herodotus his saying that Asia was
Prometheus his wife, might relate to the Country Noah lived in and our
propagation from thence. Another part of Noah's memory was preserved under
Ianus; the name of Ianus is most probably derived from (...) because of Noah's
planting a Vine, and Ianus was called Consivius, says Macrobius a conserendo,
boc est a propagine generis humani quae Iano autore conseritur; V Mayer.
Philol. sacr. p. 3. c. 5.
now to whom can this be so properly applied as to Noah from whom mankind was
propagated? And Ianus his being bifrons or looking (...) forward and backward,
is not so fit an emblem of any thing as of Noah's seeing those two ages before
and after the flood. And it is further observable which Plutarch speaks of in
his Roman questions, that the ancient coins had on one side the image of Ianus
with his two faces, on the other (...), the fore or hinder part of a ship, by
which the memory of the Ark of Noah seems to have been preserved. Thus we see
what An^logy there is in the story of Ianus with that of Noah, not that ^ give
credit to those fooleries which tell us of Noah's coming from Palestine with his
son Iaphet into Italy and planting Colonies there, for which we are beholding
to the spurious Ethruscan Antiquities; but all that I assert, is, that the
story of Noah might be preserved in the eldest Colonyes, though disguised under
other names as here in the case of Ianus. And on the same account that the name
of Ianus is attributed to Noah, some likewise believe him to have been the most
ancient Bacchus who was according to Diodorus (...), the first planter of
Biblioth. l. 5
Vines and instructor of men in making Wines; and besides Bacchus his being
twice born, seems only an adumbration of Noah's preservation after the flood,
which might be accounted a second nativity when the rest of the world was
destroyed; and withal Philostratus in the life of Apollonius relates that the
ancient Indian Bacchus came thither out of Philostr. c. 4
Assyria, which yet more fully agrees with Noah. So that from these scattered
members of Hippolytus and these broken fragments of traditions, we may gather
almost an entire history of all the passages concerning Noah.

As the story of Saturn and Noah do much agree, so the three sons of Noah and
those of Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Sect. 9.
and Pluto have their peculiar resemblances to each other. Of which Vossius and
Bochartus have largely spoken, and we have touched on already. Besides which
this latter author Voss. dcIdol. l. 1. c. 18.

Boch. Phaleg. l. 1. c. 1. Cap. 2.


has carried the parallel lower, and finds Canaan the son of Cham the same
with Mercury the son of Jupiter; as it was the curse of Canaan to be a servant
of servants, so Mercury is always described under servile employments; his
wings seem to be the ships of the Phaenicians who were derived from Canaan, and
his being the God of trade noting the great merchandise of the Phaenicians, and
Mercuryes theevery noting the Pyracies, or at lest the subtilty and craft of
the Phaenicians; he was the Father of eloquence and Astronomy, as letters and
Astronomy came from the Phaenicians into Greece. The same author parallels
Nimrod and Bacchus, and Magog and Prometheus together. The name of Bacchus is
but a light variation of (...) Bar-chus, as Nimrod was the son of Chus, and
Bacchus is called Nebrodes by the Greeks, which is the very name of Nimrod
among them, and Bacchus is called (...), which excellently interprets Nimrods
being a mighty hunter, Bacchus his expeditions into India were the attempts of
Nimrod and the Assyrian Emperors. On which account Vossius makes Nimrod or
Belus the most ancient Mars; for Hestiaeus Milesius speaks of De Idol. l. 1. c.
16.
Enyalius which is Mars, his being in Sennaar of Babylonia. That the memory of
Magog was preserved under Prometheus, these things make it probable, that Magog
was the son of Iaphet, as Prometheus of Iapetus, and that the posterity of
Magog was placed about Cau^asus, where Prometheus is fained to lie: and the
eating of Prometheus his heart, is only an interpretation of (...) which
applied to the heart signifies to wast away and be consumed. Thus far Bochartus.

The Phaenician antiquities seem to have preserved the memory of Abraham's
sacrificing his son Isaac, by that place which Eusebius produces out of
Porphyries book concerning the Jews; where he relates, how Saturn whom the
Phaenicians call Israel, when he reigned in those parts, and had an only son
called Jeoud of a Nymph called Anobret, being under some great calamity, did
sacrifice that son of his being clothed V. Scaliger. not. ad sr. Gr.
with a royal habit. Here we have a royal person called Israel, and that
Abraham should be accounted a King in those elder times, is nothing strange,
considering his wealth, and what petty royalties there were in those times. But
Grotius, and from him Vossius, do not think that Abraham was Grot. in Deuteronomy cr.
c. 18. v. 10.

Voss. de Ido. l. 1. c. 18.


here called Israel, but that the transcriber of Eusebius meeting with (...)
supposed it to be a contraction of (...), and so writ it at length; it must be
acknowledged that (...) is used in the Phaenician Theology for Saturn, but yet
the circumstances of the story make the ordinary reading not improbable;
neither is it strange, that Abraham should be called by the name of the people
which he was the Progenitor of. That Isaac should be meant by his only son
called Ieoud is most likely; for when God bids Abraham go sacrifice him, he
says, Take thy son, (...) thy only son, J^hid is the same with Genesis 22. 1.
the Phaenician Ieoud. That Sara is meant by An^bret, the original of the name
implies, which is as Bochartus derives it (...) Annoberest, that is, ex gratia
concipiens, which De phenic. col. l. 2. c. 2. Heb. 11. 11
the Apostle explains, Through faith Sara her self received strength to
conceive seed. Now all the difference is, that which was only designed and
intended by Abraham, was believed by the Phaenicians as really done, that it
might be as a president to them for their (...) sacrificing of men, a thing so
much in use among the Phaenicians, and all the Colonyes derived from them, as
many learned men have at large showed. But besides this, there are particular
testimonies concerning Abraham, his age, wisdom and knowledge, his coming out
of Chaldea, and the propagation of knowledge from him among the Chaldeans,
Phaenicians, and Egyptians, are extant out of Berosus, Eupolemus, and others
Joseph. Antiq l. 1. c 7.

Eusebius. Prep. Evang. l. 9. cap. 16. Sect. 10.


in Josephus and Eusebius, and from thence transcribed by many learned men,
which on that account I forbear transcribing as being common and obvious.

Some have not improbably conj^ctured, that the memory of Jacobs long
peregrination and service with his Uncle Laban, was preserved under the story
of Apollo his banishment and being a Shepherd under Admetus. For Callimachus
reports that Love was the cause of Apollo's travails, as it was of Jacobs, and
withal mentions a strange increase of Cattle Callimach. Hymn. in Apollo.
under Apollo's care, answerable to what the Scripture reports concerning
Jacob. But it is more certain, that the memory of Jacobs setting up the stone
he had rested on for a pillar, and pouring oil upon it, and calling the place
Bethel, Genesis 28. 18
was preserved under the anointed stones which the Phaenicians from Bethel
called (...), as has been frequently observed by learned men; from whence came
the custom Scalig. not. in sr. Gr. Bochart. Can. l. 2. c. 2 Seld. dcDiis Svris.

V. Heins. in Clem. Alex. Str. 7. Casaub. ad Theophr. p. 295. Herald. ad Arnob.
l. 1.

Colvium ad Apul. Florid. Ouzel. ot Elmenhorst. ad Minuci. De Idolola. l. 1. c.
29.


of anointing stones among the Heathens, of which so very many have largely
discoursed. Thence the proverb of a superstitious man, (...), which Arnobius
calls lubricatum lapidem and ex olivi unguine sordidatum. It seems the
anointing the stones with oil, was then the symbol of the consecration of
them. The name (...) for such a stone occurres in Hesychius, the Greek
Etymologist, Damascius in Photius and others. That the memory of Joseph in
Egypt was preserved under the Egyptian Apis, has been showed with a great
deal of probability by the learned Vossius, in his often cited piece of
Idolatry, from the testimonies of Julius Maternus, Rufinus, and Suidas, and
from these three arguments. 1. The greatness of the benefit which the
Egyptians received by Joseph; which was of that nature that it could not
easily be forgot, and that no symbol was so proper to set it out as the
Egyptian Apis; because the famine was portended by lean Kine, and the plenty
by fat; and Minucius at Rome for relieving the people in a time of famine, had
a statue of a golden bull erected to his memory. 2. The Egyptians were not
backward to testify their respect to Joseph, as appears by Pharoahs rewarding
of him; now it was the custom of the Egyptians to preserve the memories of
their great Benefactors by some symbols to posterity; which were at first
intended only for a civil use, although they were after abused to Superstition
and Idolatry. 3. From the names of Apis and Serapis. Apis he conceives to be
the sacred name of Joseph among the Egyptians, and is as much as (...) Father;
so Joseph Genesis 45. 8.
himself says he was as a Father to Pharaoh. And Serapis, as Rufinus and
Suidas both tell us, had a bushel upon his head, and Serapis is probably
derived from (...) sor, which signifies a Bull, and A^is. So that by this means
the story of Joseph is attested by the Egyptians superstitions, of which they
can give no account so likely as this is.

Many things concerning Moses are preserved in the story of Bacchus, not that
from thence we are to conclude that Sect. 11.
Moses was the Bacchus of the Greeks, as Vossius thinks, but they took several
parts of the Eastern traditions concerning him, which they might have from the
Phaenicians who came with Cadmus into Greece, while the memory of Moses was yet
fresh among the Canaanites. In the story of Bacchus as Vossius observes, it is
expressly said that he was born in De Idol. l. 1. c. 30.
Egypt, and that soon after his birth he was put in an Ark, and exposed to the
river, which tradition was preserved among the Brasiatae of Laconica: and
Bacchus in Orpheus is called (...), and by Plutarchde Iside and Osiride,
Palaestinus: and he is called (...) which agrees to Moses, who besides his own
Mother was adopted by Pharoahs daughter: Bacchus was likewise commended for his
beauty as Moses was, and was said to be educated in a mount of Arabia called
Nysa, which agrees with Moses his residence in Arabia forty years; so Plutarch
mentions (...) the banishments of Bacchus, and Nonnus mentions Bacchus his
flight into the red sea: who likewise mentions his battles in Dion. l. 20.
Arabia and with the neighboring Princes there. Diodorus says, that Bacchus
his army had not only men but women in it; which is most true of the company
which Moses led. Bibl. l. 4.
Orpheus calls Bacchus (...), and attributes to him (...), whereby we
understand Moses his being a Legislator, and that he delivered the Law in two
tables Moses his fetching water out of a rock with his rod, is preserved in the
Orgia of Bacchus, in which Euripides relates that Agave and the rest of the
Bacchae celebrating the Orgia, one of them touched a rock and the water came
out: and in the same Orgia Euripides reports, how they were wont to crown their
heads with Serpents, probably in memory of the cure of the siery Scrpents in
the wilderness. A dog is made the companion of Bacchus, which is the
signification of Caleb, who so faithfully adhered to Moses. To these and some
other circumstances insisted on by Vossius, Bochartus Canaan. l. 1. cap. 18.
adds two more very considerable ones; which are, that Nonnus reports of
Bacchus that he touched the two rivers Orontes and Hydaspes with his thyrsus or
rod, and that the rivers dried, and he passed through them: and that his
Ivy-staffe being thrown upon the ground crept up and down like a Serpent, and
that the Indians were in darkness while the Bacchae enjoyed light; which
circumstances considered will make every one that has judgment say as
Bochartus does; ex mirabili ill^ concentu vel coecis apparebit priscos
fabularum architectos e scriptoribus sacris multa ^sse mutuatos. From this
wonderful agreement of Heathen Mythology with the Scriptures, it cannot but
appear that one is a corruption of the other. That the memory of I^shua and
Sampson was preserved under Hercules Tyrius, is made De Idol. l. 1 c. 26. p.
138. p. 169.
likewise very probable from several circumstances of the stories. Others have
deduced the many rites of Heathen worship, from those used in the Tabernacle
among the Jews. Several others might be insisted on as the Parallel between Og
and Typho, and between the old Silenus and Balaam, both noted for their skill
in divination, both taken by the water, Number. 22. 5. both noted for riding on an
ass: (...), says Lucian of the old Silenus; and that De Dcor. C^ (...) 10.
Eliac^o^v. 2. p. 203.
which makes it yet more probable, is that of Pausanias (...), which some
learned men have been much puzzled to find out the truth of; and this conjecture
which I here propound, may pass at least for a probable account of it; but I
shall no longer insist on these things, having I suppose, done what is
sufficient to our purpose, which is to make it appear what footsteps there are
of the truth of Scripture-history amidst all the corruptions of Heathen
Mythology,

CHAP. VI. Of the Excellency of the Scriptures.
Concerning matters of pure divine revelation in Scripture: the terms of
Salvation only contained therein. The ground of the disesteem of the Scriptures
is tacit unbelief. The Excellency of the Scriptures manifested as to the
matters which God has revealed therein. The excellency of the discoveryes of
Gods nature which are in Scripture. Of the goodness and love of God in Christ.
The suitableness of those discoveries of God to our natural notions of a Deity.
The necessity of Gods making known himself to us in order to the regulating our
conceptions of him. The Scriptures give the fullest account of the state of
men's souls, and the corruptions which are in them. The only way of pleasing God
discovered in Scriptures. The Scriptures contain matters of greatest
mysteriousness, and mest universal satisfaction to men's minds. The excellency
of the manner wherein things are revealed in Scriptures, in regard of
clearness, authority, purity, uniformity, and perswasiveness. The excellency of
the Scriptures as a rule of life. The nature of the duties of Religion and the
reasonableness of them. The greatness of the encouragements to Religion
contained in the Scriptures The great excellency of the Scriptures, as
containing in them the Covenant of Grace in order to man's Salvation.

HAving thus largely proved the Truth of all those passages of sacred Scripture
which concern the history Sect. 1.
of the first ages of the world, by all those arguments which a subject of that
nature is capable of, the only thing le^t in order to our full proving the
Divinity of the Scriptures, is, the consideration of those matters contained in
it, which are in an espec^al ma^ne^ said to be of Divine Revelation. For those
historical p^ssages, though we believe them as contained in the Scripture, to
have been Divinely inspired as well as others; yet they are such things as
supposing no Divine Revelati^n, might have been known sufficiently to the
world, had not men been wanting to themselves as to the care and means of
preserving them; but those matters which I now come to discourse of, are of a
more sublime and transcendent nature, such as it had been imp^ssible for the
minds of men to reach, had they not been immediately discovered by God himself.
And those are the terms and conditions on which the soul of man may upon good
grounds expect an eternal happiness, which we assert the book of Scriptures to
be the only authentic and infallible records of. Men might by the improvements
of reason and the sagacity of their minds discover much, not only of the lapsed
condition of their souls, and the necessity of a purgation of them in order to
their felicity, but might in the general know what things are pleasing and
acceptable to the Divine nature, from those differences of good and evil which
are unalterably fixed in the things themselves; but which way to obtain any
certainty of the remission of sins, to recover the Grace and Favor of God, to
enjoy perfect tranquillity and peace of conscience, to be able to please God in
things agreeable to his will, and by these to be assured of eternal bliss, had
been impossible for men to have ever found, had not God himself been graciously
pleased to reveal them to us. Men might still have bewildred themselves in
following the ignes fatui of their own imaginations, and hunting up and down
the world for a path which leads to heaven, but could have found none, unless
God himself taking pity of the wanderings of men had been pleased to hang out a
light from heaven to direct them in their way thither, and by this Pharos of
Divine Revelation to direct them so to stear their course, as to escape
splitting themselves on the rocks of open impieties, or being swallowed up in
the quicksands of terrene delights. Neither does he show them only what sh^lves
and rocks they must escape, but what particular course they must ste^re, what
star they must have in their eye, what compass they must observe, what winds
and gales they must expect and pray for, if they would at last arrive at
eternal bliss. Eternal bliss! What more could a God of infinite goodness
promise, or the soul of man ever wish ^or? A Reward to such who are so ^ar from
deserving, that they are still prov^king; Glory to such who are more apt to be
ashamed of their duties, then of their offenses; but that it should not only be
a glorious reward, but eternal too, is that which though it infinitely
transcend the deserts of the receivers, yet it highly discovers the infinite
goodness of the Giver. But when we not only know that there is so rich a mine
of inestimable treasures, but if the owner of it undertakes to show us the way
to it, and gives us certain and infallible directions how to come to the full
p^ssession of it, how much are we in love with misery, and do we court our own
ruin, if we neglect to hearken to his directions, and observe his commands!

This is that we are now undertaking to make good concerning Sect. 2.
the Scriptures, that these alone contain those sacred discoveries by which the
souls of men may come at last to enjoy a complete and eternal happiness. One
would think there could be nothing more needless in the world then to bid men
regard their own welfare, and to seek to be happy; yet whoever casts his eye
into the world, will find no counsel so little hearkened to as this, nor any
thing which is more generally looked on as a matter trivial and impertinent.
Which cannot arise but from one of these two grounds, that either they think it
no great wisdom to let go their present hold as to the good things of this
world, for that which they secretly question whether they shall ever live to
see or no; or else that their minds are in suspense, whether they be not sent
on a Guiana voyage to heaven, whither the certainty of it be yet fully
discovered, or the instructions which are given be such as may infallibly
conduct them th^her. The first, though it has the advantage of sense,
fruition, delight, and further expectation; yet to a rational person who
seriously reflects on himself, and sums up what (after all his troubles and
disquietments in the procuring, his cares in keeping, his disappointments in
his expectations, his fears of losing what he does enjoy, and that vexation of
spirit which attends all these) he has gained of true contentment to his mind,
can never certainly believe that ever these things were intended for his
happiness. For is it possible that the soul of man should ever enjoy its full
and complete happiness in this world, when nothing is ^ble to make it happy,
but what is most suitable to its nature, able to fill up its large capacity,
and commensurate with its duration: but in this life the matter of men's
greatest delights is strangely unsuitable to the nature of our rational beings;
the measure of them too short for our vast desires to stretch themselves upon;
the proportion too scant and narrow to run parallel with immortality. It must
be then only a Supreme, Insinite, and Eternal Being, which by the free
communications of his bounty and goodness can fix and satiate the souls
desires, and by the constant flowings forth of his uninterrupted streams of
favor will always keep up desire, and yet always satisfy it. One whose
goodness can only be felt by some tansient touches here, whose love can be seen
but as through a lattice, whose constant presence may be rather wished for then
enjoyed, who has reserved the full sight and fruition of himself to that
future state when all these dark vails shall be done away, and the soul shall
be continually sunning her self under immediate beams of light and love. But
how or in what way the soul of man in this degenerate condition should come to
be partaker of so great a happiness, by the enjoyment of that God our natures
are now at such a distance from, is the greatest and most important enquiry of
humane nature; and we continually see how successless and unsatisfactory the
endeavors of those have been to themselves at last, who have sought for this
happiness in a way of their own finding out; The large volume of the Creation,
wherein God has described so much of his wisdom and power, is yet too dark and
obscure, too short and imperfect to set forth to us the way which leads to
eternal happiness. Unless then the same God who made men's souls at first, do
show them the way for their recovery; as they are in a degenerate, so they will
be in a desperate condition; but the same bounty and goodness of God, which did
at first display its self in giving being to men's souls, has in a higher
manner enlarged the discovery of its self, by making known the way whereby we
may be taken into his Grace and Favor again.

Which it now concerns us particularly to discover, thereby Sect. 3.
to make it appear that this way is of that peculiar excellency, that we may
have from thence the greatest evidence, it could come from no other Author but
God himself, and does tend to no other end but our eternal happiness. Now that
incomparable excellency which is in the sacred Scriptures, will fully appear,
if we consider the matters contained in them under this threefold capacity. 1.
As matters of Divine Revelation. 2. As a rule of life. 3. As containing that
Covenant of grace which relates to man's eternal happiness.

1. Consider the Scripture generally, as containing in it matters of divine
revelation, and therein the excellency of the Scriptures appears in two
things. 1. The matters which are revealed. 2. The manner wherein they are
revealed.

1. The matters which are revealed in Scripture, may be considered these three
ways. 1. As they are matters of the greatest weight and moment. 2. As m^tters
of the greatest depth and mysteriousness. 3. As matters of the most universal
satisfaction to the minds of men.

1. They are matters of the greatest moment and importance for men to know* The
wisdom of men is most known by the weight of the things they speak; and
therefore that wherein the wisdom of God is discovered, cannot contain any
thing that is mean and trivial; they must be matters of the highest importance,
which the Supreme Ruler of the world vouchsafes to speak to men concerning: And
such we shall find the matters which God has revealed in his word to be, which
either concern the rectifying our apprehensions of his nature, or making known
to men their state and condition, or discovering the way whereby to avoid
eternal misery. Now which is there of these three, which supposing God to
discover his mind to the world, it does not highly become him to speak to men
of?

1. What is there which it does more highly concern men to know then God
himself? or what more glorious and excellent Sect. 4.
object could he discover then himself to the world? There is nothing certainly
which should more commend the Scriptures to us, then that thereby we may grow
more acquainted with God; that we may know more of his nature, and all his
perfections, and many of the great reasons of his actings in the world. We may
by them understand with safety what the eternal purposes of God were as to the
w^y of man's recovery by the death of his Son; we may there see and understand
the great wisdom of God; not only in the contrivance of the world, and ordering
of it, but in the gradual revelations of himself to his people, by what steps
he trained up his Church till the fullness of time was come; what his aim was in
laying such a load of Ceremonies on his people of the Jews; by what steps and
degrces he made way for the full revelation of his Will to the World by
speaking in these last days by his Son, after he had spoke at sundry times and
diverse manners by the Prophets, etc. unto the Fathers. In the Scriptures we
read the most rich and admirable discoveries of Divine goodness, and all the
ways and methods he uses in alluring sinners to himself, with what Majesty he
commands, with what condiscension he entreats, with what importunity he wooes
men's souls to be reconciled to him, with what favor he embraces, with what
tenderness he chastises, with what bowels he pitieth those who have chosen him
to be their God! With what power he supporteth, with what wisdom he direct^th,
with what cordials he refesheth the souls of such who are dejected under the
sense of his displeasure, and yet their love is sincere toward him! With what
profound humility, what holy boldness, what becoming distance, and yet what
restless importunity do we therein find the souls of Gods people addressing
themselves to him in prayer! With what cheerfulness do they serve him, with
what confidence do they trust him, with what resolution do they adhere to him
in all streights and difficulties, with what patience do they submit to his
Will in their greatest extremities! How fearful are they of sinning against
God, how careful to please him, how regardless of suffering, when they must
choose either that or sinning, how little apprehensive of men's displeasure,
while they enjoy the favor of God. Now all these things which are so fully and
pathetically expressed in Scripture, do abundantly set forth to us the
exuberancy and Pleonasm of Gods grace and goodness toward his people, which
makes them delight so much in him, and be so sensible of his displeasure. But
above all other discoveries of Gods goodness, his sending his Son into the
world to die for sinners, is that which the Scripture sets forth with the
greatest Life and Eloquence. By Eloquence, I mean not an artificial composure
of words, but the gravity, weight, and perswasiveness of the matter contained
in them. And what can tend more to melt our frozen hearts into a current of
thankful obedience to God, then the vigorous reflection of the beams of Gods
love through Jesus Christ upon us! Was there ever so great an expression of
Love heard of! nay, was it possible to be imagined, that that God who perfectly
hates sin, should himself offer the pardon of it, and send his Son into the
world to secure it to the sinner, who does so heartily repent of his sins, as
to deny himself, and take up his cross and follow Christ! Well might the
Apostle say, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy
1. 15.
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. How dry and sapless are
all the voluminous discourses of Philosophers, compared with this Sentence! How
je^une and unsatisfactory are all the discoveries they had of God and his
goodness, in comparison of what we have by the Gospel of Christ! Well might
Paul then say, That he determined to know nothing but Christ and him crucified.
Christ crucified is the 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Library which triumphant souls will be studying in to all Eternity. This is
the only Library which is the true (...), that which cures the soul of all its
maladies and distempers; other knowledge makes men's minds giddy and flatulent;
this settles and composes them; other knowledge is apt to swell men into high
conceits and opinions of themselves; this brings them to the truest view of
themselves, and thereby to humility and sobriety: Other knowledge leaves men's
hearts as it found them; this alters them and makes them better, so
transcendent an excellency is there in the knowledge of Christ crucified above
the sublimest speculations in the world.

And is not this an inestimable benefit we enjoy by the Sect. 5.
Scripture, that therein we can read and converse with all these expressions of
Gods love and goodness, and that in his own language? Shall we admire and
praise what we meet with in Heathen Philosophers, which is generous and
handsome; and shall we not adore the infinite fullness of the Scriptures, which
run over with continued expressions of that and a higher nature? What folly is
it to magnify those lean kine, the notions of Philosophers, and to contemn the
fat, the plenty and fullness of the Scriptures? If there be not far more
valuable and excellent discoveries of the Divine Nature and Perfections; if
there be not far more excellent directions and rules of practice in the sacred
Scriptures, then in the sublimest of all the Philosophers, then let us leave
our full ears, and feed upon the thin. But certainly no sober and rational
s^irit that puts any value upon the knowledge of God, but on the same account
that he does prize the discourses of any Philosophers concerning God, he cannot
but set a value of a far higher on the word of God. And as the goodness of God
is thus discovered in Scripture, so is his Justice and Holin^ss; we have
therein recorded the most remarkable judgments of God upon contumacious
sinners, the severest denunciations of a judgment to come against all that
live in sin, the exactest precepts of holiness in the world; and what can be
desired more to discover the Holiness of God, then we find in Scripture
concerning him? If therefore acquaintance with the nature, perfections, designs
of so excellent a Being as God is, be a thing desirable to humane nature, we
have the greatest cause to admire the excellency, and adore the fullness of the
Scriptures which give us so large, rational, and complete account of the Being
and Attributes of God. And which tends yet more to commend the Scriptures to
us, those things which the Scripture does most fully discover concerning God,
do not at all contradict those prime and common notions which are in our
natures concerning him, but do exceedingly advance and improve them, and tend
the most to regulate our conceptions and apprehensions of God, that we may not
miscarry therein, as otherwise men are apt to do. For it being natural to men
so far to love themselves, as to set the greatest value upon those excellencies
which they think themselves most masters o^; thence men came to be exceedingly
mistaken in their apprehensions of a Deity, some attributing one thing as a
perfection, another a different thing, according to their humors and
inclinations. Thus imperious self-willed men are apt to cry up Gods absolute
power and dominion as his greatest perfection; easy and soft-spirited men his
patience and goodness; severe and rigid men his justice and severity; every one
according to his humor and temper, making his God of his own complexion; and
not only so, but in things remote enough from being perfections at all; yet
because they are such things as they prize and value, they suppose of necessity
they must be in God, as is evident in the Eicureans (...), by which they
excluded providence, as has been already observed. And withal considering how
very difficult it is for one who really believes that God is of a pure, just,
and holy nature, and that he has grievously offended him by his sins, to
believe that this God will pardon him upon true repentance. It is thence
necessary that God should make known himself to the world, to prevent our
misconceptions of his nature, and to assure a suspicious, because guilty
creature, how ready he is to pardon iniquity, transgession, and sin, to such as
unfeignedly repent of their follies, and return unto himself. Though the light
of nature may dictate much to us of the benignity and goodness of the Divine
Nature, yet it is hard to conceive that that should discover further then Gods
general goodness to such as please him; but no foundation can be gatherd thence
of his readiness to pardon offenders, which being an act of grace, must alone
be discoverd by his Will. I cannot think the Sun, Moon, and Stars are such
itinerant Preachers, as to unfold unto us the whole Counsel and Will of God in
reference to man's acceptance with God upon repentance. It is not every Star in
the Firmament can do that which the Star once did to the wise men, lead them
unto Christ. The Sun in the Heavens is no Parhelius to the Son of
righteousness. The best Astronomer will never find the day star from on high
in the rest of his number. What St. Austin said o^ Tullies works, is true of
the whole Volume of the Creation, There are admirable things to be found in
them; but the name of Christ is not legible there. The work of Redemption is
not engraven on the works of providence; if it had, a particular divine
revelation had been unnecessary, and the Apostles were sent on a needless
errand, which the world had understood without their Preaching, viz, That God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to men their
trespasses, and has committed to them the Ministry of Reconciliation. 2 Cor.
5. 18, 19.
How was the word of reconciliation committed to them, if it were common to
them with the whole frame of the world? and the Apostles Quaere elsewhere might
have been easily answered, How can men hear without a Preacher? For then they
might have known the way of salvation, without Romans 10. 14.
any special messengers sent to deliver it to them. I grant that Gods long
suffering and patience is intended to lead men to repentance, and that some
general collections might be made from providence of the placability of Gods
nature, and that God never left himself without a witness of his goodness in
the world, being king to the unthankful, and doing good, in giving rain and
fruitful seasons. But though Act. 14 14. Luke. 6. ^5, 36.
these things might sufficiently discover to such who were apprehensive of the
guilt of sin, that God did not act according to his greatest severity, and
thereby did give men encouragement to hearken out and enquire after the true
way of being reconciled to God; yet all this amounts not to a firm foundation
for faith as to the remission of sin, which does suppose God himself publishing
an act of grace and indemnity to the world, wherein he assures the pardon of
sin to such as truly repent and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Now is not
this an inestimable advantage we enjoy by the Scriptures, that therein we
understand what God himself has discoverd of his own nature and perfections,
and of his readiness to pardon sin upon those gracious terms of Faith and
Repentance, and that which necessarily follows from these two, hearty and
sincere obedience.

2. The Scriptures give the most faithful representation of Sect. ^.
the state and condition of the soul of man. The world was almost lost in
Disputes concerning the nature, condition, and immortality of the soul before
divine revelation was made known to mankind by the Gospel of Christ; but life
and immortality was brrught to light by the Gospel, and the future state of the
soul of man, not discoverd in an uncertain Platonical way, but with the
greatest light and evidence from that God who has the supreme disposal of
souls, and therefore best knows and understands them. The Scriptures plainly
and fully reveal a judgment to come, in which God will judge the secrets of
all hearts, when every one must give an account of himself unto God, and God
will call men to give an account of their stewardship here, of all the receipts
they have had from him, and the expenses they have been at, and the
improvements they have made of the talents he put into their hands. So that the
Gospel of Christ is the fullest instrument of discovery of the certainty of the
future state of the soul, and the conditions which abide it, upon its being
dislodged from the body. But this is not all which the Scripture discovers as
to the state of the soul; for it is not only a prospective-glass, reaching to
its future state, but it is the most faithful looking-glass, to discover all
the spots and deformities of the soul: And not only shows where they are, but
whence they came, what their nature is, and whether they tend. The true
Original of all that disorder and discomposure which is in the soul of man, is
only fully and satisfactorily given us in the Word of God, as has been already
proved. The nature and working of this corruption in man, had never been so
clearly manifested, had not the Law and Will of God been discovered to the
world; that is the glass whereby we see the secret workings of those Bees in
our hearts, the corruptions of our natures; that sets forth the folly of our
imaginations, the unruliness of our passions, the distempers of our wills, and
the abundant deceitfulness of our hearts. And it is hard for the most
Elephantine sinner (one of the greatest magnitude) so to trouble these waters,
as not therein to discover the greatness of his own deformities. But that which
tends most to awaken the drowsy, senseless spirits of men, the Scripture does
most fully describe the tendency of corruption, that the wages of sin is death,
and the issue of continuance in sin will be the everlasting misery of the soul,
in a perpetual separation from the presence of God, and undergoing the lashes
and severities of conscience to all eternity. What a great discovery is this of
the faithfulness of God to the world, that he suffers not men to undo
themselves without letting them know of it beforehand, that they might avoid
it. God seeks not to entrap men's souls, nor does he rejoice in the misery and
ruin of his creatures, but fully declares to them what the consequence and
issue of their sinful practices will be, assures them of a judgment to come,
declares his own future s^verity against contumacious sinners, that they might
not think themselves surprised, and that if they had known there had been so
great danger in sin, they would never have been such fools as for the sake of
it to run into eternal misery. Now God to prevent this, with the greatest
plainness and faithfulness, has showed men the nature and danger of all their
sins, and asks them before hand what they will do in the end thereof; whether
they are able to bear his wrath, and wrestle with everlasting burnings? if not,
he bids them bethink themselves of what they have done already, and repent and
amend their lives, lest iniquity prove their ruin, and destruction overtake
them, and that without remedy. Now if men have cause to prize and value a
faithful Monitor, one that tenders their good, and would prevent their ruin,
we have cause exceedingly to prize and value the Scriptures, which give us the
truest representation of the state and condition of our souls.

3. The Scripture discovers to us the only way of pleasing God, and enjoying
his favor. That clearly reveals the way (which man might have sought for to
all eternity without particular revelation) whereby sins may be pardond, and
whatever we do may be acceptable unto God. It shows us that the ground of our
acceptance with God, is through Christ, whom he has made a propitiation for
the sins of the world, and who alone is the true and living way, whereby we may
draw near to God with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. Through Christ we understand the
terms on which God will show favor and grace to the world, and by him we have
ground of a (...), access with freedom and boldness unto God. On his account
we may hope not only for grace so subdue our sins, resist temptations, conquer
the devil and the world; but having fought this good fight and finished our
course, by patient continuance in well doing, we may justly look for glory,
honor, and immortality, and that crown of righteousness which is laid up for
those who wait in faith, holiness, and humility for the appearance of Christ
from heaven. Now what things can there be of greater moment and importance for
men to know, or God to reveal, then the nature of God, and our selves, the
state and condition of our souls, the only way to avoid eternal misery and
enjoy everlasting Bliss!

The Scriptures discover not only matters of importance, Sect. 7. 2.
but of the greatest depth and mysteriousness. There are many wonderful things
in the Law of God, things we may admire, but are never able to comprehend. Such
are the eternal purposes and decrees of God, the doctrine of the Trinity, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and the manner of the operation of the Spirit of
God on the souls of men, which are all things of great weight and moment for us
to understand and believe that they are, and yet may be unsearchable to our
reason, as to the particular manner of them. What certain ground our faith
stands on as to these things, has been already showed, and therefore I forbear
insisting on Book 2. chapter 8. sect. 5, 6, 7. 3.
them.

The Scripture comprehends matters of the most universal satisfaction to the
minds of men; though many things do much exceed our apprehensions, yet others
are most su^table to the dictates of our nature. As Origin bid Celsus see,
(...), C. Cells. l. 3. p. 135.
whether it was not the agreeableness of the principles of faith with the
common notions of humane nature, that which prevailed most upon all candid and
ingenuous auditors of them. And therefore as Socrates said of Heraclitus his
books, What he understood was excellent; and therefore he supposed that which
he did not understand was so too: so ought we to say of the Scriptures, if
those things which are within our capacity be so suitable to our natures and
reasons, those cannot contradict our reason which yet are above them. There are
many things which the minds of men were sufficiently assured that they were,
yet were to seek for satisfaction concerning them, which they could never have
had without Divine revelation. As the nature of true happiness, wherein it lay,
and how to be obtained, which the Philosophers were so puzzled with, the
Scripture gives us full satisfaction concerning it. True contentment under the
troubles of life, which the Scripture only acquaints us with the true grounds
of; and all the prescriptions of Heathen Moralists fall as much short of, as
the directions of an Empirick does of a wise and skilful Physician. Avoiding
the fears of death, which can alone be through a grounded expectation of a
future state of happiness which death leads men to, which cannot be had but
through the right understanding of the Word of God. Thus we see the excellency
of the matters themselves contained in this revelation of the mind of God to
the world.

As the matters themselves are of an excellent nature, so is the manner wherein
they are revealed in the Scriptures; Sect. 8. 2.
and that,

1. In a clear and perspicuous manner; not but there may be still some passages
which are hard to be understood, as being either prophetical or consisting of
ambiguous phrases, or containing matters above our comprehension; but all those
things which concern the terms of man's salvation, are delivered with the
greatest evidence and perspicuiry. Who cannot understand what these things
mean, What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? that without faith it is impossible to please
God; that without holiness none shall see the Lord; that unless we be born
again, we can never enter into the Kingdom of heaven; these and such like
things are so plain and clear, that it is nothing but men's shutting their eyes
against the light can keep them from understanding them; God intended these
things as directions to men; and is not he able to speak intelligibly when he
please? he that made the tongue, shall he not speak so as to be understood
without an infallible interpreter? especially when it is his design to make
known to men the terms of their eternal happiness. Will God judge men at the
great day for not believing those things which they could not understand?
Strange, that ever men should judge the Scriptures obscure in matters
necessary, when the Scripture accounts it so great a judgment for men not to
understand them. If our Gospel be hid, it is 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
hid to them that are lost: In whom the god of this world has blinded the
minds of them which believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should shine unto them. Sure Lots door was visible enough, if it were a
judgment for the men of Sodom not to see it; and the Scriptures then are plain
and intelligible enough, if it be so great a judgment not to understand them.

2. In a powerful and authoritative manner; as the things contained in
Scripture do not so much beg acceptance as command it: in that the expressions
wherein our duty is concerned, are such as awe men's consciences and pierce to
their hearts and to their secret thoughts; All things are open Heb. 4. 12, 13.
and naked before this Word of God; every secret of the mind and thought of the
heart lies open to its stroke and force, it is quick and powerful, sharper then
a two-edged sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. The word is a Telescope to discover the great Luminaries of the world,
the truths of highest concernment to the souls of men, and it is such a
Microscope as discovers to us the smallest Atome of our thoughts, and discerns
the most secret intent of the heart. And as far as this light reaches, it
comes with power and authority, as it comes armed with the Majesty of that God
who reveals it, whose authority extends over the soul and conscience of man in
its most secret and hidden recesses.

3. In a pure and unmixed manner; in all other writings how good soever we have
a great mixture of dross and gold together; here is nothing but pure gold,
Diamonds without flaws, Suns without spots. The most current coins of the
world have their alloyes of baser metals, there is no such mixture in divine
Truths; as they all come from the same Author, so they all have the same
purity. There is a Urim and Thumim upon the whole Scripture, light and
perfection in every part of it. In the Philosophers we may meet, it may be,
with some scattered fragments of purer metal, amidst abundance of dross and
impure oar; here we have whole wedges of gold, the same vein of purity and
holiness running through the whole book of Scriptures. Hence it is called the
form of sound words; here have been no hucksters to corrupt and mix their own
inventions with Divine 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Truths.

4 In an uniform and agreeable manner. This I grant is not Sect. 9.
sufficient of its self to prove the Scriptures to be Divine, because all men
do not contradict themselves in their writings; but yet here are some peculiar
circumstances to be considered in the agreeableness of the parts of Scripture
to each other which are not to be found in mere humane writings. 1. That this
doctrine was delivered by persons who lived in different ages and times from
each other. Usually one age corrects another faults, and we are apt to pity
the ignorance of our predecessors, when it may be our posterity may think us as
ignorant, as we do them. But in the sacred Scripture we read not one age
condemning another; we find light still increasing in the series of times in
Scripture, but no reflections in any time upon the ignorance, or weakness of
the precedent; the dimmest light was sufficient for its age and was a step to
further discovery. Quintilian gives it as the reason of the great uncertainty
of Grammar rules, quia non analogia demissa coelo formam loquendi dedit; that
which he Quintil. l. 1. c. 6.
wanted as to Grammar, we have as to Divine Truths; they are delivered from
heaven, and therefore are always uniform and agreeable to each other.

2. By persons of different interests in the world. God made choice of men of
all ranks to be enditers of his oracles, to make it appear it was no matter of
State policy or particular interest which was contained in his word, which
persons of such different interests could not have agreed in as they do. We
have Moses, David, Solomon, persons of royal rank and quality, and can it be
any mean thing, which these think it their glory to be penners of? We have
Isaiah, Daniel and other persons of the highest education and accomplishments,
and can it be any trivial thing which these employ themselves in? We have Amos,
other Prophets in the old Testament, and the Apostles in the New, of the meaner
sort of men in the world, yet all these join in consort together; when God
tunes their spirits, all agree in the same strain of divine truths, and give
light and harmony to each other.

3. By persons in different places and conditions; some in prosperity in their
own country, some under banishment and adversity, yet all agreeing in the same
substance of doctrine; of which no alteration we see was made either for the
flattery of those in power, or for avoiding miseries and calamities. And under
all the different dispensations before, under, and after the Law, though the
management of things was different, yet the doctrine and design was for
substance the same in all. All the different dispensations agree in the same
common principles of religion; the same ground of acceptance with God, and
obligation to duty was common to all, though the peculiar instances wherein God
was served might be different according to the ages of growth in the Church of
God. So that this great uniformity considered in these circumstances, is an
argument that these things came originally from the same Spirit, though
conveyed through different instruments to the knowledge of the world.

5. In a persuasive and convincing manner: and that these ways. 1. Bringing
divine truths down to our capacity, clothing spiritual matter in familiar
expressions and similitudes, that so they might have the easier admission into
our minds. 2. Propounding things as our interest, which are our duty: thence
God so frequently in Scripture, recommends our duties to us under all those
motives which are wont to have the greatest force on the minds of men: and
annexeth gracious promises to our performance of them; and those of the most
weighty and concerning things. Of grace, favor, protection, deliverance,
audience of prayers, and eternal happiness; and is these will not prevail with
men, what motives will? 3. Courting us to obedience, when he might not only
command us to obey, but punish presently for disobedience. Hence are all those
most pathetical and affectionate strains we read in Scripture. O that there
were such a heart within them, that they would fear me and keep all my
commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their children
after Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
them. Woe unto thee O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it
once be? Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, ^er 13. 27.

Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Hos. 11. S.


for why will ye dye, O h^use of Israel? How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how
shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set
thee as Z^boim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Mat. 23.
37
children together, as a hen gathered her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? What Majesty and yet what sweetness and condescension is there in
these expressions? What obstinacy and rebellion is it in men for them to stand
out against God, when he thus comes down from his throne of Majesty, and wooes
rebellious sinners to return unto him that they may be pardoned. Such a
matchless and unparalleld strain of Rh^torick is there in the Scripture, far
above the art and insinuations of the most admired Orators. Thus we see the
peculiar excellency of the manner wherein the matters contained in Scripture
are revealed to us: thus we have considered the excellency of the Scripture, as
it is a discovery of Gods mind to the world.

The Scriptures may be considered as a rule of life, or as a Law of God which
is given for the Government of the lives Sict. 10. 2.
of men, and therein the excellency of it lies in the nature of the duties, and
the encouragements to the practice of them.

1. In the nature of the duties required, which are most becoming God to
require, most reasonable for us to perform.

1. Most becoming God to require, as they are most suitable and agreeable to
the Divine nature, the imitation of which in our actions is the substance of
our Religion. Imitation of him in his goodness and holiness, by our constant
endeavors of mortifying sin and growing in grace and piety. In his grace and
mercy by our kindness to all men, forgiving the injuries men do unto us, doing
good to our greatest enemies. In his justice and equity, by doing as we would
be done by, and keeping a conscience void of offense toward God and toward
men. The first takes in the duties of the first, the other the duties of the
second Table. All acts of piety toward God, are a part of Justice; for as
Tully says, Quid aliud ^st piet as nisi justitia adversus Deos? and so our
loving God with our whole bearts, our entire and sincere obedience to his will,
is a part of natural justice; for thereby we do but render unto God that which
is his due from us as we are his creatures. We see then the whole duty of man,
the fearing God and kee^ing his Commandments, is as necessary a part of
Justice, as the rendering to every man his own is.

2. They are most reasonable for us to perform, in that 1. Religion is not only
a service of the reasonable faculties which are employed the most in it, the
commands of the Scripture reaching the heart most, and the service required
being a spiritual service, not lying in meats and drinks, or any outward
observations, but in a sanctified temper of heart and mind, which discovers its
self in the course of a Christians life; but 2. The service its self of
Religion is reasonable; the commands of the Gospel are such, as no man's reason
which considers them, can doubt of the excellency of them. All natural worship
is founded on the dictates of nature, all instituted worship on Gods revealed
will; and it is one of the prime dictates of nature, that God must be
uniuersally obeyed. Besides, God requires nothing but what is apparently man's
interest to do; God prohibits nothing but what will destroy him if he does it;
so that the commands of the Scriptures are very just and reasonable.

2. The encouragements are more then proportionable to the difficulty of
obedience. Gods commands are in themselves easy, and most suitable to our
natures. What more rational for a creature then to obey his Maker? all the
a^fficulty of religion arises from the corruption of nature. Now God to
encourage men to conquer the difficulties arising thence, has propounded the
strongest motives, and most prevailing arguments to obedience. Such are the
considerations of Gods love and goodness manifested to the world by sending his
Son into it to die for sinners, and to give them an example which they are to
follow, and by his readiness through him to pardon the sins, and accept the
persons of such who so receive him as to walk in him; and by his promises of
grace to assist them in the wrestling with the enemies of their salvation. And
to all these add that glorious and unconceivable reward which God has promised
to all those who sincerely obey him; and by these things we see how much the
encouragements over-weigh the difficulties, and that none can make the least
pretense that there is not motive sufficient to down-weigh the troubles which
attend the exercise of obedience to the will of God. So that we see what a
peculiar excellency there is in the Scriptures as a rule of life, above all the
precepts of mere Moralists, the foundation of obedience being laid deeper in
man's obligation to serve his Maker, the practice of obedience being carried
higher in those most holy precepts which are in Scripture, the reward of
obedience being incomparably greater then what men are able to conceive, much
less to promise or bestow.

The Excellency of the Scriptures appears as they contain in them a Covenant of
grace, or the transactions between Sect. 11.
God and Man in order to his eternal happiness. The more memorable any
transactions are, the more valuable are any authentic records of them. The
Scriptures contain in them the Magna Charta of Heaven, an Act of pardon with
the Royal assent of Heaven, a Proclamation of good will from God toward men;
and can we then set too great a value on that which contains all the remarkable
passages between God and the souls of men, in order to their felicity, from the
beginning of the world? Can we think, since there is a God in the world of
infinite goodness, that he should suffer all mankind to perish inevitably
without his propounding any means for escaping of eternal misery? Is God so
good to men as to this present life; and can we think, if man's soul be
immortal, as we have proved it is, that he should wholly neglect any offer of
good to men as to their eternal welfare? Or is it possible to imagine that man
should be happy in another world without Gods promising it, and prescribing
conditions in order to it? If so, then this happiness is no free gift of God,
unless he has the bestowing and promising of it; and man is no rational agent,
unless a reward suppose conditions to be performed in order to the obtaining
it; or man may be bound to conditions which were never required him; or if they
must be required, then there must be a revelation of Gods will, whereby he does
require them: And if so, then there are some Records extant of the transactions
between God and man, in order to his eternal happiness: For what reason can we
have to imagine that such Records, if once extant, should not continue still,
especially since the same goodness of God is engaged to preserve such Records,
which at first did cause them to be indicted. Supposing then such Records
extant somewhere in the world of these grand transactions between God and men's
souls, our business is brought to a period; for what other Records are there in
the world that can in the least vye with the Scriptures, as to the giving so
just an account of all the transactions between God and men from the foundation
of the world? Which gives us all the steps, methods, and ways whereby God has
made known his mind and will to the world, in order to man's eternal Salvation.
It remains only then that we adore and magnify the goodness of God in making
known his Will to us, and that we set a value and esteem on the Scriptures, as
on the only authentic Instruments of that Grand Charter of Peace, which God
has revealed in order to man's Eternal Happiness.

FINIS.

