IMPRIMATUR hic Liber (cui Titulus, A Letter to a DEIST.)

Feb. 8. 1676. Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

A LETTER TO A DEIST, In Answer to several OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE TRUTH and
AUTHORITY OF THE Scriptures,

LONDON, Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by M. Pit, at the Angel in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

THE PREFACE.
THis following Discourse was Written for the satisfaction of a particular
Person, who owned the Being and Providence of God, but expressed a mean Esteem
of the Scriptures, and the Christian Religion. Which is become so common a
Theme among the Scepticks of this Age, that the Author of this Discourse
thought it worth his time and care, to consider the force of the Objections
that were made against them. Especially, being written in a grave and serious
manner, and not with that Raillery and Buffonry, which the rude Persons of this
Age commonly bestow upon Religion. It might be justly expected from such who
pretend to Breeding and Civility, that they would at least show more respect to
a thing, which has prevailed so much among Men of the best Understanding and
Education, and who have had no Interest to carry on by it. For it is against
the ordinary Rules of Conversation, to affront that which others think they
have great Reason to esteem and love; and they would not endure that scorn and
contempt of their meanest Servant, which they too often show toward Religion,
and the things belonging to it. If they are not in earnest when they scoff and
mock at sacred things, their own consciences will tell them it is a horrible
impiety; if they are in earnest, let them debate these things calmly and
seriously, and let the stronger Reason prevail. Men may speak sharply and
wittily against the clearest things in the World, as the Scepticks of old did
against all Certainty of Sense and Reason; but we should think that Man out of
his senses, that would now dispute the Being of the Sun, or the Color of the
Snow. We do not say, the Matters of Religion are capable of the same evidence
with that of Sense; but it is a great part of judgment and understanding, to
know the proportion and fitness of evidence to the Nature of the thing to be
proved. They would not have the Eye to judge of tastes, nor the Nose of
Metaphysics; and yet these would be as proper as to have the senses judge of
Immaterial Beings. If we do not give as good Reason for the Principles of our
Religion, as the nature of Religion considered, can be given for it, let us
then be blamed for our weakness in defending it; but let not Religion suffer,
till they are sure nothing more can be said for it.

There is a late Author, I hear is Tractat. Theol. politic.
mightily in vogue among many, who cry up any thing on the Atheistical side,
though never so weak and trifling. It were no difficult task to lay open the
false Reasonings, and inconsistent Hypotheses of his Book; which has been
sufficiently done already in that Language wherein it was written. But if for
the Advancement of Irreligion among us, that Book be, as it is talked,
Translated into our Tongue, there will not, I hope, want those who will be as
ready to defend Religion and Morality, as others are to decry and despise them.

A Letter of Resolution to a Person unsatisfied about the Truth and Authority
of the Scriptures.
SIR,
ALthough I do not pretend to any skill in the depths of Theology, yet I am
heartily concerned for the Truth and Honor of the Christian Religion; which it
is the design of your papers to undermine. When I first looked them over, I
could not think them so considerable as to deserve a particular Answer;
especially, from one in my circumstances, who have so much other business lying
upon me, and so little leisure and health to perform it; but I found at the
conclusion of your Papers, so earnest and vehement a desire expressed by you,
that I would return an Answer, in order to the settlement of your mind, that I
could not refuse an Office of so great Charity, as you represent it to be. I
confess, when I considered the nature of your Objections, and the manner of
managing them, I could hardly believe that they proceeded from a doubtful Mind,
that was desirous of any satisfaction; but since you tell me so, I will first
show my Charity in believing it, and then in endeavoring to give you my poor
assistance, and impartial advice, in order to your satisfaction. And in truth,
I think impartial advice will contribute more to that end, than spending Time
and Paper in running through all the difficulties, which it is possible for a
cavilling Mind to raise against the plainest Truths in the World. For there is
nothing so clear and evident, but a Sophistical Wit will always find something
to say against it, and if you be the Person I take you for, you very well know,
that there have been some, who wanted neither Wit, nor Eloquence, who have gone
about to prove, That there was Nothing in the World; and that if there were any
thing, it could not be understood by Men; that if it were understood by one
Man, it could not be expressed to another: And besides such extravagant
undertakers as these, how many have there been, who with plausible and subtle
Arguments, have endeavored to overthrow all manner of Certainty, either by
Sense or Reason? Must we therefore quit all pretenses to Certainty, because we
cannot, it may be, Answer all the Subtilties of the Scepticks? And therefore I
am by no means satisfied with your manner of proceeding, desiring all
particular difficulties to be Answered, before we consider the main evidences
of the Christian Faith: For the only reasonable way of proceeding in this
matter, is to consider, first, whether there be sufficient Motives to persuade
you to embrace the Christian Faith; and then to weigh the difficulties, and to
compare them with the Reasons and Arguments for believing; and if those do not
appear great enough to overthrow the force of the other, you may rest satisfied
in the Christian Faith, although you cannot Answer every difficulty that may be
raised against the Books wherein our Religion is contained. I pray Sir,
consider with your self; do not you think it possible for any man to have Faith
enough to save him, unless he can solve all the difficulties in Chr^^ologie
that are in the Bible, unless he can give an account of every particular Law
and Custom among the Jews, unless he can make out all the Prophetic Schemes,
and can tell what the Number of the Beast in the Apocalypse means? If a Man may
believe and be saved, without these things, to what purpose are they objected
for the overthrow of the Christian Faith? Do you think a Man has not reason
enough to believe there is extended Matter in the World, unless he can solve
all the difficulties that arise from the extension or divisibility of Matter;
or that he has a Soul, unless he can make it clear how an immaterial and
material Substance can be so united as our Soul and Body are? Or that the Sun
shines, unless he can demonstrate whether the Sun or the Earth moves? Or that
we have any certainty of things, unless he can assign the undoubted criterion
of Truth and Falsehood in all things? These things I mention on purpose, to let
you see, that the most certain things, have difficulties about them, which no
one thinks it necessary for him to Answer, in order to his assurance of the
Truth of the things; but as long as the evidence for them is much more
considerable than the Objections against them, we may safely acquiesce in our
assent to them, and leave the unfolding these difficulties to the Disputers of
this World, or the Knowledge of another. Is it not far more reasonable for us
to think, that in Books of so great Antiquity, as those of Moses are, written
in a Language whose Idiotisms are so different from ours, there may be some
difficulty in the Phrases, or computation of Times or Customs of the People,
that we cannot well understand, than that all the Miracles wrought by Moses
should have been Impostures; and that Law, which was preserved so constantly,
maintained with that resolution by the wisest of the People of the Jews, who
chose to dye rather than disown it, should be all a cheat? Is it not more
reasonable for us to suspect our own Understandings, as to the Speeches and
Actions of some of the Prophets, than to think that Men who designed so much
the advancing Virtue, and discouraging Vice, should be a pack of Hypocrites and
Deceivers? Can any Man of common sense suspect the Christian Religion to be a
Fourb, or an Imposture, because he cannot understand the Number of the Beast,
or Interpret the Apocalyptick Visions? I could hardly have believed any Man
pretending to Reason, could object these things, unless I saw them, and were
called upon to Answer them.

Therefore, Sir, my serious and impartial advice to you is, in the first place
to consider and debate the main point, i. e. the proofs of the Christian
Doctrine, and not to hunt up and down the Scriptures for every thing that seems
a difficulty to you, and then by heaping all these together to make the
Scriptures seem a confused heap of indigested stuff, which being taken in
pieces and considered, with that modesty, diligence, and care, that does become
us, will appear to contain nothing unbecoming that Sacred and Venerable Name
which the Scriptures do bear among us.

If therefore, you design not cavilling but satisfaction, you will join issue
with me upon the most material point, viz. Whether the Christian Religion were
from God, or from Men? For if this be proved to have been from God, all the
other things will easily fall off of themselves, or be removed with a little
industry.

In the Debate of this, I shall consider, first, what things are agreed upon
between us, and then wherein the difference lies.

1. You grant an absolutely perfect and independent Being, whom we call God.

2. That the World was at first Created, and is still governed by Him.

3. That He is so Holy, as to be the Author of no Sin, although he does not
hinder Men from sinning.

4. That this God is to receive from us all Worship proper to Him, of Prayers,
Praises, etc.

5. That it is the Will of this God, that we should lead holy, peaceable, and
innocent Lives.

6. That God will accept men's sincere Repentance and hearty endeavors to do
his Will, although they do not perfectly obey it.

7. That there is a State of Rewards and Punishments in another World,
according to the course of Men's Lives here.

8. That there are many excellent Precepts in the writings of the New Testament
inducing to Humility and Selfdenyal, and to the Honor of God, and civil duty
and honesty of Life; and these in a more plentiful manner than is to be found
in any other Profession of Religion publicly known.

The Questions then remaining, are, (1) Whether the matters of Fact are true,
which are reported in the Writings of the New Testament? (2) Supposing them
true, Whether they do sufficiently prove the Doctrine to have been from God?

1. Whether the matters of Fact were true or no? And as to this point, I wish
you had set down the Reasons of your doubting, more clearly and distinctly than
you have done: What I can pick up, amounts to these things. 1. That there can
be no certainty of a matter done at such a distance of time, there having been
many fictitious Histories in the World. 2. That it is probable, that these
things might be written, when there was no one Living to detect the falsehood of
them; and thus you say, the Grecians, Romans, Egyptians, and other Nations were
at first imposed upon by some Men, who pretended to deliver to them the History
of their Gods and Heroes, and the Wonders wrought by them. 3. That these things
might more easily be done, before Printing was used; and that there is reason
to suspect the more, because of the Pious Frauds of the Primitive Christians,
and the Legends of the Papists. 4. That there may have been many more
Deceptions and Impostures in the way of propagating false Revelations and
Miracles than we can now discover. 5. That we ought not to take the Testimony
of Scripture, or the Christian Writers in this case, because they may be
suspected of partiality; and that the Testimony of Josephus is suspected by
diverse learned Men to be fraudulently put in by Christians. 6. That there are
susficient grounds from the Story it self, and the Objections of Enemies to
suspect the truth of it; because of the contradiction and inconsistency of the
parts of it; the want of accomplishment of the Promises and Prophecies of it;
the obscurity and unintelligibleness of other parts; the defects of the Persons
mentioned therein, St. Paul 's oftentation, the jarrs between Peter and Paul,
and Paul and Barnabas. 7. That from these things you have just cause to doubt
the Apostles sincerity, and you think they might have indirect ends in
divulging the Miracles recorded in Scripture; and that Men might be contented
to suffer, to make themselves heads of a new Sect of Religion, and to rule over
the Consciences of Men; and that they had time enough to make a considerable
interest before the Persecutions began.

This is the force of all I can find out, in the several parts of your Papers
toward the invalidating the Testimony concerning the matters of fact reported
in the Writings of the New Testament.

In Answer to all these things, I shall show; 1. That matters of fact done at
such a distance of time may have sufficient evidence to oblige Men to believe
them. 2. That there is no reason to suspect the Truth of those Matters of fact
which are contained in the History of the New Testament. 3. That the Apostles
gave the greatest testimonies of their Sincerity, that could be expected from
them; and that no matters of fact were ever better attested than those which
are reported by them; from whence it will follow, That it is not reason but
unreasonable Suspicion and Skepticism, if not willfulness and obstinacy which
makes Men to continue to doubt after so great evidence.

1. That we may have such evidence of Matters of Fact done at such a distance
of time as may oblige us to believe the Truth of them. This we are first to
make out, because several of your Objections seem to imply, That we can have no
certainty of such things; because we cannot know what tricks may have been
played in former times, when it was far more easy to deceive; and that it is
confessed, there have been several Frauds of this kind, which have a long time
prevailed in the World. But have not the very same Arguments been used against
all Religion, by Atheists? And if the Cheats that have been in Religion, have
no force against the Being of God, why should they have any against the
Christian Religion? And if the common consent of Mankind signify any thing as
to the acknowledgement of a Deity, why should not the Testimony of the
Christian Church, so circumstantiated as it is, be of sufficient strength to
receive the Matters of Fact delivered by it? which is all I at present desire.
Do we question any of the Stories delivered by the common consent of Greek or
Latin Historians, although we have only the bare Testimony of those Historians
for them? And yet your Objections would lie against every one of them: How do
we know the great prevalency of the Roman Empire? was it not delivered by those
who belonged to it, and were concerned to make the best of it? What know we,
but thousands of Histories have been lost, that confuted all that we now have
concerning the greatness of Rome? What know we, but that Rome was destroyed by
Carthage, or that Hanniba^ quite overthrew the Roman Empire; or that Catiline
was one o^ the best Men in the World, because all our present Historie^ were
written by Men of the other side? How can we tell bu^ that the Persians
destroyed the Macedonians, because all our Accounts of Alexanders Expeditio^
are Originally from the Greeks And why might not we suspec^ greater partiality
in all these Cases, when the Writers did not giv^ a thousand part of that
evidenc^ for their fidelity, that the First Christians did? And yet, wha^
should we think of such a person who should call in question the best Histories
of all Nations because they are written by thos^ of the same Country? By which
it seems, you will never allow any competent Testimony at all; for if such
things be written by Enemies and Strangers, we have reason to suspect both
their knowledge and integ^ity; if written by Friends, then though they might
know the Truth, yet they would write partially of their own side: So that upon
this principle, no History at all, ancient or modern is to be believed; for
they are all reported either by Friends or Enemies: and so not only Divine, but
all Humane Faith will be destroyed. I am by no means a Friend to unreasonable
credulity; but I am as little to unreasonable distrust and suspicion; if the
one be Folly, the other is Madness. No prudent Man believes any thing, because
it is possible to be true; nor rejects any thing merely because it is possible
to be false: But it is the prudence of every Man to weigh and consider all
circumstances, and according to them, to assent, or dissent. We all know it is
possible for Men to deceive, or to be deceived, but we know there is no
necessity of either; and that there is such a thing as Truth in the World; and
though Men may deceive, yet they do not always so; and that Men may know they
are not deceived. For else there could be no such thing as Society among
Mankind; no Friendship, or Trust, or Confidence in the Word of another person;
because it is possible that the best Friend I have may deceive me, and the
World is full of dissimulation, must I therefore believe no Body? This is the
just consequence of this way of Arguing, That we have reason to suspect the
Truth of these Matters of Fact, because there have been many Frauds in the
World, and might have been many more than we can now discover; for if this
Principle be pursued, it will destroy all Society among Men; which is built on
the supposition of mutual trust and confidence that Men have in each other: And
although it be possible for all Men to deceive, because we cannot know one
another hearts, yet there are such Characters of Honesty and Fidelity in some
Persons, that others dare venture their Lives and Fortunes upon their Words.
And is any Man thought a Fool for doing so? Nay, have not the most prudent and
sagacious Men reposed a mighty confidence in the Integrity of others? And
without this, no great affairs can be carried on in the World; for since the
greatest Persons need the help of others to manage their business, they must
trust other Men continually; and every Man puts his Life into the hands of
others, to whom he gives any freedom of access, and especially his Servants:
Must a Man therefore live in continual suspicion and jealousy, because it is
possible he may be deceived? But if this be thought unreasonable, then we gain
thus much, that notwithstanding the possibility of deception, Men may be
trusted in some cases, and their Fidelity safely relied upon: This being
granted, we are to enquire what that assurance is which makes us trust any one;
and wherever we find a concurrence of the same circumstances, or equal
evidence of fidelity, we may repose the same trust or confidence in them. And
we may soon find that it is not any ones bare Word that makes us trust him; but
either the reputation of his Integrity among discerning Men; or our long
experience and observation of him: This latter is only confined to our own
trial; but the former is more general, and reaches beyond our own Age, since we
may have the Testimony of discerning Persons conveyed down to us in as certain
a manner, as we can know the mind of a Friend at a 100 Miles distance, viz. by
Writing. And in this case, we desire no more than to be satisfied that those
things were written by them; and that they deserved to be believed in what they
writ; thus, if any one would be satisfied about the passages of the
Peloponnesian War, and has heard that Thucydides has accurately written it,
he has no more to do, than to enquire whether this Thucydides were capable of
giving a good account of it, and for that, he hears that he was a great and
inquisitive Person, that lived in that Age, and knew all the occurrences of it;
and when he is satisfied of that, his next enquiry is, whether he may be
trusted or no; and for this, he can expect no better satisfaction, than that
his History has been in great reputation for its integrity among the most
knowing Persons; but how shall he be sure this was the History, written by
Thucydides, since there have been many counterfeit Writings obtruded upon the
World? Besides the consent of learned Men in all Ages since, we may compare the
Testimonies cited out of it with the History we have, and the Style, with the
Character given of Thucydides, and the Narrations, with other credible
Histories of those Times; and if all these agree, what reason can there be not
to rely upon the History of Thucydides? All learned Men do acknowledge, that
there have been multitudes of fictitious writings, but do they therefore
question, whether there are any genuine? Or whether we have not the true
Herodotus, Strabo, or Pausanias, because there is a counterfeit Berosus,
Manetho, and Philo, set forth by Annius of Viterbo? Do any suspect whether we
have any of the genuin Works of Cicero, because an Italian counterfeited a Book
De Consolatione in his name Or whether Caesar's Commentaries were his own,
because it is uncertain who Writ the Alexandrian War that is joined with them
By which we see, that we may not only be certain of the Fidelity of Persons we
converse with, but of all things necessary to ou^ belief of what was done at a
great distance of time from the Testimony of Writers, notwithstanding the many
supposititious Writings that have been in the World.

But it may be said, That all this only relates to mere matters of History,
wherein a Man is not much concerned whether they be true or false; but the
things we are about are matters that Men's Salvation or Damnation are ^id to
depend upon, and therefore ^reater evidence should be given of these, to oblige
Men to believe them.

To this I answer. 1. That ^^y design herein, was to prove, that
notwithstanding the possibility of deception, there may be sufficient ground
for a prudent and firm assent to the Truth of things done at as great a
distance of time, and conveyed after the same manner, that the Matters of Fact
reported in the New Testament are; and hereby those general prejudices are
showed to be unreasonable: And all that I desire from this discourse is, that
you would give an assent of the same nature to the History of the Gospel, that
you do to Caesar, or Livy, or Tacitus, or any other ancient Historian. 2. As to
the greater obligation to assent, ^ say it depends upon the evidence of Divine
Revelation, which i^ given by the Matters of Fac^ which are delivered to us.
An^ here give me leave to ask you; 1. Whether it be any ways repugnant to any
conception you have of God, for him to make use of fallible Men to make known
his Will to the World? 2. Whether those Men, though supposed to be in
themselves fallible, can either deceive, or be deceived, when God make^ known
his Mind to them? 3. Whether on supposition, that God has made use of such
Persons for this end, those are not obliged to believe them, who do not live in
the same Age with them? If not, then God must either make no Revelation at all,
or he must make a New one every Age: If they are, then the obligation lies as
much on us now to believe, as if we had lived and conversed with those inspired
Persons.

2. That there is no reason to suspect the Truth of those Matters of Fact which
are reported in the New Testament; For since it is universally agreed among
Men, that Humane Testimony is a sufficient ground for assent, where there is no
positive ground for suspicion; because deceiving and being deceived, is not the
common Interest of Mankind; therefore we are to consider what the general
grounds of suspicion are, and whether any of them do reach the Apostles
Testimony, concerning the Matters of Fact reported by them. And the just
grounds of suspicion are these 1. If the Persons be otherwis^ known to be Men
of artifice an^ cunning, full of tricks and diss^mulation, and that make n^
Conscience of speaking Truth so a Lie tends to their greates^ advantage; which
is too much the Papists case in their Legends and Stories of Miracles. 2. ^
they temper and suit their Stor^ and Doctrine to the Humor an^ Genius of the
People, they hop^ to prevail upon, as Mahomet did in encouraging War and
Lasciviousness. 3. If they lay the Scene o^ their Story at a mighty distance
from themselves, at such an Age, wherein it is impossible either to prove, or
disprove; which is the case of the Brachmans, as to their Brahma, and their
Veda; and was of the Heathens as to their Fabulous Deities. 4. If there be any
thing contained in the Story, which is repugnant to the most authentic
Histories of those times; by which means the Impostures of Annius have been
discovered. 5. If there be evident contradiction in the Story it self; or any
thing repugnant to, or unbecoming the Majesty, Holiness, Sincerity, and
Consistency of a Divine Revelation; on which account we reject Fanatic
pretenses to Revelations. If there were any thing of this nature in the
Writings of the New Testament, we might then allow there were some ground to
suspect the Truth of what is contained therein: But I shall undertake, by the
Grace of God, to defend that there is not any foundation for suspicion as to
any one of these.

1. As to the Persons, such wh^ go about to deceive others, mus^ be Men that
are versed in business and know how to deal with Men; and that have some
interest already that they have gained by other means, before they can carry on
such a design as to abuse Mankind, by Lies and Impostures in Religion:
Therefore the Atheists lay the deceiving the World by Religion, to the Charge
of Politicians and Lawgivers, to Men versed in the practice of Fraud, such as
Numa, or Lycurgus, or Xaca, or Mahomet, such as understood the ways of cajoling
the People; or to subtle Priests, that know how to suit the hopes and fears of
the superstitious multitude; whence came the multitude of Frauds in the Heathen
Temples and Oracles. But would any Man in the World have pitched upon a few
Fishermen, and illiterate Persons, to carry on such an intrigue as this? Men
that were rude and unexperienced in the World, and incapable of dealing in the
way of Artifice with one of the common Citizens of Jerusalem. When was it ever
heard that such Men made such an alteration in the Religion of the World, as
the Primitive Christians did, against the most violent persecutions? And when
they prevailed so much, the common charge still against them was, that they
were a company of Rude, Mean, Obscure, Illiterate, Simple Men: And yet in
spite of all the Cunning, and Malice, and Learning, and Strength of their
Adversaries, they gained ground upon them, and prevailed over the Obstinacy of
the Jews, an^ Wisdom of the Greeks. If the Christian Religion had been a mee^
design of the Apostles to mak^ themselves Heads of a new Sect what had this
been but to have set the Cunning of twelve, o^ thirteen Men, of no Interest or
Reputation, against the Wisdom and Power of the whol^ World? If they had any
Wisdom they would never have under taken such an impossible desig^ as this must
appear to them ^ first view: And if they ha^ none, how could they ever hop^ to
manage it? If their aim were only at Reputation, they might have thought of
thousands ^ ways more probable, and more advantageous than this: If w^ suppose
Men should be willin^ to hazard their Lives for the^ Reputations, we may
suppose withal such Men to have so much cunning as not to do it till they
cannot help it; but if they can have Reputation and ease together, they had
rather have it. I will therefore put the Case concerning the only Person that
had the advantage of a Learned Education among the Apostles; viz. St. Paul, and
whom you seem to strike at more than the rest: Is it reasonable to believe,
that when he was in favor with the Sanhedrin, and was likely to advance
himself by his opposition to Christianity, and had a fair prospect of Ease and
Honor together; he should quit all this, to join with such an inconsiderable
and hated company, as the Christians were, only to be one of the Heads of a
very small Number of Men, and to purchase it at so dear a rate as the loss of
his Friends and Interest and running on continual Troubles and Persecutions, to
the hazard of his Life? It is possibl^ for Men that are deceived an^ mean
honestly to do this; bu^ it is scarce supposable of a Man in his Senses that
should kno^ and believe all this to be a cheat and yet own and embrace it, to
s^ great disadvantage to himself When he could not make himself so considerable
by it, as he might have been without it. Me^ must love cheating the World at
strange rate, that will let go fai^ hopes of preferment and ease and lead a
life of perpetual trouble, and expose themselves to the utmost hazards, only
for the sake of deluding others. If the Apostles knew all they said to be
false, and made it so necessary for all Men to believe what they said to be
true; they were some of the greatest deceivers which the World had ever known:
But Men that take pleasure in deceiving, make use of many artifices on purpose
to catch the silly multitude; they have all the arts of Insinuation and Fawning
Speeches, fit to draw in the weakest, and such as love to be flattered; but
what is there tending this way in all the Apostles Writings? How sharply do
they speak to the Jewish Sanhedrin, upon the Murder of Christ? With what
plainness and simplicity do they go about to persuade Men to be Christians?
They barely tell the Matters of Fact concerning the Resurrection of Christ, and
say they were eyewitnesses of it, and upon the credit of this Testimony of
theirs, they Preach Faith and Repentance to Jews, and Gentiles: Was ever any
thing farther from the appearance of Artifice than this was? So that if they
were deceivers, they were some of the Subtilest that ever were in the World,
because there seems to be so little ground for any suspicion of Fraud; and we
cannot easily imagine Persons of their Education, capable of so profound
dissimulation and so artificial a Cheat. Besides all this, we are to consider
how far such Persons do allow the liberty of dissimulation and artificial
Juglings, especially in Religion; we see the Papists could not practice these
things, without being forced to defend them, by showing how convenient it is
for the People to be told strange Stories of Saints, on purpose to nourish
Devotion in them: To which end, they say, it signifies not much, whether they
were true or no: And withal they assert the Lawfulness of Equivocations, and
Mental Reservations, and doing things, not otherwise justifiable, for the
Honor of their Church and Religion; And I shall freely confess to you, if I
found any countenance to such things as these, from the Doctrine or Practice of
the Apostles, it would give me too just a ground for suspicion as to what they
delivered. For if they allowed Equivocations, or Mental Reservations, how could
I possibly know what they meant by any thing they said? For that which was
necessary to make the Proposition true, lay without my reach in the Mind of
another; and while they so firmly attested that Christ was risen from the Dead,
they might understand it of a Spiritual or Mystical Resurrection; but if they
should be found to allow Lying or Cheating for the cause of Religion, their
credit would be gone with me; for how could I be any longer sure of the Truth
of one Word they said? I should be so far from thinking them Infallible, that I
could not but suspect them to have a design to deceive me. The first thing
therefore we are to look at in Persons who require our belief, is the strictest
veracity; if they falter in this, they expose themselves to the suspicion of
all but credulous Fools. But we no where find greater plainness and sincerity
required, no where more strict and severe prohibitions of dissimulation in
Religion, nor more general Precepts about speaking Truth, than in the Writings
of the New Testament. But might not all this be done with the greater artifice
to prevent suspicion? Suspicion is a thing, which he that set bounds to the
Sea, can set no bounds to; if Men will give way to it, without reason, there
can be no end of it. For the most effectual ways to prevent it, will still
afford new matter and occasion for it. If Men do use the utmost means that are
possible, to assure others of their sincerity, and they will not believe them,
but still suspect the design to be so much deeper laid; there is no way left
possible to satisfy such Men; their suspicion is a disease incurable by
rational means, and such persons deserve to be given over as past all remedy.
If Men act like prudent Men, they will judge according to the Reason of Things;
but if they entertain a jealousy of all Mankind, and the most of those who
give them the greatest assurance they have no Intention to deceive them, it is
to no purpose to go about to satisfy such Persons, for that very undertaking
makes them more suspicious. If the Apostles therefore gave as much ground as
ever any Persons did, or could do, that they had no design to impose upon the
World, but proceeding with all the fairness and openness, with the greatest
evidence of their sincerity, there can be no reason to fasten upon them the
imputation of cunning Men who made it their business to deceive others.

2. This will more appear if we consider the Matters delivered by them, and the
nature of their Doctrine. For if the Christian Religion were only a contrivance
of the first Preachers of it, it must by the event be supposed that they were
very subtle Men, who in so little time, and against so great opposition could
prevail over both Jews and Gentiles; but if we reflect on the nature of their
Doctrine, we can never imagine that these Men did proceed by the same Methods
that Men of subtilty do make use of. If it were there own contrivance, it was
in their power to have framed it as they thought fit themselves; and in all
probability, they would have done it in a way most likely to be successful; but
the Christian Religion was so far from it, as though they had industriously
designed to advance a Religion against the genius and inclination of all
Mankind. For it neither gratifies the voluptuous in their Pleasures, nor the
Ambitious in their desires of External Pomp and Greatness, nor the Covetous in
their thirst after Riches; but lays a severe restraint on all those common and
prevailing Passions of Mankind; which Mahomet well understood, when he suited
his Religion to them. Christianity was neither accommodated to the Temper and
Genius either of Jews or Gentiles: The Jews were in great expectation of a
Temporal Prince at that time to deliver them from the Roman Slavery; and every
one that would have set up for such a Messiah, might have had followers enough
among them, as we find afterward by the attempts of Barchocebas and others.
But the Messiah of the Christians was so directly contrary to their hopes and
expectations, being a poor and suffering Prince, that this set them the more
against his Followers, because they were hereby frustrated of their greatest
hopes, and defeated in their most pleasing expectations: But besides, if they
would have taken in the Mosaic Law, it might in probability have succeeded
better; but this St. Paul would by no means hear of. But if they rejected the
Jews, methinks they should have been willing to have had some assistance from
the Gentiles. No, they charged them with Idolatry where ever they came, and
would not join in any parts of their Worship with them; nor so much as Eat of
the remainder of their Sacrifices. But supposing they had a mind to set up
wholly a new Sect of their own; yet we should think they should have framed it
after the most plausible manner, and left out all things thar were most liable
to Reproach and Infamy: But this they were so far from, that the most
contemptible part of the Christian Religion, viz. A Crucified Savior, they
insist the most upon, and Preach it on all occasions, and in comparison of it,
strangely despise all the Wisdom and Philosophy of the Greeks. What did these
Men mean, if Christianity had been only a contrivance of theirs? If they had
but left out this one circumstance, in all Human probability, the excellent
moral Precepts in Christianity would have been highly magnified among all those
who had been bred up under the Instructions of Philosophers. Nay, they would
not make use of the most commendable Methods of Humane Wisdom; nor do as the
Jesuits have done in China, make Men have a better opinion of the Religion they
brought, for their skill in Mathematics and Astronomy; but as much as it was
possible, to let the World see it was no contrivance of Humane Wisdom, they
shunned all the ways of showing it in the manner of its propagation. Nay, when
the People would have given the Apostles Divine Worship, never were vain Men
more concerned to have it, than they to oppose it; And do these things look
like the Actions of Men that designed only to make themselves great, by being
the Heads of a new Sect of Religion?

3. Men that made it their design to deceive the World, if they had thought it
necessary to bring in any matter of Story concerning the Author of their
Religion would have placed it at such a distance of time, that it was not
capable of being disproved: As it is apparent in the Heathen Mythologie; for
the Stories were such, as no person could ever pretend to confute them
otherwise than by the inconsistency of them with the common principles of
Religion. But if we suppose Christianity to have been a mere device, would the
Apostles have been so senseless to have laid the main proof of their Religion
on a thing which was but newly acted, and which they were very capable of
enquiring into all the Circumstances that related to it, viz. the Resurrection
of Christ from the Dead. We may see by the whole design of the New Testament,
the great stress of Christianity was laid upon the Truth of this; to this,
Christ himself appealed before hand: to this all the Apostles refer as the
mighty confirmation of their Religion; and this they deliver as a thing which
themselves had seen, and had conversed with him for 40 Days together, with all
the demonstrations imaginable of a true and real Body: And that not to one or
two credulous. Persons, but so many of them who were hard to be satisfied, and
one, not without the most sensible evidence, but besides these, they tell us of
500 at once who saw him, whereof many were then living when those things were
written. Now I pray tell me what Religion in the World ever put it self upon so
fair a trial as this? Of a plain Matter of Fact as capable of being attested as
any could be. Why did not Amida, or Brahma or Xaca, or any other of the Authors
of the present Religions of the East Indies? Why did not Orpheus, or Numa, or
any other introducers of Religious Customa among the Greeks or Romans? Or
Mahomet among the Arabians put the issue of the Truth of their Religion on such
a plain and easy trial as this? If you say That Christ appeared only to his
Friends, who were ready to believe such things, and not among his Enemies: I
Answer, That though they were his Friends, yet they were very hard to be
persuaded of the truth of it at first; and afterward gave larger Testimonies
of their fidelity than the Testimony of the greatest Enemies would have been;
for we should have had only their bare Words for it, (if they would have given
that, which is very questionable, considering their dealing with the other
Miracles of Christ:) But the Apostles manifested their sincerity by all real
proofs that could be thought sufficient to satisfy Mankind; appealing to the
very Persons who were concerned the most in it, having a hand in the Death of
Christ, declaring their greatest readiness to suffer any thing rather than deny
the Truth of it, and laying down their Lives at last for it. If all this had
been a mere Fiction, how unlikely is it, that among so many as were conscious
of it, no one person by hopes or fears, by flatteries or threatenings, could
ever be prevailed upon to deny the Truth of it. If there had been any such
thing, what triumphing had there been among the Jews; and no doubt his name had
been Recorded to Posterity among the Writers both of Jew^ and Gentiles that
were professed Enemies of Christianity. But they are all wonderfully silent in
this matter; and instead o^ saying enough to overthrow the truth of
Christianity, as you seem to suggest, I do assure you, I am mightily confirmed
in the belief of the Truth of it, by carefully observing the slightness of the
Objections that were made against it, by its most professed Enemies.

But you seem to imply, That all this Story concerning Christ was invented long
after the pretended time of his being in the World, Why may not you as well
suspect, that Julius Caesar lived before Romulus; or that Augustus lived at the
Seige of Troy? For you might as well reject all History upon such grounds as
those you assign; and think Mahomet as right in his Chronology, as the Bible.
It is time for us to burn all our Books, if we have lived in such a Cheat all
this while. Methinks you might as well ask, whether Lucretia were not Pope
Joan? Or Alexander the sixth, one of the Roman Emperors? Or whether Luther
were not the Emperor of Turkey? For there is no greater evidence of any History
in the World, than there is, that all the things reported in the New Testament
were done at that time, when they are pretended to be.

4. Therefore we offer this Story of the New Testament to be compared with all
the Circumstances of that Age, delivered by any other Historians, to try if any
inconsistencies can be found therein: Which is the most reasonable way can be
taken to disprove any History. If it could be proved, that there could be no
such Taxation of the Empire as is mentioned in the time of Augustus, that Herod
did not live in that Age, or that the Jews were not under the Roman Government,
or that there were no High Priests at that time, nor the Sects of Pharisees and
Saducees, or that there were any other remarkable characters of time set down
in the History of the New Testament, which could be manifestly disproved; there
were some pretense to call in Question the Truth of the Story; but there is not
the least Foundation for any scruple on this account; All things agreeing so
well with the truest accounts we have of that Age, both from Josephus and the
Roman History. I shall not insist on the particular Testimony of Josephus
concerning Christ, because we need it not; and if those who question it, would
proceed with the same severity against many other particular passages in good
Authors, they might as well call them in question as they do that; since it is
confessed, that all the Ancient Manuscripts have it in them, and supposing that
it does not come in well, must we suppose it impossible for Josephus to Write
incoherently? Yet this is the main Argument that ever I have seen urged against
this Testimony of Josephus. But I say, we need it not; all other things
concurring in so high a degree to prove the Truth of the History of Christ. Yet
since you seem to express so much doubtfulness concerning it, as though it were
framed when there was no one living capable of disproving it; give me leave to
show you the great absurdity of such a Supposition. 1. Because we have the
plain Testimonies of the greatest Enemies of Christianity, that there was such
a Person as Christ was, who suffered according to the Scripture Story. For
Tacitus not only mentions the Christians as suffering at Rome for their
Religion in the time of Nero, (Annal. 15.) but says, That the Author of this
Religion was one Christ, who suffered under Pontius Pilate, Procurator of
Judea, in the time of Tiberius; which is an irrefragable Testimony of the Truth
of the Story concerning Christ, in an Age, when if it had been false, nothing
could have been more easily detected than such a Fiction, by the number of Jews
which were continually at Rome: And neither Julian, nor Celsus, nor Porphyrie,
nor Lucian did ever question the truth of the Story it self; but only upbraided
the Christians for attributing too much to Christ. 2. If there were really such
a Person as Christ was, who suffered as Tacitus says, then the whole Story
could not be a Fiction, but only some part of it; and these additional parts
must either be contrived by the Apostles, or after their time: Not after their
time, for then they must be added after Christianity was received in the World,
for that, as appears by Tacitus, was spread in the Apostles times as far as
Rome; and if these parts were not received with it; the Cheat would presently
have been discovered as soon as broached, by those who had embraced
Christianity before: And besides, Tertullian in his time appeals to the
Authentic Writings of the Apostles themselves, which were then extant, wherein
the same things were contained, that we now believe: If these things then were
forged, it must be by the Apostles themselves; and I dare now appeal to you,
whether ever any Story was better capable of being disproved than this was, if
it had not been true, since it was published in that very time and place, where
the Persons were living, who were most concerned to disprove it: As appears by
the hatred of the Jews to the Christians, both then and ever since: which is a
very observable circumstance for proving the truth of Christian Religion; for
the Jews and Christians agreed in the Divine Revelations of old, the Christians
believed moreover, that Christ was the Messiah promised; this Christ lived and
dyed among the Jews his Enemies; his Apostles Preached, and wrought Miracles
among their most inveterate Enemies, which Men that go about to deceive never
care to do: And to this Day the Jews do not deny the Matters of Fact, but look
on them as insufficient to prove Jesus of Nazareth to have been the Messiah:
Nay, Mahomet himself, who in all probability would have overthrown the whole
Story of the New Testament, if he could have done it with any color, yet
speaks very honorably of Christ and of the great things which were said and
done by him.

5. That there is nothing in the Christian Religion, unbecoming the Majesty, or
Holiness, or Truth of a Divine Revelation. As to the precepts, you acknowledge
their excellency; and the Promises chiefly refer either to Divine Grace, or
future Glory; And what is there herein unbecoming God? And as to what concerns
the Truth of it, we have as great Characters of that throughout, as it is
possible for us to expect; there appearing so much simplicity, sincerity,
candor, and agreement in all the parts of it. Some Men would have been better
pleased, it may be, if it had been all written by one Person, and digested into
a more exact method, and set forth with all the Lights and Ornaments of Speech.
This would have better become an Invention of Men, but not a Revelation of God:
Plainness and simplicity have a natural greatness above art and subtilty; and
therefore God made choice of many to write, and at several times, that by
comparing them we may see how far they were from contriving together, and yet
how exactly they agree in all things which Men are concerned to believe. But
you say, We have many infirmities of the Apostles discovered therein, their
heats and animosities one against another. But I pray consider; 1. How came you
to know these things; Is it not by their own Writings? And if they had been
such, who minded only their applause, had it not been as easy to have
concealed these things, and would they not certainly have done it, if that had
been their aim? If St. Paul seems to boast, does he not do it, with that
constraint to himself, as a Man that is forced to do it for his own vindication
against malicious Enemies? And who ever denied a Man of a generous mind the
liberty of speaking for himself? 2. But suppose they had infirmities and heats
among them; does this prove that God could not make use of them as his
Instruments to declare his Truth to the World? Then it will follow, that God
must never reveal his will by Men, but by Voices from Heaven, or Angels, or the
assumption of the humane Nature by the Divine. But, if God be not denied the
liberty of employing mere Men, we cannot find so great evidences of Piety and
Zeal, of Humility and Selfdenyal, of Patience and Magnanimity, of Innocence and
universal Charity in any Men as were in the Apostles; And therefore did appear
with the most proper Characters of Ambassadors from Heaven. And I dare venture
the comparison of them with the best Philosophers, as to the greatest and most
excellent virtues, for which they were the most admired; notwithstanding the
mighty difference as to their Education; allowing but the same Truth as to the
Story of the New Testament, which we yield to Xenophon, or Diogenes Laertius,
or any other Writers concerning them.

But what is it then which you object against the Writings of the New
Testament, to make them inconsistent with the Wisdom of God? I find but two
things in the Papers you sent me. 1. Want of the continuance of the Power of
Miracles, which you say is Promised. Mark 16. 17. 2. The number of the Beast in
the Revelations. But, Good Sir, consider, what it is to call in question a
Divine Revelation for such Objections as these are? Must there be no
Revelation, unless you understand every Prophecy, or the extent of every
promise? Be not so injurious to your own Soul, for the sake of such Objections,
to cast away the great assurance which the Christian Religion gives us, as to
the Pardon of Sin upon Repentance here, and eternal Happiness in another World.
Would you reject all the Writings of Plato, because you do no more understand
some part of his Timaeus than the number of 666? You must have a very nice
faith, that can bear with no difficulties at all, so that if there be but one
or two hard things that you cannot digest, you must throw up all the best Food
you have taken; at this rate you must starve your Body, as well as ruin your
Soul. But of these places afterward.

3. I have hitherto removed the grounds of Suspicion, I now come to show the
positive Testimonies of their Sincerity which the Apostles showed, which were
greater than were ever given to any other Matter of Fact in the World. I will
then suppose the whole Truth of the Christian Doctrine to be reduced to this
one Matter of Fact, Whether Christ did rise from the dead or no? for (as I have
said already) it is plain, the Apostles put the main force of all that they
said upon the Truth of this; and often declared, that they were appointed to be
the Witnesses of this thing. Now ^et us consider how it is possible ^or Men to
give the highest assurance of their sincerity to others; and that must be
either by giving the utmost Testimony that Men ^an give; or by giving some
Testimony above that of Men, which cannot deceive, which is the Testimony of
God.

1. They gave the utmost Testimony that mere Men could give of their fidelity.
I know no better way we have for a full assurance as to any humane Testimony,
than to consider what those Circumstances are which are generally allowed to
accompany Truth, and if we have the concurrence of all these, we have as much
as can be expected: For nothing^ that depends on Testi^ony can be proved by
Mathematical Demonstration. But notwithstanding the want of this, either we may
have sufficient ground to assent to Truth upon Testimony, o^ there can be no
difference known between Truth and Falsehood by Humane Testimony; which
overthrows all Judicial proceeding^ among Men; the Justice whereof does suppose
not only the veracity of Humane Testimony; Bu^ that it may be so discerned by
others, that they may safely rely upon it. Now the main thing to be regarded as
to the Truth o^ Humane Testimony are these. 1. I^ Men testify nothing but wha^
they saw. 2. If they testify i^ at no long distance of time from the thing
done. 3. If they testify it plainly, and without doubtful expressions. 4. If a
great number agree in the same Testimony. 5. If they part with all that is
valuable to Mankind, rather than deny the Truth of what they have testified:
And where all these concur, it is hardly possible to suppose greater evidence
to be given of the Truth of a Thing; and now I shall show that all these do
exactly agree to the Apostles Testimony concerning the Resurrection of Christ.

1. They testified nothing but what they saw themselves. The Laws of Nations do
suppose that greater credit is to be given to eye witnesses than to any others,
thence the Rule in the Civil Law Testimonium de auditu regulariter non valet:
Because, say the Civilians and Canonists, Witnesses are to testify the Truth,
and not barely the possibility of things; that which Men see, they can testify
whether they are or not: That which Men only hear, may be, or no^ be; and their
Testimony is no^ of the Fact, but is looked on as more uncertain, and ought to
have greater allowances given it; but the Apostles testified only what they saw
and handled; and that after the most scrupulous enquiry into the Truth of
Christ Body, and after many doubts an^ suspicions among themselves about it; so
that they did not seem hastily and rashly to believe what they afterward
declared to the World. Now a Body was a proper object of Sense, and no trial
could be greater, or more accurate than theirs was; nor an^ satisfaction fuller
than putting their fingers into the very wound of the pierced side.

2. They did not stay till the circumstances might have slipped out of their
Memories, before they testified these things; but very soon after, while the
impression of them was fresh upon them: If they had let these Matters alone for
any long time, the Jews would have asked them presently, if these things were
true, why did we not hear of them as soon as they were done? Therefore we see
the Apostles on the very day of Pentecost, a little after Christ's ascension to
Heaven, openly and boldly declare the Truth of these things, not in private
corners among a few Friends, but in the most solemn meeting of their Nation
from all parts; which was the worst time could have been chosen, if they had
any intention to deceive.

3. They testify it in as plain a manner as is possible, on purpose to prevent
all mistakes of their meaning, This Jesus has God Acts 2. 32. 36.
raised up, whereof we all are Witnesses; Therefore let all the House of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified,
both Lord and Christ. Men that had a mind to deceive would have used some more
general and doubtful words, than these were.

4. If this had been testified by one single witness, the World would have
suspected the Truth of his Testimony; for according to the Rule in the Civil
Law in the case of Testimony, Vox unius, vox nullius est: But this was
testified by very many; not merely by the twelve Apostles, but by 500 at once;
among whom some might be supposed to have so much honesty, or at least capable
of being persuaded to have discovered the Imposture, if they had in the least
suspected any.

5. But that which adds the greatest weight to all this, is, that there was not
one of all the Apostles, and scarce any one of the rest, but exposed themselves
to the utmost hazards and dangers, rather than deny or retract the Truth of
what they witnessed. If the People had been careless and indifferent about
Religion, it is possible Men might have gone on in a Lie so long till they had
gotten interest enough to maintain it; but no sooner did the Apostles appear,
witnessing these things, but they met with an early and vigorous opposition,
and that from the chiefest Men in Power, who made it their business to suppress
them. Now in this case, they were put to this choice, if they would renounce or
conceal the Truth of what they testified, they might presently enjoy ease, and
it may be, rewards too; but if they went on, they must look for nothing but the
sharpest persecution; and this they met with almost in all places; and is it
conceivable, that Men should be so fond of a lie, to forsake all and follow it,
and at last to take up their cross for it? If credit and interest in the hearts
of People, might carry a Man on a great way in the delusion, yet he would be
loath to dye for it; and yet there was never a one of the Apostles, but ventured
his life for the Truth of this; and all but one, they tell us, did suffer
Martyrdom for it. I pray, Sir, consider, where you ever meet with any thing
like this, that so many Men should so resolutely dye, for what themselves at
the same time knew to be a lie; and that they must certainly do, if it were all
a contrivance of their own heads.

2. But although in these things they went as high as it was possible for
humane Testimony to go, yet they had something beyond all this, which was a
concurrence of a Divine Testimony, in the miraculous gifts and operations of
the Holy Ghost. And this we assert to be the highest Testimony can be given in
the World, of a Truth of any thing; because God will not employ his Power to
deceive the World. And as all other Truth has a criterion proper to it; so
this seems to be the proper criterion of a Divine Testimony, that it has the
power of Miracles going along with it. For if we do suppose God to make known
his Mind to the World, it is very reasonable to believe there should be some
distinguishing note of what is immediately from God, and what comes only from
the inventions of Men; and what can be more proper to distinguish what comes
from God, and what from Men, than to see those things done which none but God
can do? But against this you object several things, which I shall easily and
briefly Answer.

1. You cannot tell what it is that Miracles do attest; not all their Doctrine,
since Paul said, some was not from the Lord. Answ. Miracles do attest the
veracity of the Speaker, and by consequence the truth of the Doctrine; not that
you should believe that to be from the Lord, which he said was not; but that
which he said, was from the Lord. But when he makes such a distinction himself,
it is very unreasonable to urge that as an Argument, that he had nothing from
the Lord; it is much rather an argument of his candor and ingenuity, that he
would not pretend to Divine Revelation, when he had it not.

2. You would have it signified, what Doctrine it is which is attested by
Miracles, since the Doctrins of Scripture lie in heaps and confusion. Answ. To
what purpose should any Doctrins be singled out to have the Seal of Miracles
set to them, since it is their Divine Commission to Teach and declare the Will
of God, which is sealed by it? And what they did so Teach and declare, is
easily known by their Writings.

3. But why do not Miracles still continue? Answ. Because there are no Persons
employed to Teach any new Doctrines; and no Promise of Scripture does imply any
more: For the signs which were to follow them that believe, were such as tended
to the first confirmation of the Christian Faith; which being effected, their
use ceased; and so to ask why God does not continue a Gift of Miracles to
convince Men that the former were true, is to the same purpose as to ask why
God does not make a New Sun, to satisfy Athiests that he made the Old?

4. But does not the Scripture say, that wonders are not always to be taken as
confirmations of the Truth of Doctrine, since false Prophets may work Wonders,
Deuteron. 13. 1. Answ. That signifies no more, than that Wonders are not to be
believed against the Principles of Natural Religion; or Revealed Religion
already confirmed by greater Miracles: And that those who would value such a
particular sign above all the series of Miracles their Religion was first
established by, may be justly left to their own delusions. You might as well
object the lying Wonders of the Man of Sin, against all the Miracles of Christ
and his Apostles. If God has once done enough to convince Men, he may
afterward justly leave them to the trial of their Ingenuity; as a Father that
has used great care to make his Son understand true Coin, may afterward
suffer false to be laid before him, to try whether he will mind his being
cheated or no?

5. But you may yet farther demand, what the Testimony of Miracles does
signisie to the Writings of the New Testament? Answ. 1. The Miracles do
sufficiently prove the Authority of that Doctrine, which was delivered by those
who wrought Miracles; as Christ and his Apostles. 2. If there had been the
least ground to question the Truth and Authority of these Writings, they had
never been so universally received in those Ages, when so many were concerned
to enquire into the Truth of these things; for we see several of the Books were
a long time examined, and at last, when no sufficient reason could be brought
against them, they were received by those Churches, which at first scrupled the
receiving them: And I am so far from thinking the doubts of the first Ages any
Argument against the Authority of a Book, that by the objections of some
against some of them, I am thereby assured, that they did not presently receive
any Book, because it went under the name of an Apostolical Writing: As I am the
more confirmed in the belief of the Resurrection of Christ, because some of the
Disciples were at first very doubtful about it.

6. You may yet ask, What does all this signify to the Writings of the Old
Testament, which were written at a longer distance of Time from us, and in a
more Ignorant Age of of the World? Answ. There cannot be a more evident proof
of the Old Testament, than by the New: For if the New be true, the Old must be
so, which was confirmed so plainly and evidently by it; our Savior and his
Apostles appealing to Moses and the Prophets on all occasions. So that the same
Miracles which prove their Testimony true, do at the same time prove the Divine
Authority of the Old Testament, since it is so expressly said in the New, That
Holy Men of God did speak as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

But after all this, You urge, that you have discovered such things in these
Writings as could not come from God, as

1. Contradictions in them. 2. Somethings inconsistent with the Wisdom of God.
3. Promises made that were never fulfilled. 4. Things so obscure as no one can
tell the meaning of them. Under these four Heads I shall examine the particular
allegations you bring against the Scriptures.

1. Under the head of Contradictions, you insist on the Prophecy Genesis 15. 13,
14, 15, 16. made to Abraham concerning his Posterity; compared with the
Accomplishment mentioned, Exodus 12. 40. 41. And the force of your Argument lies
in this, That the Prophecy in Genesis does imply that the Servitude of the
Children of Israel in Egypt was to be 40 Years; or 430 says Exodus but both
these are repugnant to other places of Scripture, which make their abode in
Egypt not to exceed 215 Years; or at the highest, by the number of Generations
could not exceed 350 Years, stretching them to the utmost advantage. To this
which you lay so much weight upon, I Answer distinctly,

1. By your own confession, supposing the 430 Years to begin from the Covenant
made with Abraham, the accomplishment mentioned, Exodus 12. 40. does fall out
exactly in the time of the Children of Isreal's going out of Egypt, for you have
proved from Scripture, that from the Covenant with Abraham to Jacobs being in
Egypt, were 215 Years; to which you add, that Coath being supposed 5 Years Old
at the going into Egypt; and that at 70 Years he Begat Amram, and that Amram at
at 70 Begat Moses, to which Moses his 80 Years being added, makes up the other
215 Years, whereby we have the full 430 Years, by your own computation. Now,
Sir, I pray consider what reason you have to charge the Scripture with
contradiction in a Matter your self acknowledges, so exactly accomplished in
this way of computation?

2. But you say, the Words will not bear this; because they speak of the 400
Years to expire in their Servitude in Egypt. Answ. For this we must consider
the importance of the Words both in Genesis and Exodus. There is not a Word of
Egypt mentioned in Genesis; but only in general it is said, Thy Seed shall be a
Stranger in the Land that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall
afflict them 400 Years; and it will conduce very much to the right
understanding this Prophecy to consider the main scope and design of it, which
was not to tell Abraham how long they should be in servitude to the Egyptians,
but how long it would be before his Seed should come to the possession of the
promised Land; And it seems Abraham by the Question, Genesis 15. 7. 8. did expect
to have the Inheritance of this Land in his own time: To this therefore God
Answers, by telling him, he meant no such thing, but it was intended for his
Seed, and that not suddenly neither, for they were to tarry till the iniquity
of the Amorites should be full, which would not be till the fourth Generation;
and then his Seed should after 400 Years, come to the Possession of the
Promised Land; but in the mean time they were to Sojourn in a Land that was not
theirs, and to meet with many hardships and difficulties. This is plainly the
scope of this prophecy, and by attending to it, the great Objections presently
appear without force; for the Land of Canaan notwithstanding the Promise, was
by the Patriarchs themselves looked on as a Land wherein they were Strangers.
So Abraham says Genesis 23. 4. I am a Stranger and a Sojourner with you; and
which is more remarkable in the blessing of Jacob by Isaac, to whom the Promise
was made, it is said; And give thee the Blessing of Abraham to thee, and to thy
Seed, that thou may inherit the Land wherein thou art a Stranger, which God
gave unto Abraham, Genesis 28. 4. Where the very same Word is used concerning
Jacob, that is expressed in the Prophecy, Genesis 15. 13. So that the Patriarchs
looked on themselves as Strangers in the Land of Canaan, so long after the
promise made, and after the increase of the Seed of Abraham* And therefore the
land of Canaan was called Terra Peregrinationum, the Land wherein they were
strangers; Genesis 36. 7. -- 37. 1. And when God was calling the People of Israel
together out of Egypt, yet then the Land of Canaan was called by the very same
title, the Land of their Pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers: Exodus 6. 4.
And Ps. 105. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. where we have a full account of the Promise
made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, concerning the inheritance of that Land it
is said, that they were few, and strangers in it, when they went from one
Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another People. Which does fully explain
the meaning of the Prophecy in Genesis, and that it is not to be restrained to
the servitude of the People of Israel in Egypt, but to be understood of their
state of Pilgrimage for 400 Years, wherein they were to suffer great hardships,
before they should come to the Inheritance of Canaan. This is no forced or
unnatural exposition of the Words, as you seem to suggest; but to my
apprehension, very plain and easy, if we attend to the main scope and design
of them which was to acquaint Abraham how long it would be before the prophecy
were accomplished, and what the condition of his Seed should be the mean time,
viz. That they should have no Land which they should call their own by
Inheritance all that time, but they should be exposed to great hardships, yea
even to Servitude; but that Nation whom they should serve, should at last
suffer for their ill usage of them, and they should come out of that Captivity
with great substance; and all this to be done in the fourth Generation of the
Amorites when their Iniquities should be arrived at the full height. All which
particulars, were so remarkably accomplished at such a distance of time, and
under such improbable circumstances, that that this very prophecy were enough
to convince an unprejudiced mind, that it came from Divine Inspiration. For
where do we meet with any thing like this in the Histories of other Nations?
viz. A Prophecy to be accomplished 400 Years after, and the very manner
foretold, which no humane conjecture could reach to, since the manner of
deliverance of the People of Israel out of their Captivity in Egypt, was to all
humane appearance so impossible a thing, especially at such a time when the
Spirits of the People were sunk and broken by so long a slavery: And not only
the manner foretold, but the accomplishment happened to a day, according to
Exodus 12. 41. And it came to pass at the end of the 430 Years, even the
selfsame day it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord went out from
the Land of Egypt. But against this you object, That the sojourning is spoken
of the Children of Israel in Egypt for 430 Years; which cannot hold good any
ways; since, to make it up, the times of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, must be
taken in who could not be called the Children of Israel. Answ. For the 430
Years, I grant, that according to St. Paul, they did commence from the Covenant
made to Abraham Gal. 3. 17. and that the 400 Years began from Isaac's being
owned for the Promised Seed; between which time the 30 Years were passed; and
all appearance of difficulty is avoided, if we admit the reading of the best
Copies of the LXX. which is in these words, (...), Now the sojourning of the
Children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt and Canaan, they and their Fathers was
430 Years. This is the reading of our Alexandrian Copy, and the Complutensian,
and that of Aldus, and of Eusebius in his Chronicon, and of St. Hierome in his
Translation of it; and of the Church in St. Augustins time, and afterward; and
lest any should reject this as a late Interpolation, or gloss received into the
Text, besides these Testimonies of the Antiquity of it, we find the very same
in the Samaritan Copy, which the Enemies of it do allow to be as ancient as our
Saviors time. And that which very much confirms the Truth of this reading is,
that the Jews themselves follow the sense of it, who are the most eager
contenders for the Authority of the Hebrew Copy; who all agree, that the
beginning of the Computation of the 430 Years is to be taken before the
Children of Isreal's going into Egypt: and Menasseh Ben Israel contends with
many others, that the 430 Years did begin from the Promise made to Abraham, and
the 400 from the time of Isaac, to which their most ancient Books of Chronology
do agree, and to the same purpose speak both Philo Judaeus, and Josephus; who
although in one place he seems to make the Israelites affliction in Egypt to
have been 400 Years, yet when he speaks more particularly of it, he makes the
time of their abode in Egypt to have been only 215, and the 430 to begin from
Abraham's entrance into Canaan: The Targum of Jonathan begins the 430 from the
Vision of Abraham, and the 400 from the Birth of Isaac; all which I mention, to
let you see that the Jews themselves do in sense concur with the Samaritan and
Greek Copy; and therefore we have more reason to suspect something left out in
the present Hebrew, than any thing added in those Copies. But does not this
take off from the Authority of the Scripture? Not at all: For the only Question
is about the True Reading: And having the consent of the Samaritan,
Alexandrian, and other Copies of the LXX. and of the Ancient Church; and of the
Jews themselves as to the sense of it, we have reason to look on this as the
truer Reading: Which is making no addition to the scripture either as to
Persons or Places, but only producing the more Authentic Copy; much less is
this Adding or Changing as we please, for if we did this without so much
Authority as we have for it, you might as easily reject it as we produce it.

3. After all this, I do not see the mighty force of your Reason to charge the
Scripture with Contradiction, supposing the 400 Years were to be spent in the
servitude of the Children of Israel in Egypt. I confess, when I found the
Scripture so boldly, so frequently charged with no less than Contradiction, I
expected something like Demonstration in the Case, especially in this place
which you chose to put in the Front of all; but I do not find any thing like
such a proof of a Contradiction, supposing we should allow the 400 Years to be
spent in Egypt. Yes, say you, Coath was 5 Years Old when he came down into
Egypt, and When he had lived there 65 Years he begat Amram, and Amram being 70
Years Old begat Moses, to which Moses his 80 Years being added, we have only
215 Years. But since the Scripture does not assign, the particular Age of any
of these, when they begat their Children, I see no impossibility or repugnancy
in the supposition, that 400 Years should pass from Levi's going into Egypt, to
the Eightieth of Moses, any more than from Salmons entrance into Canaan to the
time of David, for no more are reckoned in scripture than Boaz the Son of
Salmon, by Raab, and Obed, and Jesse; So that by the same way, this latter may
be explained, the former may be so too. If it be said, That either they begat
their Children at a great Age, or that the scripture in Genealogies does not
set down all the intermediate Parents, but only the most eminent, (as Caleb is
called the Son of Esron. 1 Chronicles. 2. 9, 18. although there was at least one
between them,) the very same Answer will serve to clear this part of the
Chronology of Scripture from any appearance of Contradiction. These things you
might have found more largely deduced and fully handled by those Learned
Persons, who have undertaken to clear the Chronology of Scripture: Who were men
of more Judgment, than from any difficulty of this nature, to call in question
the Truth and Authority of the sacred Scriptures; and although the Opinions of
Chronologers, are like the City Clocks, which seldom agree, yet some come
nearer the time of the day than others do; and therefore you ought to examine
and compare them before you pronounce so peremptorily about Contradictions in
scripture, which you have no reason to do till you find that no one hypothesis
among them will serve to free the scripture from Contradiction: For otherwise,
you do but blame the Sun, because you cannot make the Clocks agree.

This is all I can find in your Papers under the head of Contradictions; and I
leave you now soberly to consider, whether this place did afford you sufficient
ground for so heavy a Charge; but if you say, you have a great many more by
you, but you sent me this only for a Trial of my skill; before you send any
more; I beseech you, Sir, to consider,

1. How easily things do appear to be Contradictions to weak, or unstudied, or
prejudiced minds, which after due consideration appear to be no such things. A
deep prejudice finds a Contradiction in every thing; whereas in Truth, nothing
but ill will, and impatience of considering, made any thing, it may be, which
they Quarrel at, appear to be so. If I had been of such a quarrelsome humor, I
would have undertaken to have found out more Contradictions in your Papers,
than you imagine, and yet you might have been confident, you had been guilty of
none at all. When I consider the great pains, and Learning, and Judgment,
which has been shown by the Christian Writers in the Explication of the
Scriptures; and the raw, indigested Objections which some love to make against
them, if I were to judge of things barely by the fitness of persons to judge of
them, the disproportion between these, would appear out of all comparison. A
modest Man would in any thing of this nature say with himself, methinks, if
there were such Contradictions in the Bible, as now seem to me; so many persons
of incomparable Abilities in the First, and latter Ages of the Christian
Church, who have made it their business to enquire into these things, would
have discerned them before me: And yet they retained a mighty veneration for
the scriptures, as coming from God himself; and therefore it may be only
weakness of Judgment, want of Learning, or some secret prejudice may make me
suspect these things; or else I must suspect the honesty of all those persons
who have pretended such a Devotion to the Scriptures, and yet have believed
them full of Contradictions.

2. Wherein the Contradiction appears. Is it in the main and weighty parts of
the Religion revealed herein; or is it only in some smaller Circumstances as to
time and place? The great thing you are to look after, are the Matters those
Scriptures tell you your Salvation depends upon; and if there be a full
consent, and agreement therein; you find enough for you to believe and
practice. And if some Contradictions should still appear to you in smaller
Matters, what follows from thence, but only that the same care was not taken
about little, as about great things? And you ought to set that appearance of
Contradiction in small Matters, together with the real consent in the things of
the highest importance; and from thence rather to infer, that this was no
combination or design to deceive others; for such persons take the greatest
care to prevent suspicion, by their exactness in every minute Circumstance; and
sometimes the overmuch care to prevent suspicion does raise it the more.

3. What ways have been used by Men of judgment and learning, to clear those
places from the charge of Contradiction. For, not one of the Objections you can
start now, but has been considered over and over; and all the difficulties
that belong to it examined; If you will not take the pains to do this; it is
plain you do not desire satisfaction, but only seek for a pretense to cavil;
especially, if you only search the weakest or most injudicious Writers on the
Scriptures, and endeavor to expose their opinions, without taking notice of
what others have said with more clear and evident Reason. This shows either
want of Judgment in choosing such Expositors, or want of Candor and fair
dealing and a desire of taking any advantage against the Scriptures.

4. How hard a Matter it is for us at this distance to understand exactly the
grounds of Chronology, or the manner of computation of Times used so long ago:
and therefore in all difficulties of this nature, we ought to make the fairest
allowances that may be, considering withal, that escapes and errors are no
where more easily committed by Transcribers, than in numbers: and that it is a
very unreasonable thing, that a Book otherwise deserving to be thought the best
Book in the World, should be scorned and rejected, because there appears some
difference in the computation of times. We do not so exactly know the manner of
the Hebrew Chronology, nor, the nature of their Year, or Intercalations, nor
the customs of their Genealogies; nor the allowance to be made for
interregnums, so as to be able to define peremptorily in these things; but it
is sufficient to show, that there is no improbability in the accounts that are
given; and no sufficient reason can be drawn from thence to reject the
Authority of the Scriptures.

2. I come to consider the places you object, as containing things inconsistent
with the Wisdom, or Goodness of God, according to a rational persuasion; and
those are either, 1. From the Laws of Moses. 2. From the express story of the
Bible, or actions of the Prophets.

1. From the Laws of Moses: Your first Objection is from Exodus 21. 7. Where a
Man is supposed to sell his Daughter; which you say, it is incredible to
believe that God should permit; because it implies unnatural affection and
covetousness in the Father. But, Sir, 1. You do not consider, that this is
barely a provisional Law, and is not the permission of the thing, so much as
the regulation of it, supposing it to be done, i. e. in case a Man should part
with his interest in his Daughter to another Person, upon an extraordinary case
of necessity, as the Jews understand it; yet then, she was not to be in the
condition of a Servant, but to be either Betrothed to the Person who received
her, or to his Son; which was intended for the restraint of promiscuous Buying
and Selling Daughters, merely for the satisfaction of Lust. The Jews who
certainly best understood their own Judicial Laws, do say, that this was never
to be done, but where there was a presumption of such a betrothing; for no Man
could Sell his Daughter to those to whom it was unlawful for her to Marry by
their Law; so that this was looked on as a kind of Espousals of a young Girl,
taken into Wardship by another; but so, that if she were not Betrothed, she was
to remain her 6 Years during her Minority, as the Jews understand it; unless
she were redeemed, or set Free, or the Jubilee came, or the Master dyed, or the
time of her Minority expired.

2. The case of necessity being supposed, it has been thought lawful for
Parents to make advantage by their Children, not only by the Jews, but by other
Nations, who have been in the greatest esteem for Wisdom. For by the Law of the
12 Tables, among the Romans, the Father had the liberty of Selling his Son
three times, for his own advantage, as Dionys. Halicarnasseus relates; and
before that time, it was not only in use among the Romans, but in such esteem
among them, that upon the review of their Laws the Decemviri durst not leave it
out; but by one of the Laws of Numa Pompilius, it was restrained to the times
before Marriage, for in case the Son had the Fathers consent to Marry, he could
not Sell him afterward, as the same Author tells us. This Law continued in
force among them, till Christianity prevailed in the Roman Empire, for although
there were a prohibition of Diocletian against it, yet that signified nothing,
till Constantine took care, That such indigent Parents should be relieved out
of the public charge, Cod. Theodos. l. 11. tit. 27. 2. And yet after this, the
Custom did continue, when the Parents were in great want, as appears by a Law
of Theodosius, Cod. 3. tit. 3. Omnes quos Parentum miseranda fortuna in
servitium dum victum requirunt addixit, ingenuitati pristinae reformentur. And
it further appears, that even in Constantin's time, notwithstanding the Law
made by him, Parents would still, when they thought themselves overcharged with
Children, part with their Interest in them to others for advantage, but it was
chiefly while they were sanguinolenti, as the Law expresses it, i. e. new Born.
Cod. Theod. l. 5. tit. 8. By the Laws of Athens, before Solons time, Parents
might sell their Children, as appears by Plutarch, in his Life; and the same
Philostratus reports of the Phrygians, l. 3. vit. Apollon. Tyan. and the like
custom does obtain among the Chinese to this day, if persons do think
themselves unable to bring up their Children themselves. And there are two
things to be said for it. 1. The natural obligation lying on Children to
provide for their Parents in necessity, by any way they are able. 2. The
probability of better Education under more able Persons; and therefore the
Thebans had a Law, That Parents in case of poverty, were to bring their
Children to the Magistrate, as soon as they were Born, who put them out to such
as were judged AElian. v. hist. l. 2. c. 7.
fit to bring them up, and to have their service for their reward.

But however, you say, This place implys a toleration of having many Wives,
because it is said, if he take him another Wife, v. 10. I do not deny, that the
Mosaical Law did suppose the practice of Polygamy; but as it does no where
expressly allow it, neither does it expressly condemn it. And although we say,
the Christian Law is far more excellent, which reduces Marriage to its first
institution; yet you will find it a hard Matter to prove such a permission of
Polygamy as this was, to be so repugnant to the Law and Principles of Nature,
as from thence to infer, that this Law of Moses could not be from God: You
might have said the same about the Matter of Divorce, which was permitted them;
Christ says, for the hardness of their hearts: Which shows, that God does not
always require that from Men which is best pleasing to himself; and that as to
his Political Government, he may not always punish that, which is not so
pleasing to him.

The next Law you quarrel at is that, Deuteronomy. 22. 13, etc. About the trial of
Virginity: Which you object against, as immodest, and uncertain, and therefore
unbecoming the Wisdom of God. So, many customs of those elder times of the
World, and of the Eastern parts to this day seem very strange to us, that are
not so well acquainted with the Reasons of them. Methinks, it better becomes
our Modesty in such cases, to question our understanding those customs, than
presently to cast so much disparagement on the Author of them. If you had been
offended at the literal sense of those Words, many of the Jews themselves say,
they are to be understood figuratively of the evidence that was to be brought
and laid open before the Judges, on behalf of the defamed Person. And both
Josephus and Philo omit the laying open the Cloth. But supposing it to be taken
in the plainest literal sense, I have Two Things to say in vindication of this
Law. 1. That however uncertain some Physicians have thought that way of Trial
to have been in these parts of the World; yet it is generally agreed to have
held for the Eastern parts, by the most skilful Physicians among the Arabians:
And a custom of the same nature is said by good Authors to have been observed
among the Egyptians, and other Africans, as well as the Arabians; so that this
could not be thought so strange or immodest among the Inhabitants of those
parts: And it is very probable that some particulars, as to the Practice of
these Laws are not set down, which might very much tend to the certainty of
them, as the Age of the Married Persons, which was most likely then, as it is
to this day in the Eastern parts, very early, the Jews say, at 12 years old,
which would make the Trial more certain. 2. As to the Modesty of it, you are to
consider, that the Law was intended to keep persons from unjust defamations,
and such a way of Trial was therefore pitched upon to deter persons from such
defamations; which Men might otherwise have been more ready to, because of the
liberty of divorce, and the advantage they had in saving the dower, if they
could prove the party vitiated before Marriage; therefore all the proof of that
Nature was to be passed soon after the consummation of Marriage, which being
agreed then by all the Friends, there was to be no liberty left for defamation
afterward; but in case any Man should be guilty of it, the producing those
Evidences, which before they were agreed upon, should be sufficient to clear
the Innocence of the party accused. And therefore I look on this Law, as the
Jews do on that of the rebellious son, of which they say, that there is no
instance of the practice of it; the Penalty threatened being so effectual to
prevent the occasion of it.

And such in a great Measure, I suppose the other Law mentioned by you to have
been, viz. of the Water of Jealousy, which you make so strange a matter of; and
think it savours too much of a design to gratify the jealous humor of the
Jewish Nation: But you might have put a fairer construction upon it, viz. That
it was intended to prevent any occasion of suspicion being given to the
Husband, by too much familiarity with other persons; since the Law allowed so
severe a Trial, in Case the Wife after admonition did not forbear such
suspected familiarity, but if you had looked on the Law, as it is, Number. 5. 12,
13. etc. you would have found, that the design of it was to keep Women from
committing secret Adultery, by so severe a Penalty; yet withal allowing so
much to a reasonable suspicion, (for so the Jews understand it, with many
Cautions and Limitations) that rather then Married persons should live under
perpetual jealousies, he appointed this extraordinary way of Trial, whereby
Adultery was most severely punished, and the honor of Innocence publicly
vindicated; which certainly are not ends at all unbecoming due Conceptions of
God.

The last of the Jewish Laws, which you quarrel with is the prohibition of
Usury, in several places of Moses his Law and the Psalms: And from hence you
fall into a long Discourse to prove the lawfulness of Usury: But to what
purpose I beseech you? For you were to prove, that God could never forbid it;
you might have spared your pity for Men, as you think, Blinded with
superstition, and cheated with New and Aerie Notions: For by all that I can see
by these Papers, some pretended Enemies to superstition have no better Eyes
than their Neighbors, and are as easily cheated with groundless Fancies and
Aerie imaginations. The only thing to the business in that long Discourse is
this, That you cannot imagine that God should make a Law so much to Man's
inconvenience, and forbid him so nice and indifferent a thing, as Moderate
increase of profit by letting out of Money, when it is allowed upon Lands,
Houses, and Trade, etc. To this I Answer, that the prohibition of Usury, to the
Jewish Nation, was upon political Grounds peculiar to the constitution of that
People; as appears by the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 23. 19, 20. Thou shall not
lend to Usury unto thy Brother -- Unto a Stranger thou may lend upon Usury;
but none of the Laws which are founded upon common and Moral Reasons have such
Limitations as this; for God would never have said, Thou shall not commit
Adultery with thy Brothers Wife; but with the Wife of a Stranger thou may.
But there was this particular Reason, for the prohibition of Usury to the
Jewish Nation: It pleased God to fix their Habitation, not upon the Seaside,
as Tire and Sidon stood; but within Land where they had no conveniences of
Trading, but the Riches of the Nation lay in Agriculture and Pasturage: In
which the Returns of Money are neither so quick nor so advantageous to make
sufficient compensation for the Interest of the Money in the time they have it:
For the main thing valuable in Money is the advantage the borrower makes of it;
and where that is great, it seems reasonable that the person whose the Money
is, should have a proportionable share of the advantage made by it; but where
persons borrow only for present occasions to supply their necessities, there it
is only an Act of kindness to lend, and it would be unreasonable to press upon,
or take advantage by another necessities. And this seems to have been the case
among the Jews; they were only the Poor that wanted Money for present
necessities; the Rich had no way to employ it in Trading, unless that they lent
to the Tyrian Merchants, which it was lawful by their Law to do; now if they
took Usury of their own people, it must be of those whose urgent necessity, and
not hopes of a mighty increase by it made them borrow, and therefore it was a
very just and reasonable Law to forbid Usury among them: which I believe he
would never have done, if he had placed the Jews upon the Coasts of Phoenicia,
where Trading was so much in request.

These are all the Laws which you have picked out of the whole Body of the
Jewish Law, to represent it unbecoming the Wisdom of God: And now I pray Sir,
look back again upon them, see how few, how small, how weak your Objections
are; and compare them with the weight, and justice, and prudence, and piety,
expressed in all the rest, and I hope you will find cause to be ashamed of
speaking so harshly of those Laws, so well accommodated to those Ages of the
World, and the Condition of that People for whom they were appointed.

2. I now consider what you object against the story of the Bible.

1. That passage of Moses; Exodus 32. 32. Blot me out of thy Book which thou
have written: Where your design is to show that Moses prayed to be Damned, and
that this was a very irrational thing: And savouring more of passion than of
the Spirit of God. But what if Moses meant no such thing as Damnation? As there
is not any word in the Context relating that ways, but all the design of that
Chapter is about a Temporal punishment, which was a present Destruction of the
People for their sins. And the Book out of which he prayed God to blot him,
seems to me to be no other, than the Roll of Gods chosen people, who were to
possess the Land of Canaan: For so (...) properly signifies a Roll or Register.
Psalm 69. 28. We meet with (...) the Roll of the living, or the Book of the
living we render it, because all ancient Books were in the fashion of Rolls. In
that Chapter, Moses intercedes with God on behalf of the People, that he would
make good his promise to them, of bringing them into the Land of Canaan. v. 13.
and v. 30. He goes up to make an Atonement for the People, i. e. as to the
cutting them off in the Wilderness, and therefore he desires rather than the
People should be destroyed, that God would strike him out of the Roll, that he
might Dye in the Wilderness rather than the People: And God gives that Answer
to this purpose, v. 33. Whoever has sinned against me, will I blot out of my
Book, the sense of which is the same with those words of the Psalmist, he swear
in his wrath that they should not enter into his Rest. Psalm. 95, 11. And
according to this interpretation, which is most natural and easy, all your
long Discourse against praying to be Damned comes to just nothing; there being
no pretense for it, either in the Text or Context.

2. The story of Ruth does not please you, as savouring in your opinion of a
great deal of Immodesty; but you would have a better opinion of it, if you
consider that the reason of her carriage toward Boaz, in such a manner, was
upon Naomies telling her that he was one to whom the right of redemption did
belong, and by consequence, by their Law, was to Marry her. Ruth 2. 20. And
this Ruth pleaded to Boaz, Ruth 3. 9. By which it appears, that she verily
believed that he was legally her Husband; and Boaz we see speaks of her as one
that was a virtuous Woman, and known to be such in the whole City. v. 11. And
he confesses he was her near kinsman, only he says, there was one nearer. v.
12. By which it seems, if there had not, Boaz had made no Scruple of the
matter: And the Jews say, in such Marriages very little Ceremony was required,
if the next of kin did not renounce his right, because the Law had determined
the Marriage before hand. If you had but considered this one thing, you would
have spared the many Observations you make on this story.

3. You Object against 2 Samuel 12. 8. as too much countenancing either Incest or
Adultery, because it is said, that God gave to David his Masters Wives into his
Bosom. But 1. It is very strange to bring this place as a countenance to
Adultery, which was purposely designed to upbraid David with the sin of
Adultery; and you will find it no easy matter, by the constitution of the
Mosaical Law, to prove Polygamy to be Adultery. 2. The Jews give a fair
Interpretation of this place, for they say, that the Wife of a King could never
Marry after her Husbands decease, as the Gemara on the Title Sanhedrim expressly
says, although some among them follow the opinion of R. Jehuda, that she might
Marry the succeeding King; but that is built chiefly on this place; of which
the rest give a better account, viz. that (...) does not Seldom. vxor Ebra. l.
1. c. 10. Schick. De jure Reg. c. 16. Theor. 19.
imply Saul's Wives, but the Maids of Honor, or Attendants, on the Court of
Saul, which all fell into David's power, and out of whom he might choose Wives,
without danger of Incest; and even some of those who assert it lawful for one
King to Marry his predecessors Wife, yet say in this case of David, that the
Word only implies, that they were of Readiness Family, as Merab and Michal were,
but not Readiness Wives. So that all the difficulty here arises only from the
Interpretation of an unusual word, in which we have much more reason to trust
the Jews than other Writers.

4. You are much offended at Hosea's Marrying an Adulteress: But all the
formidable difficulties of that place will presently vanish, if you allow the
Prophetical Schemes, wherein those things are said to be done, which are
intended only to represent in a more lively manner the things signified by
them. And so you may see the Chaldee Paraphrase, fully explains this place of
Hosea and Maimonides purposely discourses on the Prophetic parables, and
Maim. Moro Nevoch. l. 2. c. 46.
brings this as one of the instances of them; and with him the rest of the
Jewish Interpreters agree. But you Object against such a way of Teaching, as
tending to the encouragement of Vice, which it is very far from, being designed
to represent the odiousness of it: For the whole Scope of the Prophet is to let
the People understand, that their Idolatry was as hateful to God as the sin of
Adultery, and that the consequence of it would be their Misery and Ruin. And
yet that God expressed as much tenderness to them, as a Man that was very fond
of a Woman would do, in being unwilling to put her away, although he knew she
were false to his Bed: the former is intended in the first Chapter, and the
latter in the third. And what is there tending to Immorality in all this? May
not God make use of one Vice, whose evil is more notorious to represent another
by, whose evil they are more hardly convinced of? May not he set forth a
Degenerate People by the Sons of an Adulteress? And by the Names given to them
express his detestation of their wickedness? Especially when the Parabolical
Terms are so clearly explained, as they are in the second Chapter.

But you will say, these things are related as plain matters of Fact: with the
several circumstances belonging to them. It is true, they are so, but so
Parables use to be; so was Nathan's to David; so is that of the Rich Man and
Lazarus in the New Testament; so is Jeremies going to Euphrates to hide Jer.
13. 4. 5.
his Girdle; (for it is not very likely the Prophet should be sent 18 or 20
days Journey into an Enemies Country for no other end:) So is Ezekiels lying on
one side for 390 Ezekiel. 4. 5. 6.
days, and having his Head and Beard contrary to the Law, as Maimonides
observes: And his Ezekiel. 5. 1.
digging in the Walls of the Temple at Jerusalem, while he was in Ezekiel. 8. 8.
Babylon: And many other things of a like nature, which are set forth with as
punctual a Narration of circumstances as this of Hosea, and yet they were only
figurative expressions. We that are accustomed to another way of Learning,
think these things strange; but this was a very common way in the elder times,
and it is to this day much used in the Eastern Countries, to represent Duties
to some, under the Parables of things as really done by others: As may be seen
in Locman and Perzoes, besides what Clemens Alexandrinus and others have said,
concerning the Antiquity and common use of this Parabolical way of Teaching.

I now come to your Objections against the New Testament: but I find them so
few, and those so slight and inconsiderable, as to the end for which you
produce them, that I may easily pass them over. To that about the continuance
of Miracles, I have already Answered: And I find not one word in the places
mentioned by you, which implies the necessity of the continuance of them in all
Ages of the Christian Church. That place, Mark 10. 29, 30. speaks of no more
but such a recompense in this life as is consistent with persecution; and
therefore must chiefly lie in inward contentment; which all wise Men have
valued above external accommodations; although withal, by the account St. Paul
gives of himself, and his Brethren, God did abundantly provide for them one way
or other. As having nothing, and yet enjoying 2 Cor. 6. 10.
all things: Which amounts to a Hundredfold in this life.

But certainly you are the first Man, Who have Objected the obscurity of the
Book of Revelations, againgst the Authority of the Scriptures: Which is just as
if one should Object the quadrature of the Circle against Mathematical
certainty. If we grant that there are some things in that Mystical Book, we do
not yet well understand; what then! Must neither that Book, nor any other of
the Bible be of Divine Revelation? I will not pursue the unreasonableness of
this way of arguing so far as I might; but I leave your self to consider of it;
and of all that I have Written, in order to your satisfaction. If you think fit
to return an Answer, I pray do it clearly and shortly, and with that freedom
from Passion, which becomes so weighty a Matter: And I beseech God to give you
a right understanding in all things.

I am Sir, Your Faithful Servant.
June 11. 1675.
FINIS.
Books sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio.
THeses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad
disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico le Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and
Theologiae professore. In qua exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecelesiae Romanae,
and Protestantium. Price 20 s.

Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675.

A Table of Ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. stitcht, 1 s. 6 d.

Tuba Stentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an Instrument of
excellent use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1
s. of the Instrument 2 l. 5 s.

Articles and Rules for the Government of His Majesty's Forces by Land, during
this present War, 1673. 1 s. 6 d.

Bailii opus Hist. Chronol. vet. and Nov. Test. 1663.

Becmanni Exercitationes Theol. Contra Socinianos.

An History of the Church, by Alex. Petrey. 1662.

Catalogus Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum.

Quarto.
Dr. Pell's Introduction to Algebra. 7 s.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668. and Jac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. 2 s.

Love only for Love sake, a Dramatick Romance, by Sir Richard Fanshaw. 3 s. 6 d.

Mori Enchiridion Metaphysicum, 1671. 10 s.

Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat. 1624. 5 s.

Petrus Paaw de Ossibus, Amst. 1633. 5 s. Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the Eighth
Chapter of the Romans. 8 s.

A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord Howard's Retinue, to his Friend in
London, dated at Fez, Nov. 1. 1670. 6 d.

Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s.

Hieronymi Mercurialis de Art Gymnastica Libri sex cum figuris, 1672.

Pignorii Mensa Isaica, 1669.

Pharmacopeia Hagiensis, 1659. Augustana, 1672.

J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16 s.

Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum, 16 s.

Theod. Kerkringii D. M. Spicilegium Anatomicum, Continens Observationum
Anatomicarum rariorum centuriam unam nec non Osteogeniam foetuum in qua quid
cuique ossiculo ^ingulis accedat Mensibus, quidve decedat and ^n eo per varia
immutetur tempora, accuratissime oculis subjiciuntur, 1670.

There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons (Preached at the
French-Church in the Savoy) by two Converted Romanists, Mr. Dela Motte, late
Preacher of the Order of the Carmelites; and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licentiate in
Divinity; wherein the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and
confuted. Both Printed in French and English.

Also two other Sermons, one Preached before the King at White Hall, Jan. 30.
1676. by Henry Bagshaw, D. D. the other before the Lord Mayor, Dec. 19. 1675.
by JohnCook.

A Modest Survey of the most material things in a discourse, called the Naked
Truth, 6 d.

Octavo.
A discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion,
and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on
this Subject, he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s.

The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a
description of the Country, in two Volumes. 7 s.

The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars. 1671. 4 s.

Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a discourse, wherein is held forth the
opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the
Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian Faith, by Gilbert Burnet. 1 s.

A Collection of Popish Miracles wrought by Popish Saints, both during their
lives, and after their death, collected out of their own Authors, 1 s.

Theod. Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide, Accesserunt ejusdem Consilia
aliquot Medicinalia, 1 s.

A new way of curing the Gout, and Observations and Practices relating to Women
in Travel, 3 s.

A Relation of a Conference held about Religion at London, Apr. 3. 1676. by
Edward Stilling fleet, D. D. and Gilbert Burnet, with some Gentlemen of the
Church of Rome. 2 s. 6 d.

Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars tertia, sive Motus Compositi. Ubi G.
Monchii e Scotia progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus;
ejusdemque Regiae Majest. per Decennium gesta fideliter enarra^tur, 1676.

Gualteri Needham Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu. 1667. 3 s. 6 d.

Buxtorfius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1
s. 6 d.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of Dr. Ce^nudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s.

The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, with a description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places
thereabouts, 1670. 1 s. 6 d.

Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that
the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the First Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the
Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy, 1 s.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French Kings order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of Taffaletta,
etc. with a Letter in Answer to diverse Questions concerning their Religion,
Manners, etc. 1671. 1 s. 6 d.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, by A. B.
Peganius. 1671. 2 s.

Prodronius to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids, laying a foundation for the rendering a rational account, both of the
Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various
Productions of the same. By Nich. Steno, 1671. 1 s. 3 d.

Basilius Valentinus, of Natural and Supernatural things, also of the first
Tincture, Root, and Spirits of Metals and Minerals, how the same are Conceived,
Generated, Brought forth, Changed and Augmented: Whereunto is added Friar Bacon
of the Medicine or Tincture of Antimony, Mr. John Isaac Holland his works of
Saturn, and Alexander Van Suchten, of the Secrets of Antimony out of Dutch,
1671. 2 s.

The Poetical Histories, being a complete Collection of all the Stories
necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other
Ancient Authors, written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit P.
Galtruchius. Now Englished and Enriched with Observations concerning the Gods
worshipped by our Ancestors in this Island, by the Phoenecians and Syrians in
Asia; with many useful Notes and occasional Proverbs, gathered out of the best
Authors: Unto which are added two Treatises; One of the Curiosities of Old
Rome, and of the difficult Names relating to the Affairs of that City; The
other containing the most remarkable ^ieroglyphicks of Egypt. The Third
Edition, with Additions. By Marius D' Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6 d.

An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert
Boil. 1 s. 6 d. Idem Lat. twelves, 1 s.

Sir Samuel Morland's Arithmetic, with several useful Tables, and a Perpetual
Almanac, 1673. 3 s.

A Complete Treatise of Chyrurgery, containing Barbetts Surgery. Mindererus
of Diseases Incident to Camps and Fleets: With a Chyrurgeons Chest of Medicines
and Instruments. etc. 6 s.

Dr. Lower de cord. Amster. 1671. 3 s.

Dr. Grews Anatomy of Vegetables, 1672. 2 s.

Crowei Elenchi Script. in Scripturam. 3 s. 6 d.

Eugelenus de Scorbuto. Fred. Deckeri Exercitationes Medicae. Grotii via ad
Pacem. Alb. Gentilis de Armis Romany. De Imperio. De Legationibus. De Nuptiis.
Hammond de Confirmatione. Hugenii momenta Desultoria. Paraei Chronologia
Sacra. Thruston de Respiratione.
Twelves.
A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of Comforts offered to Believers, in two
discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18. the second on Romans 8. 32. By Robert
Wine. 1 s.

Grotii Sophompaneas. Gronovius in Livium. Primrose Ars Pharmaceutica. Schook
de Pace. Suetonius. Swalve Alcali. Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae. Terentii
Flores. Trelcatii loci Communes.
Balduinus de Calceo and Nigronius de Caliga Veterum. Accesserunt ex Q. Sept.
Fl. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii and Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejusdem
Argumenti, 1667.

Pauli Barbetti opera Chirurgica Anatomica, 1672.

Praxis Barbettiana Cum notis Fred. Deckeri,

Ottonis Tachenii Hippocrates Chymicus,

Q. Horatii Poemata cum Commentariis Jo. Menellii, 1676.

Hugo Grotius de veritate Religionis Christianae, 1674?

Theodori Kerckringii D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumphalem Antimonii
Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671.

Jo. Pincieri M. D. AEnigmatum Libri Tres cum solutionibus, 1655.

Francisci Redi Experimenta circa res diversas naturales, speciatim illas quae
ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675.

Aulus Gellius. Besterfeldus Redivivus. Herls Wisdoms Tripos. Wilkins Beauty of
Providence.
Quarto.
A New Dictionary, French and English, by Guy Miege. 1677.

Marshal Turenne's Funeral Sermon. 1677.

Jer. Horroccii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in Point of Schism, by Sir
To. Twisden.

The last Siege of Mastricht. Sept. 5. 1676.

Dr. Tillotson's Sermon before the King, Apr. 18. 1675.

Dr. Wilkins's two Sermons before the King, March 7. 1669. and Feb. 7. 1670.

Dr. Jo. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. 1676.

Rhetores selecti: Demetrius Phalerius, Tiberius Rhetor, Anonymus Sophista,
Severus Alexandrinus Greece et Lat. per Tho. Gale. Soc. Coll. M. 1676.

A Scriptural Catechism, according to the Method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, 1676.

How, of delighting in God; of the blessedness of the Righteous. Two Vol.

Art of Speaking, by M. du Port Royal, 1676:


