James Stewart's ANSWER To a Letter writ by Mijn Here Fagel Pensioner to the
States of Holland and West-Friesland, Concerning the REPEAL Of the Penal Laws
and Tests.

This may be Printed, Ja. Vernon.

London, Printed and are to be sold, by Andrew Soul, at the Three Kyes, in
Nags-Head Court, in Grace-Church Street, over against the Conduit. 1688.

James Stewart's ANSWER To Pensioner Fagel's LETTER.
My Lord,
I Was so much surprised to see a Letter appear in Print, in January last,
Entitled A Letter writ by Mijn Here Fagel Pensioner of Holland to Mr James
Stewart Advocate, giving an account of the Prince and Princess of Orange's
thoughts concerning the Repeal of the Tests, and of the Penal Laws; that
reflecting on my own meanness, with the far different figure that your Lordship
makes in the World, and withal considering the remoteness of the occasion given
for that Letter, the high and tender import of the matters therein treated,
with the obvious Singularity of such a foreign Interposition, beyond all
ordinary lines and rules, I was, at first inclined to dis-believe my own Eyes.

True it is, that after my return into England in July last, I was so well
satisfied with what I observed of his Majesty's sincere Intention, and steady
Resolution, to perfect the Settlement of our Religious Liberty by a Legal and
Perpetual Establishment, (which I doubted not would calm the late violent
disstractions of these Kingdoms, and in the end overcome that froward
opposition which remains in some Spirits, too narrow for such a Blessing) that
I thought I could not, in my little Sphere, do a piece of better Service both
to God and Man, than to contribute my small endeavors, toward the advancing
of so good a Work, and particularly, toward the removing of some mistakes and
jealousies, which I knew to be entertained in those parts that I had left.

For this end, having obtained leave to write to a private Friend, who I judged
might have opportunity to represent any thing I could say, to the best
advantage, I did by several Letters directed to him (for to your Lordship I
neither sent nor directed any, as looking upon that to be a thing not only too
presumtuous, but also most improper, and against which I was expressly
cautioned) declare in what a different posture I had found things in these
Kingdoms, from what I and others had believed them, while I was in Holland; and
having in two of them especially, (the only Letters intended for communication)
laid down for my ground his Majesty's Sincerity in all this affair, evident not
only by his Royal Word, but even demonstrable by things themselves, I proceeded
to evince by a few Arguments the Equity and Expediency of repealing both Tests
and Penal Laws, and that with a peculiar regard to the Prince and Princess of
Orange's interest.

And being grieved in my self at the consideration of their Highnesses
Reluctance to the thing, and Uneasiness about it, especially as to the Repeal
of the Test; and wishing, as I do still, that from the beginning they had
complied more heartily with his Majesty's pleasure for the establishing of this
Liberty, and that they would yet resolve to concur with him in it, or that at
least the obstruction of their known Dissent might be removed; I adventured to
add the best perswasives I could think on for that effect; desiring in the end
that what I had written should be imparted to Friends, and chiefly to those at
the Hague, (whereof I hope your Lordship is still One, according to the honor
you were pleased to allow me while I was there) for their more full Information
and Satisfaction. And this, to the best of my remembrance, is the Sum and
Substance of all I writ on that occasion.

To this, after some waiting, I had my Friends Answer, telling me that he had
conferred with you upon the Subject, and found that the Prince had already
declared himself in these matters, and particularly to the Lord Albeville His
Majesty's Envoy; and that He was not to be moved to go any greater length in
them than he had then expressed. That Answer having drawn from me a Return of
some more earnest Expressions of my grief for so great an unhappiness, I
resolved to insist no further. Only my Friend insinuating that he had still
hopes to get a more distinct and satisfying Answer from a better hand, (tho
without naming any person) I attended the issue: And accordingly about the
beginning of November (almost three Months after my first Writing) he sent me a
Letter from your Lordship writ in Latin; with an English Version.

Those I received at London: And acknowledge with all humility the singular
Honor you were pleased to do me therein; which on any other occasion I should
certainly have expressed my sense of, with all readiness. But finding them to
be Letters directly from your Lordship, (to whom I had not written) and that
they contained an account of their Highnesses thoughts, about the Repeal of the
Tests and Penal Laws, (which I had not desired) together with your own
Reasonings in justification thereof; Both your public Character, and the
matters treated, moved me to put them immediately out of my hands, in the most
safe and dutiful manner; resolving rather to refer my self to the knowledge
that some persons had of my ways, for clearing the mistake insinuated in the
entry of your Letter, (as if I had presumed to write to you, or for such a
purpose) than to pursue with more noise an explication of what I thought would
proceed no further. Yet my Friend advising me, by the next Post after that
which brought your Letter, that when you gave it to him, you told him you had
given out a Copy or two to Friends there; And my Apprehensions suggesting that
a Letter, so dilligently and accurately writ upon so slender an occasion, might
either have a further prospect, or at least be further made use of, I
immediately returned him answer, that, tho I was confident you were far from
interposing in his Majesty's affairs, by causing any thing to be printed to his
Disservice, and no less assured that you would not suffer so obscure a name as
mine to be unnecessarily heard of in so great matters, yet I knew how ready
some persons in your Parts were to lay hold on any thing that might cross his
Majesty's purpose for the Establishing of this Liberty; and therefore I
entreated him to use his utmost endeavors for the prevention thereof. And
accordingly I had his return, that though he feared you were no more Master of
the Copies you had given out, yet as to my private Letters, writ so familiarly
and ingenuously to himself, he would undoubtedly secure them.

So that truly when I first saw the printed Letter above mentioned, and
perceived by the Impression that it was done in Holland, I did not doubt but it
was done without your Lordships privity, and therefore laid it aside without
once Reading it.

But now that there is come abroad a new Print in your Lordships name, (upon
what provocation I know not) which plainly affirms That you were very earnestly
desired by me to write what were the Prince and Princess of Orange's thoughts,
concerning the Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws, and that it was intimated
to you that these pressing desires were made by his Majesty's Knowledge and
Allowance; I can no longer forbear, for the vindication of his Majesty's
Honor, and my own Duty, to crave leave to say, with all submission, that the
difference of this Account from what I have above represented, (and which I am
sure is true in every point) must of necessity flow from some mistake in the
Report you have had of my Letters. For since I did not write any Letter to your
self, and that my writing to my Friend was not out of any curiosity to know
their Highnesses thoughts about the Repealing of Penal Laws and Tests, (which
it is evident I already knew sufficiently, and which had been, as you well say,
before particularly signified to the Marquess of Albeville) But for a quite
different purpose, as I have before ingenuously represented it; How could his
Majesty's Knowledge and Allowance be avouched by me for that which was not? It
is true, I find it said in one of mine, That what I writ on the nineteenth of
July was writ not only with Permission, but according to his Majesty's mind
sufficiently expressed. And this may also have been elsewhere repeated in other
terms. But its as true that the intent and meaning of those words was only to
enforce some Arguments I had used for Liberty, which my Friend inclined to
think I had too confidently advanced; and no ways to assume to my self an
authority for writing what I really neither had writ, nor intended to write.
There being nothing more certain than that, although his Majesty might have
permitted me, as he does many others, to use my little endeavors for the
advancing of his Service, yet it was never either thought by my self, or moved
to me by any other, to write to your Lordship, or to any other Person, either
in his Majesty's name, (a presumption and indecency which I cann ot mention
without blushing) or in the name of any of his Secretaries: And neither was
there the least necessity to inquire into their Highnesses thoughts in the
aforesaid matter, since they were already perfectly known, and to none more
distinctly than to his Majesty himself, as all my Letters do very plainly
suppose.

Seeing therefore that this last Print does, in several passages, intimate that
your Letter of the Fourth of November was not only a true Letter, but published
by your order, (tho I know not why it should insinuate as if that Letter had
been first printed in England) and that any thing relating to me is manifestly
extrinsick to the point of the reality of your Letter; I cannot but again in
all humility wish that Your Lordship had forborne to press so hard upon me, for
justifying a Publication which evidently was a pure Act of your own free
choice, and no doubt calculated for a far different End than what was by me
intended.

But since I have acknowledged that you did me the honor to write to me, and
that you now own the printed Copy to be the true Copy of what was so writ, and
thereby as it were call me to consider it more particularly; I shall no longer
decline the liberty you allow me, but freely explain my thoughts upon it in all
sincerity; and submit them to your profound Judgment; Especially seeing it is
in order to no other Ends than those I formerly proposed, and which I am
persuaded You approve as much as I do.

What you declare to be their Highnesses thoughts and opinion, concerning the
Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, as it was not the Subject of my Inquiry, so
is it above the Sphere of my Consideration; only seeing They seem to be under
no restraint, as to a full compliance with his Majesty's design, except from
their care of the Security of the Protestant Religion, I am not without hopes
that, when they shall have considered his Majesty's no less express Purpose for
the Establishment of Liberty, (the only Secular Security and Advantage that
Gods Religion requires) than for the procuring of the aforesaid Repeal in order
to Men's just Relief, Their Highnesses second Thoughts may yet happily advance,
and ripen so fair an Appearance.

But the Question, as by me formerly stated, was precisely, Whether all
Protestant Dissenters ought not to concur with his Majesty, by contributing
their best Endeavors to have the Penal Laws in matters of Religion and
Conscience abrogated, and the present Liberty legally Established and Fixed; And
whether, if his Majesty should in Favor of his Roman Catholic Subjects think
fit to make the abrogating of the Test a condition of the continuance of his
Grant of Liberty, He ought not in this also to be readily gratified, for so
great a Favor. Now your Agreement as to the entire abrogation of all Penal
Coercive Laws is altogether becoming your Sound Judgment and Christian Charity.
Your Haesitation seems to be about the Law of the Test, and those other Laws
made for excluding RomanCatholicks from Public Trusts, and securing the
Protestant Religion; to the repeal whereof you think no Protestant can in
Conscience consent. And the sum and force of all your Reasonings resolves into
this; That the Laws for the Test and disabling Roman Cotholicks to enjoy
Public Trusts contain no Severities against them, nor import any wrong that
any who cannot comply with their Conditions ought justly to complain of; But
that they were fairly made according to the Custom of all Christian States, and
the very Natural Right of all Politic Bodies, who have ever made Laws for
securing the public established Religion, and their own Safety, by excluding
the Enemies thereof from all Public Employments. And the Law for the Test
being of this Sort, you conclude that the Repeal of it would take away all the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and expose the Nation to most certain
Danger; Because All Governors do naturally favor those of their own Religion;
and the way of Roman Catholics is so unequal toward Protestants, that it must
be concluded they would never agree with them in the joynt-administration of
Public Trusts, but would press his Majesty in Conscience until they were
possessed of All, even to the depriving Protestants of the Support of the Law,
and Protection of the Magistrate. So that on the one hand it is indeed manifest
by the whole substance of your Discourse That, if the Repeal of the Test and
Admission of Roman Catholics to Public Employments do take away all the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and expose it to Ruin; then no true
Protestant ought to consent to it: But on the other hand it follows no less
evidently, That if it can be showed that the Protestant Religion may be
sufficiently secured without the Law of the Test, and moreover that the Legal
Establishment of the present Liberty (as designed by his Majesty) does in all
probability tend more to the Advantage than Prejudice of the Protestant
Religion; then they both may, and ought to do it.

But because the matters in hand do, above all others, require a clear and
sound mind, free from all prejudice and pre-possession, and are not to be
determined by general rules only and abstract notions, but ought to be examined
with a just exactness in all their circumstances; Before I go any further, I
must entreat you (in the first place) to remember the solid Reflection you make
in your Letter upon the Spirituality and Heavenliness of the Christian
Religion: Which I am sure, if duly considered and improved, would not only
convince others, as it does you, of the absurdity of all forcible and
compulsory methods for its advancement, but also compose and sweeten Men's
minds, and thereby prepare them to a more clear understanding and equitable
determination of the point in Controversy.

That Faith and Obedience toward God (which are only so far acceptable to him,
so they proceed from a willing mind) cannot be constrained, without an open
mockery of God, and violence to the rights of Men, is a plain dictate of
Reason, which all Times and Dispensations have acknowledged. But more
especially that gentle Spirit of the Gospel, which Christ so often owns and
recommends, and whose Characters are so visible in all his own and his Apostles
Practices, seems to carry the thing yet a greater length. I need not put you in
mind that the Gospel was not sent (as the Law) unto One, but unto All Nations;
that our Lord, by asserting his Kingdom not to be of this World, does not only
assure to all men their Civil Rights, as then by them possessed, but in my
opinion removes its Administration further than is commonly supposed from all
Secular Mixtures; And that God's Choice of the Foolishness and Weakness of Men
for its Propagation (design edly and expressly to the greater commendation of
the power of his Grace) does very probably supercede much of that humane
Caution which men have thought fit, but never with any Success, to add to his
better Counsel. But undoubtedly if any man seriously ponders how the Gospel at
first set out, and how by its own pure and spiritual Weapons, without any
assistance of men's Laws, it prospered, to the subduing of the World; and at
the same time call to mind that certain Truth, That every thing is best
preserved by the same Causes that produced it; He will hardly be induced to
think that these Exclusive Laws, which you say are now so Customary in all
Christian Kingdoms and States, are indeed so necessary as is imagined for the
Conservation and Security of Religion. For my part, when I reflect on plain
matter of Fact, viz. That when the Gospel did at first get footing in Cities or
Kingdoms, and its Disciples came afterward to be persecuted by the Government
and Body of the People, still Pagan, (it may be by Tests as well as other Penal
Laws) they did not lay the stress of their Apologies upon the Truth of their
Profession (which they knew their Persecutors rejected) but only upon their
Civil Rights and Liberties, as Men; I cannot but think it very unjustifiable
for the same Persons, or others of the same Persuasion (when afterward grown
more numerous and powerful) to retaliate the same dealing to their old
Adversaries. But, not to press too hard upon these Excluding Laws, which I
believe many, thinking piously that Gods Gift deserved their best care, have
introduced in great sincerity; I shall only add, that as it is evident they
were never any where enacted for the Preservation of Religion, until Religion
had first prevailed and done its greatest work, So the best Effects they have
ever produced, have always been, either to make Hypocritical Converts, or else
to distinguish, irritate, and unite into a Factious Obstinacy, such as in
probability would sooner have yielded to a more equal and moderate Treatment.
But the best of it is, That tho a Ruling Clergy, (the worst of Politicians)
have always been observed to be most forward to procure such Sanctions, Yet are
they still but Human Laws and Expedients, and therefore absolutely at the
disposal of the same Powers that made them.

But in the next place, Since you have been pleased to interpose so far in our
Affairs, let me now entreat you to enlarge your Thoughts a little further upon
our present Circumstances. The King is our Sovereign; And his Majesty's
Persuasion and Religion, with what he has already done, and may hereafter do,
as also what he designs to have done in Parliament touching this Liberty, are
su^^^ently known: Nor are you altogether a Stranger to the State of Religion,
the Parties who compose it, the Laws made about it, and the Effects they have
produced, within these Kingdoms. Now for my part, I heartily wish that the
Church of England had always been as much Protestant as at present she pretends
to be; That now, when she has leisure, She may no less zealously mind and
cleave to her own Doctrine, and its sincere Lovers, than sometime we have seen
her violent for her Ceremonies, and angry at Men that were not of her Fashion;
and, what ever may be the issue of things, That all Protestant Dissenters may
always love her more (if more be possible) for our agreement in Substantials,
than she has hated and persecuted them for their disagreement in
Circumstantials. But considering what opinion some Men have entertained about
the good effects of these Penal and Exclusive Laws, And, on the contrary, what
Sufferings many Thousands of Protestants have in all times undergone, and
should still in all appearance have undergone by them, even to their utter
undoing, if his Majesty had not graciously vouchsafed to hinder it; And
observing at the same time how improbable, or rather impossible, it is that the
Church of England, if in Power, should either remain without those Laws, or
suffer those Laws to remain without Execution; I must humbly crave leave to
say, that for Protestant Dissenters to neglect the present opportunity, and not
to comply with his Majesty's pleasure to have them totally and for ever
abrogated, is, in my opinion, no better than to reject the Goodness of God, and
to abandon themselves to their Adversaries. It has been the fate of these
Kingdoms since the first beginning of our Reformation, that all Parties,
Papist, Protestant, Prelate, Presbyterian, and Independent also, have in their
several turns, both practiced Persecution and repented their doing it: And now
of late when the last Scene was the blackest, and men's troubles were further
hightened by their apprehensions of what was to come, It has pleased God to
raise us up a Prince, Who tho he be of another Persuasion, and had (as all
thinking men must grant) the fairest advantage to promote it, by pnrsuing only
those methods which he found ready disposed to his hand; yet has been pleased,
out of his just consideration of the true Rights of God and Man, and his tender
and fatherly care of all his People, to deliver us out of bondage, and
introduce us into a State of Christian Liberty. This as it is his Majesty's
peculiar glory, denied to all his predecessors, ought the rather to be closed
withal by his People. And surely we are not justly blamable, if neither the
unhappy relics of old Prejudices, nor present Jealousies, nor even future
Hopes, do hinder us from embracing the present opportunity of securing to our
selves and to our posterity so great a Blessing.

The greatest part of what I have here said I know you will readily assent to,
and that it is only the Law of the Test, (which you judge to be both righteous
and necessary) that you would have still maintained. And therefore (referring
my full Answer upon that head to its proper place) I shall only here again put
you in mind that the King is our Sovereign, whose power goes far, both as to
the bestowing of Public Employments, and also as to the continuing or
restraining of our present Liberty at his pleasure; That it is to me
unaccountable how any Protestant should think the enjoyment of our present
Liberty not to be more valuable than all our exclusive Laws; and that, as I
have above given a hint of my own sense of all such human cautions, so I hope
it will easily be made appear, that there is neither that security in the Test
nor danger in its Repeal, which some Men, pretending in show to keep up the
Test against Roman Catholics, but intending in reallity to keep up the Penal
Laws against Protestant Dissenters, would gladly have you and other Strangers
to believe, on their bare assertion.

But further yet, I would again humbly beseech you to observe, that it is not a
simple Repeal of Tests and Penal Laws that his Majesty proposes, but really and
principally the Establishment of an equal and fair Liberty; which is the only
Secular Advantage, as I have already said, that true Religion requires. Men
talk ordinarily of the repeal of Tests and Penal Laws, as if that were the only
thing intended: And thereupon their Minds are immediately over-clouded with
this Prejudice; That the Protestant Religion must needs be thereby divested of
all Legal Security. Whereas on the other hand, if they would take notice how
careful His Majesty has been in His first Proclamation, and in His Answer to
most of the Addresses, to declare himself for such a just and secure Liberty of
Conscience as may for ever set us free from Persecutions and Impositions, and
how, in His late Proclamation of the Twenty seventh of April last, He
publishes his Resolution to use his utmost endeavors to establish Liberty of
Conscience on such just and equal Foundations as will render it unalterable,
and secure to all People the free exercise of their Religion for ever; They
might easily rest satisfied that the Protestant Religion is to lose none of the
Security she now enjoys, by all that is intended; save only the power of
Persecuting and Imposing upon others, which you your self do Condemn.

It is true, you think the imposing of Tests upon all Persons in public
Employments is no undue Imposition. But whether it be so or not, and whether
the Law of the Test be that great and indispensible Security of the Protestant
Religion which you endeavor to make it, I shall now go on to consider. And
because in effect nothing can be added to what has been so fully said, and
often repeated, by others, on this Subject, I shall do it with all possible
brevity.

You say then against the repeal of the Law of the Test, and other exclusive
Laws; First, That they contain no unjust Severity. 2dly, That such Laws are
agreeable to the Right and Rules of all Kingdoms and Civil Societies, and are
used in all Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths. And 3dly, That they are the
chief Security of the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms, and that the
taking them away would expose both the Protestant Religion and the People of
these Kingdoms to Danger and Ruin.

As to the first, whether the exclusive Laws contain any unjust Severity I
shall not much contend. It is known that within these few Years we have had in
England Tests of several Fashions, and for diverse Persuasions, and that some of
them have been so severe as to throw Men not only out of public Employments,
but out of their private Callings, and so to deprive them of their Daily Bread.
A Man may also adventure to say that, all things duly weighed, Those pretended
pious and political Tests have in our real Experience been more prejudicial to
the true Interest of Religion, and the Peace and Welfare of these Nations,
than ever their total Repeal can, in the most strained rational Conjecture, be
hurtful to either of them. So strange and unaccountable a thing is this humor
of Testing.

But seeing you seem to confine your self to the Test against Roman Catholics
appointed principally for the two Houses of Parliament, I shall add more
particularly; First, that according to what I have above touched, this appears
to be but an extraneous unwarranted human Caution, and that it may justly be
thought strange that, after Religion had through its own heavenly Power and
Methods prevailed against all the human Laws, Councils, and other hindrances
that stood in its way, Men should relaps, from such Divine Grounds of
Confidence, to their own weak Contrivances, for its support and continuance:
And further, that, however innocent you may now judge this Injunction to be;
Take the Test, or quit all public Employments; Yet I am fully assured, that,
If in the Primitive times a Prince or other Magistrate, turning Christian, had,
for the better Conservation of his Religion, set forth an Edict to his still
Pagan Subjects, commanding them to Turn from vain Idols to serve the Living and
True God, or else to forsake all public Places and Trusts, He would have been
Condemned for it by Christ and all his Apostles.

Secondly, That the effects of such Exclusions in all times have been no better
than their Causes; and that, instead of preserving and securing our Religion,
they have only brought into it hypocritical and false Converts, or provoked
those that were rejected to a more froward Obstinacy, and worse Practices, who
otherwise might have been gained by Gentleness and Patience, which are the
genuine Methods of true Christianity.

And Thirdly, That those who by Birthright have a real Title to all the
Honors and Privileges of Peerage, And even All Men, Who, upon the like
ground, do naturally judge that they have at least an equal right of access to
Places and Preferments in the Societies whereof they are Members with others of
their Degree and Quality, will never be persuaded to think that there is no
unjust Severity in those excluding Laws which deprive them either of their
acknowledged Privilege, or no less valuable Pretensions. And since you are
pleased to tell us That it is their Highnesses Judgment, That no man should be
ill used because he differs from the Public and Established Religion, I
question a little how you can reconcile the deposing of Peers, and civil
Excommunication of all others, (which I am sure is no good usage) for not
taking the Test, to so true and honest a Judgment. It is easy for men who have
either got themselves into public Places, or got above the desire of such
Places by a true Christian Mortification, to say with you, That it is but a
small, if indeed any, Advantage to have a share in the Government. But, on the
other hand, If it be considered that, As hundreds of Freemen can willingly
confine themselves to the narrow corner of a private House, who yet could not
endure to be imprisoned in a Palace, So it is the Exclusion, especially when
looked upon as Causeless and Unjust, that in this Case is really grievous, I am
persuaded no impartial man will undertake to vindicate the Laws that enacted it
from a great measure of Severity. And this I say from so disinteressed and so
unbyassed a Judgment, that, for my own part, I sincerely protest that I am not
only well content with my present Condition, but (if it might in any sort
facilitate his Majesty's Christian design of Liberty) I would also readily
consent that all Dissenters, and my self amongst the rest, should be made
incapable of all the more tempting public Employments for ever.

But for justifying of these exclusive Laws, you say in the second place, That
they are agreeable to the Right and Rules of all Kingdoms and Civil Societies,
to whom it was never denied to make Laws for their own safety, and for that end
to prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they judge necessary for all
that shall bear public Employments. Now that all Governors may and ought to
make rational and just Laws for their safety, and for the due conferring of
their public Employments, is in my mind so little to be doubted, that it
needed not at all to have been mentioned. The only Speculation proper for our
case is, Whether These Exclusive Laws upon the account of difference in
Religion, be either warrantable or profitable. And seeing that I have already
told you that they not only incroach upon Men's natural and civil Rights and
Liberties, the principal Ends of Government, but do also in some sort bring a
constraint upon the Profession of the Truth, which ought to be most free, and
which the Apostle expressly will have to stand not in the Wisdom of Man (such
as Penal Laws and Tests are) but in the Power of God, or in the same spiritual
and heavenly means whereby it was first established and is undoubtedly best
preserved, I shall not trouble you with Repetitions. I see you add that such
Laws have also been and are used in all Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths;
and you might as truly have subjoyned, That even Protestants, when prevalent,
do by their Practices justify Roman Catholics in that very point for which
they condemn them in their Discourses. But tho I confess that there is nothing
more natural than for Men to be anxiously careful to preserve what they esteem,
and in this their anxiety to judge their own way the best, especially when
either Passion or Self-interest enter into the deliberation; Yet considering
the experience we have had of the fruitlesness of these Exclusions, and that
there is nothing more becoming Men professing to be assured that their Religion
is Christ's true Religion, than to rest upon the same methods for its
conservation which he, who had the choice of all, thought only fit to make use
of for its propagation; and considering also that it has pleased God so to
order things, that his Majesty (the Head and Fountain of the Government) is of
a different persuasion from the main Body of the People, and so might justly
turn all this your reasoning against us; I can scarce forbear to wonder that
Men should refuse the fair Equality which he proposes. Had it been the Divine
Will that his Majesty and his People had agreed in the same Profession, it is
more than probable that, whatever might have been his Majesty's Indulgent
disposition the present Question would not have been moved. But since this is
not our case, and that the Kingdom and Government are certainly in his Hands, I
must crave leave to say that your Arguments from the Rights and Customs, and
from the providencial Councils of all Governments, makes more against you than
for you; and that I am very inclinable to believe that if the Sovereign Power
were as much Roman Catholic in your Provinces as it is with us, it would
produce suitable Effects. And therefore, since your Argument rather commends
his Majesty's gracious Condescension, than any way impugns his Design, I cannot
but wish that, in a matter in itself so indifferent, it may accordingly
persuade all Men to a just compliance.

But because the Indifferency I here mention is that which you can hardly bear,
and that the force of all your Reasonings lies in the third Point, viz. That
these Exclusive Laws are the chief Security of the Protestant Religion, and
that the taking them away would expose the Protestant Religion, and the People
of these Kingdoms, to Danger and Ruin, I shall now proceed to examine more
closely what you are pleased to say upon it: Not doubting, in the mean while,
but we are fully agreed that the true and principal Security of the Protestant
Religion consists in its being the immovable Truth of God, which if well laid
to Heart would contribute more to its Preservation than all the Tests and Penal
Laws in the World; And in treating you still to remember that it is not a bare
Repeal of Penal Laws and Tests that his Majesty designs, but the sure and firm
Establishment of Liberty, (the only secular Advantage, as I have often said,
that Gods Truth requires) Which if rightly understood, and if a just
distinction were made between the free Enjoyment of Civil Rights (the proper
Object and End of Government) and that Liberty of Conscience in matters of
Religion over which God has reserved to himself the incommunicable Right, would
quickly bring the World to the happiest State that it can ever attain to. These
things, I say, being premised, I proceed to observe what you say for making out
your Assertion, viz. That the taking away of these Exclusive Laws would bring
Roman Catholics into both Houses of Parliament and all other public
Employments; That in these Employments they would not agree with Protestants;
But that because of their contrary Principles, Jealousies would arise, which
his Majesty would not be able to repress; And that there is a great difference
between Roman Catholics and Protestants, because the former Exclude, Suppress
and Persecute, where ever they can do it safely; And if they were admitted into
Trusts they would not only favor their own Religion, as all Menin Power do,
but it would not be easy for the King to resist them, because they would press
him in point of Conscience; and that then Protestants would want all Support of
Law, and Encouragement from the Magistrates.

This way of Reasoning, so manifestly proceeding from an over anxious
Jealousy, must needs be so much the less Satisfactory, in that it is obvious
to all Men how much that cross and froward Humor is disposed to convert the
most proper Antidotes for its Cure, into the Nourishment of its Malady.

But more particularly, First, It is evident that the strength of all objected,
tho in softer Expressions, Is That this design of Liberty is only pretended and
carried on for the better advancement of Popery. But, seeing his Majesty has
in this matter declared the uprightness of his Intentions with the clearest and
most forcible Expressions, delivered with all the binding Circumstances of a
full Assurance, which from a Prince of his Veracity and Firmness may be
sufficient to convince the most Incredulous, and also confirmed the Sincerity
of his Purpose by the Evidence of things incapable of any consistency with the
Design suspected, what place can be found for so improbable a Suggestion? For
it being undeniably evident to all considering Men that the plain contrary
Methods to what his Majesty now practices had been the most direct and
effectual Ones for the introducing of Popery; and that the pressing and
carrying on the Execution of Penal Laws, begun to his Hand, might in all human
appearance have broken and undone that Party which has in all times been judged
remotest from, and most Opposite and Zealous against Popery; and so have left
that other Party, the Church of England, (who after the acting of such an
unchristian Persecution, would never have been strong enough nor have had the
Hearts to endure the like, and whose sequacious Temper in matters of Religion,
falling in with the Interest of their Livings and Dignities, may abundantly be
seen in our Records) to be the only feeble Defenders of Protestancy, already
more than half ruined; Ought not his Majesty's Moderate and Generous Deportment
so contrary to those Methods for ever free Him from so foul a Suspicion? This
real and most sensible Demonstration of his Majesty's Truth and Sincerity is so
much the more to be regarded, in that it is known how His entry into the
Government was fortified with the suppressing of Insurrections; which not only
might have rendered His Power more terrible, and provoked Him to greater
Severities, but also might have been made use of to have involved one way or
other (no new thing in the World) a great part of the Dissenters in the Fate
and Ruin of those broken Parties.

But, Secondly, although you say There is a great difference betwixt Roman
Catholics and Protestants in the business of Persecution, Yet in the present
Controversy, I must beg leave of you, and all Protestants, to say that this
comes ill from those of the Church of England, whose Exclusions, Suppressions
and Persecutions, (to use your own terms) all things considered, are in the
Judgment of many sober People more Unchristian (tho perhaps not so Severe) than
any of those deplorable Instances which you say are in many places abroad this
Day before our Eyes. It is true that Strangers, having easier opportunity to
know the Doctrine of the Church of England, agreeing with that of the best
Protestants, than to observe their dealings with their Dissenting Brethren for
the rejecting of her Ceremonies, can scarce think it possible that this
Difference should have produced so Violent a Persecution; especially against
such who immediately before had done them the greatest Service, in contributing
so readily to the means of their Restitution. And it is true also that some of
that Communion, especially in your Parts, (as appears by their late Prints) do
endeavor to Apologize for their former Rigours and Cruelties, partly by
exclaiming against Persecution, and partly by suggesting that the late
Severities used against Dissenters were set on Foot by a Popish Party and
Design at Court, on purpose to increase their Number and render them more
unquiet, that so the Parliament might have been constrained to grant a general
Toleration wherein the Roman Catholics might be included; The great Design of
this Mystery. But the first of those Excuses being now too late, and the other
being false, and visibly affected; I cannot but still wish that this their
extraordinary Zeal for the Exclusion of Roman Catholics be not a mere effect
of their itch after their former Power and Practice of Persecuting Protestant
Dissenters; and withal that the Remembrance of our late Sufferings may put
Protestants as well as Roman Catholics in mind of their Failings, to the end
that all Parties may become more sober and averse to all manner of Persecution
for ever.

Thirdly, Seeing you lay the greatest stress of your Argument upon the hazard
that you pretend lies in the making of Roman Catholics capable of, and giving
them Entry into public Employments, and particularly to take places in both
Houses of Parliament, I entreat you to observe that it is evident in point of
fact, that Roman Catholics are already in many Public Employments, and that
those Employments will always depend, as they have ever depended, upon the
pleasure of the Prince Regnant: So that considering how it is with us at this
present, any Man that is possessed with this Fear ought rather to rejoice then
to be grieved at his Majesty's design of Liberty; Because it plainly carries a
Relief against this Apprehension, by opening a Door to Dissenting Protestants
also to enter into such Employments, who are not forward to do it while the
restraining Laws, that lie upon them also, remain in force. And as his Majesty
has already begun to show his Equality in conferring of Public Employments as
well on Dissenters as on Roman Catholics, the taking away of those Laws will
certainly induce Him to a yet greater Freedom in that particular. Whereas on
the contrary, it is more than probable that the refusing to gratify Him in
that Repeal, may, instead of hindering Roman Catholics to be further employed
in Public Trusts, rather provoke Him by the disobligation to intend the thing
more vigorously; and also irritate that whole Party, (who must needs look upon
this Denial for the present as a Threatening for the future) to more
extraordinary and worse Courses. And as to what is commonly said, that the
keeping up of the Test will at least be a Bar to many, who otherwise might be
tempted to turn by the Bait of a good Employment; as also that it will be some
Restraint upon such as are advanced, and make them act moderately; I must crave
leave to say that the contrary is to me far more probable: For whosoever can be
supposed capable to turn for a place, will certainly time his turn, so as that
it may have most of Merit; and consequently will rather seek to recommend
himself by a frank reliance upon the Kings Declaration for Liberty, than come
in sneakingly afterward under the Security of the desired Repeal; Especially
when it cannot be doubted but that, both by the Fundamental Laws of Government,
and also by the force of his Majesty's Prerogative, from which no Successor
will willingly derogate, those that are or shall be employed are in all Events
secured; And that at least it is incontravertibly as safe for a Man to accept
of a public Employment as to go to a Conventicle.

Fourthly, The most material Consideration on this Point seems to be much by
you neglected, viz. That we are not in the condition of an absolute free
choice, but under the limited offer of a plain alternative, I mean, Either that
the present Liberty shall be continued on condition that the restraints of
Tests be also taken off from Roman Catholics; or else, if this be denied, that
the other shall at least become more precarious. Now, whether a true
Protestant, having the fear of God, (as you express it) in this Conjuncture,
and in a just view of all our Circumstances, may not very allowably think that
the free Liberty of the Gospel (as being Gods way) is more valuable, as to the
Interest of the Protestant Religion, than the exclusion of a few Roman
Catholics from having Place in Parliament, (for to this narrow Compass we see
it plainly brought) which is but Man's way; and whether this last may not well
be consented to, for the establishing of the first, let all Impartial Men
judge. You tell us that If the Protestant Dissenters should, upon this acceunt,
be deprived of their Libetty, the Roman Catholics are only to blame for it;
Who, rather than be restrained from having a share in the Government, do choose
to have both themselves and the Protestant Dissenters ly still under the weight
of the Penal Laws. But if the proposal made to the Dissenters be fair, and
their compliance not sinful, you must of necessity grant that for them to be
dispossessed of their Liberty (the great concern of their Souls, and the best
method of supporting true Religion) is but poorly repaired, by telling them
that the Roman Catholics are to blame for it.

Fifthly, Your frequent supposing That the Roman Catholics will be still
attemping to overturn the Protestant Religion, and disturb the Kingdoms Peace,
and that they will get into all places of Trust, and press the King in
Conscience, and give Him no rest until they accomplish their Designs, appear to
me to be too manifest improvements of a melancholy Jealousy. For, as has been
often said, It is not a simple Repeal of Penal Laws and Tests, but the
Establishment of an equal Liberty, whereby the Protestant as well as the Roman
Catholic may be secured against all Persecution, that his Majesty designs. So
that it is not possible that you should judge the Repeal of the Test to be the
licensing of Roman Catholics to attempt the ruin of the Protestant Religion,
unless you think that the Protestant Religion can never by Law be secured
against the attempts of others, if it be not at the same time armed with a
Power to persecute them.

Sixthly, You tell us, That Roman Catholics are not shut out amongst you from
Military Employments, and that it had been hard to have done it; both because
the good Services they did you in the Wars for defense of your Liberty deserved
that Recompense; and because their Numbers being but few, any Inconvenience
arising from their admission might easily be prevented. Now by this you plainly
acknowledge that this whole matter is subject to a Rational Deliberation, and
is to be determined by the weighing the Conveniences and Inconveniences that
attend such an Admission or Exclusion, without entering into any deeper
reflection, about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness thereof. And further, I must
tell you that his Majesty has not only the same Considerations that you mention
to move Him in Favor of his Roman Catholic Subjects, but, all things
considered, I think it may very well be asserted that the admitting of Roman
Catholics with you to Military Employments is much more unnecessary, than the
admitting of them with us to place in Parliament (upon the Conditions declared)
can be dangerous; and that if the Adventure be on this side more hazardous, yet
it it compensated with counterbalancing Advantages, that render it much more
excusable than your unnecessary Practice.

Seventhly, Tho you are pleased according to your ordinary Prudence and
Moderation to propose your Fears with much Modesty, yet others there are in
your Parts, as well as here, who speak out the Devices of their own
Imaginations more plainly, and tell us That if the Test were taken away, his
Majesty might by a new Creation of Peers, and by bold Returns into the House of
Commons, get a Parliament of such a Temper as would absolutely forbid the
Exercise of the Protestant Religion, Revive the Act De Comburendo and make yet
greater Alterations in the Government. But how vain and groundless, to say no
worse, these Apprehensions are may appear by what his Majesty has already done
in putting a stop to our late Persecution; which in the opinion of many might
have carried on that change in Religion more effectually (because more easily
and insensibly) than the Act De Comburendo, and all the Fires that it kindled.
Besides, whatever be the Security that Men ascribe to these Excluding Laws, it
is only from the force they have as Acts of Parliament that it arises. Why then
should not the same force of a Law as well secure the Protestant Religion in
its just Liberty, without the Power of persecuting, as now its thought to do
with it? And as for the Facility the King may have to fill both Houses with
Roman Catholics, when the Test shall be abrogated, Why may he not as well
first fill them in that manner, and abrogate it afterward? For it is judged by
many to be no less than a Fundamental in our Government that the King's Call,
with the Peoples Choice, and the Lords and Commons Assembling thereupon with
his Majesty's Approbation, are all the Essentialls of a Parliament; and that no
Parliament can so pre-engage and limit another, by any Act or Oath, that it
cannot Act as a Parliament until it first comply therewithal. If such a Power
of Limitation were admitted, One Parliament might, by an Oath framed for the
purpose, restrain, weaken, and even make void the Power of all succeeding
Parliaments for ever. So long indeed as Oaths and Tests appointed by Acts of
Parliament do stand unrepealed, they are undoubtedly binding. But to think that
One Parliament can so bind up and prescribe Rules to Another, that, tho it may
repeal the very Act so binding and prescribing, yet it has not Power to do so
till first it submit it self by Oath unto the Rules prescribed (and then
perjure it self by the Repeal) is an Absurdity against the very Essence of
Parliaments.

But Lastly, As matters ought not to be strained on either side, (especially
when all things concur on his Majesty's part to persuade to a fair and right
understanding, in order to the establishing of Peace, securing of Right and
Property, and the putting an end to our so unnatural and unchristian
Persecutions) So it cannot be doubted by any discerning Person, that the
present Security of the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms does scarce at
all depend on either Penal Laws or Tests, but principally on his Majesty's
Wisdom and Moderation, on the Constitution of our Government, and on those just
Arguments for mutual Forbearance, which our present Circumstances do forcibly
suggest to all Men, of all Parties, that are capable to understand their own
Interest, and have not wholly abandoned the care of it. Seeing therefore that it
remains evident, from what has been said, that all these Exclusive Laws upon
account of Religion, however Lewd they may be called, are no ways Evangelical;
and (...) they may have been at first piously intended for the Conservation of
Religion, and for the public safety, yet in the event they have always proved
unprofitable and unpolitick; And seeing also that all the Jealousies so
industriously raised to obstruct his Majesty's present Design of Liberty are
sufficiently removed, not only by the assurance of his Royal Word, and the
manifest engagement of his Honor, but by the demonstrative Evidence that lies
in the circumstances of things themselves, I cannot but heartily wish that all
Men, and above all their Highnesses, may give their effectual concurrence to so
good and great a work. It is I confess, as you say, very natural for All
persons in Power to favor those of their own Religion: And this in my Opinion
ought to oblige us to make the fairest construction of what his Majesty does in
behalf of those that are of his. But it must also be acknowledged that it is a
very extraordinary, and a most noble and generous Disposition, in his Majesty,
to be so gentle and indulgent to those of his Subjects that are of a different
Religion from his: And that ought to beget in us an entire confidence in what
he promises, and persuade all his Subjects, of what Profession soever, to rest
assured both of a firm Support in the designed Law of Liberty, and of a
favorable Protection in his Majesty's Authority.

In my former Letters I adventured to insinuate to my Friend how much I judged
their Highnesses obliged, as well by their own interest and that of the
Portestant Religion, as by their Relation to his Majesty, to comply with him in
this Affair. But that being a Subject too high and too delicate for me to
engage any further in, I will not now presume to add any thing further upon it.

My Lord, having thus faithfully represented to you such thoughts as have
occurred to my mind upon the perusal of your Letter, I judge it not needful nor
decent for me to enter into further particulars; As how this Liberty may be
established, to all the Intents and withal the Advantages above mentioned. But,
in my humble Opinion, his Majesty's Proclamations of the fourth of April 1687.
And of the twenty fourth of April last, are a very excellent Foundation for
that Work; which I wish were completed by a Parliamentary Ratification, to the
vindicating of the Divine Right of Religion and Conscience from all Human
Impositions, the confirming of our Peace, and the Advancement of his Majesty's
Glory and the Kingdoms Prosperity. It is not doubt a great Undertaking to offer
to satisfy all the Jealousies and Fears that, in such high and tender matters,
may arise from the conflict of so various Interests as are concerned therein.
But this small Essay that I have made, being truly involuntary, and such as
your Lordship has in a manner extorted from me, I hope those Considerations
will be accepted as a just Apology for my having thus far pursued it in all
Sincerity. And for the future tho I am firmly resolved to meddle no more in
such Debates, Yet I shall always remain, as I acknowledge my self to be
indispensibly obliged,

Edinburgh, May the 8th, 1688. My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most
Obedient Servant James Stewart.

FINIS.

