THE Council of Trent EXAMINED and DISPROVED BY Catholic Tradition. In the
main Points in Controversy between Us and the Church of Rome; WITH A
Particular Account of the Times and Occasions of introducing them; PART I. To
which a PREFACE is prefixed concerning the true Sense of the Council of Trent
and the Notion of Transubstantiation.

The Second Edition Corrected. WITH An APPENDIX in Answer to some late Passages
of J. W. of the Society of Jesus, Concerning the Prohibiting of Scripture in
Vulgar Languages.

LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THere is it seems a Train in Controversies, as well as in Thoughts; one thing
still giving a start to another; Conferences produce Letters; Letters, Books;
and one Discourse gives Occasion for another. For this follows the former as a
necessary Pursuit of the same Argument against Tradition.

I. S. in his last Letter, had vouched the Authority of the Council of Trent
proceeding upon Tradition, and he instanced in three Points,
Transubstantiation, Sacramental Third Letter p. 64.
Confession and Extreme Unction. The Examination of this I thought fit to
reserve for a Discourse by it self; wherein, instead of confining my Self to
those three Particulars, I intend to go through the most material Points there
established, and to prove from the most Authentic Testimonies, that there was
no true Catholic Tradition for any of them. And if I can make good what I have
undertaken, I shall make the Council of Trent it Self the great Instance
against the Infallibility of Tradition.

This is a new Undertaking; which the impetuousness of our Adversaries setting
up Tradition for the Ground of their Faith, has brought me to. But besides the
showing that really they have not Tradition on their side; I have endeavored
to trace the several steps and to set down the Times and Occasions of
Introducing those Points which have caused that unhappy breach in the Christian
world, whose sad effects we daily see and lament, But have little hopes to see
remied, till these new Points be discarded and Scripture interpreted by truly
Catholic Tradition, be made the Standard of Christian Communion.

I do not pretend, that all these Points came in at one Time or in the same
Manner; for some Errors and Corruptions came in far more early; some had the
favor of the Church of Rome in a higher degree; some were more generally
received in the Practice of the Church in later times, than others; and some
were merely School Points before the Council of Trent, but as far as the
Thomists and Scotists could be made to agree there against the Reformers, these
passed for Articles of Faith. For, this was one of the great Arts of that
Council to draw up their Decrees in such Terms, as should leave Room enough for
Eternal Wranglings among themselves, provided they agreed in doing the business
effectually against the Heretics, as they are pleased to call them. I
therefore forbear to urge these as Points of Faith, which have been freely
debated among themselves since the Council of Trent, without any Censure. We
have enough in the plain Decrees and Canons of that Council, without meddling
with any School-Points. And so I cannot be charged with Misrepresenting.

The great Debate of late has been about the true Exposition of the Points
there defined; and for my part, I am content to yield to any just and
reasonable Methods of giving the true sense of them. And such I conceive these
to be,

I. Where the Council of Trent makes use of Words in a strict and limited
Sense, there it is unreasonable to understand them in a large and improper
Sense. As for instance, Sess. 6. c. 26. It decrees that Justified Persons do
vere promerere; truly merit Eternal Life; and Can. 32. there is an Anathema
against him who denies true Merit in the good Works of justified Persons, both
as to Increase of Grace and Eternal Life. There is no one conversant in Ancient
Writers, but knows that there was a large and improper Sense of the Word Merit;
but how is it impossible to apply that Sense, where such Care is taken, that it
may be understood in a strict and limited Sense? If the Council had left the
Word in its General Sense, there might have been Reason to have given the
fairest Interpretation to it; but when it is certainly known, that there had
been a difference of Opinions in the Church of Rome about true and proper
Merit, and that which was not (however it were called,) and the Council
declares for the former, no man of understanding can believe that only the
improper Sense was meant by it. As in the Point of the Eucharist when the
Council declares that the words of Christ, This is my Body, are truly and
properly to be understood; Would it not be thought strange for any one to say,
that the Council notwithstanding might mean that Christ's Words may be
figuratively understood? And we must take the true notion of Merit not from any
large expressions of the Ancients, but from the Conditions of true and proper
Merit among themselves. But of this at large afterward. So as to the Notion of
Sacraments; every one knows how largely that Word was taken in Ancient Writers;
but it would be absurd to understand the Council of Trent in that Sense, when
Sess. 6. Can. 1. De Sacramentis, it denounces an Anathema not merely against
him that denies seven Sacraments; but against him that does not hold every one
of them to be truly and properly a Sacrament. And in the Creed of Pius IV. one
Article is, that there are seven true and proper Sacraments How vain a thing
then were it for any to Expound the Sacraments in a large and improper Sense?

II. Where the Council of Trent has not declared it self, but it is fully done
in the Catechism made by its Appointment, we ought to look on that, as the true
Sense of the Council. As in the Case of the Sacraments; the Council never
declares what it means by true and proper Sacraments; but the Catechism makes
large and full amends for this Defect. For after it has mentioned the
Catechism Romans Part 2.
use of the Word in Profane and Sacred Writers, it sets down the Sense of it
according to their Divines for a sensible sign which conveys the Grace which it
signifies. And after a large Explication of the Nature of Signs, it gives this
Description of a true and proper Sacrament, that it is a sensible thing, which
by Divine Institution not only has the force of signifying but of causing
Grace. And to show the Authority of this Catechism for explicating the Doctrine
of the Sacraments we need only to look into Sess. 24. c. 7. de Reform. where it
is required that the People be instructed in the Sacraments according to ^it.
It is supposed that the Catechism was appointed to be made in the 18th Ses^ion
at the Instigation of Carolus Borromaeus, (since Canonized) but it was not
finished while the Council sat, and therefore Sess. 25. it was referred to the
Judgment and Authority of the Pope. I confess therefore it has not a Conciliar
Authority stamped upon it, but it has a sort of transfused Infallibility, as
far as they could convey it; and as much as a Council has, when it borrows it
from the Popes Confirmation. It was near two Tears hammering at Trent, viz.
from 26. of Feb. 1562. to December. 1563. when the Council rose; Afterward, it
was preparing at Rome three Years longer, and then presented to the Pope to be
approved, and published by his Authority, after it had been carefully reviewed
by Cardinal Sirlet, Borromeo, and others; and has since been universally
received in the Roman Church; so that we can have no more Authentic Exposition
of the Sense of the Council of Trent, than what is contained in that Cat^chism.

III. Where the Council of Trent declares a thing in general to be lawful and
due, but does not express the manner of it, that is to be understood from the
generally received and allowed Practices at that time. For, otherwise the
Council must be charged with great unfaithfulness in not setting down and
correcting public and notorious Abuses, when it mentioned the things
themselves and some Abuses about them. As in the 25th Session, concerning
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images and Relics, it goes no
farther than that the sound Doctrine be taught, that Saints are to be
Invocated, Images and Relics to be Worshipped; but never defines what that
sound Doctrine is, what bounds are to be set in the Worship of Saints, Images
and Relics, which it is unlawful to exceed. So that in this Case, we have no
other way to judge of the Meaning of the Council, but by comparing the Public
and Allowed Practices of the Church with the General Decrees of the Council.
And we have this farther Reason for it, that we are told by the latest
Expositors of it, that the Sense of the Church in speculative Points, is to be
taken from Public Practices. For, thus one of them expresses himself,
Moreover, even her Speculative Reply to the Defense of the Expo^^tion, etc. p.
134.
Doctrines are so mixed with Practical Ceremonies, which represent them to the
Vulgar, and instruct even the meanest Capacities in the abstrusest Doctrines,
that it seems ever impossible to make an alteration in her Doctrine without
abrogating her Ceremonies, or changing her constant Practices.

IV. Where the Decrees of the Council, are not sufficiently clear, there we
must take in the Canons to make the Sense more plain. This Rule I take from the
Council it self, which in the 6th Session, just before the Canons says, that
those are added, that all may know not only what they are to hold and follow,
but what they are to shun and avoid. As in the famous Instance of
Transubstantiation; suppose, that the Words of the Decree do not determine
expressly the Modus; yet it is impossible for any one to doubt of it who looks
into the Canon, which denounces an Anathema against him, not only that denies
Transubstantiation, but that asserts the substance of Bread and Sess. 13. Can.
2.
Wine to remain after Consecration. Therefore he that asserts
Transubstantiation according to the Council of Trent, must hold it in such a
manner, as thereby to understand that the Substance of Bread and Wine does not
remain. Otherwise he is under an Anathema by the express Canon of the Council.

Therefore it is so far from being a fatal Oversight, (as a late Author
expresses it,) to say that the Council of Trent has determined the Modus of
the Real Presence, that no man who is not resolved to oversee it can be of
another Opinion. And herein the Divines of the Church of Rome do agree with us,
viz. that the particular Modus is not only determined by the Council, but that
it is a Matter of Faith to all Persons of the Communion of that Church. As not
only appears from the 2d Canon, but from the very Decree it self, Sess. 13. chapter
4.

The holy Synod declares, that by Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is
a Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread into the Substance of the Body
of Christ, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into the Substance of his
Blood, which Conversion is fitly and properly by the holy Catholic Church
called Transubstantiation. In which Words the Council does plainly express the
Modus of the Real Presence to be, not by a Presence of Christ's Body together
with the Substance of the Bread, as the Lutherans held, but by a Conversion of
the whole Substance of the Bread into the Substance of the Body, etc. And since
there were different Manners of understanding this Real Presence, if the
Council did not Espouse one so, as to reject the other as Heretical; then it is
impossible to make the Lutheran Doctrine to be declared to be Heretical, i. e,
unless the Council did determine the Modus of the Real Presence. For, if it did
not, then notwithstanding the Decrees and Canons of the Council of Trent,
Persons are at liberty to believe either Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation, which I think no Roman Catholic will allow.

But. it is said, that the meaning of the Decree is, that the Real Presence is
not to be understood after a Natural, but a Sacramental Manner; But does it not
plainly tell us, how that Sacramental Manner is to be understood, viz. by a
Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread into the whole Substance of the
Body, etc. And if other ways be possible, and all others be rejected, then this
particular Modus must be determined.

I grant, that the Council does not say, there is an Annihilation of the
Elements; and I know no Necessity of using that Term, for that which is
supposed to be turned into another thing cannot properly be said to be
Annihilated (which is the reducing it to nothing) but the Council does assert a
Total Conversion of one Substance into another, and where that is, that
Substance must wholly cease to be what it was; and so, there can be no
Substance of the Elements remaining after Consecration. For, as Aquinas
observes, Quod convertitur in aliquid facta Conversione non manet. If then the
Substance of the Elements does 3 Q. 75. A. 2.
not remain after Consecration, by virtue of this total Conversion, then the
Council of Trent by its Decree has plainly determined the Modus of the Real
Presence, so as to exclude any such Manner, as does suppose, the Substance to
remain, whether it be by Impanation or Consubstantiation, or any other way.

What if Rupertus thought the Bread might become the Real Body of Christ by an
Union of the Word to it? All that can be inferred is, that the Modus was not
then so determined, as to oblige all Persons to hold it. But what is this to
the Council of Trent? Can any one hold the Substance to remain, and not to
remain at the same time? For, he that holds with Rupertus must allow the
Substance to remain; he that believes a total Conversion must deny it. And he
that can believe both these at once, may believe what he pleases.

But the Council only declares the Sacramental Presence to be after an
ineffable manner. I say, it determines it to be by a total Conversion of one
Substance into another; which may well be said to be ineffable, since what
cannot be understood can never be expressed.

Our Dispute is not about the use of the Word, Transubstantiation, for I think
it proper enough to express the Sense of the Council of Trent; but as the Word
Consubstantial did exclude all other Modes how Christ might be the Son of God,
and determined the Faith of the Church to that Manne^; so does the Sense of
Transubstantiation, as determined by the Council of Trent, limit the Manner of
the Real Presence, to such a Conversion of the Substance of the Elements into
the Substance of Christ's Body and Blood, as does imply no Substance to remain
after Consecration.

It is to no purpose to tell us, the Council uses only the Word Species and not
Accidents; for whatever they are called, the Council denounces its Anathema
against those who hold the Substance to remain after Consecration; and denies
the Total Conversion of the Substance of the Bread and Wine into the Substance
of the Body and Blood of Christ. If the Substance be not there, the Modus is to
purpose determined. And whatever remains, call it what you will, it is not the
Substance; and that is sufficient to show, that the Council of Trent has
clearly determined the Modus of the Real Presence.

V. We must distinguish the School Points left undetermined by the Council of
Trent, from those which are made Articles of Faith. We never pretend, that it
left no School-Disputes about the Points there determined; but we say it went
too far in making some School-Points to be Points of Faith, when it had been
more for the Peace of Christendom to have left them to the Schools still. Thus
in the Point of Transubstantiation, the elder Schoolmen tell us, there were
different Ways of explaining the Real Presence; And that those, which supposed
the substance to remain, were more agreeable to Reason and Scripture than the
other; and some were of Opinion, that the Modus was no matter of Faith then.
But after the Point of the Real Presence came to be warmly contested in the
time of Berengarius, it rose by degrees higher and higher, till at last the
particular Modus came to be determined with an Anathema by the Council of Trent.

When Berengarius, A. D. 1059. was forced to Recant by Nicolaus 2d, with the
Assistance of 113. Bishops; no more was required of him, than to hold that the
Bread and Wine after Consecration; are not only the Sacrament, but the true
Body and Blood of Christ, and that it is sensibly handled and broke by the
Priests hands, and eaten by the Communicants. Here is no denying the Substance
of Bread to remain; and Joh. Parisiensis observes, that the words cannot be
defended but by an Assumption of the Bread; for, says he, If the Body of
Christ be truly and sensibly handled and eaten, this cannot be understood of
Christ's Glorious Body in Heaven, but it must be of the Bread really made the
Body of Christ after Consecration.

The Sense which the Canonists put upon the Words of this Recantation is
absurd, viz. that they are to be understood of the Species; For Berengarius his
Opinion related to the Substance of Christ's Body which he denied to be in the
Sacrament. And what would it have signified for him to have said that Christ
was sensibly broken and eaten under the Species of Bread and Wine? i. e. that
his Body was not sensibly broken and eaten but the Species were. It had
signified something, if he had said, there was no Substance of Bread and Wine
left but only the Species. But all the design of this Recantation was to make
him assert the Sacrament to be made the true and real Body of Christ in as
strong a manner, as the Pope and his Brethren could think of. And although the
Canonists think, if strictly taken, it implies greater Heresy than that of
Berengarius; yet by their favor, this Form was only thought fit to be put into
the Canon Law, as the Standard of the Faith of the Roman Church then; and the
following Abjuration of Berengarius was only kept in the Register of Gregory
the seventh's Epistles.

For about twenty years after by Order of Gregory VII. Berengarius was brought
to another Abjuration, but by no means after the same Form with the former. For
by this he was required to declare, that the Bread and Wine are substantially
Converted into the true and proper Flesh and Blood of Christ, and after
Censecration are the true Body of Christ born of the Virgin and Sacrificed upon
the Cross, and that sits at the right hand of the Father; and the true Blood of
Christ which was shed out of his Side, not only as a Sacramental Sign, but in
propriety of Nature and Reality of Substance.

This was indeed a pretty bold Assertion of the Substantial Presence. And so
much the bolder, if the Commentary on S. Matthew be Hildebrand's. For there he
says, the manner of the Conversion is uncertain. But as far as I can judge, by
Substantial Conversion he did not then mean, as the Council of Trent does, a
total Conversion of one substance into another, so as that nothing of the
former Substance remains; but that there was a Change by Consecration not by
making the Body of Christ of the Substance of the Bread, but by its passing
into that Body of Christ which was born of the Virgin. For, upon comparing the
two Forms, there we shall find lies the main difference. Pope Nicolaus went no
farther than to the true Body of Christ; which it might be as well by
Assumption, as Conversion; Gregory VII. went farther and thought it necessary
to add that the Change was into the Substance of that Body which was born of
the Virgin, etc. And so this second Form excludes a true Body merely by
Assumption, and asserts the Change to be into the Substance of Christ's Body in
Heaven; but it does not determine, that nothing of the Substance of the
Elements does remain. For when he puts that kind of Substantial Conversion
which leaves nothing but the Accidents, and the Body of Christ to be under
them, which belonged to the Substance of the Elements; he declares this matter
to be uncertain. Which shows, that however a Change was owned into the
Substance of Christ's Body, yet such a total Conversion, as is determined by
the Council of Trent, was not then made an Article of Faith.

But from this supposition made by Hildebrand it appears, that the Dectrine of
Substance and Accidents was then well known; and therefore the introducing
Aristotle's Philosophy from the Arabians afterward could make no Alteration in
this Matter. For the words of Hildebrand are as plain as to the difference of
Substance and Accidents, as of any of the Schoolmen; and that the Accidents of
the Bread and Wine might be separated from the Substance of them; but this was
not then made a Matter of Faith; as it was afterward.

But the case was remarkably altered, after the Lateran Council under Innocent
III. For Transubstantiation being admitted there among the Articles of Faith;
and so entered in the Canon Law in the very beginning of the Decretals; this did
not merely become a School-Term, but by the Inquisitors of that time, it was
accounted Heresy to deny it. It may be sufficiently proved by the Schoolmen
and Canonists, that a difference of Opinions, as to the Modus did still
continue, (but that belongs to a more proper place) and Joh. Parisiensis
declares (p. 103) that the Lateran Council in his Opinion did not make
Transubstantiation a Point of Faith; or at least that Substance was not to be
taken for the Matter, but the Suppositum; but the Inquisitors went more briskly
to work and made it downright ^^^^esie to assert, that the Substance of the
Elements did remain after Consecration.

Of this, we have full Evidence in the Register of Courtney Archbishop of
Canterbury, (which is no Invisible Manuscript.) For there we read f. 25. that
he called a select Convecation of Bishops, Divines and Canonists, May 17. A. D.
1382. to declare some Propositions to be Heretical, and some to be Erroneous
and contrary to the determination of the Church. Among the first, these two are
set down in the first Place,

1. That the material Substance of the Bread and Wine does remain in the
Sacrament of the Altar after Consecration.

2. That the Accidents do not remain without their Subject in that Sacrament
after Consecration.

After this the Archbishop sent forth his Mandate to all his Suffragans not
only to prohibit the preaching of that Doctrine, but to inquire after those who
did it. And June 12. Robert Rygge Chancellor of Oxford and Thomas Brightwall
appeared before him and were examined upon these Propositions; which they
declared to be Heretical: who thereupon required the Publication of them as
such in the University; and the proceeding against those who were suspected to
favor them.

The Ground the Archbishop went upon, was, that these had been already
condemned by the Church, and therefore ex abundanti, they declared them to be
so condemned; as appears by the Monition given to Robert Rygge himself as too
much suspected to favor the contrary Doctrine; as well as Nicholas Hereford,
Philip Reppyndon D. D. and John Ashton B. D.

Against these the Archbishop proceeded as Inquisitor Haereticae Pravitatis
per totam suam Provinciam, as it is in the Record; who appearing desired a Copy
of the several Propositions, and then they were required to give in their
judgment upon them. Ashton refused, but the other promised, which they
performed soon after; and to these two Propositions, their Answers were,

To the first that as far as it was contrary to the Decretal, Firmiter
Credimus, it was Heresy.

To the second that as far as it was contrary to the Decretal, Cum Marthoe, it
was Heresy.

These Answers were judged insufficient, because they did not declare what that
Sense was And the Archbishop put this Question to them, whether the same
Numerical material Bread which before Consecration was set upon the Altar, did
remain in its proper Substance and Nature after Consecration, but they would
give no other Answer at that time. But afterward Reppyndon abjured, and was
made Bishop of Lincoln.

From hence it appears, that it was then thought that the Modus was so far
determined by the Lateran Council, that the contrary Doctrine was declared not
merely Erroneous in Faith, but Heretical.

In the first Convocation held by Th. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury A. D.
1396, A Complaint was Regist. f. 47.
brought, that several Divines and others of the University of Oxford held some
heretical and erroneous opinions; the first whereof was,

That the Substance of Bread does remain after Confecration; and does not cease
to be Bread; which is there affirmed to be Heresy, speaking of material Bread.

The second, that the Court of Rome in the Can. Ego Berengarius, had determined
that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is naturally true Bread.

It is very hard to say, how this came to be then accounted Heretical Doctrine,
when no less a man than Durandus in the same Age affirms, that the Canonists
grant that the Opinion of the ceasing of the Substance was grounded on the Can.
Firmiter Credimus, i. e. on the Lateran Council; but that of the remaining of
the Substance on that, Ego, Berengarius. But however it passed for Heretical,
or at least very Erroneous Doctrine here; but the main Heresy was to hold,
that the Substance remained.

For A. D. 1400. (as appears by the Register p. 2. f. 179.) William Sawtre
alias Chatris a Parochial Priest in London, was summoned before the same
Archbishop in Convocation upon an Information of Heresy; and one of the main
Articles against him was that he held the Substance of the Bread to remain in
the Sacrament of the Altar after Consecration; and that it does not cease to be
Bread. Sawtre answered, that he believed, that after Consecration the Bread did
remain with the Body of Christ; but it does not cease to be simply Bread, but
it remains holy and true the Bread of Life and Body of Christ. The Arch Bishop
examined him chiefly upon this Article; and because he did not answer home to
the point, he was condemned for a Heretic, and was the first who was burned
for Heresy in England. And yet his Answer was, that he could not understand
the matter; then the Archbishop asked him, if he would stand to the Churches
Determination; he said, he would so far as it was not contrary to the Will of
God. Upon which he was declared an Heretic and delivered over to the Secular
Power.

In the same Convocation John Purvey made an Abjuration of Heresy, and the
first he renounced was that after Consecration in the Sacrament of the Altar,
there neither is, nor can be an Accident without a Subject, and that the same
Substance and Nature of Bread remained which was before.

In the Examination of William Thorp by Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of
Canterbury A. D. 1407. (which is not in the Register being defective, but the
account is preserved from his own Copy) The Archbishop declared, that the
Church had now determined, that there abides no Substance of Bread after
Consecration in the Sacrament of the Altar. And that if he believed otherwise
he did not believe as the Church believed. Thorp quoted S. Augustine and
Fulgentius to prove that the Substance remained; and the very Mass on Christmas
Day. The Archbishop still pressed him with the Churches Determination. Thorp
said this was a School-nicety whether Accidents could be without a Subject; no,
said the Archbishop, it is the Faith of the Church I go upon. Thorp replied,
it was not so for a thousand years after Christ.

In the Examination of the Lord Cobham A. D. 1412. by the same Archbishop we
find that he owned the Real Registr. Arundel p. 2. f. 143.
Presence of Christ's Body as firmly as his Accusers; but he was condemned for
Heresy, Because he held the Substance of Bread to remain. For the Archbishop
declared this to be the Sense of the Church; that after Consecration, remains
no material Bread or Wine which were before, they being turned into Christ's
very Body and Blood. The Original words of the Archbishop as they are in the
Register, are these.

The faith and the determination of holy Church touching the blestfull
Sacrament of the auter is this, that after the Sacramental Words ben said by a
Pressed in his Mass, the material bred that was before is turned into Christ's
very body. And the material Wyn that was before is turned into Christ very
blood, and so there leweth in the auter, no material bread ne material Win the
which were there before the saying of the Sacramental words.

And the Bishops afterward stood up and said; It is manifest Heresy to say
that it is Bread after the Sacramental Words be spoken; because it was against
the Determination of holy Church.

But to make all sure, not many years after, May 4th. A. D. 1415. the Council
of Constance Session 8. declared the two Propositions before mentioned to be
heretical; viz. to hold that the Substance does remain after Consecration, and
that the Accidents do not remain without a Subject.

Let any impartial Reader now judge, whether it be any fatal Oversight to
assert, that the Modus of the Real Presence was determined by the Council of
Trent, when there were so many leading Determinations to it, which were
generally owned and received in the Church of Rome. But there were other
Disputes remaining in the Schools relating to this Matter; which we do not
pretend were ever determined by the Council of Trent. As,

(1.) Whether the Words of Consecration are to be understood in a Speculative
or Practical Sense? For, the Scotists say, in the former Sense, they do by no
means prove Transubstantiation; since it may be truly said This is my Body,
though the Substance of Bread do remain; and that they are to be understood in
a Practical Sense, i. e. for converting the Bread into the Body, is not to be
deduced ex vi verborum, from the mere force of the Words, but from the Sense of
the Church which has so understood them. Which in plain terms is to say, it
cannot be proved from Scripture, but from the Sense of the Church; and so
Scotus does acknowledge, but then he adds, that we are to judge this to be the
Sense of Scripture, because the Church has declared it. Which he does not
think was done before the Council of Lateran. So that, this Council must be
believed to have had as Infallible a Spirit in giving this Sense of Scripture
as there was in the writing of it; since it is not drawn from the Words, but
added to them. On the other side, the Thomists insist on the force of the Words
themselves; for, if, say they, from the Words be inferred that there is a Real
Presence of the Substance of Christ's Body, then it follows thence, that there
is no Substance of the Bread remaining; for a Substance cannot be where it was
not before, but it must either change its place, or another must be turned into
it; as Fire in a House must either be brought thither, or some other thing must
be turned into Fire; but, say they, the Body of Christ cannot be brought from
Heaven thither, for then it must leave the place it had there; and must pass
through all the Bodies between; and it is impossible for the same Body to be
Locally present in several places; and therefore the Body of Christ cannot
otherwise be really and substantially present, but by the Conversion of the
Substance of the Bread into it.

(2.) In what Manner the Body of Christ is made to be present in the Sacrament?
The Scotists say, it is impossible to conceive it otherwise than by bringing it
from the place where it already is; the Thomists say that is impossible, since
that Body must be divided from it self by so many other Bodies interposing. The
former is said to be an adductive Conversion, the latter a productive; but then
here lies another difficulty, how there can be a productive Conversion of a
thing already in being. But my business is not to give an account of these
School-Disputes; but to show how different they were from the point of
Tranfubslantiation; and that both these disputing Parties did agree that the
Modus of the Real Presence was defined to be by changing the Substance of the
Elements into the Body and Blood of Christ; but they still warmly disputed
about the Modus of that Modus; viz. how a Body already in being could be
present in so many places without leaving that Place where it was already. And
no Man who has ever looked into these School Disputes can ever imagine that
they disputed about the Truth of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, but only
about the manner of explaining it. Wherein they do effectually overthrow each
others Notions without being able to establish their own; as the Elector of
Cologn truly observed of their Debates about this matter in the Council of
Trent.

VI. Where the Sense of Words has been changed by the introducing new
Doctrine, there the words ought to be understood according to the Doctrine at
that time received. Of this we have two remarkable Instances in the Council of
Trent;

The first is about Indulgences, which that Council in its last Session never
went about to define; but made use of the old Word, and so declares both
Scripture and Antiquity for the use of them. But there had been a mighty change
in the Doctrine about them, since the Word was used in the Christian Church. No
doubt there was a Power in the Church to relax Canonical Penances in
extraordinary Cases; but what could that signify when the Canonical Discipline
was laid aside, and a new Method of dealing with Penitents was taken up, and
another Trade driven with Respect to Purgatory Pains? For here was a new thing
carried on under an old Name. And that has been the great Artifice of the
Roman Church; where it has evidently gone off from the old Doctrines, yet to
retain the old Names, that the unwary might still think, the things were the
same, because the Names were. As in the present Case, we deny not the use of
Indulgences in the Primitive Church; as the Word was used for Relaxations of
the Canonical Discipline; but we utterly deny it as to the Pains of Purgatory.
And that this was the Sense then received in the Church of Rome, appears from
the Papal Constitutions of Bon face the 8th, Clemens the 6th, and Leo the 10th.
But of these more hereafter.

The other Instance is in the Word Species used by the Council of Trent, Sess.
13. Can. 2. where an Anathema is denounced against him that denies the
Conversion of the whole Substance of the Elements into the Body and Blood of
Christ, the Species of Bread and Wine only remaining. Now a Controversy has
been started in the Church of Rome, what is to be understood by Species,
whether real Accidents or only Appearances.

Some of the Church of Rome who have had a Taste of the New Philosophy, reject
any real Accidents, and yet declare Transubstantiation to be a matter of Faith,
and go about to explain the Notion of it in another manner. Among these one
Emanuel Maignan, a Professor of Divinity Maignan Philosophia Sa^ra. Part 2.
Append. 5.
at Toulouse, has at large undertaken this matter. The Method he takes is this.

(1.) He grants, that nothing remains of the Bread after Consecration, but that
whereby it was an Object of Sense; because that which is really the Being of
one thing cannot be the Being of another. And he confesses that the Modus as to
the not being of the Substance after Consecration, is determined by the
Councils of Constance and Trent.

(2.) He asserts, that real Accidents, supposing them separable from the
Substance, are not that whereby the Elements are made the Objects of Sense;
because they do not make the Conjunction between the Object and the Faculty.

(3.) Since he denies, that Accidents have any real Being distinct from the
Substance they are in, he grants, that it is as much a matter of Faith, that
there are no real Accidents after Consecration, as that there is no real
Substance; and he brings the Authorities of the Councils of Lateran, Florence
and Trent to prove it.

(4.) As the Substance did by Divine Concourse so Act upon the Senses before,
as to make it be an Object of Sense; so after Consecration, God by his
immediate Act makes the same Appearances, although the Substance be gone. And
this, he says, is the effect of this Miraculous Conversion, which is concealed
from our Senses, by God's immediate causing the very same Appearances, which
came before from the Substance. Which Appearances, he says, are the Species
mentioned by the Council of Trent; and other elder Councils and Fathers.

Against this new Hypothesis, a famous Jesuit, Theophilus Raynaudus, opposed
himself with great vehemence; and urged these Arguments against it.

(1.) That it overthrows the very Nature of a Sacrament, leaving no external
visible sign; but a perpetual illusion of the Senses, in such a manner, that
the Error of one cannot be corrected by another.

(2.) That it overthrows the Design of the Sacrament, which is to be true and
proper Food. My Flesh is meat indeed, etc. John 6. Which, he says, is to be
understood of the Sacrament, as well as of the Body of Christ, and therefore
cannot agree with an imaginary appearance.

(3.) It is not consistent with the Accidents which befall the Sacramental
Species, as to be trod under foot, to be cast into indecent places, to be
devoured by Brutes, to be Putrified, etc. If the Body of Christ withdraws,
there must be something beyond mere Appearances.

(4.) He makes this Doctrine to be Heretical, because the Council of Constance
condemned it as an Heretical Proposition, to affirm, that in the Eucharist
Accidents do not remain without their Subject; and because the Council of Trent
uses the Word Species in the Sense then generally received, and so it signified
the same with Accidents. Which, says he, farther appears, because the Council
speaks of the Species remaining; but if there be no real Accidents, the Species
does not remain in the Object; but a new Appearance is produced. And it seems
most reasonable to interpret the Language of the Council according to the
general Sense wherein the Words were understood at that time.

VII. What things were disputed and opposed by some in the Council, without
being censured for it, although they were afterward decreed by a Major Party,
yet cannot be said to have been there received by a Catholic Tradition.
Because Matters of Faith which have been universally received in the Church,
can never be supposed to be contested in a Council without Censure; but if it
appears that there were Heats and warm Debates among the Parties in the Council
it self, and both think they speak the Sense of the Catholic Church; then we
must either allow that there was then no known Catholic Tradition about those
matters, or that the Divines of the Church of Rome assembled in Council did not
understand what it was. And what happens to be decreed by a Majority, can never
be concluded from thence to have been the Tradition before, because there was a
different Sense of others concerning it. And since in a division, a single
Person may make a Majority, it will be very hard to believe, that he carries
Infallibility and Catholic Tradition along with him.

But I think it Reasonable in the enquiry after Catholic Tradition to take
notice of the different Opinions in the Council; and among the Schoolmen
before it; and not only to observe, what was the Sense of the Roman Church, but
of the Eastern Churches too; and where the matter requires it, to go through
the several Ages of the Church up to the Apostolical Times; that I may
effectually prove, that in the main Points in Controversy between us, which
are established by the Council of Trent, there cannot be produced any Catholic
and Apostolical Tradition for them.

THE CONTENTS.
SOme Postulata about Catholic Tradition, Page 1.

I. Point examined about Traditions being a Rule of Faith equal with
Scriptures, 2.
The Sense of the Council of Trent concerning it, 3. No. Catholic Tradition
for it showed from the differences about it in the Council, 4. From the Divines
of the Roman Church for some Ages before the Council, 5. The Testimonies of the
Canon Law against it, 17. Of the Ancient Offices of the Roman Church, 20. Of
the Fathers, 21. The first step of Traditions being set up as a Rule by the
second Council of Nice, 26. Not received as a Rule of Faith till after the
Council of Lateran under Innocent III. 27. The occasion of it set down from new
Points of Faith there determined, 28. Never established for a Rule till the
Council of Trent, 29.
II. About the Canon of Scripture defined by the Council of Trent, 30.
The Sense of the Council, ibid. The difference there about it, 31. A constant
Tradition against it in the Eastern Church. 33. No Catholic Tradition for it
in the Western Church, 35. The several steps as to the Alteration of the Canon
set down, 38. The different meaning of Apocryphal Writings, 40.
III. About the free use of the Scripture in the vulgar Language prohibited by
the Council of Trent, 43.
The Sense of the Council, ibid. No Catholic Tradition about this proved from
the Writers of the Roman Church, 44. The General Consent of the Catholic
Church against it proved from the Ancient Translations into Valgar Languages,
46. The first Occasion of the Scriptures being in an unknown Language, 52. The
first prohibition by Gregory VII. 56. Continued by the Inquisition after
Innocent III. 58.
IV. About the Merit of Good Works, 59.
The Sense of true Merit cleared from the Divines of the Church of Rome, ibid.
No Catholic Tradition for it proved from ancient Offices, 61. From Provincial
Councils and eminent Divines in several Ages before the Council of Trent, 63.
The several steps how the Doctrine of Merit came in, 68.
V. Of the number of Sacraments, 74.
An appeal to Tradition for 500. years for Seven Sacraments examined and
disproved, 75. As to Chrism, 77. As to Drders, 80. As to Penance, 85. As to
Extreme-Unction, 92. As to Patrimony, 97. The sense of the Greek Church about
the Seven Sacraments, 102. The Sense of other Eastern Churches, 110. When the
number of Seven Sacraments came first in, 112. The particular occasions of
them, 116.
VI. Of Auricular Confession, 117.
No Catholic Tradition confessed by their own Writers, 118. andgt;The several
steps and Occasions of introducing it, at large set down, 127. The difference
between the ancient Discipline and Modern Confession, 128. Of voluntary
Confession, 133. Of the Penitentiaries Office, 135. Public Discipline not
taken away at Constantinople when the Penitentiary was removed, 136. Proved
from S. Chrysostom, 140. Public Penance for public Sins, 142. Private
Confession came in upon the decay of the Ancient Discipline, 144.
THE Council of Trent EXAMINED AND DISPROVED, etc.
THere are Two things designed by me in this Treatise,

1. To show that there is no such thing as universal Tradition for the main
Points in Controversy between us and the Church of Rome, as they are
determined by the Council of Trent.

2. To give an Account by what Steps and Degrees, and on what Occasion those
Doctrines and Practices came into the Church.

But before I come to particulars, I shall lay down some reasonable Postulata.

1. That a Catholic Tradition must be universally received among the sound
Members of the Catholic Church.

2. That the force of Tradition lies in the Certainty of Conveyance of Matters
of Faith from the Apostolical Times. For no New Doctrines being pretended to,
there can be no Matter of Faith in any Age of the Church, but what was so in
the precedent and so up to the Apostles times.

3. That it is impossible to suppose the Divines of the Catholic Church to be
ignorant, what was in their own time received for Catholic Tradition. For, if
it be so hard for others to mistake it, it will be much more so for those whose
business is to enquire into, and to deliver Matters of Faith.

These things premised, I now enter upon the Points themselves; and I begin
with,

I. Traditions being a Rule of Faith equal with Scriptures.
This is declared by the Council of Trent, as the Groundwork of their
Proceedings.

The words are Sess. 4. That the Council receives Traditions both as to Faith
Necnon Traditiones ipsas tum ad ^idem tum ad mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore
tenns a Christo vel a Spiritu sancto dictatas and continua successione in
Ecclesia Catholica conservatas, pari pietatis affectu ac re^erentia suscipit
and veneratur.
and manners, either delivered by Christ himself with his own mouth, or
dictated by the Holy Ghost, and preserved in the Catholic Church by a
continual Succession with equal Piety of Affection and Reverence as the Proofs
of holy Scripture.

Where the Council first supposes there are such Traditions from Christ and the
Holy Ghost distinct from Scripture which relate to Faith; and then it declares
equal Respect and Veneration due to them. No one questions but the Word of
Christ and Dictates of the Holy Ghost deserve equal Respect, howsoever conveyed
to us; But the Point is, whether there was a Catholic Tradition before this
time for an unwritten Word, as a Foundation of Faith, together with the written
Word.

1. It is therefore impertinent here to talk of a Tradition before the written
Word; for our Debate is concerning both being joined together to make a perfect
Rule of Faith: and yet this is one of the common Pleas on behalf of Tradition.

2. It is likewise impertinent to talk of that Tradition whereby we do receive
the written Word. For the Council first supposes the written Word to be
received and embraced as the Word of God, before it mentions the unwritten
Word; and therefore, it cannot be understood concerning that Tradition whereby
we receive the Scriptures. And the Council affirms, That the Truth of the
Gospel is contained partly in Books that are written, and partly in unwritten
Traditions. By the Truth of the Gospel they cannot mean the Scriptures being
the Word of God, but that the word was contained partly in Scripture and partly
in Tradition; and it is therefore impertinent to urge the Tradition for
Scripture to prove Tradition to be part of the Rule of Faith, as it is here
owned by the Council of Trent.

3. The Council does not here speak of a Traditionary sense of Scripture, but
of a distinct Rule of Faith from the Scripture. For of that it speaks
afterward in the Decree about the use of the Scripture; where it says, no man
ought to interpret Scripture against the Sense of the Church to whom it belongs
to judge of the true Sense and Meaning of Scripture, nor against the unanimous
Consent of the Fathers. Whereby it is evident, the Council is not to be
understood of any Consequences drawn out of Scripture concerning things not
expressly contained in it; but it clearly means an unwritten Word distinct from
the written, and not contained in it, which, together with that, makes up a
Complete Rule of Faith. This being the true sense of the Council, I now show
that there was no Catholic Tradition for it.

Which I shall prove by these steps:

1. From the Proceedings of the Council it self. 2. From the Testimony of the
Divines of that Church before the Council for several Centuries. 3. From the
Canon Law received and allowed in the Church of Rome. 4. From the ancient
Offices used in that Church. 5. From the Testimony of the Fathers.
1. From the Proceedings of the Council about this matter.

By the Postulata it appears, that the Catholic Tradition is such as must be
known by the sound members of the Church, and especially of the Divines in it.
But it appears by the most allowed Histories of that Council, this Rule of
Faith was not so received there. For Cardinal Pallavicini tells us that it was
warmly debated and canvassed even by the Bishops themselves. The Bishop of Fano
(Bertanus) urged against it, that God had not given Hist. Council. Trident. l.
6. c. 14. n. 3.
equal firmness to Tradition as he had done to Scripture, since several
Traditions had failed. But the Bishop of Bitonto (Mussus) opposed him and said,
Though all Truths were not to be equally regarded, yet every word of God ought,
and Traditions as well as Scripture were the word of God, and the first
Principles of Faith; and the greater part of the Council followed him. It seems
then there was a division in the Council about it; but how could that be if
there were a Catholic Tradition about this Rule of Faith? Could the Bishops of
the Catholic Church, when assembled in Council to determine Matters of Faith,
be no better agreed about the Rule of Faith; and yet must we believe there was
at that time a known Catholic Tradition about it, and that it was impossible
they should err about such a Tradition? Nay farther, the same Author tells us,
that although this Bishop had gained the greatest part of the Council to him,
yet his own heart misgave him, and in the next Congregation himself proposed,
that instead of equal it might be put a like Veneration; and yet we must
believe there was a Catholic Tradition for an Equal Veneration to Scripture
and Tradition. But the Bishop of Chioza, (Naclantus) he says, inveighed more
bitterly against this Equality, and in the face of the Council charged the
Doctrine with Impiety; N. 4.
and he would not allow any Divine Inspiration to Tradition, but that they were
to be considered only as Laws of the Church. It Is true, he says he professed
to consent to the Decree afterward, but withal he tells us, that he was
brought under the Inquisition not long after, upon suspicion of Heresy; which
shows they were not well satisfied with his submission. We are extremely
beholden to Cardinal Pallavicini for his Information in these matters, which
are past over too jejunely by F. Paul.

2. I proceed to the Testimony of the Divines of the Roman Church before the
Council of Trent. It is observed by some of them, that when the Fathers
appealed to the Tradition of the Church in any controverted Point of Faith,
they made their Appeal to those who wrote before the Controversy was started;
as S. Augustine did against the Pelagians, etc. This is a reasonable Method Aug.
l. 2. c. Julian.
of proceeding, in case Tradition be a Rule of Faith: and therefore must be so
even in this point, whether Tradition be such a Rule or not. For the Divines
who wrote before could not be ignorant of the Rule of Faith they received among
themselves.

Gabriel Biel lived in the latter end of the 15th Century, and he affirms, that
the Scripture alone teaches all things necessary Et caetera nostrae saluti
necessaria, quae omnia sola docet sacra Scriptura. Lection. in Canon. Missae 71.
to salvation; and he instances in the things to be done and to be avoided, to
be loved and to be despised, to be believed and to be hoped for. And again,
that the Haec autem in sacris Scripturis discuntur, per quas solas plenam
intelligere possumus Dei voluntatem. ib.
Will of God is to be understood by the Scriptures, and by them alone we know
the whole Will of God. If the whole Will of God were to be known by the
Scripture, how could part of it be preserved in an unwritten Tradition? And if
this were then part of the Rule of Faith, how could such a Man, who was
Professor of Divinity at Tubing be ignorant of it? I know he says he took the
main of his Book from the Lectures of Eggelingus, in the Cathedral Church at
Mentz; but this adds greater strength to the Argument, since it appears hereby
that this Doctrine was not confined to the Schools, but openly delivered in one
of the most famous Churches of Germany.

Cajetan died not above 12 Years before the Council, who agrees with this
Doctrine of Biel or Eggelingus (and he was accounted the Oracle of his time for
Divinity) for he affirms that the Scripture gives such a perfection to a Man of
God (or one that E^^e quo tendit utilitas divinae Scripturae ad perfectionem
hominis Dei (hoc est qui totum seipsum Deo dat) perfectionem inquam ta^em ut
sit perfectus ad omne bonum exercendum. In 2. ad Tim. 3. 16.
devoutly serves him) that thereby he is accomplished for every good Work; How
can this be, if there be another Rule of Faith quite distinct from the Written
Word?

Bellarmin indeed grants, that all things which are simply necessary to the
Salvation of all, are plainly contained in Scripture, by which he yields, that
the Scripture alone is the Rule of Faith as to necessary points; and he calls
the Scripture the certain and stable Rule of Faith, yea the most certain and
most secure Rule. If there be then Dico i^^a omnia Scripta esse ab Apostolis
quae sunt ^mnibus necessaria, and quae ipsi palam omnibus vulgo praedicaverunt.
Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 11.

Illud imprimis statuendum erit Propheticos and Apostolicos libros juxta mentem
Ecclesiae Catholicae verum esse verbum Dei and certam ac stabilem Regulam
fidei. Id. l. 1. c. 1.

At sacris Scripturis quae Propheticis and Apostolicis literis continentur,
nihil est notius, nihil certius. Id. c. 2.

Quare cum Sacra Scriptura Regula credendi certissima tutissimaque sit. Ibid.


any other, it must be less certain and about points not necessary to
Salvation; i. e. it must be a Rule where there is no need of a Rule. For if
Men's Salvation be sufficiently provided for, by the Written Rule; and the
Divine Revelation, be in Order to men's Salvation, what need any other
Revelation to the Church, besides what is Written?

He asserts farther, that nothing is de fide, but what God L. 4. c. 9.
has revealed to the Prophets and Apostles, or is deduced from thence. This he
brings to prove that whatsoever was received as a matter of Faith in the
Church, which is not found in Scripture must have come from an Apostolical
Tradition. But if it be necessary to Salvation, according to his own Concession
it must be written; and if it be not, how comes it to be received as a matter
of Faith? unless it be first proved, that it is necessary to Salvation to
receive an unwritten Rule of Faith, as well as a written? For, either it must
be necessary on its own Account, and then he says it must be written; and if
not, then it can be no otherwise necessary than because it is to be believed on
the Account of a Rule, which makes it necessary. And consequently that Rule
must be first proved to be a necessary Article of Faith: Which Bellarmin has
no where done; but only sets down Rules about knowing true Apostolical
Traditions from others in matters of Faith, wherein he wisely supposes that
which he was to prove.

And the true Occasion of setting up this new Rule of Faith is intimated by
Bellarmin himself in his first Rule of judging true Apostolical Traditions.
Which is, when the Church believes any thing as a Doctrine of Faith which is
not in Scripture, then says he, we must judge it to be an Apostolical
Tradition. Why so? Otherwise the Church must have erred in taking that for a
matter of Faith which was not. And this is the great Secret about this New Rule
of Faith; they saw plainly several things were imposed on the Faith of
Christians, which could not be proved from Scripture; and they must not yield
they had once mistaken, and therefore this New, Additional Less certain Rule
for unnecessary Points must be advanced, although they wanted Tradition among
themselves to prove Tradition a Rule of Faith, which I shall now farther make
appear from their own School Divines before the Council of Trent.

We are to observe among them what those are which they strictly call
Theological Truths, and by them we shall judge, what they made the Rule of
Faith. For, they do not make a bare Revelation to any Person a sufficient
Ground for Faith; but they say Et quantum ad ea quae pro^onantur omnibus
credenda quae per^inent ad fiaem. 2. 2. q. 171. prol.
the Revelation must be public, and designed for the general Benefit of the
Church; and so Aquinas determines 1. q. 1. a. 5.
that our Faith rests only upon the Revelations made to the Prophets and
Apostles; and Theological Truths are such as are immediately deduced from the
Principles of Faith, i. e. from public Divine Revelations owned and received
by the Church. The modern School men, Melch. Can. l. 12. c. 3.
who follow the Council of Trent make Theological Truths to be deduced from the
unwritten as well as the Written word; or else they would not speak consonantly
to their own Doctrine. And therefore if those before them deduce Theological
Truths only from the Written Word, then it will follow that they did not hold
the unwritten Word to be a Rule of Faith.

Marsilius ab Inghen was first Professor of Divinity of Heidelberg (at the
latter end of the 15th Century says Bellarmin, but Trithemius says the 14th)
and he determines, that a Theological Proposition is that which is positively
Marsil. in 4. lib. Sentent. l. 1. Prooem. q. 2. art. 2.
asserted in Scripture or deduced from thence by good Consequence; and that a
Theological Truth strictly taken is the Truth of an Article of Faith, or
something expressed in the Bible, or deduced from thence. He mentions
Apostolical Traditions afterward, and joins them with Ecclesiastical Histories
and Martyrologies. So far was he from supposing them to be part of the Rule of
Faith.

In the beginning of the 15th Century lived Petrus de Alliaco, one as famous
for his skill in Divinity, as for his Pet. de Alli^co in Sent. l. 1. q. 1. a. 3.
Dignity in the Church, He says, that Theological Discourse is founded on
Scripture, and a Theological Proof must be drawn from thence; that Theological
Principles are the Truths contained in the Canon of Scripture; and Conclusions
are such as are drawn out of what is contained in Scripture. So that he not
only makes the Scripture the Foundation of Faith, but of all sorts of true
Reasoning about it. He knew nothing of Cardinal Palavicini's two first
Principles of Faith.

To the same purpose speaks Gregorius Ariminensis, about the middle of the 14th
Century he says, all Theological Greg. Arimin. q. 1. a. 2.
Discourse is grounded on Scripture and the Consequences from it; which he not
only proves from Testimony, but ex communi omnium conceptione, from the
general Consent of Christians. For, says he, all are agreed that then a thing
is proved Theologically, when it is proved from the Words of Scripture. So that
here we have plain Tradition, against Traditions being a distinct Rule of
Faith, and this delivered by the General of an Order in the Church of Rome. He
affirms that the Principles of Theology, are no other than the Truths contained
in the Canon of Scripture; and that the Resolution of all Theological Discourse
is into them; and that there can be no Theological Conclusion, but what is
drawn from Scripture.

In the former part of that Century lived Darandus, Durand. Prol. Q. 5. n. 9.
he gives a threesold Sense of Theology. 1. For a habit whereby we assent to
those things which are contained in Scripture, as they are there delivered. 2.
For a habit whereby those things are ^efended and declared which are delivered
in Scripture. 3. For a habit of those things a. 13.
which are deduced out of Articles of Faith; and so it is all one with the holy
Scripture. n. 21.


And in another place he affirms, that all Truth is contained in the Holy
Scripture at large; but for the People's L. 3. Did. 25. q. 2.
Convenience the necessary Points are summed up in the Apostles Creed.

In his Preface before his Book on the Sentences he highly commends the
Scriptures for their Dignity, their Usefulness, their Certainty, their Depth;
and after all concludes, that in matters of Faith men ought to speak agreeably
to the Scriptures; and whosoever does not, breaks the Rule of the Scriptures,
which he calls the Measure of our Faith. What Tradition did appear then for
another Rule of Faith in the 14th Century?

But before I proceed higher I shall show the Consent of others with these
School Divines in the three last Centuries before the Council of Trent. In the
middle of the 15th lived Nicholaus Panormitanus, one of mighty Reputation for
his skill in the Canon Law. In the Chapter Significasti prima. 1. de Electione,
debating the Authority of Pope and Council, he says, Nam in concernentibus
fidem etiam dictum unius privati esset pra^erendum dicto Papae si ille
movere^ur melioribus rationibus novi and veteris Testamenti quam Papae.
If the Pope has better Reason his Authority is greater than the Councils; and
if any private person in matters of Faith has better Reason out of Scripture
than the Pope, his saying is to be preferred above the Pope's. Which words do
plainly show, that the Scripture was then looked on as the only Rule of Faith;
or else no Man's grounding himself on Scripture could make his Doctrine to be
preferred before the Pope's; who might allege Tradition against him, and if
that were an equal Rule of Faith, the Doctrine of one Rule could not be
preferred before the other.

At the same time lived Tostatus the famous Bishop of Avila, one of infinite
Industry and great Judgment, and therefore could not be mistaken in the Rule of
Faith. In his Preface on Genesis he says, that there must be a Rule for our
understandings to be Cum ergo in omni veritate veritas divina sit certior and
immutabilior, ergo omnes aliae debent regulari per illam, and in quantum
conformantur illi sunt verae; in quantum autem deviant ab illa, deviant a
natura veritatis. Sacra autem Scriptura veritas divina est, ideo judicium
nostrum debemus regulare per illam applicando ad eam, etc. Tostatin Ep. Hieron.
c. 6. p. 28. D.
regulated by, and that Rule must be most certain; that Divine Faith is the
most certain; and that is contained in Scripture, and therefore we must
regulate our understandings thereby. And this he makes to be the measure of
Truth and Falsehood. If he knew any other Rule of Faith besides the Scriptures,
he would have mentioned it in this place; and not have directed Men only to
them, as the exact measure of Truth and Falsehood.

In the beginning of this Century Thomas Walden (Confessor to our Henry 5th,
says Trithemius,) disputed sharply against Wickliff; but he durst not set up
the Churches Authority or Tradition equal with the Scriptures. For when he
mentions Tradition after Scriptures, he utterly disclaims any such thought as
that of Equality between them; but he desires a due Non quod in Auctoritate
aequantur, absit; sed sequantur. Non quidem in subsidium Auctoritatis Canonicae
sed in admonitionem posterorum, l. 2. Art. 2. c. 22.
distance may be kept between Canonical Scripture and Ecclesiastical Authority
or Tradition. In the first place he says, we ought to believe the holy
Scriptures; then the Definitions and Customs of the Catholic Church; but he
more fully explains himself in another place, where c. 28.
he plainly asserts, that nothing else is to be received by c. 27.
such Faith as the Scripture and Christ's symbolical Church; but for all other
Authorities, the lowest degree is that of Catholic Tradition, the next of the
Bishops, especially of the Apostolical Churches, and the Roman in the first
place; and above all these he places that of a General Council; but when he
has so done, he says, all these Authorities are to be regarded but as the
Instructions of Elders, and Admonitions of Fathers. So that the chief Opposers
of Wickliff had not yet found out this new Rule of Faith.

Much about the same time lived Joh. Gerson, whom Joh. Gerson. Exam. Doctr. p.
540. Part. 1. Cons. 5.
Cardinal Zabarella declared, in the Council of Constance, to be the greatest
Divine of his time, and therefore could not be ignorant of the true Rule of
Faith. He agrees with Panormitan in this, that if a man be well skilled in
Scriptures, his Doctrine deserves more to be regarded than the Pope's
Declaration; for, says he, the Gospel is more to be believed than the Pope,
and if such a one teaches a Doctrine to be contained in Scripture, which the
Pope either knows not or mistakes, it is plain whose Judgment is to be
preferred. Nay, he goes farther, that if in a General Council he finds the
Majority incline to that part which is contrary to Scripture, he is bound to
oppose it, and he instances in Hilary. And he shows, that since the Canon of
Scripture received by the Church, no Authority of the Church is to be equalled
to it. He allows a Judgment of Discretion in private Cons. 6.
persons, and a Certainty of the literal Sense of Scripture attainable thereby.
He makes the Scripture the only standing infallible Rule Nihil audendum dicere
de divinis nisi quae nobis a Sacra Scriptura tradita sunt. Cujus ratio est,
quoniam Scriptura nobis tradita est tanquam Regula sufficiens and infallibi^i^,
pro Regi^^ine totius Ecclesiastici corporis and membrorum usque in finem
seculi. Est igitur talis Ars, talis regula, vel exemplar, cui se non conformans
alia Doctrina, vel abjicienda est ut haereticalis, aut suspecta, aut
impertinens ad Religionem prorsus est habenda. Exam. Doctr. Part. 2. Consid. 1.
of Faith for the whole Church to the end of the world. And whatever Doctrine
is not agreeable thereto, is to be rejected either as Heretical, suspicious, or
impertinent to Religion. If the Council of Trent had gone by this Rule, we had
never heard of the Creed of Pius IV.

In the beginning of the 14th Century lived Nicolaus de Lyra, who parallels the
Scriptures in matters of Faith Lyra, Praesat. ad lib. Tobiae.
with First-principles in Sciences; for as other Truths are tried in them by
their reduction to First-principles, so in matters of Faith by their reduction
to Canonical Scriptures, which are of divine Revelation, which is impossible to
be false. If he had known any other Principles which would have made Faith
impossible to be false, he would never have spoken thus of Scripture alone. But
to return to the School Divines.

About the same time lived Joh. Duns Scotus, the head of a School, famous for
Subtilty; He affirms, that the Scot. in Sentent. Prolog. Q. 2. n. 14.
holy Scripture does sufficiently contain all matters necessary to salvation;
because by it we know what we are to believe, hope for, and practice. And after
he has enlarged upon them, he concludes in these words, patet quod Scriptura
sacra sufficienter continet Doctrinam necessariam viatori. If this be
understood only of Points simply necessary, then however it proves, that all
such things necessary to Salvation are therein contained; and no man is bound
to enquire after unnecessary Points. How then can it be necessary to embrace
another Rule of Faith, when all things necessary to Salvation are sufficiently
contained in Scripture?

But Thomas Aquinas is more express Ea enim quae ex sola Dei voluntate supra
omne debitum Creatur^, nobis innotescere non possunt, nisi quatenus in sacra
Scriptura traduntur, per quam Divina voluntas nobis innotescit. 3. q. 1. a. 3.
in C.
in this matter; For he says, that those things which depend on the Will of
God, and are above any desert of ours, can be known no otherways by us, than as
they are delivered in Scriptures by the Will of God, which is made known to us.

This is so remarkable a Passage, that Suarez could not let it escape without
corrupting it; for instead of Scripture he makes him to speak of Divine
Revelation in general, Suarez, in 3. p. 117.
viz. under Scripture he comprehends all; that is, under the written Word he
means the unwritten. If he had meant so, he was able to have expressed his own
mind more plainly; and Cajetan apprehended no such meaning in his words, But
this is a matter of so great consequence, that I shall prove from other
passages in him, that he asserted the same Doctrine, viz. That the Scripture
was the only Rule of Faith.

1. He makes no Proofs of matters of Faith to be sufficient but such as are
deduced Authoritatibus autem Canonicae Scripturae utitur proprie ex necessitate
argumentando; autoritatibus autem aliorum Doctorum Ecclesiae quasi arguendo ex
propriis sed probabiliter. Inni^itur enim fides nostra Revelationi Apostolis
and Prophet is factae, qui Canonicos libros scripserunt, non autem Revelationi
si qua fuit aliis Doctoribus facta. 1. q. 1. a. 8. ad 2.
from Scripture; and all other Arguments from Authority to be only probable;
nay although such Persons had particular Revelations. How can this be
consistent with another Rule of Faith distinct from Scripture? For if he had
owned any such, he must have deduced necessary Arguments from thence, as well
as from Canonical Scriptures. But if all other Authorities be only probable,
then they cannot make any thing necessary to be believed.

2. He affirms, that to those who receive the Scriptures we are to prove
nothing Quae igitur fidei sunt non sunt tentanda probari nisi per Autoritates
his qui Autoritates suscipiunt. 1. q. 32. a. 1. c.
but by the Scriptures, as matter of Faith. For by Authorities he means nothing
but the Scriptures; as appears by the former place, and by what follows, Si
autem ad veritatem eloquiorum sc. sacrorum respicit, hoc and nos Canone utimur.
Ib.
where he mentions the Canon of Scripture expressly.

3. He asserts that the Articles of the Creed are all contained in Scripture,
and are drawn out of Scripture, and put together by the Church only for the
Ease of the People. From hence it nenessarily Dicendum quod veritas fidei in
Sacra Scriptura diffuse continetur -- ideo fuit necessarium ut ex sententiis
Sacrae Scripturae aliquid manifestum summarie colligeretur, quod proponeretur
omnibus ad credendum; quod quidem non est additum Sacrae Scripturae, sed potius
ex Sacra Scriptura sumptum. 2. 2. q. 1. a. 9. ad primum.
follows that the Reason of believing the Articles of the Creed, is to be taken
from the written Word and not from any unwritten Tradition. For else he needed
not to have been so careful to show, that they were all taken out of Scripture.

4. He distinguishes the Matters of Faith in Scripture, some to be believed
for themselves, which he calls prima Credibilia; these he says every one is
bound explicitly to believe; but for other things he is bound only implicitly,
or Quantum ad prima Credibilia, quae sunt Articuli fidei, tenetur homo
explicit credere, sicut and tenetur habere fidem. Quantum autem ad alia
credibilia non tenetur homo explicit credere, sed solum implicit, vel in
praeparatione animi in quantum paratus est credere quicquid Scriptura continet;
sed tunc solum hujusmodi tenetur explicit credere, quando hoc ei constiterit
in Doctrina fidei contineri. 2. 2. q. 2. a 5. c.
in a preparation of mind, to believe whatever is contained in Scripture; and
then only is he bound to believe explicitly when it is made clear to him to be
contained in the Doctrine of Faith. Which words must imply the Scripture to be
the only Rule of Faith; for otherwise implicit Faith, must relate to whatever
is proved to be an unwritten Word.

From all this it appears that Aquinas knew nothing of a Traditional Rule of
Faith; although he lived after the Lateran Council A. D. 1215. being born about
nine years after it.

And Bonaventure, who died the same year with him, affirms, that nothing was Et
nihil nobis dicendum est, praeter ea quae nobis ex Sacris Eloqui^ claret.
Bonav. in 3 Sent. Did. 1. Art. 2. q. 2.
to besaid, (about Matters of Faith) but what is made clear out of the holy
Scriptures.

Not long after them lived Henricus Gandavensis; and he delivers these things
which are very material to our purpose.

1. That the Reason why we believe the Guides of the Church since the Apostles,
Quod autem credimus posterioribus circa quos non apparent virtutes divinae, hoc
est, quia non praedicant alia quam quae illi in scriptis certissimis
reliquerunt, quae constat per medios in nullo fuisse vitiata ex consensicne
concordi in eis omnium succedentium usque ad tempora nostra. Hen. Gandav. Sum.
A^t. 9. q. 3 n. 13. 2.
who work no Miracles, is, because they preach nothing but what they have left
in their most certain Writings, which are delivered down to us pure and
incorrupt by an universal consent of all that succeeded to our times. Where we
see he makes the Scriptures to be the only Certain Rule, and that we are to
judge of all other Doctrines by them.

2. That Truth is more certainly preserved in Scripture than in the Church;
Quia veritas ipsa in Scriptura immobiliter and impermutabiliter semper
cuf^^ditur. -- In personis autem Excclesiae mutabilis est and variabil^s ut
dissentire fidei possit multitudo illorum, and vel per errorem, vel per
malitiam a side discedere licet; semper Ecclesia in aliquibus just^s stabit.
Art. 8. q. 1. n. 5.
because that is fixed and immutable, and men are variable, so that multitudes
of them may depart from the Faith, either through Error or Malice; but the
true Church will always remain in some righteous persons. How then can
Tradition be a Rule of Faith equal with Scriptures, which depends upon the
Testimony of Persons who are so very fallible?

I might carry this way of Testimony on higher still, as when Richardus de S.
Victore says, in the thirteenth Century, that every Truth is suspected by him,
which is not confirmed by Holy Suspecta est mihi omnis veritas, quam non
confirmat Scriptu^arum Auctoritas. Rich. de S. Victore, De Praepar. Animi ad
Contempl. Part. 1. c. 81.
Scripture; but in stead of that I shall now proceed to the Canon Law, as
having more Authority than particular Testimonies.

3. As to the Canon Law collected by Gratian, I do not insist upon its
Confirmation by Eugenius, but upon its universal Reception in the Church of
Rome. And from thence I shall evidently prove that Tradition was not allowed to
be a Rule of Faith equal with the Scriptures.

Did. 9. c. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. The Authority and Infallibility of the holy
Scripture is asserted above all other Writings whatsoever; for all other
Writings are to be examined, and men are to judge of them as they see cause.

Now Bellarmin tells us, that the unwritten Word is so De verbo Dei l. 4. c. 2.
called, not that it always continues unwritten, but that it was so by the
first Author of it. So that the unwritten Word does not depend on mere Oral
Tradition, according to him, but it may be found in the Writers of the Church;
c. 12.
but the Canon Law expressly excludes all other Writings, let them contain what
they will, from being admitted to any Competition with Canonical Scripture; and
therefore according to that, no part of the Rule of Faith was contained in any
other than Canonical Scriptures.

Did. 37. c. Relatum, A man is supposed to have an entire and firm Rule of Cum
enim ex divinis Scripturis integram quis and firmam Regulam veritatis
susceperit.
Faith in the Scriptures.

Cause. 8. q. 1. c. Nec sufficere, The Scriptures Quibus sacris literis unica
est credendi pariter and vivendi Regul^ praescripta.
are said to be the only Rule both of Faith and Life.

And the Gloss on the Canon Law there owns the Scripture to be the Rule for
matters of Faith; but very pleasantly applies it to the Clergy, and thinks
Images enough for the Laity.

Cause. 24. q. 1. c. Non afferentes. The Scriptures are acknowledged to be the
true Balance; and that we are not so much to weigh what we find there, as to
own what we find there already weighed. Which must imply the Scripture alone to
be that Measure we are to trust to.

Did. 8. c. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It is there said, that Custom must yield to
Truth and Reason, when that is discovered, and that for this Reason, because
Christ said, I am Truth and not Custom. Now, if Tradition be an Infallible
Rule of Faith, Custom ought always to be presumed to have Truth and Reason of
its side. For, if we can once suppose a Custom to prevail in the Church
against Truth and Reason, it is impossible that Tradition should be Infallible;
for what is that but Ancient Custom?

Cause. 11. Q. 3. c. 101. Si is qui proeest. If any one commands what God has
forbidden, or forbids what God has commanded, he is to be accursed of all that
love God. And if he requires any thing besides the Will of God, or what God
has evidently required in Scripture, he is to be looked on as a false Witness
of God, and a Sacrilegious Person. How can this be, if there be another
infallible way of conveying the Will of God besides the Scriptures?

Cause. 24. q. 3. c. 30. c. Quid autem. In matters of doubt it is said that men
are to fly to the Written word for satisfaction, Sed in han^ insipientiam
cadunt, qui cum ad cognoscendam veritatem aliquo impediuntur obscuro, non ad
Propheticas voces, non ad Apostolicas liter as, nec ad Evangelicas
auc^oritates, sed ad seipsos recurrunt.
and that it is folly not to do it. It is true, Men's own Fancies are opposed
to Scripture, but against Men's Fancies no other Rule is mentioned but that of
the Written Word.

Joh. 22. Extravag. c. Quia quorundam. Tit. 14. makes his Appeal to Scripture
in the Controversy then on foot about Use and Property; Dicunt nobis ubi
legunt, etc. and he shows that if it were a matter of Faith, it must be
contained in Scripture, either expressly or by reduction; otherwise the
Scripture would Nec quasi hoc sacra Scriptura contineat, quo negato tota
Scriptura sacra redditur dubia; and per consequens articuli Fidei, qui habeat
per Scripturam sacram probari redd^^tur dubii and incerti.
be no certain Rule; and by consequence, the Articles of Faith which are proved
by Scripture, would be rendered doubtful and uncertain.

The Glosser there says, Whence comes this consequence? and refers to another
place; where he makes it out thus; that Faith can only be proved by the
Scripture, and therefore if the Authority of that be destroyed, Faith would
Extrav. Joh. 22. Cum inter Gloss. per consequens.

Turrecrem. de Ecclesia, l. 4. part. 2. c. 9.


be taken away. The Roman Editors for an Antidote refer to Cardinal
Turrecremata, who does indeed speak of Catholic Truths, which are not to be
found in the Canon of Scripture; and he quotes a passage in the Canon Law for
it under the name of Alex. 3. c. cum Marthoe Extrav. de Celebr. Missae. but in
truth it is Innoc. 3. Decretal. l. 3. Tit. 41. and yet this will not prove what
he aims at; for the Question was about the Author of the Words added in the
Eucharist to those of Christ's Institution; and he pleads that many of Christ's
words and actions are omitted by the Evangelists, which the Apostles afterward
set down; and he instances in Saint Paul, as to those words of Christ, It is
more blessed to give than to receive; and elsewhere. But what is all this to
Catholic Truths not being contained in Scripture either in words or by
consequence? The Cardinal was here very much to seek, when he had nothing but
such a Testimony as this to produce in so weighty and so new a Doctrine. The
best Argument he produces is, Turrecre^. l. 2. c. 18.
a horrible blunder of Gratian's, where S. Augustine seems to reckon the
Decretal Epistles equal with the Scriptures, Did. 19. c. in Canonicis; which
the Roman Correctors were ashamed of, and consess that S. Augustine speaks only
of Canonical Epistles in Scripture. So hard must they strain, who among
Christians would set up any other Rule equal with the Written Word.

4. I proceed to prove this from the ancient Offices of the Roman Church.

In the Office produced by Morinus out of the Vatican MS. which he says was
very ancient; the Bishop before Morin. de Ordinat. Sacris, p. 275.
his Consecration was asked, If he would accommodate all his prudence, to the
best of his skill, to the Sense of Holy Scripture?

Resp. Yes, I will with all my heart consent, and obey it in all things.

Inter. Will thou teach the People by Word and Example, the things which thou
learnest out of holy Scriptures?

Resp. I will.

And then immediately follows the Examen about Manners.

In another old Office of S. Victor's, there are the same Morin p. 333.
Questions in the same manner.

And so in another of the Church of Rouen lately produced by Mabillon, which he
says was about William Mabillon A. nalect. To. 2. p. 468.
the Conquerour's time, there is not a word about Traditions; which crept into
the Ordo Romanus, and from thence has been continued in the Roman Pontificals.
But it is observable, that the Ordo Romanus owns that the Examen was originally
taken out of the Gallican Offices, (although it does not appear in those
imperfect ones lately published at Rome by Th^masius) and therefore we may
justly suspect that the additional Questions about Traditions were the Roman
Interpolations, after it came to be used in that Pontifical.

And the first Office in Morinus was the true ancient Gallican Office. But if
Tradition had been then owned as a Rule of Faith, it ought no more to have been
omitted in the ancient Offices than in the modern.

And the ancient Writers about Ecclesiastical Offices speak very agreeably to
the most ancient Offices about this matter. Amalarius says the Gospel is the
Fountain Amalarius de Offi^i^s, l. 3. c. 5.
of Wisdom; and that the Preachers ought to prove the Evangelical Truth out of
the sacred Books. Isidore, that we ought to think nothing (as to matters of
Faith) Isidor. de Offic. l. 2. c. 23.
but what is contained in the two Testaments. Rabanus Maurus, that the
knowledge of the Scriptures is the foundation Rab. Maur. de Inst. Cler. l. 3.
c. 2.

l. 2. c. 53.


and perfection of Prudence, That Truth and Wisdom are to be tried by them;
and the perfect instruction of Life is contained in them. Our Venerable Bede
agrees with them, when he says, that the true Teachers Bed. in Cant. l. 5.

De Tabernaculo l. 1. c. 6.


take out of the Scriptures of the old and new Testament that which they
preach: and therefore have their minds employed in finding out the true meaning
of them.

5. I now come to the Fathers; wherein I am in great Vindic. of the Answ. to
some late Papers.
measure prevented by a late Discourse, wherein it is at large showed that the
Fathers made use of no other Rule but the Scriptures for deciding
Controversies; therefore I shall take another method, which is to show that
those who do speak most advantageously of Tradition, did not intend to set up
another Rule of Faith distinct from Scripture.

And here I shall pass over all those Testimonies of Fathers which speak either
of Tradition before the Canon of Scripture, or to those who did not receive it,
or of the Tradition of Scripture it self, or of some Rites and Customs of the
Church, as wholly impertinent. And when these are cut off, there remain scarce
any to be considered, besides that of Vincentius Lerinensis, and one Testimony
of S. Basil.

I begin with Vincentius Lerinensis, who by some is thought so great a Favourer
of Tradition; but he says not a word of it as a Rule of Faith distinct from
Scripture; Commonit. 1. c. 2.

Cum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat.


for he asserts the Canon of Scripture to be sufficient of it self for all
things. How can that be, if Tradition be a Rule of Faith distinct from it? He
makes indeed Catholic Tradition the best Interpreter of Scripture; and we have
no reason to decline it in the Points in dispute between us, if Vincentius his
Rules be followed.

1. If Antiquity, Universality and Consent be joined.

2. If the difference be observed between old Errors and new ones. For, says
he, when they had length of c. 39.
time, Truth is more easily concealed, by those who are concerned to suppress
it. And in those Cases we have no other way to deal with them, but by Scripture
and ancient Councils. And this is the Rule we profess to hold to.

But to suppose any one part of the Church to assume to it self the Title of
Catholic, and then to determine what is to be held for Catholic Tradition by
all Members of the Catholic Church, is a thing in it self unreasonable, and
leaves that part under an impossibility of being reclaimed. For in case the
Corrupt Part be judge, we may be sure no Corruptions will be ever owned.
Vincentius grants that Arianism had once extremely the advantage c. 6.
in Point of Universality, and had many Councils of its side; if now the
prevailing Party be to judge of Catholic Tradition, and all are bound to
submit to its Decrees without farther Examination, as the Author of the Guide
in Controversies says upon these Rules of Of the Necessity of Church-Guides p.
201.
Vincentius; then I say all men were then bound to declare themselves Arians.
For if the Guides of the present Church are to be trusted and relied upon for
the Doctrine of the Apostolical Church downwards; how was it possible for any
Members of the Church then to oppose Arianism, and to reform the Church after
its prevalency? To say it was condemned by a former Council, does by no means
clear the difficulty; For the present Guides must be p. 199.
trusted, whether they were rightly condemned or not; and nothing can be more
certain, than that they would be sure to condemn those who condemned them. But
Vincentius says, Every true Lover of Christ preferred the ancient Faith before
the novel betraying of it; but then he must choose this ancient Faith against
the judgment of the present Guides of the Church. And therefore that, according
to Vincentius, can be no Infallible Rule of Faith.

But whether the present Universality dissents from Antiquity, whose Judgment
should be sooner taken than its own? says the same Author, This had been an
excellent Argument in the mouth of Ursacius or Valens at the Council of
Ariminum; and I do not see what Answer the Guide in Controversies could have
made. But both are Parties, and is not the Councils Judgment to be taken rather
than a few Opposers? So that, for all that I can find by these Principles,
Arianism having the greater number, had hard luck not to be established as the
Catholic Faith. But if in that case, particular Persons were to judge between
the New and the Old Faith, then the same Reason will still hold, unless the
Guides of the Church have obtained a new Patent of Infallibility since that
time.

The great Question among us, is, Where the true ancient Faith is; and how we
may come to find it out? We are willing to follow the ancient Rules in this
matter. The Scripture is allowed to be an Infallible Rule on all hands; and I
am proving that Tradition was not allowed in the ancient Church as distinct
from it. But the present Question is, how far Tradition is to be allowed in
giving the Sense of Scripture between us. Vincentius says, we ought to follow
it when there is Antiquity, Universality and Consent: This we are willing to be
tried by. But here comes another Question, Who is to be Judge of these? The
present Guides of the Catholic Church? To what purpose then are all those
Rules? Will they condemn themselves? Or, as the Guide admirably says, If the
present Universality be its own Judge, when can we think p. 199.
it will witness its departure from the true Faith? And if it will not, what a
Case is the Church in, under such a pretended Universality?

The utmost use I can suppose then, Vincentius his Rules can be of to us now,
is in that Case which he puts when Corruptions and Errors have had time to
take root and fasten themselves; and that is, By an Appeal to Scripture and
Ancient Councils. But because of the charge of Innovation upon us, we are
content to be tried by his second Rule. By the Consent of the Fathers of
greatest Reputation, who are agreed on all hands to have lived and died in the
Communion of the Catholic Church: and what they delivered freely, constantly
and unanimously, let that be taken for the undoubted and certain Rule in
judging between us. But if the present Guides must come in to be Judges here
again, then all our labor is lost, and Vincentius his Rules signify just
nothing,

The Testimony of S. Basil is by Mr. White magnified Tabulae Suf^ragial. p. 54.
above the rest, and that out of his Book de Spiritu Sancto above all others,
to prove that the Certainty of Faith depends on Tradition; and not merely on
Scripture. The force of it is said to lie in this, that the practice of the
Church, in saying, with the holy Spirit, though not found in Scripture is to
determine the Sense of the Article of Faith about the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost. But to clear this place, we are to observe,

1. That S. Basil does not insist on Tradition for the Proof of the Article of
Faith, for he expressly disowns it in that Book; It is not enough, says he,
that we have it by Tradition from our (...)* De Sp. Sancto c. 7.
Fathers; for our Fathers had it from the Will of God in Scripture, as appears
by those Testimonies I have set down already, which they took for their
Foundations. Nothing can be plainer than that S. Basil made Scripture alone the
Foundation of Faith as to this Point. And no one upon all Occasions speaks more
expressly than he does as to the Sufficiency of Scripture for De vera fide, p.
386. A. C.

p. 391. C.


a Rule of Faith; and he was too great, and too wise a Man to contradict
himself.

2. That there were different forms of speech used in Ascet. Reg. 26.

Reg 80. c. 22.


the Church concerning the Holy Ghost, some taken out of Scripture, and others
received by Tradition from the Fathers. When he proves the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost De Sp. San^t. c. 9.
he appeals to Scripture, and declares, that he would neither think nor speak
otherwise than he found there. But c. 10.
it was objected that the Form S. Basil used was not found in Scripture; he
answers, that the equivalent is there c. 21.
found; and that there were some things received by Tradition, which had the
same force toward Piety. And if we take away all unwritten Customs, we shall
do wrong to the Gospel, and leave a bare name to the Public Preaching. And
from thence he insists on some Traditionary Rites, as the Sign of the Cross,
Praying toward the East, etc. His business is to show that to the greater
solemnity of Christian Worship several Customs were observed in the Church,
which are not to be found in Scripture. And if other ancient Customs were
received which are not commanded in Scripture, he sees no Reason that they
should find such fault with this. And c. 29.
this is the whole force of S. Basil's Reasoning, which can never be stretched
to the setting up Tradition as a Rule of Faith distinct from Scripture.

Having thus showed that there was no Catholic Tradition for this New Rule of
Faith, I am now to give an Account how it came into the Church.

The first Step that was made toward it, was by the second Council of Nice.
For, although the Emperor in the Synodical Epistle proposed to them the true
ancient Mehod of judging in Councils, By the Books of Scripture placed on a
Throne in the middle of the Council; yet they found, they could by no means do
their business that Way, and therefore as Bellarmin observes, they set up
Tradition in the 6th and 7th Sessions, and pronounced Anathema's against those
who rejected unwritten Traditions. But although there were then almost as
little pretense for Tradition as Scripture in the matter of Images; yet there
having been a practice among them, to set up Richer. Hist. Conc. General. l. 1.
c. 11. n. 13.
and to worship Images, (which Richerius thinks came first into the Church from
the Reverence showed to the Emperors Statues) they thought this the securest
way to advance that, which they could never defend by Scripture.

But this prevailed very little in the Western Church, as is well known by the
rejection of that Synod; however Pope Hadrian joined with them, and produced a
wretched Tradition about Sylvester and Constantine to justify their
Proceedings; as appears by the Acts of that Council. And from the time that
Images were received at Rome, the force of Tradition was magnified; and by
degrees it came to be made use of to justify other Practices, for which they
had nothing else to plead.

Hitherto Tradition was made use of for matters of Practice, and the Scripture
was generally received as the Rule of Faith; but some of the Schoolmen found it
impossible to defend some Doctrines held in the Church of Rome by mere
Scripture, and therefore they were forced to call in the Help of Tradition. The
most remarkable of these was Scotus, who although in his Prologue he asserted,
as is said already, that the Scripture did sufficiently contain all things
necessary to salvation; yet when he came to particular Points, he found
Scripture alone would never do their business. And especially as to the
Sacraments of the Church, about which he saw the Church of Rome then held many
things which could never be Scot. in l. 1. Sent. Did. 11.
proved from thence. And this was the true occasion of Traditions being taken
in for a partial Rule.

For after the Council of Lateran had declared several things to be of Faith,
which were in no former Creeds, as Scotus confesses, and they were bound to
defend them as Points of Faith, the Men of Wit and Subtilty, such as l. 4.
Did. 11. n. 15.
Scotus was, were very hard put to it, to find out ways to prove those to have
been old Points of Faith, which they knew to be very new. Then they betook
themselves to two things, which would serve for a color to blind the common
People; and those were,

1. That it was true, these things were not in Scripture; but Christ said to
his Disciples, I have many things to say unto you, etc. and among those many
things they were to believe these new Doctrines to be some.

2. When this would not serve, then they told them, though these Doctrines were
not explicitly in Scripture, yet they were implicitly there; and the Church had
authority to fetch them out of those dark places, and to set them in a better
light. And thus Scotus helped himself out in that dark Point of
Transubstantiation. First he attempts n. 13.
to make it out by Tradition, but finding that would not do the business
effectually, he runs to the Authority of the Church, especially in the business
of Sacraments, and we are to suppose, says he, that the Church does expound
the Scripture with the same Spirit which indicted them. This was a brave
Supposition indeed, but he offers no proof of it.

If we allow Scotus to have been the Introducer of Tradition, as to some Points
of Faith, yet I have made it appear, that his Doctrine was not received in the
Schools. But after the Council of Constance had declared several Propositions
to be Heretical, which could not be condemned by Scripture, there was found a
Necessity of holding, that there were Catholic Truths not contained in
Scripture. The first Proposition there condemned was, That the Substance of
Bread and Wine remain in the Sacrament of the Altar: the second, That the
Accidents do not remain without their Subject: Now how could such as these be
condemned by Scripture? But although only some were said to be Heretical, yet
all were said to be against Catholic Truth. But where is this Catholic Truth
to be found? Cardinal Cusanus thought of a current sense of Scripture,
according Scripturas esse and tempus adaptatas and vary intellectas, ita ut
uno tempore secundum eurrentem universalem ritum exponerentur, mutato ritu
iterum sente^tia mutaretur Cusan. ad Bohem. Epist. 2.
to the Churches Occasions; so that though the Churches Practice should be
directly contrary, yet the Scripture was to be understood as the Church
practiced. This was a very plain and effectual way, if it had not been too
gross; and therefore it was thought much better by Cardinal Turrecremata, to
found Catholic Verities on unwritten Tradition, as well as on Scripture.

After this, Leo X. in his famous Bull against Luther, Exurge Domine, made a
farther step; for 22 Proposition condemned therein, is That it is certain that
it is not in the power of the Church or Pope to appoint new Articles of Faith.
It seems then the Pope or Church have a Power to constitute new Articles of
Faith; and then neither Scripture nor Tradition can be the certain Rule of
Faith, but the Present Church or Pope.

This had put an end to the business, if it would have taken; but the World
being wiser, and the Errors and Corruptions complained of not being to be
defended (...) Scripture, Tradition was pitched upon as a secure Way; and
accordingly several attempts were made toward the setting of it up, by some
Provincial Councils before that of Trent. So in the Council of Sens, 1527. Can.
53. It is declared to be a pernicious Error to receive nothing but what is
deduced from Scripture, because Christ delivered many things to his Apostles
which were never written. But not one thing is alleged as a matter of Faith so
conveyed; but only some Rites about Sacraments and Prayer; and yet he is
declared a Heretic as well as Schismatic, who rejects them. Indeed the
Apostles Creed is mentioned, but not as to the Articles contained in it, but as
to the Authors of it. But what is there in all this that makes a man guilty of
Heresy?

Jod. Clicthoveus, a Doctor of Paris, the next Year wrote an Explication and
Defense of this Council, but he mistakes the Point; for he runs upon it as if
it were, whether all things to be believed and observed in the Church, were to
be expressly set down in Scripture? whereas a just consequence out of it is
sufficient. And the greatest strength of what he says to the purpose, is, that
the other Opinion was condemned in the Council of Constance.

And from no better a Tradition than this did the Council of Trent declare the
unwritten Word to be a Rule of Faith equal with the Scriptures.

II. About the Canon of Scripture, defined by the Council of Trent.
This is declared by the Council of Trent, Sess. 4. and therein the Books of
Tobias, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Maccabees and Baruch are
received for Canonical, with the twenty two Books in the Hebrew Canon, and an
Anathema is denounced against those who do not. And presently it adds, that
hereby the World might see what Authorities the Council proceeded on for
con^^rming matters of Faith as well as reforming manners.

Now to show that there was no Catholic Tradition for the ground of this
Decree, we are to observe,

1. That these Canonical Books are not so called in a large sense for such as
have been used or read in the Church; but in the strict sense for such as are a
good Foundation to build matters of Faith upon.

2. That these Books were not so received by all even in the Council of Trent.
For what is received by virtue of a Catholic Tradition, must be universally
received by the Members of it. But that so it was not appears by the account
given by both the Historians. F. Paul says, that in the Congregation there
were two different Opinions Hist. of the Council of Tr. l. 2. p. 154.
of those who were for a particular Catalogue; one was to distinguish the Books
into three parts, the other to make all the Books of equal authority; and that
this latter was carried by the greater number. Now if this were a Catholic
Tradition, how was it possible for the Fathers of the Council to divide about
it? And Cardinal Pallavicini himself says, that Bertanus and Seripandus
propounded the putting the Books into several Classes, Ibid. l. 6. c. 11. p. 4.
some to be read for Piety, and others to confirm Doctrines of Faith; and that
Cardinal Seripando wrote a most learned Book to that purpose. What! against a
Catholic Tradition? It seems, he was far from believing it to be so. And he
confesses, that when they came to the Anathema, the Legates and twenty Fathers
were for it; p. 8.
Madrucci and fourteen were against it, because some Catholics were of another
opinion. Then certainly, they knew no Catholic Tradition for it.

Among these Cardinal Cajetan is mentioned, who was, says Pallavicini,
severely rebuked for it by Melchior Canus; but what is that to the Tradition of
the Church? Canus does indeed appeal to the Council of Carthage, Innocentius I.
and the Council of Florence; but this does Can. Loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 11.
not make up a Catholic Tradition against Cajetan; who declares that he
follows S. Jerome, who cast those Books Cajet. in Eccles. fine.
out of the Canon with Respect to Faith. And he answers the Arguments brought
on the other side, by this distinction, that they are Canonical for
Edification, but not Ad Ester c. 10. ad fin.
for Faith. If therefore Canus would have confuted Cajetan he ought to have
proved that they were owned for Canonical in the latter Sense. Cajetan in his
Epistle to Clemens VII. before the Historical Books, owns the great Obligation
of the Church to S. Jerome for distinguishing Canonical and Apocryphal Books;
and says, that he has freed it from the Reproach of the Jews, who said the
Christians made Canonical Books of the Old Testament which they knew nothing
of. And this was an Argument of great consequence; but Canus takes no notice of
it, and it fully answers his Objection, that men could not know what Books were
truly Canonical, viz. such as were of divine inspiration, and so received by
the Jews. Catharinus says, in Answer to Cajetan, that the Jews Annot. in
Cajet. l. 1. p. 37.
had one Canon, and the Church another. But how comes the Canon to be received
as of divine Inspiration which was not so received among the Jews? This were to
resolve all into the Churches Inspiration and not into Tradition.

Bellarmin grants, that the Church can by no means make De Verb. Dei, l. 1. c.
11.
a Book Canonical which is not so, but only declare what is Canonical, and
that, not at pleasure; but from ancient Testimonies, from similitude of style
with Books uncontroverted, and the general Sense and Taste of Christian People.
Now the Case here relates to Books not first written to Christians, but among
the Jews, from whom we receive the Oracles of God committed to them. And if the
Jews never believed these Books to contain the Oracles of God in them, how can
the Christian Church embrace them for such, unless it assumes a Power to make,
and not merely to declare Canonical Books? For he grants we have no Testimony
of the Jews for them.

But Catharinus himself cannot deny that S. Jerome says, that although the
Church reads those Books, yet it does not receive them for Canonical
Scriptures. And he makes a pitisull Answer to it. For he confesses, that the
Church taken for the Body of the Faithful did not receive them; but as taken
for the Governors it did. But others grant that they did receive them no more
than the People; and as to the other, the cause of Tradition Jul. Ruger. de
libris Canonicis, p. 80.
is plainly given us. And in truth he resolves all at last into the opinion of
the Popes Innocentius, Gelasius and Eugenius 4. But we are obliged to him for
letting us know the Secret of so much zeal for these Apocryphal Books, viz.
that they are of great force against the Heretics, for Purgatory is no where
so expressly mentioned as in p. 41.
the Maccabees. If it had not been for this, S. Jerome and Cajetan might have
escaped Censure, and the Jewish Canon had been sufficient.

But to show, that there has been no Catholic Tradition about the Tridentine
Canon, I shall prove these two things:

1. That there has been a constant Tradition against it in the Eastern Church.

2. That there never was a constant Tradition for it in the Western Church.

1. That there has been a constant Tradition against it in the Eastern Church,
which received the Jewish Canon, without the Books declared Canonical by the
Council of Trent. We have very early Evidence of this in the Testimony of
Melito, Bishop of Sardis, who lived not long after the middle of the 2d.
Century, and made it his business to enquire into this matter, and he delivers
but Eusebius. l. 4. c. 25.
22 Books of the Old Testament. The same is done by Origin in the next, who
took infinite Pains, as Eusebius l. 6. c. 25.

Philocal. c. 3.


says, in searching after the Copies of the Old Testament. And these
Testimonies are preserved by Eusebius in the following Century: and himself
declares, that there was no sacred Book among the Eusebius. Demonstr. l. 8. p. 368.

Chronic. Gr. p. 172.


Jews from the time of Zorobabel; which cuts off the Books canonized by the
Council of Trent. In the same Age we have the Testimonies of Athanasius, St.
Athanas. Ep. 39. Cyril. Cabech. 4.
Cyril of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, S. Basil, Epiph. de mensuris and ponder.
S. Gregory Nazianzene, Amphilochius and Basil. in Origin. Philocal.
S. Chrysostom: It is not to be imagined Greg. Nazianzen. in Carm.
that a Tradition should be better attested Amph. in Canon. Ep. apud Balsam.
in one Age than this was, by so considerable Men in different S. Chrysostom. in
Genesis hom. 4.
Churches, who give in the Testimony of all those Churches they belonged to.
And yet besides these we have in that Age a concurrent Testimony of a Council
of Bishops at Laodicea, from several Provinces of Asia; and Conc. Laodicea, c.
59.
which is yet more, this Canon of theirs was received into the Code of the
Catholic Church; and so owned by the Council of Chalcedon, which by its first
Canon gives Authority to it. And Justinian allows the force of Laws to the
Canons which were either made or confirmed by No^el. 131.
the four General Councils. But it is the point of Tradition I am upon; and
therefor Justinian's Novel may at least be a s^rong Evidence of that in the
6th Century: In the 7th, Leontius gives his own Testimony, and that of
Theodorus. Leont. de Sect^s, Act. 2. D^mascen. de ^ide, lib. 4. c. 18.
In the 8th, Damascen expressly owns the Hebrew Canon of 22 Books, and excludes
by name some of the Books made Canonical at Trent. In the 9th we have the
Test^mony of Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, if Niceph Chro^^gr. p.
419.
he be the Author of the Laterculus, at the end of his Chr^nography; but if he
be not, he must be an Author of that Age, being translated by Anastasius
Bibliothecarius. Anastas. Hist. p. 189.

Not. in Can. 27. Carthag. Niceph. in Epigram.

Metroph. Confess. c. 7. p. 82.

Phil. Cyprii Chronic. Eccles. Graec. p. 459.


In the 12th. Balsamon and Zonaras refer to the Council of Laodicea, and the
Greek Fathers. In the 14th. Nicephorus Calisthus reckons but 22 Books of the
Old Testament. And in this Age, we have the clear Testimony of Metrophanes,
(afterward Patriarch of Alexandria) who says, there are but 22 Canonical
Books of the Old Testament; but the rest, i. e. Tobit, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, Baruch and Machabees are useful, and therefore not wholly to
be rejected, but the Church never received them for Canonical and Authentical,
as appears by many Testimonies, as, among others, of Gregory the Divine,
Amphilochius and Damascen: and therefore we never prove matters of Faith out of
them.

2. Let us now compare this Tradition with that of the Western Church for the
New Canon of Trent. It cannot be denied, that Innocentius I. and Gelasius did
enlarge the Canon, and took in the Apocryphal Books (unless we call in question
the Writings under their Names;) but granting them genuine, I shall show that
there is no comparison between this Tradition and that of the Eastern Church,
and therefore there could be no possible Reason for the Council of Trent to
make a Decree for this Tradition, and to anathematize all who did not submit to
it. For,

1. This Tradition was not universally received at that time. Innocentius his
Epistle is supposed to be written A. D. 405. Was the Western Church agreed
before or after about this matter? This Epistle was written to Eruperius, a
Gallican Bishop, (to whom St. Jerome dedicated his Commentaries on Zechariah,)
but now it unluckily falls out, that the Tradition of the Gallican Church was
contrary to this; as appears by S. Hilary, (who could Hilar. Prolog. in Psalm.
not be ignorant of it, being a famous Bishop of that Church) and he tells us,
there were but 22 Canonical Books of the Old Testament. I confess he says,
some were for adding Tobit and Judith, but it is very observable that he says,
that the other Account is most agreeable to ancient Tradition, which is a
mighty Argument against Innocentius, who brings no Tradition to justify his
Canon. When St. Augustine produced a Place out of the De Praedest. Sanctor. c.
14.
Book of Wisdom, the Divines of Marseilles rejected it; because the Book was
not Canonical: Therefore in that time Innocent's Canon was by no means received
in the Gallican Church; for by it this Book was made Canonical. But S. Jerome,
who had as much learning as Pope Innocent, Prolog. Gal. Prolog. in lib. Salom.
ad Paul. and Eust. ad Chromat.
vehemently opposed this New Canon more than once or ten times; and not only
speaks of the Jewish Canon, but of the Canon of the Church. The Church, says
he, reads the Books of Tobit, Judith and Machabees, but the Church does not
receive them among Canonical Scriptures. What Church does he mean? Not the
Synagogue certainly. Pope Innocent says, Those Books are to be received into
the Canon; S. Jerome says, the Church does not receive them, but that they are
to be cast out; Where is the Certainty of Tradition to be found? If Innocent
were in the right, S. Jerome was foully mistaken, and in plain terms belied the
Church. But how is this consistent with the Saintship of St. Jerome? Or with
common discretion if the Church did receive those Books for Canonical? For
every one could have disproved him. And it required no great Judgment or deep
Learning to know what Books were received, and what not. If S. Jerome were so
mistaken (which it is very hard to believe) how came Ruffinus not to observe
his errors and opposition to the Church? Nay, how came Ruffinus himself to
fall into the very same prodigious mistake? For he not only rejects the
controverted Books out of the Canon, but says, he followed the ancient
Tradition therein. What Ruffin. in Symbol. page 188, 189.
account can be given of this matter? If Innocent's Tradition were right, these
men were under a gross Delusion; and yet they were learned and knowing Persons,
and more than ordinarily conversant in the Doctrines and Traditions of the
Church.

2. This Opinion was not received as a Tradition of the Church afterward. For,
if it had been, how could Gregory I. reject the Book of Machabees out of the
Canon, Greg. Moral. in Job. l. 19. c. 17.
when two of his Predecessors took it in? It is somewhat hard, to suppose one
Pope to contradict two of his Predecessors about the Canon of Scripture; yet I
see not how to avoid it; nor how it is consistent with the Constancy of
Tradition, much less with the pretense to Infallibility. He did not merely
doubt, as Canus would Can. Loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 11. ad 4.

Cath. de Ca^o^icis Scrip. in Opuscul. p. 302.


have it thought, but he plainly excludes them out of the Canon. Catharinus
thinks he followed S. Jerome. What then? Does this exclude his contradicting his
Predecessors? Or was S. Jerome's Judgment above the Pope's? But it was not S.
Gregory alone who contradicted the former Popes Canon; for it was not received
either in Italy, Spain, France, Germany or England; and yet no doubt it was a
very Catholic Tradition.

Not in Italy; for there Cassiodore, a learned and devout Man in the next
Century to them, gives an account of the Canon of Scripture, and he takes not
any notice either of Innocent or Gelasius. He first sets down the Order of
Scripture according to S. Jerome; and then Cassiodor. de Instit. Divin. liter.
cap. 12, 13, 14. c. 6.
according to S. Augustine; and in the last place, according to the old
Translation and the LXX. and where himself speaks of the Apocryphal Books
before, he follows S. Jerome 's Opinion, that they were written rather for
manners than Dactrine. He confesses there was a difference about the Canon; but
he goes about to excuse it. But what need that if there were a Catholic
Tradition then in the Church concerning it, and that enforced by two Popes?

But it may yet seem stranger, that even in Italy, one canonized for a Saint by
Clemens VII. should follow S. Jerome's Opinion in this matter, viz. S.
Antoninus, Bishop S. Antonin. Sum. Hist. P. 1. Tit. 3. c. 4.
of Florence. Who speaking of Ecclestasticus received into the Canon of the two
Popes, he says, it is only received by the Church to be read, and is not
authentic to prove any thing in matters of Faith. He that writes Notes upon
him, says, that he follows S. Jerome, and must be understood of the Eastern
Church; for the Western Church always received these Books into the Canon. But
he speaks not one word of the Eastern Church; and by the Church he could
understand nothing but what he accounted the Catholic Church. Canus allows
Antoninus to Can. Loc. Theol. l. 2. c. 11.
have rejected these Books; but he thinks the matter not so clear, but then
they might doubt concerning it. Then there was no such Evidence of Tradition to
convince men. But Antoninus has preserved the Judgment of a Part. 3. Tit. 18.
c. 6. Sect. 2, and 3.
greater man concerning these Books even Thomas Aquinas, who in 2. 2dae. he
says, denied these Books to have such authority as to prove any matter of
Faith by them: which is directly contrary to the Council of Trent. If this
passage be not now to be found in him, we know whom to blame for it. If
Antoninus saw it there, we hope his word may be taken for it.

In Spain, we have for the Hebrew Canon the Testimonies Eur in Adait. ad Lyram
ad c. 1. Ester. and 7.

Tostat. in Matt. Pr^f. q. 1. 2.

Xim. Praef. ad Bib. Comp.


of Paulus Burgensis, Tostatus, and Cardinal Ximines.

In France, of Victorinus, Agobardus, Radulphus Flaviacensis, Petrus
Cluniacensis, Hugo de S. Victore, and Richard de S. Victore, Lyra and others.

In Germany, of Rabanus Maurus, Strabus, Rupertus, Hermannus Contractus and
others.

In England, of Bid, Alcvin, Sarisburiensis, Ockam, Waldensis and others. Whom
I barely mention, because their Testimonies are at large in Bishop Cosins his
Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture, and no man has yet had the
hardiness to undertake that Book.

These I think are sufficient to show there was no Catholic Tradition for the
Decree of the Council of Trent about the Canon of Scripture.

I now proceed to show on what pretenses and colors it came in, and by what
degrees and steps it advanced.

1. The first step was, the Esteem which some of the Fathers expressed of these
Books in quoting of passages out of them. We do not deny that the Fathers did
frequently cite them: even those who expressly rejected them from being
Canonical, and not as ordinary Books, but as such as were useful to the
Church, wherein many wise Sayings and good Actions are recorded. But the many
Quotations the Fathers do make out of them is the only plausible pretense
which those of the Church of Rome have to defend the putting them into the
Canon, as appears by Bellarmin and others. The Book of Tobit, they tell us, is
mentioned by S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, St. Basil, and St. Augustine. Of Judith by
St. Jerome who mentions a Tradition that it was allowed in the Council of Nice;
but certainly S. Jerome never believed it, when he declares it to be Apocryphal,
and not sufficient to prove any matter of Faith. The Book of Wisdom by S.
Cyprian, S. Cyril and S. Augustine. Ecclesiasticus by Clemens Alexandrinus, S.
Cyprian, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose and S. Augustine. The Machabees by Tertullian,
Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Eusebius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine. But
all these Testimonies only prove that they thought something in those Books
worth alleging, but not that they judged the Books themselves Canonical. And
better Arguments from their Citations might be brought for the Books of the
Sibylls than for any of these. We are not then to judge of their Opinion of
Canonical Books by bare Citations, but by their declared Judgments about them.

2. The next step was, when they came to be read in Churches; but about this
there was no certain Rule. For the Councils of Laodicea and Carthage differed
chiefly upon this Point. The former decreed, That none but Canonical Scripture
should be read under the Name of Holy Writings; and sets down the names of the
Canonical Books then to be read, (and so leaves out the Apocalypse.) The latter
from their being read, inferred their being Canonical; for it agrees with the
other, that none but Canonical should be read, and because these were read, it
reckons them up with the Canonical Books; for so the Canon concludes, We have
received from our Fathers that these Books are to be read in Churches.

But the Council of Carthage was not peremptory in this matter; but desired it
might be referred to Boniface and other Bishops beyond the Seas: Which shows
that here was no Decree absolutely made, nor any Certainty of Tradition; for
then to what purpose should they send to other Churches to advise about it?

3. When they came to be distinguished from Apocryphal Writings. Whence those
who do not consider the Reason of it, conclude them to have been Canonical. But
sometimes Apocryphal signified such Books as were not in the Canon of Faith, as
in the Authors before mentioned; sometimes such Books which were not allowed
to be used among Christians. This distinction we have in Ruffinus, who says
there are three sorts of Books; Canonical, as the 22 of the Old Testament;
Ecclesiastical, of which sort he reckons Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith
and Machabees, and these he says were permitted to be read in Churches, but no
Argument could be brought out of them for matter of Faith, Apocryphal are such
which by no means were permitted to be read. And thus Innocentius his words may
well be understood: For he concludes with saying, that other Writings were not
only to be rejected, but to be condemned. And so his meaning is to distinguish
them from such counterfeit Divine Writings as were then abroad. For these were
not to be wholly rejected, and in that large sense he admits them into the
Canon, taking Ecclesiastical Writings which were read in Churches into that
number. And in this sense S. Augustine used the Word Apocryphal, when the Book
of Enoch is so called by him, and such other counterfeit Writings under the
Names of the Prophets and Apostles; Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 15. c. 23.

l. 17. c. 20.


but elsewhere he distinguishes between the Canonical Books of Solomon, and
those which bear his Name; which he says the more learned know not to be his,
but the Western Church had of old owned their Authority. But in the case of the
Book of Enoch, he appeals to the Canon, which was kept in the Jewish Temple;
and so falls in with S. Jerome; and he confesses it is hard to justify the
Authority of those which are not in the Hebrew Canon. Of the Machabees he
says, It is distinguished from the Writings Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 36.
called Canonical; but it is received by the Church as such. What! to confirm
matters of Faith? No. But for the glorious sufferings therein recorded; and
elsewhere he says, C. Gaudent. c. 29.
it is useful, if it be soberly read. S. Augustine knew very well that all
Books were not received alike; and that many were received in some parts of the
Western Church from the old Translation out of the LXX, which were not received
in the Eastern; and therefore in his Books of Christian Doctrine he gives Rules
in judging of Canonical De Doctr. l. 3. c. 8.
Books; to follow the Authority of the greatest Number of Catholic Churches,
especially the Apostolical; and that those which were received by all, should
be preferred before those which were only received by some. But he very well
knew, that the Hebrew Canon was universally received, and that the controverted
Books were not; and therefore, according to his Rule, these could never be of
Equal Authority with the other.

4. When the Roman Church declared that it received the controverted Books into
the Canon. This is said to have been done by Gelasius, with his Synod of LXX
Bishops, (and yet it is hard to understand how Gregory so soon after should
contradict it.) The Title of it in the old MS. produced by Chiffletius, and by
him attributed to Hormisdas, is, The Order of the Old Testament which Not. in
Vigil. Taps. p. 150.
the holy Catholic Roman Church receives and honors is this. But whether by
Gelasius, or Hormisdas, I cannot understand, why such a Decree as this should
not be put into the old Roman Code of Canons, if it had been then made. That
there was such a one appears by the Copies of it in the Vatican, mentioned by
the Roman Correctors of Gratian, and by mention of it by the Canon Si
Romanorum, Did. 19. and De Libellis, Did. 20. and by the latter we understand
what Canons of Councils and Decrees of Popes are in it, among whom are both
Gelasius and Hormisdas. This they agree to be the same with that published by
Wendelstin at Mentz, 1525. The Epistle of Innocentius to Exuperius with the
Canon is there published; but not the other; and so is the Canon of the Council
of Carthage; but that of Laodicea is cut off; and so they are in that published
by Dionysius Exiguus and Quesnell, (Justellus his ancient Copy was imperfect
there,) but both these Canons being in the Roman Code, are an Argument to me,
that the controverted Books were received by the Roman Church at that time; but
in such a manner, that S. Jerome's Prologues still stood in the vulgar Latin
Bible, with the Commentaries of Lyra, and Additions of Burgensis, which were
stiff for the Hebrew Canon; and S. Jerome's Authority prevailed more than the
Pope's, as appears fully by what has been already produced.

5. To advance the Authority of these Books one step higher, Eugenius IV.
declared them to be Part of the Canon in the Instruction given to the
Armenians. Which the Roman Writers pretend to have been done in the Council of
Florence: But Naclantus Bishop of Chioza, in the Council of Trent, as
Pallavicini says, denied that any Hist. Council. Trident. l. 6. c. 11. ^. 12.
such Decree was made by the Council of Florence; because the last Session of
it ended 1439. and that Decree was signed Feb. 4. 1441. To this the Legate
replied, that this was a mistake occasioned by Abraham Cretensis, who published
the Latin version of it, only till the Greeks departure; but the Council
continued three years longer, as appeared by the Extracts of Augustinus
Patricius, since published in the Tomes of the Councils. But he never mentions
the Canon of Scripture; however, because Cervinus affirms that he saw the
Original signed by the Pope and Cardinals, we have no reason to dispute it. But
then it appears how very little it signified, when Antoninus the Bishop of
Florence opposed it, and Cardinal Ximenes and Cardinal Cajetan slighted it, and
all who embraced the Council of Basil looked on Eugenius his Decree as void;
and after all, that very Decree only joins the Apocryphal Books in the same
Canon, as the Council of Carthage had done; but it was reserved as the peculiar
Honor of the Council of Trent to declare that Matters of Faith might be proved
out of them, as well as out of any Canonical Scriptures.

III. About the free use of the Scripture in the vulgar Language, prohibited by
the Council of Trent.
To understand the Sense of the Council of Trent in this matter, we must
consider;

1. That it declares the vulgar Latin to be Authentic; i. e. that no man under
any pretense shall dare to presume to reject it. Suppose the pretense be that
it differs from the Original; no matter for that, he must not reject that which
the Council has declared Authentic, i. e. among the Latin Editions. But
suppose a Man finds other Latin Translations truer in some parts, because they
agree more with the Original Text, may he therein reject the vulgar Latin? By
no means, if he thinks himself bound to adhere to the Council of Trent. But the
Council supposes it to agree with the Original. And we must believe the Council
therein. This is indeed the meaning of the Council as far as I can judge. But
what Catholic Tradition was there for this? Tes for a thousand years after
Gregory 's time. But this is not Antiquity enough to found a Catholic
Tradition upon. If there were no more than a thousand from Gregory, there were
six hundred past before him; so that there must be a more ancient Tradition in
the Church, wherein this version was not Authentic; and how came it then to be
Authentic by virtue of Tradition? Here then Tradition must be given up; and
the Council of Trent must have some other ground to go upon. For I think the
Traditionary Men will not maintain the vulgar Latin to have been always
Authentic.

2. That it referred the making the Index of prohibited Books to the Pope; and
in the 4th Rule of that Index, All Persons are forbidden the use of the
Scripture in the vulgar Tongue, without a particular License, and whosoever
presumes to do it without a faculty, unless he first gives up his Bible, he is
not to receive Absolution.

My business is now to enquire what Catholic Tradition the Pope and Council
went upon in this Prohibition. But as to the Testimony of Fathers, I am
prevented by some late Discourses on this Subject. In stead thereof therefore I
shall,

1. Show from their own Writers, that there could be no Catholic Tradition for
such a Prohibition.

2. Prove the General Consent of the Catholic Church from public Acts, as to
the free use of the Scripture.

Thomas Aquinas grants that the Scripture was proposed Sum. 1. q. 1. a. 9.
to all, and in such a manner that the most rude might understand it. Therefore
there was no Prohibition of such Persons reading it.

Cajetan there uses two Arguments for the Scriptures using Metaphors and
Similitudes. 1. Because God provides for all. 2. Because the Scripture is
tendered to all. And the common People are not capable of understanding
spiritual things without such helps. If the Scripture were intended for all,
how comes a Prohibition of the use of it?

Sixtus Senensis grants, that in former times the Scripture Sixth. Senens.
Biblioth. l. 6. n. 152.
was translated into the vulgar Languages, and the People did commonly read
it, to their great Benefit. Then a Prohibition of it must alter the Churches
practical Tradition.

Alphonsus a Castro yields to Erasmus, that the Scriptures Alphons. a Castro,
l. 1. c. 13.
were of old translated into the vulgar Tongues, and that the Fathers, such as
S. Chrysostom, and S. Jerome, persuaded People to the reading them. But the Case
is altered now, when such mischief comes by the Reading the Scriptures. And yet
the Tradition of the Church continues the same, and is impossible to be changed.

Azorius puts the Case fairly; he grants that the Scriptures Azor. Instit.
Moral. l. 8. c. 26.
were at first written and published in the Common Language; that S. Chrysostom
admits all to read the Scriptures; and that the People did so then; but they
do not now. But he says, the People then understood Greek and Latin, and now
they do not. If it were their own Language they might well understand it; but
why should not the Scripture now be in a Language they may understand? For
Greek and Latin did not make the common People one jot wiser or better; and yet
this Man calls it a Heresy now to say, the Scriptures ought to be translated
into vulgar Languages. How much is the Faith of the Church changed?

2. I am now to prove the General Consent of the Catholic Church in this
matter from public Acts, i. e. that all Parts of it have agreed in
Translations of Scripture into Vulgar Languages without any such Prohibition.

If there had been any such thing in the Primitive Church, it would have held
against the Latin Translation it self. For I hope none will say it was the
Original, however Authentic it be made by the Council of Trent. How then came
the Originals to be turned into the common Language? (as I suppose Latin will
be allowed to have been the common Language of the Roman Empire.) There is no
Objection can now be made against any modern Translations, but would have held
against the first Latin Version. Who the Author of it was is utterly unknown;
and both S. Augustine and S. Jerome Aug. de Doct. Christian. l 2. c. 11.

Hier. Praes. in Josuam.


say, there was a great variety among the old Translations, and every one
Translated as he thought fit. So that there was no restraint laid upon
translating into the common Language. And unless Latin were an infallible Guide
to those that understood it, the People were as liable to be deceived in it, as
either in English or French.

But it was not only thus in the Roman Empire, but wherever a People were
converted to Christianity in all the elder times, the Scripture was turned into
their Language. The Ecclesiastical Historians mention the Conversion Socr. l.
4. c. 33.

Soz. l. 6. c. 37.

Nicep. l. 11. c. 48.

Isid. in Chron. Gothorum. Walas. Strab. de Reb. Ec^l. c. 7.


of the Goths, and upon that, the Translation of the Bible into their Language
by Ulphilas their Bishop. Walafridus Strabo adds to this, that besides the
Bible, they had all public Offices of Religion performed in their own Language.

How soon the Churches in Persia were planted, it is impossible for us now to
know; but in the MS. Ecclesiastical History of Abulpharagius (in the hands of
Dr. Loftus) it is said, that a Disciple of Thaddaeus preached the Gospel in
Persia, Assyria and the Parts thereabouts; and that by another Disciple of his
360 Churches were settled there in his time; and that he came to Seleucia, the
Metropolis of the Persians, and there established a Church, where he continued
fifteen years. And from him there was a Succession of the Patriarchs of
Seleucia, which continues still in the East; for upon destruction thereof by
Almansor, they removed first to Bagdad, and after that to Mozal over against
Ninive, where their residence has been since; and this Patriarch had universal
Jurisdiction over the Eastern Churches as far as the East Indies, as appears by
Morinus his Books of Ordinations in the East, and the proceedings with the
Christians of St. Thomas in the very end of the last Century.

But we are certain from the Greek Historians, that in Constantine's time the
Christians in Persia were so numerous that he wrote to the King of Persia on
their behalf. Eusebius says that Constantine was informed, that the Churches
Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 8.
were much increased there, and great Multitudes were brought into Christ's
Flock; and Constantine himself in his Letter to Sapores says, the Christians
flourished in the best c. 13.
parts of Persia; and he hoped they might continue so to do. But after
Constantine's death a terrible Persecution befell them, wherein Sozomen says,
the Names of 16000 Martyrs Soz. l. 2. c. 14.
were preserved, besides an innumerable Multitude of unknown persons. The
sharpest part of the Persecution fell upon the Bishops and Presbyters;
especially in Adiabene, c. 12.
which was almost wholly Christian, which Ammianus Ammianus Marcell. l. 23.
Marcellinus says was the same with Assyria, wherein were Ninive, Ecbatane,
Arbela, Gaugamela, Babylon (or Soz. l. 2. c. 9.
Seleucia) and Ctesiphon, of which Sozomen says, Symeon was then Archbishop.
And he names above twenty Bishops who suffered besides, and one Mareabdes a
Chorepiscopus, with 250 of his Clergy. After the time of Sapores several sharp
Persecutions fell upon those Churches in the times of Vararanes and Isdigerdes,
of which the Greek Historians take notice, and one of them, says Theodoret,
lasted thirty years. This I mention to show Theod. l. 5. ^. 39.
what mean thoughts those have of the Catholic Church who consine it to the
Roman Communion. Theodoret Theod. de Cur. Graec. affect. Sermon. 5. p. 555.

Sermon. 9. p. 615.

Chrysostom in Joh. Hom 2 p. 561.


and S. Chrysostom both affirm that the Persians had the Scriptures then in
their own Language; and Sozomen says, that Symeon Archbishop of Seleucia, and
Ctesiphon before his own Martyrdom, encouraged the rest to suffer out of the
holy Scriptures. Which supposes them well acquainted with the Language of it,
and it is not very likely they should be either with the Hebrew, Greek or
Latin; but the other Testimonies make it clear that it was in their own Tongue.

The Anonymous Writer of S. Chrysostom's Life affirms, Vit. Chrysostom. c. 113.
that while he staid in Armenia, he caused the New Testament to be translated
into the Armenian Tongue for the benefit of those Churches. And this Tradition
is allowed by several learned Men in the Church of Rome. But the Armenians
themselves say, the whole Bible was translated Conc. Eccl. Armen. cum Romans c.
7. p. 63.
into the Armenian Language by Moses Grammaticus, David and Mampraeus, three
learned Men of their own, in the time of their Patriarch Isaac, about S.
Chrysostom 's time. Theodoret, in the place already cited, mentions the
Armenian Translation, as a thing well known; and he was near enough to
understand the truth of it.

Jacobus de Vitriaco, a Roman Cardinal, says, that the Hist. Orient. c. 79.
Armenians in his time had the Scriptures read to them in their own Language.

The Syriack Version for the Use of those in the Eastern parts who understood
not Hebrew or Greek, is allowed by all learned Men to have been very ancient. I
mean the old simple Version out of the Originals, and not that out of the LXX.
of the Old Testament. As to the New, the Tradition of the Eastern People is,
that it was done either in the Apostles times or very near them. Abraham
Ecchellensis shows, from the Syriack Writers, that the Complete Translation of
the Bible was made in the Abr. Ecchell. not. in Ebe^. Jesu.
time of Abgarus, King of Edessa, by the means of Thaddaeus and the other
Apostles; and as to the time of Thaddaeus, Gregorius Malatiensis confirms it.
Greg. Hist. Dynast. 6.


Postellus quotes an ancient Tradition (which my Adversaries ought to regard)
that S. Mark himself Translated not only his own Gospel, but all the Books of
the Ne^ Testament into the Vulgar Syriack. It is sufficient to my purpose, to
show that there was such an ancient Translation; which is owned by S. Chry^ost.
bom. 2. in Joh.

Ambros. Hex. 1. c. 8.

Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 15. c. 13.

Diod. ad Genesis 27. 27.

Theod in Psalm. 3. 4. in Ps. 103. 26. in Ps. 112. 1. in Ps. 115.

De Verb. Dei, l. 2. c. 4.


S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Diodorus and Theodoret: which makes me
wonder at Cardinal Bellarmin's affirming with so much confidence, that none of
the Fathers speak of the Syriack Version, when Theodoret alone mentions it so
often in his Commentaries.

Although the Greeks in Egypt might very well understand the Greek of the Old
and New Testament, (especially if that which is called the LXX. were done by
the Alexandrian Jews, as some imagine) yet those who knew no other than the old
Egyptian Language could not make use of it. And therefore a Coptick Translation
was Prodr. Copt. c. 8.
made for them; which Kircher thinks to have been 1300 years old. And he withal
observes, that their ancient Liturgies were in the Coptick Language.

That it might not be susp^cted that Kircher imposed upon the World, he gives a
particular account of the Books he had seen in the Vatican Library and
elsewhere in the Coptick Tongue. The Pentateuch in three Tomes, distinguished
into Paragraphs by lines. The four Gospels by themselves. S. Paul's Epistles
and three Canonical Epistles with the Acts in another Volume. The Apocalypse by
it self; and the Psalter. The Liturgy of S. Mark with other daily Prayers. The
Liturgy of S. Gregory, with the Prayers of S. Cyril in the Coptick Language;
and a Liturgy of S. Basil, with Gregory and Cyril, with several other Rituals,
Missals and Prayers, all in the same Tongue. All these, he says, are in the
Vatican Library. And in that of the Maronites College, he says, is an old
Coptick p. 1^6.
Martyrology about 1300 years standing, by which he finds, that the chief
employment of the old Egyptian Monks was to translate the Bible out of Hebrew,
Chaldee and Greek into the Coptick Tongue.

Morinus says, that in the Oratorian Lbrary at Paris, Dissert. Epist. 13.
they had the Coptick Gospels brought from Constantinople by Monsr. de Sancy.

Petrus a Valle, a Nobleman of Rome, and a great Traveller, says he had
several parts of Scripture in the Coptick Epist. 14.
Language; which were turned into Arabic, when the old Coptick grew into
disuse.

Petraeus had in the Eastern Parts a Coptick Psalter, with an Arabic Version,
which he designed to publish. Hottinger. Methurgem. p. 189.


The Congregation de propaganda Fide at Rome had several Coptick MSS. sent to
them out of Egypt, among the rest the Coptick Book of Ordination Transloatd and
Printed by Kircher; and since reprinted by Morinus.

Seguier the late Chancellor of France had in his Library, the Consecration of
a Patriarch in Coptick and Arabic, De Ordinat. sacris, p. 504. Catal. M S S.
p. 31.
and several Translations of the Bible, and Prayers in both Languages.

The Aethiopick Translation bears date with the Conversion Ludolph. Hist.
Aethiop. l. 3. c. 4.
of the Nation, according to their own Tradition, which some make to be in the
Apostolical times, and others in the time of Constantine; and their Public
Offices are performed in their own Tongue. The Chancellor Seguier had not only
many parts of the Bible, but Prayers and Offices in the Aethiopick Tongue.

I shall add but one thing more to this purpose, which is taken from the want
of Antiquity in the Arabic Versions; which is confessed by the learned
Critics on all sides. And even this tends to prove my design. For when the
Saracen Empire prevailed, the People grew more acquainted with the Arabic than
with the ancient Syriack or Coptick; and therefore the Scripture was then
translated into Arabic; (as Vasaeus says it was done in Spain after the Moors
came thither by a Bishop of Sevil) and this was the true reason why the Arabic
Versions have no greater Antiquity. For Gabriel Sionita observes Gabr. Sionita
de Arab. c. 12.
that the Arabic is become the most Vulgar Language in the Eastern Parts. And
because it was so in Syria as well as Egypt, therefore there are different
Arabic Versions; the one called Codex Antiochenus, and the other Alexandrinus.

Thus I have proved that there was a Catholic Tradition directly contrary to
that established by order of the Council of Trent.

And now I proceed to give an Account of the Methods and Steps by which this
Decree came to its ripeness.

1. The first Step was the Declension and Corruption of the Latin Tongue in the
Western Church. It is observed by Polybius, that from the time of the first
League between Polyb. l. 3.
the Romans and Carthaginians, the Latin Tongue was so much changed even in
Rome it self that very few could understand the Words of it. And Festus in
Latin loqui says, that the Language was so altered, that scarce any part of
it remained entire. Scaliger thinks these words were added to Festus by Paulus
Diaconus; which seems much more probable, since he lived in the time of
Charlemagn. At which time we may easily suppose the Latin Tongue to have been
very much corrupted by the Writers, and not so easy to be understood any where
by the Common People in sudden Discourse, as it had been before. Which appears
evident by the Latin Sermons made to the People in the several Provinces in the
Roman Empire; as in Africa by S. Augustine and Fulgentius; in Italy by Petrus
Chrysologus, Laurentius Novariensis, Gaudentius Brixiensis, Ennodius
Ticinensis: In Spain by Isidore, Ildephonsus and others: In Gaul by Caesarius,
Eucherius, Eligius, and several others, whose Latin Sermons to the People are
still extant. In the Council of Tours, in the Conc. Turon. 3. c. 17.
time of Charlemagn, particular care is taken that the Homilies should be
translated by their Bishops either into the Rustic Roman or the German, that
the People might the easier understand them. These Homilies were either those
which Charlemagn caused to be taken out of the Fathers, and applied to the
several Lessons through the year, as Sigebert observes, or of their own
composing; however Sigeb. ad An. 807.
they were to be turned by the Bishops either into Rustic Roman, or German, as
served best to the capacities of the People. For the Franks then either
retained the Original German, or used the Rustic Roman; but this latter so
much prevailed over the other, that in the solemn Oaths between Lewis and
Charles upon parting the Dominions of France and Germany, set down in
Nithardus, Nithard. l. 3.
the Rustic Roman was become the Vulgar Language of France, and these were but
the Grandchildren of Charlemagn. Marquardus Freherus thinks that only Freher,
in Exposit. Foederis inter Lud. and Car.
the Princes and Great Men retained the German, but the generality then spoke
the Rustic Roman; as appears by the Oath of the People; which begins thus.

Si Lod^igs Sacrament que Son Fradre Carlo jurat conservat, v. Capitul. Caroli
Calvi. Tit. 8.
and Carlus meo Serdra de suo part non los tanit, si jo returnar non licit
pois, ne io, ne neuls cui eo returnar nil pois, in nulla adjudha contra Lodwig
nun li iver.

By which we may see what a mixture of Latin there was in the vulgar Language
then used by the Franks, and how easy it was for the People then to understand
the public Offices being constant; but the Sermons not being so, there was
greater necessity to turn them into that corruptor Rustic Roman, which was
thoroughly understood by them. In Spain the Latin was less corrupted before the
Gothic and Arabic or Moorish Words were taken into it. Lucius Mariness says,
that had it not been for Marineus Sicul. de Rebus Hisp. l. 5. ^. 4.
the mixture of those words, the Spaniards had spoken as good Latin as the
Romans did in the time of Tully: and he says, that to his time he had seen
Epistles written in Spanish, wherein all the Nouns and Verbs were good Latin.
In Italy the Affinity of the vulgar prevailing Language and the Latin continued
so great, that the difference seemed for some hundred years, no more than of
the learned and common Greek, or of the English and Scotch; and so no necessity
was then apprehended of Translating the correct Tongue into a corrupt Dialect
of it.

But where there was a plain difference of Language there was some care even
then taken, that the People might understand what they heard, as appears by
these things:

1. Alcuinus gives an Account why one day was called Sabbatum in 12
Lectionibus, when there were but six Lessons, Alchuin. de divin. Offic. c. 29.
and he says, it was because they were read both in Greek and Latin, they not
understanding each others Languages. Not because the Greek was a holy Tongue,
but quia aderant Graeci, quibus ignota er at lingua Latina; which shows that
the Church then thought it a reasonable cause to have the Scripture in such a
Language, which might be understood by the People. The same Reason is given
Amalar. de Offic. l. 2. c. 1,.
by Amalarius.

2. In the German Churches there were ancient Translations of Scripture into
their own Language. B. Rhenanus ^^en^^. Rer. German. p. 112.
attributes a Translation of the Gospels to Waldo Bishop of Freising, as soon as
the Franks received Christianity, and he says, it was the immortal Honors of
the Franks, to have the Scripture so soon translated into their own Language;
which, says he, is of late opposed by some Divines: So little did he know of
an universal Tradition against it. Goldastus mentions the Translation in Rhyme
by Ottfridus Wissenburgensis, published by Achilles Gassarus, the Rer. Alem.
To. 1. p. 120.

To. 2. p. 119.


Psalter of Notkerus, Rudolphus ab Eems his Paraphrase of the old Testament.
Andreas du Chesn has published a Preface before an old Saxon Book, wherein it
is said, that Hist. Franc. To. 2. p. 326.
Ludovicus Pius did take care that all the People should read the Scripture in
their own Tongue, and gave it in charge to a Saxon to translate both Old and
New Testament into the German Language; which, says he, was performed very
elegantly.

3. In the Saxon Churches here, it was not to be expected that the Scripture
should be translated, till there were Persons learned both in the Saxon and the
other Languages. Bid, in his Epistle to Egbert, puts him upon instructing the
common People in their own Language, Bed. Epist. ad Egbert, p. 65.
especially in the Creed and Lord's Prayer; and to further so good a Work, Bid
himself translated the Gospel of St. John into the Saxon Tongue, as Cuthbert
says in the Epistle about his Death, in the Life of Bid, before his Saxon
History. It appears by the old Canons of Churches, and the Epistles of Aelfric,
says Mr. Lisle, that there was an old Saxon Canon for the Priest to say unto
the People the Saxon Treatise of the Old and New Testament.
sense of the Gospel in English; and Aelfric says of himself, that he had
translated the Pentateuch, and some of the Historical Books. The New Testament
was translated by several hands; and an ancient Saxon Translation has been
lately published with the Gothic Gospels. And there were old Saxon Glosses
upon the Gospels; of Aldred, Farmen and Owen. The last Work of K. Alfred was
the translating the Psalter; and if the MS. History of Ely deserves credit, he
translated both the Old and New Testament.

4. It is not denied either by Bellarmin or Baronius, that the Slavonians in
the 9th Century had a permission upon Bell. de Verbo Dci, l. 2.
their conversion to Christianity, to enjoy the Bible, and to have public
Offices performed in their own Language. But Bar. ad An 880. n. 16.
they tell us, it was because they were then Children in the Faith, and to be
indulged; (but methinks Children were the most in danger to be seduced;) or
there were not Priests enough to officiate in Latin at first: But this was no
Reason then given, as appears by the Pope's own Letter published by Baronius,
Wherein he gives God thanks for the Invention of Letters among them by
Constantine a Philosopher; and he expressly says, that God had not confined his
Honor to three Languages, but all People and Languages were to praise him; and
he says, God himself in Scripture had so commanded; and he quotes St. Paul's
words for it. One would wonder those great Men should no better consider the
Popes own Reasons; but give others for him, which he never thought of. It is
true, he adds, that he would have the Gospel read first in Latin, and then in
Salvonian, and if they pleased he would have the Mass said in Latin; but the
Slavonians continued their Custom, and the Pope was willing enough to let them
enjoy it, for his own convenience as well as theirs. For there was a secret in
this matter, which is not fully understood.

Aventinus, says, that Methodius invented their I etters, Ave^^in. Annal. l.
4. p. 434.
and translated the Scriptures into the Slavonian Tongue, and persuaded the
People to reject the Latin Service; but this I see no ground for. But the Truth
of the matter was, the Slavonians were converted by the means of Methodius and
Cyril, (otherwise called Constantine) two Greek Bishops, and the Christian
Religion was settled among them by their means, and they Translated the
Scriptures and Offices of Worship into their own Language. The Pope had not
forgotten the business of the Bulgarians, and he could not tell but this might
end in subjection to another Patriarchal See; and therefore he en^eavours to
get Methodius and Cyril to Rome, and having gained them, he sends a sweetning
Letter to the Prince, and makes the concession before mentioned. For he could
not but remember how very lately the Greeks had gained the Bulgarians from him;
and lest the Slavonians should follow them, he was content to ^ar. A. 869. n.
80.
let them have what they desired, and had already Established among themselves,
without his Permission. All this appears from the account of this matter given
by Constantinus Porphyrogenetus, compared with Diocleas his Regnum Slavorum,
and Lucius his Dalmatian History.

It is sufficient for my purpose, that Diocleas owns that Constantine (to whom
Andreas Dandalus, D. of Venice, in his M S History cited by Lucius, says, the
Pope gave Luci. de Regno Dalmatiae, l. 2. c. 3.
the name of Cyril) did Translate the Bible into the Slavonian Tongue, for the
benefit of the People, and the public Offices out of Greek, according to their
Custom. And the Chancellor Seguier had in his Library both the New Testament
and L^turgies in the Slavonian Language, and Catal. M S S. p. 33, 34.
in Cyril's Character; and many of the Greek Fathers Commentaries on Scripture
in that Tongue, but not one of the Latin.

2. The next step was, when Gregory 7. prohibited the Greg. Regist. l. 7. Ep.
11.
Translation of the Latin Offices in the Slavonian Tongue. And this he did to
the King of Bohemia himself, after a peremptory manner; but he says, it was
the request of the Nobility, that they might have divine Offices in the
Slavonian Tongue, which he could by no means yield to. What was the matter? How
comes the Case to be so much altered from what it was in his Predecessor's
time? The true Reason was, the Bohemian Churches were then brought into greater
Subjection to the Roman See, after the Consecration of Dithmarus Saxo to be
their Archbishop; and now they must own their Subjection, as the Roman
Provinces were wont to do, by receiving the Language. But as his Predecessor
had found Scripture for it, for Gregory pretends he had found Reason against
it, viz. The Scripture was obscure, and apt to be misunderstood and despised.
What! more than in the time of Methodius and Cyril? If they pleaded Primitive
Practice, he plainly answers, that the Church is grown wiser, and has
corrected many things that Cum primitiva Ecclesia multa dissimulaverit quae a
sanctis Patribus postmodum sirmataChristianitate, and Religione crescente,
subti^^ examinatione correcta sunt.
were then allowed. This is indeed to the purpose; and therefore by the
Authority of S. Peter, he forbids him to suffer any such thing, and charges him
to oppose it with all his might.

But after all, it is entered in the Canon Law De Officio Jud. Ord. l. 1. Tit.
31. c. Quoniam. as a Decree of Innocent 3. in the Lateran Council, that where
there were People of different Languages, the Bishop was to provide Persons fit
to officiate in those several Languages. Why so? If there were a prohibition of
using any but the Latin Tongue. But this was for the Greeks, and theirs was an
holy Tongue. That is not said; nor if it were would it signify any thing; for
does any imaginary holiness of the Tongue sanctify ignorant Devotion? But the
Canon supposes them to have the same Faith. Then the meaning is, that no man
must examine his Religion by the Scripture, but if he rseolves beforehand to
believe as the Church believes, then he may have the Scriptures or Prayers in
what Language he pleases. But even this is not permitted in the Roman Church.
For,

3. After the Inquisition was set up by the Authority of Innocent 3. in the
Lateran Council, no Lay Persons were permitted to have the Books of the Old and
New Testament, but the Psalter, or Breviary, or Hours, they might have; but by
no means in the vulgar Language. This is called by D'achery and Labbe the
Council of Toulouse, Labb. Council. To. 11. p. 427.
but in truth it was nothing else but an Order of the Inquisition, as will
appear to any one that reads it. And the Inquisition ought to have the Honor
of it, both in France and Spain. Which Prohibition has been so grateful to
some Divines of the Church of Rome, that Cochlaeus calls it pious, just,
reasonable, Cochl. c. Alex. Alesium, A. D. 1533.

Andrad. Defens. Council. Trident. l. 4.


wholesome and necessary; Andradius thinks the taking of it away would be
destructive to Faith; Ledesma says, the Ledesma de Div. Script. quavis ^ingua
non leg. p. 155.
true Catholics do not desire it, and bad ought not to be gratified with it.
Petrus Suitor, a Carthusian Doctor, calls the Pet. Suitor de Tralatione Bibliae,
p. 99. p. 96.
Translating Scripture into the vulgar Languages, a rash, useless and dangerous
thing; and he gives the true Reason of it, viz. that the People will be apt to
murmur when they see things required as from the Apostles, which they cannot
find a word of in Scripture. And when all is said on this Subject that can be,
by men of more Art, this is the plainest and honestest Reason for such a
Prohibition; but I hope I have made it appear it is not built on any Catholic
Tradition.

IV. Of the Merit of Good Works.
The Council of Trent Sess. 6. c. 16. declares, That the Good Works of
justified Persons do truly deserve Eternal Life; and Can. 3^. an Anathema is
denounced against him that denies them to be meritorious, or that a justified
Person by them does not truly merit Increase of Grace, and Happiness, and
Eternal Life.

The Council has not thought fit to declare what it means by truly meriting;
but certainly it must be opposed to an improper kind of Meriting, and what that
is we must learn from the Divines of the Church of Rome.

1. Some say, That some of the Fathers speak of an improper kind of Merit,
which is no more than the due Means for the attaining of Happiness as the End.
So Vega confesses they often use the word Merit, where Vega de Justif. l. 8. c.
8.
there is no Reason for Merit, either by way of Congruity or Condignity.
Therefore, where there is true Merit there must be a proper Reason for it. And
the Council of Trent being designed to condemn some prevailing Opinions at that
time, among those they called Heretics, this Assertion of true Merit must be
levelled against some Doctrine of theirs; but they held Good Works to be
necessary as Means to an end, and therefore this could not be the meaning of
the Council.

Suarez says, the words of the Council ought to be specially Suarez de Great.
l. 12. c. 1 n. 8.
observed, which are, that there is nothing wanting in the good works of
justified Persons, ut vere promeruisse censeantur; and therefore no
Metaphorical or improper, but that which by the Sense of the Church of Rome was
accounted true Merit in opposition to what was said by those accounted
Heretics must be understood thereby.

2. Others say, that a mere Congruity arising from the Promise and Favor of
God in rewarding the acts of his Grace in justified Persons cannot be the
proper Merit intended by the Council. And that for these Reasons.

1. Suarez observes that although the Council avoids Suarez de G^^t. l. 12. c.
1. ^. 12.
the Terms ex Condigno, yet because it still uses the words vere mereri, it
implies something more than mere Congruity; and because it speaks of meriting
the Increase of Grace, and not the first Grace; now a Congruity is allowed for
the first Grace, which it excludes by mentioning the Increase. And withal, it
brings places to prove that the giving the Reward must be a Retribution of
Justice, and if so, the merit must be more than that of Congruity.

2. Because God's Promise does not give any Intrinsic value to the Nature of
the Act; no more than his threatening does increase the Nature of Guilt. If the
King of Persia had promised a Province to him that gave him a draught of Water,
the Act it self had been no more meritorious; but it only showed the
Munificence of the Prince; no more do God's Promises of Eternal Life add any
merit to the Acts of Grace, but only set forth the Infinite Bounty of the
Promiser.

3. In the Conference at Ratisbon (the year this Decree passed) by the
Emperor's Order the Protestant Party did yield, that by virtue of God's
Promise the Reward of Eternal Life was due to justified Persons; as a Father
Disputat. Ratisbonae An. 1546. p. 568.
promising a great Reward to his Son for his pains in studying, makes it become
due to him, although there be no proportion between them. And if no more were
meant by Merit of Congruity, than that it was very agreeable to the Divine
Nature to reward the Acts of his own Grace with an infinite Reward, they would
yield this too.

4. Cardinal Pallavicini gives us the plain and true Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 8. c.
4. n. 4.
meaning of the Council, viz. that a Merit de Congruo was allowed for Works
before Justification; but for Works after, they all agreed, he says, that
there was a Merit de condigno in them both for increase of Grace and Eternal
Glory. By Merit de condigno is meant such an intrinsic value in the nature of
the Act as makes the Reward in Justice to be due to it.

Some call one of these, Meritum secundum quid; which Rich. de Media. Vill. in
l. 2. sent. did. 17. art. 2. q. 1. Nich. de Orbellis in 3. sent. did. 27.
is the same with de congruo; which really deserves no reward, but receives it
only from the liberality of the Giver; and this has not truly, say they, the
notion of Merit; but that which makes the reward due is simple and true Merit,
when it does not come merely from the Kindness of the Giver, but from Respect
to the worthiness of the Action and the Doer, and this is de condigno.

Let us now see what Catholic Tradition there was for this Doctrine, and
whether this were taught them by their Fathers in a continued succession down
from the Apostles times.

But that there was a change as to the sense of the Church in this matter, I
shall prove in the first place from an Office which was allowed in the Church
before, and forbidden after. It was an Office with respect to dying Persons,
wherein are these Questions.

Q. Do thou believe that thou shall Credis non pr^priis meritis, sed pass^^^^
Domini nostri Jesu Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam pervenire?
come to Heaven, not by thy own Merits, but by the virtue and Merit of Christ
's Passion?

A. I do believe it. Credo.


Q. Do thou believe that Christ died Credis quod Dominus no^^er Jes^s
Christus pro Salute nost^^ m^r^^us sit; and quo^ ^x propriis meri^is, vel al^o
in ^^ ^ull^s (...) salvari nis^ in merito p^ss^^nis ejus?
for our Salvation, and that none can be saved by their own Merits, or any
other way but by the Merits of his Passion?

A. I do believe it. Credo.


Now when the Indices Expurgatorii were made in pursuance to the Order of the
Council of Trent, this passage was no longer endured. For, in the Roman Index
the Ordo baptizandi, wherein this Question was, is forbidden till it were
Corrected. But the Spanish Indices explain the mystery; that of Cardinal
Quiroga says expressly, those Questions and Answers must be blotted out; and
the like we find in the Index of Soto major and San^oval. What now is the
Reason, that such Questions and Answers were no longer permitted, if the
Churches Tradition continued still the same? Was not this a way to know the
Tradition of the Church by the Offices used in it? This was no private Office
then first used, but although the prohibition mentions one Impression at Venice
(as though there had been no more) I have one before me, Printed by Gryphius at
Venice two years before that; and long before with the Praeceptorium of Lyra,
A. D. 1495. where the Question to the dying Person is in these words, Si credit
se Merito Passionis Christi and non propriis ad gloriam pervenire? Et
respondeat, Credo. And the same Questions and Answers I have in a Sacerdotale
Romanum Printed by Nicolinus at Venice 1585. Cardinal Hosius says that he had
seen these Questions and H^^. Conf^ss. Petricovi, c. 73. p. 144.
Answers in the Sacerdotale Romanum and in the Hortulus Animae; and that they
were believed to be first prescribed by Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury. On
what account now, come these things to be prohibited and expunged, if the
Churches Doctrine and Tradition about this matter, be still the very same? No
doubt it was believed that the Council of Trent had now so far declared the
Sense of the Church another way, that such Questions and A^s^^rs were no longer
to be endured.

But before the Council of Trent the Canons of Colen against (...) (...). 16. 2.
Hermannus their Bishop, when he published his Reformation, declare, that God's
giving Eternal Life up on good Works is ex gratuita dignatione suae clementiae,
from the Favor which God vouchsafes to them. Which to my apprehension is
inconsistent with the Notion of true Merit in the Works themselves; for if
there be any Condignity in them, it cannot be mere Grace and Favor in God to
reward them.

The same Canons in their Enchiridion some years before, Enchirid Colon. f.
176. 2.
when they joined with their Bishop, call it stupidity to think that good Works
are rewarded with Eternal Life for any Dignity in the Works themselves. And if
there be no dignity in them, there can be no true Merit; as the Council of
Trent determines with an Anathema.

Pope Adrian VI. gives such an account of the Merit Adrian. de Sacr. Eucbar. f.
61.
of our Works, that he could never imagine any condignity in them to Eternal
Life. For, says he, our Merits are a broken reed, which pierce the hand of him
that leans upon them; they are a menstruous Cloth, and our best Actions mixed
with impurities; and when we have done all that we can, we are unprofitable
Servants.

Petrus de Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray attributes no Pet de Alliaco, in 4. l.
Sent. q. 1. art. 1. f. 225. ^.
other effect to good Works than of Causa sine qua non; and says that the
Reward is not to be attributed to any Virtue in them, but to the Will of the
Giver. Which I think overthrows any true Merit.

Gabriel Biel attributes the Merit of Good Works not to Bicl in l. 2. sent.
dis^. 27. art. 1. ^o^. 3.
any intrinsecal Goodness in them, but to God's acceptance. Which is in words
to assert Merit, and in truth to deny it; for, how can there be true Merit in
the Works, if all their value depends upon divine Acceptance?

Thomas Walden charges Wickliff with asserting the Walden. de Sacram. Ti^. ^. c
7.
Doctrine of Merit and encouraging men to trust in their own Righteousness, and
he quotes Scripture and Fathers against it; and he blames the use of the term
of Merit either ex congruo or ex condigno: which he says was an Invention of
some late Schoolmen, and was contrary to the ancient Doctrine of the Church. As
he proves, not only from Scripture and Fathers, but from the ancient Offices
too: as in the Canon of the Mass, Non aestimator meriti, sea veni^ quaesumus
largitor, etc. Fer. 4. Pass. Ut qui de meritorum qualitate diffidimus, non
judicium tuum sed miseric^rdiam cons^quamur. Dom. 2. Adv. Ubi nulla suppetunt
sufsragia meritorum, tuae nobis indulgentiae succurre praesidtis. How comes the
Doctrine condemned in Wickliff to be established in the Council of Trent? For
he was blamed for asserting true Merit, and the Council asserts it with an
Anathema to those that deny it. And yet we must believe the very same Tradition
to have been in the Church all this while.

Vega says, that Walden speaks against Merits without Grace; but any one that
reads him will find it otherwise, Vega i^Opu^c. Qu. 4.
For he produces those passages out of the Fathers against Merits which do
suppose Divine Grace, as it were easy to show; but Friar Walden thought the
notion of Merit inconsistent with the Power and Influence of Divine Grace
necessary to our best Actions. God, says he, does not regard Merit either as
to Congruity or Condignity, but his own Grace, and Will, and Mercy.

Marsilius de Ingen who lived before Walden reckons Marfil. in l. 2. (...). ^.
1^.
up three Opinions about Merit; the first of those who denied it, and of this,
says he, Durandus seems to be, and one Job. de Everbaco. The second of those
who said that our Works have no merit of themselves, but as informed by d^^ine
Grace, and from the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, so they do t^uly merit
Eternal Life, and of this Opinion he says was Thomas de Argentina. The third
was, of those who granted that true Merit does imply an Equality, but then they
distinguish Equality, as to Quantity and as to Proportion, and in this latter
sense they asserted an Equality. And of this Opinion he says was Petrus de
Tarantasia. But he delivers his own Judgment in these Conclusions.

1. That our Works either considered in themselves or with Divine Grace are not
meritorious of Eternal Life ex condigno, which he proves both from Scripture
and Reason, viz. because 1. No Man can make God a Debtor to him; for the more
Grace he has the more he is a Debtor to God. Ana 2. He cannot merit of another
by what he receives from him. And 3. No man can pay what he owes to God, and
therefore can never merit at his hands. 4. No man can merit here so much Grace
as to keep him from falling away from Grace; much less then Eternal Life.

2. These works may be said to be meritorious of Eternal Life ex condigno by
divine acceptance originally proceeding from the Merit of Christ's Passion,
because that makes them worthy. But this is Christ's Merit and not the true
Merit of our Works.

3. Works done by Grace do merit Eternal Life de congruo from God's liberal
disposition, whereby he has appointed so to reward them. It being agreeable
to him to give Glory to them that love him. But this is an improper kind of
Merit, and can by no means support the Tradition of true Merit.

Durandus utterly denies any true Merit of Man toward God; he does not deny it
in a large improper sense Durand. in sent. l. 2. di^^. 27. q. 2.
for such a Condignity in our actions as God has appointed in order to a
Reward; which is by the Grace of God in us; but as it is taken for a free
Action to which a Reward is in Justice due; because whatever we do is more
owing to the Grace of God than to our selves; but to make a Debtor to us, we
must not only pay an equivalent to what we owe, but we must go beyond it; but
to God and our Parents we can never pay an equivalent, much less exceed it. And
we can never merit by what God gives us, because the Gift lays a greater
Obligation upon us. And n. 14.
he says, the holding the contrary is temerarious and blasphemous.

The two grounds of holding Merit were, the supposing a Proportion between
Grace and Glory, and an Equality between Divine Grace and Glory in Virtue,
Grace being as the Seed of Glory; and to both these he answers.

To the first, That the giving a Reward upon Merit is no part of distributive,
but commutative Justice, because it respects the relation of one thing to
another, and not the mere quality of the Person.

To the second, That the Value of an Act is not considered with respect to the
first Mover, but to the immediate Agent: and as to Grace being the seed of
Glory, it is but a metaphorical expression, and nothing can be drawn from it.
So that Durandus concludes true Merit with respect to God to be temerarious,
blasphemous and impossible.

Ockam declares, That after all our good Works God may Ockam in 4. s^nt. q. 3.
ad secundum.

In. l. 1. did. 17. q. 1.

in l. 1. did. 17. q. 2.


without Injustice deny Eternal Life to them who do them; because God can be
Debtor to none; and therefore whatever he does to us, it is out of mere Grace.
And that there can be nothing meritorious in any act of ours, but from the
Grace of God freely accepting it. And therefore he must deny any true Merit.

Gregorius Ariminensis says, That no Act of ours though Greg. Arim. in l. 1.
sent. did. 17. art. 2.
coming from Grace to never so great a degree, is meritorious with God ex
condigno of any Reward either Temporal or Eternal; because every such Act is a
Gift of God; and if it were at all meritorious, yet not as to Eternal Life,
because there is no equivalency between them, and therefore it cannot in
Justice be due to it; and consequently if God gives it, he must do it freely.
But, says he, God is said to be just, when he gives bona pro bonis, and
merciful, when he gives bona pro malis; not but that he is merciful in both,
but because his mercy appears more in the latter; and in the other, it seems
like justice in a general sense from the conformity of the Merit and the
Reward; but in this particular retribution it is mere Mercy.

Scotus affirms, that all the meritoriousness of our Acts Scot. in l. 1. sent.
did. 17. q 3. n 24.
depends on divine Acceptance in order to a Reward; and if it did depend on
the intrinsic worth of the Acts, God could not in justice deny the Reward;
which is false; and therefore it wholly depends on the good will and favor of
God.

Bellarmin is aware of this, and he confesses this to be Bell. de Just. l. 5.
c. 17.
the Opinion of Scotus and of other old Schoolmen. But how then do they hold
the Doctrine and Tradition of true Merit? He holds that good Works are properly
and truly good. So do we, and yet deny Merit. But he grants, that he denies
that they bear any proportion to Eternal Life, and therefore they cannot be
truly meritorious of it. Bellarmin himself asserts that without the divine
Promise good Works have a proportion to Eternal Life, and this he saw was
necessary to defend the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; but then he adds,
that there is no obligation on God's part to reward in such a manner without a
Promise. Now here are two hard Points, 1. To make it appear that there is such
a meritoriousness in good Works without a Divine Promise. 2. That if there were
so, there is no Obligation on God to reward such Acts in point of Justice. The
former is so much harder to do from what he had proved before, c. 14. Viz. that
they are not meritorious without a Promise; and here he proves that they have
no proportion to the Reward, from Scripture, Fathers and Reason; because there
is no Obligation on God to do it, either from commutative or distributive
justice; and because we are God's Servants. These are good Arguments against
himself for how can such Acts then become meritorious without a Promise? If
there be no proportion or equality on Man's part, no Justice on God's part to
reward, how can they possibly be meritorious? But this is too deep for me to
comprehend. My business is Tradition, and I have evidently proved that there
was no Tradition even in the Church of Rome for the true Merit defined by the
Council of Trent. It were easy to carry this point higher, by she wing that
the Fathers knew nothing of this Doctrine, but that has been done by many
already, and it is needless in so plain a case.

But I am now to give an account by what Steps and Occasions this Doctrine came
to be established.

1. From the common Use of the word Merit with the Fathers and others, in
another sense than it signified at first. The original signification of it is
Wages Jos. Scalig. in Varr. de L. L. p. 172. bud. in Pandect. page 362. Plir^.
ep. l. 1. 8.
paid in consideration of Service; and from thence Soldiers were said merere
(as Budaeus observes, and thence came the word merces) who truly deserved their
pay by their labor and hazard; but by degrees it came to signify no more than
merely to attain a thing; which is sometimes used by good Authors; but in the
declension of the Latin Tongue no sense of this word was more common than this,
especially among Ecclesiastical Writers. Who frequently used it in a sense
wherein it was impossible to understand it in its original signification; and
it cannot imply so much as digne consequi, as in the instance brought by
Cassander; when St. Cyprian renders Cassand. in Hymn. Eccl. p. 179.
those words of St. Paul, Misericordiam merui, which we render, I obtained
Mercy; but the Council of Trent allows there could be no true Merit here. And
St. Augustine Aug. in Joh. Tr. 31. n. 9.
says of those who murdered the Son of God, Illi veniam meruerunt qui Christum
occiderunt. And so the vulgar Latin often uses it, Genesis 4. 13. major est
iniquitas mea quam ut veniam merear. Jos. 11. 20. and non mererentur ullam
Clementiam. And in that sense it has been used in the Hymns and other Offices
of the Church, as in that expression, O felix culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit
habere Redemptorem! where it cannot be denied that the word is used in an
improper Sense.

2. When the School Divines set themselves to explain the Mysteries of
Theology, this plain and easy, but improper sense of Merit, would not go down
with some of them; but they endeavored to make out the notion of Merit with
respect to God, in its proper and original Sense. The last considerable Writer
before the Scholastic Age, was St. Bernard, and he pretended not to find out
any such proportion between the best Works and Eternal Life, that God should be
bound in Neque enim talia sunt hominion merita, ut propter ea vita aeterna
deberetur ex jure, aut Deus injuriam aliquam faceret, nisi eam donaret. Nam ut
taceam quod merita ^mnia Dona Dei sunt, and ita bomo m^gis propter ipsa Deo
debtor est, qu^m Deus bomini, quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam?
Bernard Se^m. 1. de Aunur. Bellarm. de Justis. l. 5. c. 6.
justice to bestow it as a Recompense for them; and the Reason he gives is
plain and strong, because those things men pretend to merit by, are themselves
the Gifts of God's Grace, and so by them they are more bound to God, than God
to them; but besides, what are all men's merits to Eternal Glory? St. Bernard
does not speak of Merits without Grace, but with the supposition of it; and
Bellarmin wisely left out the latter part, that he might seem to answer the
former.

Hugo de Sancto Victore lived in the same Age, who first showed the way to
School Divinity, and upon the Hugo de S. ^ict. Annot. Elucidator in Romans
same place which St. Bernard speaks of, Non sunt condig nae, etc. he puts the
Question, how any temporal Acts can merit that which is eternal? And he denies
any Condignity, because there is more in the Reward than there was in the
Merit; but then he adds, that there may be a threefold comparison of things;
either as to themselves, as a Horse for a Horse, Money for Money; or according
to equity, either in punishments or rewards; or by Pact or Agreement, as when a
good sum is promised for a little work; and this, says he, God has made
known to Mankind as to future rewards and punishments. Which plainly shows, he
understood nothing of the proportion between Acts of Grace, and an Eternal
Happiness; but resolved all into the Favor and Mercy of God.

Peter Lombard, called the Master of the Sentences, Lomb. Sent. l. 2. did. 27.
says, Nothing of any Condignity or Proportion in our works to the Reward;
but, he says, they are themselves God's Gifts, and that the Reward it self is
from the Grace of God, and quotes the noted Saying of St. Augustine, Cum coronat
Deus merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam dona sua. But still this is
nothing but Grace and Favor in God, first in enabling us to do good Works, and
then in rewarding them.

Bandinus wrote a Book of the Sentences much about the time P. Lombard did,
with so much agreement of Method and Expressions, that it is not known which
took from the other. Genebrard has produced this passage Genebrard. de Trinit.
l. 3. p. 312.
out of him, Debet, inciviliter de Deo dicitur, quia nihil omnino nobis debet,
nisi ex promisso. If it be so rude to say God owes any thing to his Creatures
but by promise, he could not imagine any Condignity in good Works, to which a
Reward is due in Justice. And Genebrard thinks he had reason to deny, that God
can be made a Debtor to us by any of our Works.

Robertus Pullus, who wrote another Book of the Sentences Pull. Sentent. Part.
1. c. 13.
about the same time, mentioning that place, Non sunt condignae, etc. he says,
because our Works are not sufficient, being small and temporal, God by his
Mercy makes it up; which not only shows that God does reward beyond our merit,
but that there is no proportion between the best Works and Eternal Glory.

But by the time of Gulielmus Antissiodorensis, there were two Parties in the
Church about this point; some, Guliel. Antis. l. 3. tr. 12. q. 2. de m^rito
virt.
he says, denied any Merit of Eternal Life, ex condigno, and others asserted
it; and after laying down the Arguments on both sides, he concludes for the
Affirmative; but in Answer to the place, Non sunt condignae, etc. he says they
are not ad proportionaliter merendum, but they are ad simpliciter merendum; so
that still he denied any Proportion, though he held simple Merit.

But Thomas Aquinas coming after him, denies that 1. 2. q. 114. art. 1.
there can be any simple Merit with respect to God, because that cannot be
where there is so great inequality; and so there can be no equal Justice
between them, but ac^ording to a proportion; which he afterward explains, viz.
as to the substance and Freedom of our good Works there is only art. 3.
a Congruity; but as they proceed from Divine Grace, so they are meritorious of
Eternal Life, ex condigno.

This Doctrine had some followers in the Schools, but not many in comparison of
those who opposed it, as appears by what is said already.

Richardus de Mediavilla, though a Franciscan, follows Richard. in Sent. l. 2.
did. 27. art. 2. Q. 3.
herein the Doctrine of Aquinas, and asserts, that by Acts of Free Will,
informed by Grace, a man may merit Eternal Life, ex condigno, and he adds
somewhat more, potest certissime; and he uses the same Answers to the
Objections which the other did.

And Nich. de Orbellis follows Richardus, so that Aquinas Nich. deOrb. in Sent.
l. 2. did. 27.
his Doctrine had prevailed beyond his own School.

But it was as vehemently opposed by others of that Fraternity, among whom
Cardinal Hosius mentions Stephanus Brulifer, who maintained, that no Act of
Grace, Hos. Confess. Petrico c. 73. p. 141.
how good soever, was worthy of Eternal Life.

Paulus Burgensis, though he is said to have been converted from being a Jew,
by reading Aquinas, yet utterly P. Burg. addit. ad Lyram in Ps. 35.
dissented from him in this matter: For he says, that no man can by the
Ordinary assistance of Grace Merit Eternal Life ex condigno, and therefore the
Mercy of God is most seen in Heaven.

However the Reputation of Aquinas might gain upon some, yet this was very far
then from being a Catholic Tradition.

But no Council ever interposed its Authority in this matter, till the Council
of Trent, which resolved to carry the Points in difference to the height, and
to establish every thing that was questioned. Nothing had been more easy than
to have given satisfaction in this matter, considering what Pighius and
Contarenus, and even Genebrard, had yielded in it; but there the Rule was, that
every thing that was disputed, must be determined first, and then defended.

And so it has happened with this Decree, which, lest we should think the
matter capable of softening, has been since asserted in the highest manner.
Bellarmin asserts Good Works of themselves, and not merely by compact, Bell. de
justif. l. 5. c. 17.
to be meritorious of Eternal Life, so that in them there is a certain
Proportion and Equality to Eternal Life.

Costerus says, that in Works of Grace, there is an equality Coster. En^^rid.
p. 294.
between the Work and the Reward.

Suarez, that they have an intrinsecal Dignity, whereby Suarez. de Great. l. 12.
c. 1. n. 18.

Vasquez in 1. 2. Disp. 213. c. 5.


they become worthy of Eternal Life.

Vasquez, that there is an Equality of Dignity between Good Works and Eternal
Life, without which a Promise could not make true Merit.

The Rhemists say, that good Works are truly and properly Bhemists on 2 Timothy 4.
8.
meritorious, and justly worthy of Everlasting Life; and that thereupon Heaven
is the just Due, and just Stipend, Crown or Recompense, which God by his
Justice owes to the Persons so doing by his Grace.

And again, that Good Works are meritorious, and the very cause of Salvation.
so far that God should be unjust, On Heb. 6. 8.
if he rendered not Heaven for the same.

Phil. Gamachaeus, a late Professor of Divinity in the Sorbon, speaks it
roundly, Gamach. in 1. 2. Th. Q. 114. c. 2. Council. 2. Omnes Catholici fatentur
justos suis bonis operibus mereri gloriam de Condigno.
that the Council of Trent did plainly mean to establish Merit ex condigno, and
that all Catholics are agreed in it.

The last Defender of the Council of Trent within these Aug. Reding Defens.
Conc. Trident. Tr. 4. sent. 2. ad sess. 6. c. 1.
few years, says, That there is an intrinsecal Condignity in good Works,
whereby they bear a proportion commensurate with the Glory of Heaven. And
without such Doctrine as this, he does not think the Council of Trent can be
defended in this matter.

If after all it be said, that this is a mere subtilty concerning the
proportion an Act of Grace bears to the state of Glory; I answer, the more to
blame they, who have made and imposed it as a matter of Faith, as the Council
of Trent has done with an Anathema, and that without any pretense from
Catholic Tradition.

But what made the Council of Trent so much concerned for a Scholastic
Subtilty? There was a deep Mystery lay in this, They were wise enough to frame
the Decree so, as to avoid Offense, and to make it appear plausible, but it was
enough to the People to understand that the Merit of Good Works was allowed,
and they were to believe the Priests, both as to the Good Works they were to
do, and as to the putting them into a state of Grace, to make them capable of
meriting. And this was the true Reason of the Anathema, against those who
should deny the true Merit of Good Works.

V. Of the Number of Sacraments.
The Council of Trent pronounces an Anathema in these words, If any one says
that the Sacraments of the new Law were not all appointed by Jesus Christ our
Lord, or Sess. 7. Can. 1.
that they were more or fewer than Seven, viz. Baptism, Confirmation,
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony, or that any one of
these is not truly and properly a Sacrament, let him be Anathema.

But what is it to be truly and properly a Sacrament?

It had been very reasonable to have defined a Sacrament first truly and
properly, before such an Anathema passed. But that defect may be said to be
supplied by the Roman Catechism, published by Authority of the Council; and
there we are told, that a Sacrament is a sensible C^tech. Trident. Part. 2. n.
10.
thing, which by divine Institution has a power of causing as well as
signifying holiness and righteousness. So that to a true and proper Sacrament
two things are necessary:

1. That it be of Divine Institution. 2. That it confer Grace on those who
partake of it.
And by these we must examine the Catholic Tradition about the number of
Sacraments.

Bellarmin says, that all their Divines, and the whole Church for 500 years,
viz. from the time of the Master of Bell. de Sa^^am. l. 2. ^. 25.
the Sentences, have agreed in the Number of the seven Sacraments.

Here we see is a bold Appeal to Tradition for 500 years; but although, if it
were proved, it cannot be sufficient to prove an Apostolical Tradition; for the
Fathers might for a thousand years have held the contrary; and I do not think
one clear Testimony can be produced out of Antiquity for that number of
Sacraments, truly so called; yet I shall at present wholly wave the debate of
the former times, and confine my self to Bellarmin's 500 years; and I hope to
make it appear there was no Universal Tradition for it within his own time.

For Alexander Hales (who wrote, says Possevin, his Sum of Divinity by order
of Innocent IV. and it was approved by Alexander IV. with seventy Divines,)
affirms, there were but Four In quatuor quae sunt proprie dict^ Sacramenta
novae legis est forma instituta a Domino vel ab Ecclesia. Alex. Halens. Part.
4. q. 5. M. 3. 4. 2.
proper Sacraments; now if this were the Catholic Tradition then, That there
were Seven proper Sacraments, how could this Doctrine pass, and be so highly
approved? He says farther, that Christ himself only appointed two, viz.
Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and for the rest, he says, it may Memb. 2. a. 1.
be presumed the Apostles did appoint them by Christ's Direction, or by divine
I^spiration. But how can that be, when he says, the Form even of those he
calls proper Sacraments, was either appointed by our Lord or by the Church? How
can such Sacraments be of divine Institution, whose very Form is appointed by
the Church? He puts the Question himself, why Christ appointed the Form only of
Two Sacraments, when all the Grace of the Sacraments comes from him? He
answers, because these are the principal Memb. 3. a. 2. sect. 3.
Sacraments which unite the whole man in the body of the Church by Faith and
Charity. But yet this does not clear the Difficulty, how those can be proper
Sacraments, whose Form is not of Divine Institution; as he grants in the
Sacrament of Penance and Orders, the Form is of the Churches Appointment.

And this will not only reach to this great School Divine, but to as many
others as hold it in the Churches Power to appoint or alter the Matter and Form
of some of those they call Sacraments. For, however they may use the Name, they
can never agree with the Council of Trent in the Nature of the Seven
Sacraments, which supposes them to be of Divine Institution, as to Matter and
Form. And so the Divines of the Church of Rome have agreed since the Council of
Trent.

Bellarmin has a Chapter on purpose to show, that the ^ell. de Sacr. l. 1. ^.
21.
Matter and Form of Sacraments are so certain and determinate, that nothing can
be changed in them; and this determination must be by God himself. Which, he
says, is most certain among them; and he proves it by a substantial Reason,
viz. because the Sacraments are the Causes of Grace; and no one can give Grace
but God, and therefore none else can appoint the Essentials of Sacraments but
he, and therefore he calls it Sacrilege to change even the matter of Sacraments.

Suarez asserts, that both the Matter and Form of Sacraments Suarez. in 3. p.
Tb. Tom. 3. Disp. 2. sect. 3.
are determined by Christ's Institution, and as they are determined by him,
they are necessary to the making of Sacraments. And this (he says) absolutely
speaking, is de Pide, or an Article of Faith. And he proves it from the manner
of Christ's instituting Baptism and the Eucharist, and he urges the same
Reason, because Christ only can conf^r Grace by the Sacraments, and therefore
he must appoint the Matter and Form of them.

Cardinal Lugo affirms, that Christ has appointed both Lugo de (...). D^p. ^.
(...). 5.
Matter and Form of the Sacraments, which he proves from the Council of Trent.
He thinks Christ might have grant^d a Commission to his Church to appoint
Sacraments, which he would make efficacious, but he reither believes that he
has done it, or that it was fitting to be done.

Petr^s a Sancto Joseph says, that although the Council P^t. a Sanct. Joseph.
Idea Theol. Sacr. l. 1. c. 3.
of Trent does not expressly affirm the Sacraments to be immediately instituted
by Christ; yet it is to be so understood. And although the Church may appoint
Sacramentalia, i. e. Rites about the Sacraments; yet Christ himself must
appoint the Sacraments themselves; and he concludes, that no Creature can have
authority to make Sacraments conferring Grace; and therefore he declares that
Christ did appoint the Forms of all the Sacraments himself, although we do not
read them in Scripture.

If now it appears that some even of the Church of Rome before the Council of
Trent, did think it in the Churches Power to appoint or alter the Matter and
Form of some of those they called Sacraments, then it will evidently follow
they had not the same Tradition about the Seven Sacraments which is there
delivered.

Of Chrism.
The Council of Trent declares the matter of Confirmation Conc. Tri^. De
Confirm. Can 2.

Conc. Florent. Decret. U^isnis.


to be Chrism, viz. a Composition made of O^l of Olive and Balsam; the one to
signify the clearness of Conscience, the other the Odor of a good Fame, says
the Council of Florence. But where was this Chrism appointed by Christ?
Marsilius says from Petrus Aureolus, that Ma^^il. in s^^^. l. 4 q. 5. 4. 1.
there was a Controversy between the Divines and Ca^^^ists about this matter;
and the latter affirmed that Chris^^ was not appointed by Christ, but
ast^^wards by the Church; and that the Pope could dispense with it; which he
could not do if it were of Christ's Insti^^^ion.

Petrus Aureolus was himself a great Man in the Church Aureol in 4. d. 7. q. 1.
of Rome; and after he had mentioned this difference, and named one Brocardus
(or Bernardus) with other Canonists for it; he does not affirm the contrary to
be a Catholic Tradition; but himself asserts the Chrism not to be necessary to
the Sacrament of Confirmation; which he must have done if he had believed it of
Divine Institution.

Gregory de Valentia on the occasion of this Opinion of Greg de Val. Tom. 4. Q.
5. Pun^. 2.
the Canonists, that Confirmation might be without Chrism, says two notable
things. 1. That they were guilty of Heresy therein: for which he quotes
Dominicus Soto. 2. That he thinks there were no Canonists left of that mind. If
not, the Change was greater; since it is certain they were of that Opinion
before. For Guido Brianson Gui^o Brianson in 4. sent. q. 5. Con^. 1.
attests, that there was a difference between the Divines and Canonists about
this matter; for Bernard the Glosser and others held, that Chrism was not
necessary to it, because it was neither appointed by Christ nor his Apostles,
but in some ancient Councils.

Guil. Antissiodorensis long before mentions the Opinion Guil. Antis. in l. 4.
tract. 9.
of those who said that Chrism was appointed by the Church after the Apostles
times; and that they confirmed only by imposition of hands; but he does not
condemn it; only he thinks it better to hold that the Apostles used Chrism,
although we never read that they did it. But he does not lay that Opinion only
on the Canonists; for there were Divines of great note of the same. For,

Bonaventure says, that the Apostles made use neither of Bonav. in 4. d. 7. a.
1. q. 2.
their Matter nor Form in their Confirmation; and his Resolution is, that they
were appointed by the Governors of the Church afterward; as his Master
Alexander of Hale had Alex. p. 4. q. 9. m^mb. 1.
said besore him, who attributes the Institution of both to a Council of Meaux.

Cardinal de Vitriaco says, that Confirmation by Imposition J^^. de Vitr.
Hi^^. occid. c. ^7.
of Hands was srom the Apostles; but by Chrism from the Church; for we do not
read that the Apostles used it. Thomas Aquinas confesses there were different
Opinions Aq. p. 3. q. 72. a 1. Resp. ad 1.
about the Institution of this Sacrament; some held that it was not instituted
by Christ nor his Apostles, but afterward in a certain Council. But he never
blames these for contradicting Catholic Tradition although he dislikes their
Opinion.

Cajetan on Aquinas says, that Chrism with Balsam was appointed by the Church
after the Primitive times; and yet now, this must be believed to be essential
to this Sacrament; and by Conink it seems to be heretical to deny Conink de
Sacram. q. 72. a. 3. dab. 1.
it. For he affirms, that it seems to be an Article of Faith that Confirmation
must be with Chrism, and no Catholic, he says, now denies it. Which shows,
that he believed the sense of the Church not to have been always the same about
it.

But others speak out, as Gregory de Valentia, Suarez, Filliucius and Tanner,
who say absolutely, it is now a matter of Faith to hold Chrism to be essential
to Confirmation; and that it is now not only erroneous but heretical to deny
it. Their Testimonies are at large produced by Petrus Aurelius, or the famous
Abbat of S. Cyran. And even he grants it to be Heresy since the Council of
Trent; Petr. Aurel. Oper. p 546, 547. p. 567.
but he yields that Alensis, Bonaventure and de Vitri^co all held that Opinion,
which was made Heresy by it. From whence it follows, that there has been a
change in the Doctrine of the Roman Church about Confirmation by Chrism. For if
it be Heresy now to assert that which was denied without any reproach before,
the Tradition cannot be said to continue the same.

Thus we have seen there was no certain Tradition for the Matter of this
Sacrament, and as little is there for the Form of it. Which is, Consigno te
signo Crucis, and confirmo te Chrismate salutis in nomine Patris, etc. But
Sirmondus produces another Form out of S. Ambrose, Sirmo^, Ant. 2. p. 64.
Deus Pater omnipotens, qui te regeneravit ex Aqua and Spirit^ Sancto,
concessitque tibi peccata tua, ipse te ungat in vitam aeternam. And from thence
concludes the present Form not to be ancient; and he confesses that both Matter
and Form of this Sacrament are changed. Which was an ingenuous Confession; but
his adversary takes p. 6^.
this Advantage from it; that then the Sacrament it self Petr. A^rel. Op. p.
5^7.
must ^e changed, if both Matter and Form were; and then the Church must be a
very unfaithful keeper of Tradition; which I think is unanswerable. Suarez
proposes the Objection Suarez. To. 3. q. 3. p. Th. ^. 72. Disp. 33. sect. 5.
fairly both as to the Matter and Form of this Sacrament, that we read nothing
of them in Scripture, and Tradition is very various about them; but his Answer
is very insufficient, viz. that though it be not in Scripture, yet they have
them by Tradition from the Apostles; now that is the very thing which Sirmondus
disproves, and show that the Church of Rome is clearly gone off from Tradition
here both as to Matter and Form.

Of Orders.
I proceed to the Sacrament of Orders. It it impossible for those of the Church
of Rome to prove this a true and proper Sacrament, on their own Grounds. For,
they assert that such a one must have Matter and Form appointed by Christ; but
that which they account the Matter and Form of Orders were neither of them of
Christ's Institution. The Council of Florence, they say, has declared D^^ret.
Uni^nis.
both; the matter is that, by the delivery whereof the Order is conferred, as
that of Priesthood by the delivery of the Chalice with the Wine, and the Paten
with the Bread; and the Form is, Accipe potestatem offerendi Sacrificium in
Ecclesia pro vivis and mortuis. Now if neither of these be owned by themselves
to have been appointed by Christ, then it necessarily follows, that they cannot
hold this to be a true and proper Sacrament. Imposition of hands they grant was
used by the Apostles, and still continued in the Christian Church; and
Bellarmin confesses Bell. de Sacr. Ordinis, l. 1. c. 9.
that nothing else can be proved by Scripture to be the external Symbol in this
Sacrament. And others are forced to say, that Christ has not determined the
Matter and Form of this Sacrament particularly, but has left a latitude in it
for the Church to determine it. Which in my opinion is clear giving up the
Cause, as to this Sacrament.

It is observed by Arcudius, that the Council of Trent Arcud. de Sacram. l. 6.
c. 4.
does not declare the particular Matter and Form of this Sacrament, but only in
general, that it is performed by words and external signs, Sess. 23. c. 3. From
whence he infers, that the outward Sign was left to the Churches determination;
and he says, that Christ did particularly appoint the Matter and Form of some
Sacraments, as of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and Extreme Unction, but not
of others; and therefore in the Sacrament of Orders, he says, Christ
determined no more but that it should be conveyed by some visible sign; and so
it may be either by the delivering the Vessels, or by the imposition of hands,
or both. But we are to consider that the Council of Florence was received by
the Council of Trent; and that it is impossible to reconcile this Doctrine with
the general Definition of a Sacrament by the Roman Catechism, viz. that it is a
sensible thing which by the Institution of Christ has a power of causing as
well as signifying Grace; which implies that the external Sign which conveys
Grace must be appointed by the Author of the Sacrament it self; or else the
Church must have Power to annex Divine Grace to its own appointments. But here
lies the main difficulty, the Church of Rome has altered both Matter and Form
of this Sacrament from the primitive Institution; and yet it dares not disallow
the Ordinations made without them, as is notorious in the Case of the Greek
Church; and therefore they have been forced to allow this latitude as to the
Matter and Form of this Sacrament; although such an allowance does really
overthrow its being a true and proper Sacrament on their own grounds.

Yet this Doctrine has very much prevailed of late among their chief Writers.
Cardinal Lugo confesses, L^go de Sac. Disp. 2. sect. 5. n. 85.
that of old Priesthood was conferred by imposition of Hands with suitable
Words; and he saw it himself so done at Rome, without delivering the Vessels by
Catholic Greek Bishops. He says farther, that the Fathers and Councils n. 92.
are so plain for the conferring Priesthood by imposition of hands, that no one
can deny it; but yet he must justify the Roman Church in assuming new Matter
and Form, which he does by asserting that Christ left the Church at liberty as
to them.

Nicol. Ysambertus debates the point at large, and his Resolution of it is,
that Christ determined only the general Ysambert. de Sacram. Ordinis, Disp. 3.
Art. 6.
matter, but the particular sign was left to the Church; and he proves by
Induction that the Church has appointed the external sign in this Sacrament,
and as to the Order of Priesthood he proves that Imposition of hands was of old
an essential part of it, but now it is only accidental.

Franciscus Hallier confesses the Matter of this Sacrament Hallier de Sacris
Elect. and Ordinat. sect. 2. c. 2. art. 1.
to have been different in different times. In the Apostles times and many Ages
after, hardly any other can be found but imposition of hands, as he proves from
Scripture and Fathers. He carries his proofs down as low as the Synod of Aken
in the time of Ludovicus Pius, and the Council of M^aux, A. D. 845. but
afterward he says, that by the Council of Florence and the common p. 439.
Opinion of their Divines, the delivery of the Vessels is the essential matter
of this Sacrament. Here we find a plain change in the Matter of a Sacrament
owned after the continuance of above 800 years; and yet we must believe the
Tradition of this Church to have been always the same. Which is impossible by
the Confession of their own Writer. He cannot tell just the time when the
change was made, but he concludes it was before the time of the Vetus Ordo
Romanus, which mentions the Vessels.

Petrus a Sancto Joseph says, that by Christ's Institution Petr. a Sanct.
Joseph, Idea Theod. Sacr. l. 4. c. 1. p. 396.
there is a latitude allowed in the matter of Orders; but he shows not where;
but he thinks, of it self it consists in the delivery of the Vessels, but by
the Pope's permission Imposition of Hands may be sufficient. Which is a Doctrine
which has neither Scripture, Reason nor Tradition for it.

Joh. Morinus shows that there are five Opinions in the Morin. de Sacris Ordin.
Part. 3. Ex. ercit. 7. c. 1.
Church of Rome about the matter of this Sacrament. The first and most common
is that it consists in the delivery of the Vessels. The second, that Imposition
of Hands together with that makes up the matter. The third, that they convey
two different powers. The fourth, that Unction with Imposition of Hands is the
matter. The fifth, that Imposition of Hands alone is it; and this, says he,
the whole Church, Greek and Latin, ever owned; but he says, he can bring two
demonstrations against the first, i. e. against the general sense of the now
Roman Church. 1. From the Practice of the Greek Church, which never used it. 2.
From the old Rituals of the Latin Church, which do not mention them; and he
names some above 800 years old; and in none of them he finds either the Matter
or Form of this Sacrament, as it is now practiced in the Church of Rome; nor in
Isidore, Alcuinus, Amalarius, Rabanus Maurus, Valafridus Strabo, although they
wrote purposely about these things. He thinks it was first received into the
public Offices in the tenth Age. Afterward he says, he wonders how it came
about that any c. 3. n. 1.
should place the essential Matter of Ordination only in delivery of the
Vessels, and exclude the Imposition of Hands, which alone is mentioned by
Scripture and Fathers. And again he says, it strikes him with astonishment
that there should be such an alteration, both as to Matter and Form. n. 6. c. 6.
And at last he says, Christ has determined no particular Matter and Form in
this Sacrament. n. 2.


But still the Difficulty returns, how this can be a true and proper Sacrament,
whose Matter and Form depend on divine Institution, when they confess there was
no divine Institution for the Matter and Form in Orders?

Bellarmin (as is proved before) has a Chapter on purpose to prove that the
Matter and Form of Sacraments Bell. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 24.
are so determined, that it is not lawful to add, diminish or alter them; and
he charges it on Luther as a part of his Heresy, that no certain Form of words
was required to Sacraments: and he makes it no less than Sacrilege to change
the Matter of them. So that all such who hold the Matter and Form in Orders to
be mutable, must either charge the Church of Rome with Sacrilege, or deny
Orders to be a true and proper Sacrament.

Of the Sacrament of Penance.
The next new Sacrament is that of Penance. They are agreed, that Matter and
Form are both necessary to a true and proper Sacrament. The Matter is the
external or sensible Sign; and what is that in this New Sacrament?

There are two things necessary to the Matter of a Sacrament:

1. That it be an External and sensible Sign; which S. Augustine calls an
Element in that known Expression, Accedat verbum ad Elementum, and fit
Sacramentum; which Aug. in Joh. Tr. 80.
Bellarmin would have understood only of Baptism there spoken of; but S.
Augustin's meaning goes farther, as appears by his following Discourse, and
immediately he calls a Sacrament verbum visibile; and therefore cannot be
applied to Words as they are heard, for so they have nothing of a Sacramental
sign in them. How then can Contrition make up any part of the Matter of a
Sacrament, when it is not external? How can Confession, when it is no visible
sign, nor any permanent thing as an Element must be? how can satisfaction be
any part of the Sacrament, which may be done when the Effect of the Sacrament
is over in Absolution?

2. There must be a Resemblance between the Sign and the Thing signified. Which
St. Augustine is so peremptory in, that he denies there can be any Sacrament
where there St. Aug. ^^. ad Bonifac.
is no Resemblance. And from hence, he says, the Signs take the name of the
Thing signified; as after a certain manner the Sacrament of the Body of Christ
is the Body of Christ.

And this was looked on as so necessary, that Hugo de Suarez. T^m. 3. in 3. C.
Q. 60. Disp. 1. a. 3. sect. 4.
Sancto Victore and Peter Lombard both put it into the Definition of a
Sacrament, as Suarez confesses, viz. that it is the visible appearance of
Invisible Grace, which bears the similitude, and is the Cause of it. But this
is left out of the Definition in the Roman Catechism, and Suarez thinks it not
necessary, for the same Reason; because it is very hard to understand the
similitude between words spoken in Confession, and the Grace supposed to be
given by Absolution, any more than in the words of Abrenunciation, and the
Grace of Baptism. How can the Act of the Penitent signify the Grace conveyed
in Absolution? For there is no effect of the Sacrament till Absolution, by
their own Confession; and therefore the Acts of the Penitent being antecedent
to it, and of a different nature from it, can have no such Resemblance with it,
as to signify or represent it.

However the Councils of Florence and Trent have declared, Council Flor. Decr.
Union. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 3.
that the Acts of the Penitent, viz. Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction,
are as the matter in the Sacrament. Quasi materia: What is this quasi materia?
Why not, are the matter? Is not true matter necessary to a true Sacrament? If
there be none true here, then this can be but quasi Sacramentum, as it were a
Sacrament, and not truly and properly so. But if it be true matter, why is it
not so declared? But common Sense hindered them, and not the difference between
the matter here and in other Sacraments. For in the Definition of Sacraments
they were to regard the Truth, and not the kind of Matter. They are not solid
and permanent Matter, says Bellarmin; not Bell. de poenit. l. 1. c. 16. Soto
in l. 4. sent. d. 14. q. I.

Vasq. in 3. p. ^. 34 Art. 1. n. 9.


Matter externally applied, says Soto; not any Substance but humane Acts,
says Vasquez; but none of these clear the point. For still if it be true
Matter of a Sacrament, why was it not so declared? Why such a term of
Diminution added, as all men must understand it, who compare it with the
expressions about the other Sacraments?

But they knew very well there was a considerable Party in the Church of Rome,
who denied the Acts of the Penitent to be the Matter or Parts of this
Sacrament. The Council of Colen (but little before the Council of Trent)
Enchirid. Colon. f. 180.
excludes the Acts of the Penitent from any share in this Sacrament: which
Bellarmin denies not, but blames Bell. de poenit. l. 1. c. 16.
Gropperus, the supposed Author of the Enchiridion. But Gropperus was thought
fit to be a Cardinal as well as Bellarmin; and certainly knew the Tradition of
the Church if there had been any such in this matter. The Council of Florence,
it is plain, he thought not to be a sufficient declarer of it. No more did Joh.
Major, who after it denied Major. in 4. sent. did. 14. q. 2.

Biel in 4. did. 14. q. 2.


this Sacrament to consist of Matter and form, or that the Acts of the Penitent
were the parts of it. So did Gabriel Biel, who refutes the contrary Opinion,
and says Contrition can be no part, because it is no sensible sign; and
satisfaction may be done after it. So that he cuts off two parts in three of
the Matter of this pretended Sacrament.

Guido Brianson, who lived after the Council of Florence Brianson in 4. sent.
Q. 8. Concl. 3.
supposes no certain Tradition in the Church about this matter; but he sets
down both Opinions with their Reasons, and prefers that which excludes the Acts
of the Penitent from being parts of the Sacrament; although the Florentine
Council had declared the contrary.

Durandus rejects two parts in three of those declared Durand. in l. 4. did.
16. q. 1.
by the two Councils, and for the same Reasons mentioned by Biel.

Ockam absolutely denies all three to be Parts of the Sacrament. Ockam in 4.
sen. q. 8.

Scot. in l. 4. sent. did. 16. Q. 1.


And so did Scotus before him; whose words are remarkable, De Poenitentiae
Sacramento dico, quod illa tria nullo modo sunt parts ejus, viz. These three
are by no means any part of the Sacrament of Penance; and yet the Council of
Trent not only declares that they are so, but denounces an Anathema against him
that denies them to Cancil. Trid. Sess. 14. de Poenit. Sacr. Can. 4.
be required, as the Matter of the Sacrament of Penance. And let any one by
this judge what Catholic Tradition it proceeded upon; when some of the
greatest Divines in the Church of Rome were of another Opinion.

As to the Form of this Sacrament the Council of Trent denounces an Anathema
against thesewho affirm Absolution to be only declarative of the Remission of
Sins: and yet Can. 9.
I shall prove that this was the more current Doctrine, even in the Church of
Rome, up to the Master of the Sentences.

Gabriel Biel says, the ancient Doctors did commonly follow it; but it was
supposed by Scotus, because it seemed B^^l in 4. did. 14. 1. 2. ^ot. 2.
to take off from the efficacy of Absolution, and consequently make it no
Sacrament, which is a cause of Grace. But after he has set down Scotus his
Arguments, he says, that Opinion were very desirable, if it had any Foundation
in Scripture or Fathers. And to his Arguments he answers, that true Contrition
obtains Pardon with God, before Sacerdotal Absolution, but not with the Church;
and that Contrition supposes a desire of Absolution; which will never hold to
make Absolution to confer the Grace of Remission, if the Sin be really forgiven
before. For what is the desire of the Penitent to the force of the Sacrament
administered by the Priest? And he says, they all grant, that by true and
sufficient Contrition the sin is forgiven without the Sacrament in act, i. e.
the actual receiving absolution. So that here was an universal Tradition as to
the Power of Contrition, but in the other they had different Opinions.

Marsilius says, that God forgives sin upon Contrition (...). (...). 4. (...).
^. 12. (...).
Authoritatively; the Priests Absolution is ministerial in the Court of
Conscience, and before the Church. And those sins which God first absolves from
principally and Authentically, the Priest afterward absolves from in right of
the Church, as its Minister.

Tostatus says, that the Priests Absolution follows God's. Tostat. Defens.
part. 1. c. 6.

Ockam in l. 4. q. 9. a. 4. ad 1.


Ockam, that the Priests then bind and loose, when they show men to be bound or
loosed; and for this he relies on the Master of the Sentences.

Thomas de Argentina, that the Power of the Keys does extend to the Remission
of the fault which was done before Thom. de Argent. l. 4. Did. 18. a 3.
by Contrition; but it tends to the Increase of Grace in the Person.

Gulielmus Antissiodore, that Contrition takes away the Gul. Antis. l. 4. f.
254.
guilt and punishment of Sin, as to God and Conscience, but not as to the
Church, for a man is still bound to undergo the Penance which the Church
enjoins him.

Bonaventure, that Absolution presupposes Grace; for no Priest would absolve
any one whom he did not presume God Bonavent. l. 4. did. 18. q. 1.
had absolved before.

Alexander Hales, that where God does not begin in Absolution, Alex. Halens.
part 4. q. 21. memb. 3. art. 1.

Pet. Lomb. l. 4. did. 18. part. 1.


the Priest cannot make it up.

But the Master of the Sentences himself most fully handles this point; and
shows from the Fathers, that God alone can remit sin both as to the Fault and
the Punishment due to it. And the Power of the Keys, he says, is like the
Priests Judgment about Leprosy in the Levitical Law, God healed the Person,
and the Priest declared him healed. Or as our Savior first raised Lazarus,
then gave him to his Disciples to be loosed. He is loosed before God, but not
in the face of the Church but by the Priests Judgment. Another way, he says,
Priests bind by enjoining Penance, and they loose by remitting it, or
readmitting Persons to Communion upon performing it.

This Doctrine of Peter Lombard's is none of those in quibus Magister
nontenetur; for we see he had followers of great Name, almost to the Council of
Trent. But it happened, that both Th. Aquinas and Scotus agreed in opposing
this Doctrine; and the Franciscans and Dominicans bearing greatest sway in the
Debates of the Council of Trent, what they agreed in, passed for Catholic
Tradition. And Vasquez is in the right when he says, this Vasquez in 3. Q. 84.
A. 3. dub. 2. 17.
Doctrine was condemned by the Council of Trent; and so was Scotus, when he
said, that it did derogate from the Sacrament of Penance; for in truth it makes
it but a nominal Sacrament, since it has no Power of conferring Grace; which
the Council of Trent makes necessary to a true and proper Sacrament.

The main Point in this Debate is, whether true contrition be required to
Absolution or not? Which Scotus saw well enough and argues accordingly. For
none of them deny, that where there is true Contrition, there is immediately an
Absolution before God; and if this be required before the Priests Absolution,
he can have no more to do, but to pronounce or declare him absolved. But if
something less than Contrition do qualify a Man for Absolution, and by that
Grace be conveyed, then the Power of Absolution has a great and real Effect;
for it puts a Man into a State of Grace which he had not been in without it.
And from hence came the Opinion, that Attrition with Absolution was sufficient;
and they do not understand the Council of Trent's Doctrine of the Sacrament of
Penance, who deny it, as will appear to any one that reads the 4th Chapter of
the Sacrament of Penance, and compares it with the 7, and 8 Canons about
Sacraments in general. It is true that Contrition is there said to have the
first place in the Acts of the Penitent; but observe what follows: True
Contrition reconciles a Man to God, before he receives this Sacrament. What
has the Priest then to do, but to declare him reconciled? But it says not
without the desire of it. Suppose not, yet the thing is done upon the desire,
and therefore the Priests Power can be no more than declarative. And that such
a Desire is so necessary as without Contrition avails not, is more than the
Council has proved, and it is barely supposed, to maintain the Necessity of
going to the Priest for Absolution; and so it will be no more than a Precept of
the Church, and not a condition of Remission in the Sacrament of Penance. But
afterward, it declares that imperfect Contrition or Attrition does dispose a
Man for the Grace of God in this Sacrament; and by the general Canons, the
Sacraments do confer Grace where Men are disposed. So that the Council of Trent
did rightly comprehend the force of the Power of Absolution, which it gave to
the Priest in the Sacrament of Penance.

But what Catholic Tradition could there be for the Doctrine of the Council of
Trent in thismatter, when Hadrian Hadrian Quodlib. q. 5. 3. princip.
6. so little before it declares, it was a great difficulty among the Doctors,
whether the Keys of Priesthood did extend to the Remission of the Fault? And
for the Negative he produces Pet. Lombard, Alex. Alens. and Bonaventure; and
says, that Opinion is probable, because the Priests Power of binding and
loosing is equal; and as they cannot bind where God does not, for they cannot
retain the sins of a true Penitent; so neither can they loose where God does
not, i. e. where there is not true Contrition. But because he says others held
the contrary Opinion, and had probability on their side too, therefore he would
determine nothing. Notwithstanding this, in a few years after, the Council of
Trent finds no difficulty, no Probability in the other Opinion; but determines
as boldly, as if there had been an Universal Tradition their way; whereas the
contrary cannot be denied by any that are conversant in the Doctrine of their
Schools. But it was the mighty Privilege of the Council of Trent, to make the
Doctrins of Thomas and Scotus, when they agreed, to be Articles of Faith; and
to denounce Anathema's against Opposers, although they reached to some of the
greatest Divines of their own Church, within Bellarmin's compass of 500 Years.

Of Extreme Unction.
We are now to examine another pretended Sacrament, viz. of Extreme Unction. The
Council of Trent declares Council. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 1, 2.
this to be a true and proper Sacrament, and denounces an Anathema against him
that denies it to be instituted by Christ, and published by St. James; or that
it confers Grace Cap. 1, 2, 3.
and Remission of Sins; or that affirms it was appointed for bodily Cures. It
farther declares from the place of St. James interpreted by Tradition, that the
Matter is Oil consecrated by the Bishop; The Form, that which is now used, Per
istam unctionem, etc. the Effect, the Grace of the Holy Ghost in purging away
the remainder of Sin, and strengthening the Soul; and sometimes bodily cures,
when it is expedient for the Health of the Soul. So that the primary Intention
of this Sacrament must respect the Soul, otherwise it is granted, it could not
be a true and proper Sacrament. So Suarez says in this Case, If the external
Suarez in 3. part. disp. 39. sect. 1. n. 5.
Sign be not immediately appointed for a spiritual Effect, it cannot prove a
true Sacrament of the New Law; no not although the bodily cure were designed
for the strengthening of Faith. And from hence he proves, that when the Apostles
are said to anoint the sick, and heal them, Mark 6. 13. this cannot relate to
the Sacrament of Unction, because their cures had not of themselves an
immediate respect to the Soul. The same Reason is used by Bellarmin, Sacramenta
Bell. de Extr. Unct. c. 2. Makl. de Sacram. Extr. Unct. q. 2.
per se ad animam pertinent, ad corpus per accidens aut certe secundario. The
same is affirmed by Maldonat, although he differs from Bellarmin about the
Apostles anointing with Oil, which Bellarmin denies to have been Sacramental
for this Reason, but Maldonat affirms it; and answers other Arguments of
Bellarmin, but not this.

Gregory de Valentia carries it farther, and says, that if Greg. de Val. To.
4. Disp. 8. Q. 1 Punct. 1.
the anointing with Oil were only a Symbol of a miraculous Cure, it could be no
Sacrament; for that is a Medium to convey supernatural Grace, and then it would
last no longer than the Gift of Miracles.

So that we have no more to do, but only to prove that by the Tradition of the
Church St. James his anointing was to be understood with respect to bodily
cures in the first place.

We cannot pass over so great a Man as Cajetan, who wrote on that place of St.
James, not long before the Council of Trent, and a good while after the Council
of Florence, which relies on this place for this Sacrament of Unction. But
Cajetan says, it does not relate to it, because the immediate effect is the
cure of the Party in Saint James; but in this Sacrament the direct and proper
effect is Remission of Sins. All that Catharinus has to say Cath. ^^not. in
Comment. Cajet. l. 5. p. 464.
against this, is, that the bodily cure is not repugnant to it; but what is
this to the purpose, when the Question is, what is primarily designed in this
place?

The School Divines, from Peter Lombard, had generally received this for a
Sacrament; but the Canonists denied it, as appears by the Gloss on c. Vir autem
de Secund. Nuptiis Decret. Gregor. Tit. 21. where it is said, that this Unction
might be repeated, being no Sacrament but only Prayer over a Person. The Roman
Correctors cry out it is Heresy by the Council of Trent; but the Glosser knew
no such thing; and if it were so only by the Council of Trent, then not by any
Catholic Tradition before. For, I suppose matter of Heresy must reach to the
Canonists, as well as the Divines.

But the plainest determination of this matter will be by the ancient Offices
of the Church; for if they respected bodily Cures in the first place, then it
is owned there could be no Tradition for any Sacrament in this Unction.

In the ancient Ordo Romanus it is called Benedictio Olei ad omnem Languorem
quocunque tempore. I desire to know whether the Oil so consecrated be chiefly
designed for the Body or the Soul. And in the Office it self, this place of St.
James is mentioned: And then follows, Te Domine peritissimum Medicum
imploramus, ut virtutis tuae Medicinam in hoc Oleum propitius infundas. And a
little after; Prosit Pater Misericordiarum, febribus and dysenteria
laborantibus, prosit paralyticis, caecis and claudis simulque vexatitiis, with
abundance more; which manifestly shows that this consecrated Oil was intended
primarily for the cure of Diseases.

In the Ambrosian Form, the Prayer is, Infunde sanctificationem tuam huic Oleo,
ut ab his quae unxerit membra, fugatis insidiis adversariae potestatis,
susceptione praesentis Olei, Sancti Spiritus Gratia salutaris debilitatem
expellat and plenam conferat sospitatem, Where the effect relates to the
soundness of the Members anointed, and not to the Sins committed by them.

In the Gregorian Sacramentary, published by Menardus, S^^r. Greg. p. 252.
there is a Prayer wherein this place of St. James is mentioned; and presently
it follows, Cura quaesumus Redemptor noster gratia Spiritus Sancti languores
istius infirmi, etc. and immediately before the anointing, Sana Domine infirmum
istum, cujus ossa turbata sunt, etc. and while he was anointing, the Patient
was to say, Sana me Domine; and where the pain was greatest, he was to be so
much more anointed, ubi plus dolor imminet amplius perungatur. While the rest
were anointing, one of the Priests was to pray, pristinam and immelioratam
recipere merearis sanitatem; what was this but bodily health? and yet this was
per hanc Sacramenti Olei Unctionem: after which follows a long Prayer for
Recovery from Pains and Diseases.

And such there are in the several Offices published by Menardus, in his Notes;
although the general strain of them shows that they were of latter times, when
the Unction was supposed to expiate the Sins of the several Senses.

Cassander produces many instances to show, that the Cassand. not. in Hymn. p.
288.
Prayers and Hymns, and the Form of anointing did respect bodily health. In one
he finds this Form, In nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti accipe
sanitatem. Not the health of the Mind, but the Body.

Maldonat takes notice of Cassander's Offices, and the Maldonat. de Sacramen
ex^r. Unct. q. 1.
expressions used in them; but he gives no answer to the main design of them.
But three things he owns the Church of Rome to have varied from the ancient
Tradition in, with respect to this Sacrament. 1. As to the Form; the Council of
Trent owns no other but that now used, Per istam Unctionem, etc. but Maldonat
confesses it was Indicative, Ego te ungo, etc. or Ungo te Oleo sancto, etc. and
he runs to that shift, that Christ did not not determine any certain Form;
whereas the Council of Trent says, the Church understood by Tradition the
other to have been the Form. Here the Council of Trent makes an appeal to
Tradition, and is deserted in it, by one of its most zealous defenders; and
Gamachaeus affirms this to Gamach. de Extr. U^^t. c. 3.

Suar^z in 3. p^r^. Disp. 4^. (...). 3.


be an essential Change; and he thinks the Sacrament not to be valid in another
Form. S^arez thinks the other Form not sufficient. But Maldonat affirms the
other Form was used; and so at that time, there was no S^crament of extreme
Unction, because not administered in a valid or sufficient Form. And yet in the
Gregorian Office the Form is Indicative, Inungo te de Oleo sancto, etc. So in
that ^reg. Sacr. p. 252.

Menard. Not. p. 337.


of Ratoldus, Ungo te Oleo sanctificato in nomine Patris, etc. In the Tilian
Codex, Inungo te in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, Oleo sancto
atque sacrato, etc. In the Codex Remigii the general Forms are Indicative, Ungo
p. 342.
te Oleo sancto, etc. but there being a variety of Forms set down, among the
rest there is one, Per istam Unctionem p. 353.
Dei, etc. Which afterward came to be the standing p. 352.
Form; and yet the Council of Trent confidently appeals to Tradition in this
matter. Which showed how very little the Divines there met were skilled in the
Antiquities of their own Church. Suarez shows his skill when he says, the
Tradition of the Roman Church is infallible Suarez ibid.
in the Substance of this Sacrament, and that it always used a deprecative
Form; but Maldonat knew better, and therefore on their own grounds their
Tradition was more than fallible; since the Roman Church has actually changed
the Form of this Sacrament. 2. Maldonat observes another change, and that is as
to the Season of administering it. For the Council of Trent says it ought to be
in Exitu Vitae, and therefore it is called Sacramentum ^. 3.
Exeuntium, the Sacrament of dying Persons; but Maldonat says, it is an abuse
to give it only to such; Mald. ib. q. 3
for, in the ancient Church, they did not wait till the party were near death;
but, he says, it was given before the Eucharist, and that not once, but for
seven days together, as is plain, he says, in the ancient MS. Offices; and he
quotes Albertus Magnus for it. So that here is another great change in the
Roman Tradition observed and owned by him. 3. In not giving it now to Children;
for in the ancient Writers he says, there is no exception, but it was used to
all that were sick; and he quotes Cusanus for saying expressly that it was
anciently administered to Infants. But the reason of the change was the Doctrine
of the Schoolmen; for with their admirable Congruities they had fitted
Sacraments for all sorts of sins; as Bellarmin Bell. de Sacr. l. 2. c. 26.
informs us; Baptism against Original Sin, Confirmation against Infirmity,
Penance against actual Mortal Sin, Eucharist against Malice, Orders against
Ignorance, Matrimony against Concupiscence; and what is now left for Extreme
Unction? Bellarmin says, they are the Remainders c. 2.
of sin; and so says the Council of Trent. But what Remainders are there in
Children, who have not actually sinned, and Original sin is done away already?
Therefore the Church of Rome did wisely take away Extreme Unction from
Children; but therein Maldonat confesses it is gone off from Tradition. I know
Alegambe would have Maldonat not believed to be the Author of the Books of the
Sacraments; but the Preface before his Works has cleared this beyond
contradiction from the MSS. taken from his Mouth with the day and year compared
with the Copy printed under his Name. But if Maldonat may be believed, the
Church of Rome has notoriously gone off from its own Tradition as to this
Sacrament of Extreme Unction.

Of Matrimony.
The last new Sacrament is that of Matrimony; which having its institution in
Paradise, one would wonder how it came into men's heads to call it a Sacrament
of the New Law, instituted by Christ; especially when the Grace given by it
supposes Mankind in a fallen condition. Hour the Council of Trent denounces an
Anathema against him that says that Matrimony is not truly Conc. Trid. Sess.
24. c. 1.
and properly a Sacrament, one of the Seven of the Evangelical Law, instituted
by Christ.

That which is truly and properly a Sacrament must be a Cause of Grace,
according to the general Decrees about the Nature of Sacraments. So that those
who do not hold the latter, must deny the former.

Now that there was no Tradition even in the Roman Church for this, I prove
from the Confession of their own most learned Divines since the Council of
Trent.

Vasquez confesses that Durandus denies that it confers Grace, and consequently
that it is truly a Sacrament, Vasq. de Sacr. Matri^. Disp. ^. c. 1.
(but he yields it in a large improper sense) and that the Canonists were of
his Opinion; and that the Master of the Sentences himself asserted no more than
Durandus. And which adds more to this, he confesses that Soto durst not condemn
this Opinion as heretical, because Thomas, ^. 3.
Bonaventure, Scotus and other Schoolmen did only look on their own as the more
probable Opinion. But, says he, after the Decree of Eugenius and the Council
of Trent it is heretical.

Gregory de Valentia says the same thing, only he adds that the Master of the
Sentences contradicts himself. So Greg. de Val. To. 4. Disp. 10. Punct. 5.
certain a deliverer was he of the Churches Tradition; and wonders that Soto
should not find it plainly enough in the Councils of Florence and Trent, that a
true Sacrament must confer Grace.

Maldonat yields, that Durandus and the Canonists denied Matrimony to be a
proper Sacrament, but he calls Mald. de Sac. Matrim. q. 1.
them Catholics imprudently erring.

Bella^min denies it not; but uses a disingenuous shift Bell. de Matr. Sa^r. l.
1. 0. 5.
about Durandus, and would bring it to a Logical Nicity, whereas (...) very
Arguments he pretends to answer, show pl^^^^y that he denied this to be a true
and proper Sacrament.

But he offers something considerable about the Canonists if it will hold.

1. That they were but a few, and for this he quotes Navarr, that the common
Opinion was against them; for Navar. Max. c. 22. n. 20.
which he mentions the Rubric de Spons. but I can find nothing like it through
the whole Title; and it is not at all probable that such Men as Hostiensis and
the Glosser should be ignorant of, or oppose the common Opinion. Hostiensis
says plainly, that Grace is not conferred by Matrimony, Hostiens. Sum. de
Sacr. non iter. n. 7.
and never once mentions any Opinion among them against it; and the Glosser
upon Gratian affirms it several times, Cause. 32. q. 2 c. Honorantur, In hoc
Sacramento non confertur Gratia Spiritus Sancti sicut in aliis. The Roman
Correctors could not bear this; and say in the Margin, immo confert; this is
plain contradicting; but how is it proved from the Canon Law? They refer to
Did. 23. c. his igitur, v. pro beneficiis. Thither upon their Authority I go;
and there I find the very same thing said, and in the same words; and it is
given as a Reason why Symony cannot be committed in Matrimony as in other
Sacraments, and in both places we are referred to 32 q. 2. c. connubia, and to
1. q. 1. c. quicquid invisibilis, the former is not very favorable to the
Grace of Matrimony; and in the latter the Gloss is yet more plain, if it be
possible, Nota Conjugium non esse de his Sacramentis quae consotationem
coelestis grati^ tribuunt. There the Correctors fairly refer us to the Council
of Trent, which has decreed the contrary. But that is not to our business, but
whether the Canonists owned this or not. And there it follows, that other
Sacraments do so signify as to convey, this barely signifies. So that I think
Bellarmin had as good have given up the Canonists, as to make so lame a Defense
of them.

2. He says we are not to rely on the Canonists for these Durand. in sent. l.
4. Did. 26. q. 3.
things, but on the Divines. But Durand^ says, the Canonists could not be
ignorant of the Doctrine of the Roman Church; for some of them were Cardinals;
and he gives a better Reason, viz. that the sense of the Roman Church was to be
seen in the Decretals. For therefore Marriage was owned to be a Sacrament in
the large sense, because of the Decret. of Lucius III. Extra de haeret. c. ad
abolendam; but the Schoolmen argued from Probabilities and Niceties in this
matter, which could not satisfy a Man's understanding; as appears by Durandus
his Arguments, and Bellarmin's Answers to them.

1. Where Sacraments confer Grace, there must be a Divine Institution of
something above Natural Reason, but there is nothing of that kind in Matrimony,
besides the signifying the Union between Christ and his Church; and therefore
it is only a Sacrament in a large, and not in a proper sense.

In answer to this Bellarmin says, that it both signifies Eell. de Sacr. Matr.
l. 1. c. 5.
and causes such a Love between Man and Wife, as there is between Christ and
his Church.

But Vasquez says, that the Resemblance as to Christ and Vasq. da Sacr. Matr.
Disp. 2. ^. 6.

Basil. Pont. de Matr. l. 1. ^. 5. n. 10.


his Church in Matrimony, does not at all prove a promise of Grace made to it.
And Basilius Pontius approves of what Vasquez says, and confesses, that it
cannot be inferred from hence that it is a true and proper Sacrament.

2. Here is nothing External added, besides the mere Contract of the Persons;
but the nature of a Sacrament impli^s some external and visible sign.

Bellarmin answers, that it is not necessary there should be in this Sacrament
any such extrinsecal sign; because it lies in a mere Contract. And that I think
holds on the other side, that a mere Contract cannot be a Sacrament, from their
own Definition of a Sacrament.

3. The Marriage of Infidels was good and valid, and their Baptism adds nothing
to it; but it was no Sacrament before, and therefore not after.

Bellarmin answers, that it becomes a Sacrament after. And so there is a
Sacrament without either Matter or Form; for there is no new Marriage.

4. Marriage was instituted in the time of Innocence, and is a natural Dictate
of Reason, and therefore no Sacrament.

Bellarmin answers, that it was no Sacrament then, because there was no need of
Sacramental Grace. And although the Marriage of Adam and Eve did represent the
Union between Christ and his Church; yet it was no proper Sacrament. But how
does it prove that it is a Sacrament upon any other Account, under the Gospel?
And if that does not imply a promise of Grace, then how can it now?

So that Durandus his Reasons appear much stronger than Bellarmin's Answers.

But Durandus urges one thing more, which Bellarmin takes no notice of, viz.
that this Opinion of the Canonists was very well known at that time, and was
never condemned as contrary to any determination of the Church. Now, if there
had been any constant Tradition even of the Church of Rome against it, it is
impossible these Canonists should have avoided Censure; their Opinion being so
much taken notice of by the Schoolmen afterward. Jacobus Almain says, it was
a Controversy between the Canonists Almain in 4. Did. 26. q. 1.
and Divines, whether Matrimony was a Sacram^nt; not all the Divines neither;
for the confesses Durandus and others seemed to agree with them. What Universal
Tradition then had the Council of Trent to rely upon in this matter? When all
the Cano^ists, according to Almain, and some of the Divines, opposed it? He
sets down their different Reasons; but never alleges matter of Faith, or
Tradition against them, but only says, the Divines hold the other Opinion,
because Matrimony is one of the Seven Sacraments. But on what was the Opinion
of the Necessity of Seven Sacraments grounded? What Scripture, what Fathers,
what Tradition was there, before Peter Lombard, for just that number?

The Sense of the Greek Church about Seven Sacraments.

But before I come to that, it is fit to take notice of what Bellarmin lays
great weight upon, both as to the Number of the Sacraments in general, and this
in particular; Bell. de Sacr. l. 2. c. 25.
which is, the consent of both the Greek and Latin Church for at least 500
Years. But I have showed there De Matrim. Sacr. l. 1. c. 4.
was no such Consent, as is boasted of even in the Latin Church. As to the
Greek Church, he says, it is an argument of Universal Tradition, when they had
the same Tradition even in their Schism.

To this I Answer.

1. We do not deny that the latter Greeks, after the taking Constantinople by
the Latins, did hold Seven Mysteries; which the Latins render Sacraments. For
after there were Latin Patriarchs at Constantinople, and abundance of Latin
Priests in the Eastern Parts, they had perpetual Disputes about Religion; and
the Latins by degrees did gain upon them in some points; and particularly in
this of Seven Sacraments, for the Latins thought it an advantage to their
Church to boast of such a Number of Sacraments; and the Greeks that they might
not seem to come behind them, were willing to embrace the same Number.

The first Person among them who is said to have written about them, was Simeon
Bishop of Thessalonica, whom Possevin sets at a greater distance, that the
Tradition might seem so much elder among them; (for he makes Possev. in Appar.
him to have lived 600 years before his time;) but Leo Allatius has evidently
proved, that he lived not two Leo Allat. de Concord. l. 2. c. 13.

n. 13. De Simeon. Script. p. 185. etc.


hundred years before him, (which is a considerable difference,) for Simeon
dyed but six months before the taking of Thessalonica, A. D. 1430, as he proves
from Joh. Anagnosta, who was present at the taking it. From hence it appers how
very late this Tradition came into the Greek Church.

After him Gabriel Severus, Bishop of Philadelphia, wrote about the Seven
Sacraments, and he lived at Venice in Arcudius his time, who wrote since
Possevin; and Crusius wrote to this Gabriel A. D. 1580, and he was consecrated
Crusii Turc^ Groec.
by Jeremias A. D. 1577. So that neither his Authority, or that of Je^emias,
can signify any thing as to the Antiquity of this Tradition among the Greeks.

Leo Allatius talks of the old as well as Modern Greeks, Leo Allat. de Concord.
l. 3. c. 16. n. 4.
who held Seven Sacraments, but he produces the Testimony only of those who
lived since the taking of Constantinople; as Job the Monk, Simeon, Johannes
Palaeologus, Jeremias, Gabriel, Cyrillus Berrhoensis, Parthenius, and such
like: But he very craftily says, he produces these to let us see they have not
gone off from the Faith of their Ancestors, whereas that is the thing we would
have seen, viz. the Testimony of the Greeks before, and not afterward. As to
the ancient Greeks, he confesses they say nothing of the number. De numero apud
eos altum silentium n. 9.
est. And how could therebe a Tradition in so much silence? But some speak of
some, and others of others, but all speak of all. This is a very odd way to
prove a Tradition of a certain Number. For then, some might believe Three,
others Four, others Five, but how can this prove that all believed just Seven?
However let us see the Proof. But instead of that he presently starts an
Objection from the pretended Dionysius Areopagita, viz. That where he designs
to treat of all the Sacraments, he never mentions Penance, Extreme Unction, and
Matrimony; n. 10.
and after a great deal of rambling Discourse, he concludes that he did ill to
leave them o^t; and that others Answers n. 15. n. 17.
are insufficient. He shows from Tertullian, Ambrose and Cyril that the
necessary Sacraments are mentioned; but where are the rest? and we are now
enquiring after them in the ancient Greek Church; but they are not to be foun^.
As one may confidently affirm, when one who professed so much skill in the
Greek Church, as Leo Allatius, has no more to say for the Proof of it.

2. Those Greeks who held Seven Sacraments, did not hold them in the Sense of
the Council o^ Trent. And that for two Reasons.

1. They do not hold them all to be of divine Institution. Which appears by the
Patriarch Jeremias his Answer to the Tubing Divines, who at first seems to
write agreeably to the Church of Rome in this matter, (except about Extreme
Unction;) but being pressed hard by them in their Reply; he holds to the Divine
Institution of Baptism, and the Eucharist, but gives up the rest, as instituted
by the Churches Authority. Which is plain giving Act. Theolog. Wirtemberg. p.
240.
up the Cause. How then comes Bellarmin to insist so much on the Answer of
Jeremias? The Reason was, that Socolovius had procured from Constantinople the
Patriarch's first answer, and translated and printed it; upon which great
Triumphs were made of the Patriarch's Consent with the Church of Rome; but when
these Divines were hereby provoked to publish the whole proceedings, those of
the Church of Rome were unwilling to be undeceived; and so take no notice of
any farther Answer. Since the time of Jeremias, the Patriarch of Alexandria,
(as he was afterward,) Metrophanes Critopulus Metroph. Confess. Eccl. Orient.
p. 74.
published an Account of the Faith of the Greek Church; and he says expressly
of Four of the Seven, that they are Mystical Rites, and equivocally called
Sacraments. And from hence it appears how little Reason Leo Allatius had Leo
Allat. de Concord. E^^l. Occident. and Orient. l. 3. c. 17.
to be angry with Caucus, a Latinized Greek, like himself, for affirming that
the modern Greeks did not look on these Sacraments as of Divine Institution;
but after he has given him some hard words, he offers to prove his Assertion
for him. To which end he not only quotes that passage of the Patriarch
Jeremias, but others of Job and Gregorius; from whence he infers, that Five of
the Sacraments were of Ecclesiastical Institution, and he says nothing to take
it off. So admirably has he proved the Consent of the Eastern and Western
Churches!

2. They do not agree in the Matter, or Form, or some essential part of them,
with the Council of Trent, and therefore can make up no Tradition for the
Doctrine of that Council about the Seven Sacraments. This will be made appear by
going through them.

1. Of Chrism.
1. As to the Form, Arcudius shows, that Gabriel of Philadelphia, Cabasilas and
Marcus Ephesius, all place Arcud. d^ Concord. l. 2. c. 6.
the Form in the Consecration of it; but the Church of Rome makes the Form to
lie in the Words spoken in the Use of it.

2. As to the Minister of it. Among the Greeks it is commonly performed by the
Presbyter, though the Bishop be present; but the Council of Tr^nt denounces an
Anathema against him that says, the Bishop alone is not C^^^il. Trid. de
(...). C^^. ^.

De Sa^ra^. (...). 9.


the ordinary Minister of it.

3. As to the Character. The Council of Trent declares that whosoever affirms
that Confirmation does not imprint an indelible Character, so as it cannot be
repeated is Anathematized; but Arcudius shows at large, that the modern (...).

(...).


Greeks make no scruple of reiterating Confirmation. But Catumsyritus, another
Latinized Greek, opposes Arcudius herein; and says, that the Use of Chrism
among the Geeeks, does not relate to the Sacrament of Confirmation, but was a
Symbolical Ceremony relating to Baptism; and for this he quotes one Corydaleus
a Man of great Note in the Patriarchal Church at Constantinople. Therefore
Caucus had reason to deny that the Greeks receive that which the Latins call
the Sacrament of Confirmation. And if this hold, then the Tradition of the
Seven Sacraments must fail in the Greek Church. For they deny that they have
any such thing as a Sacrament of Confirmation distinct from Baptism.

2. Of the Sacrament of Penance.
1. The Council of Trent declares Absolution of the Penitent to be a judicial
Act, and denounces an Anathema against Council. Trid. de Paenit. c. 6. ^an. 9.
him that denies it; but the Greek Church uses a deprecative Form, (as they
call it,) not pronouncing Absolution by way of Sentence, but by way of Prayer
to God. Which as Aquinas observes, rather shows a Person to be absolved by God
than by the Priest, and are rather a Prayer (...). (...). p. q. 84. (...). a^.
1.
that it may be done, than a signification that it is done; and therefore he
looks on such Forms as insufficient. And if it be a judicial Sentence, as the
Council of Trent determines, it can hardly be reconciled to such a Form,
wherein no kind of judicial Sentence was ever pronounced; as Arcudius grants;
and in Extreme Unction, where such a Arcud de Concord. 4. l. c. 3. p. 36^.
Form is allowed, there is, as he observes, no Judicial Act. But he hopes at
last to bring the Greeks off by a Phrase used in some of their Forms, I have
you absolved; but he p. 370.
confesses it is not in their Public Offices; and their Priests for the most
part use it not. Which shows it to be an Innovation among the Latinizing
Greeks, if it be so observed, which Catumsyritus denies, and says, he proves
Catumsyritus de vera Conc. Proleg. p. 153.
it only from some Forms granted by Patents, which are not Sacramental; and
supposing it otherwise, he says, it is foolish, false and erroneous to suppose
such a Form to be valid; because it is no Judicial Act.

2. The Council of Trent makes Confession of all Mortal Council. Trid. de
Poenit. c. 5.
Sins, how secret soever, to be necessary in order to the benefit of Priestly
Absolution in this Sacrament, and denounces an Anathema against those that deny
it; but the Can. 7.
Greek Church grants Absolution upon supposition that they have not confessed
all Mortal Sins: As appears by the Form of the Patriarch of Antioch, produced
by Arcudius, and another Form of the Patriarch of Constantinople, in Jeremias
Arcud. p. 373.
his Answer. Arcudius is hard put to it, when to excuse this he says, they
only pray to God to forgive them; for this is to own that a deprecative Form is
insufficient, and so that there is no Sacrament of Penance in the Greek Church.

3. Of Orders.
The Greek and Latin Churches differ, both as to Matter and Form. The Council
of Trent Anathematiseth those who deny a visible and exeternal Priesthood in
the New Testament; S^^. 2^. de (...). Or^i^. C^^. 1.
or a Power of consecrating and offering the true Body and Blood of Christ, and
of remitting and retaining of Sins. And this twofold Power the Church of Rome
expresses by a double Form, one of delivering the Vessels with Accipe
Potestatem, etc. the other of Imposition of Hands, with Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.

But the Greek Church wholly omits the former, on which the greatest weight is
laid in the Latin Church, and many think the Essential Form lies in it. When
the Office of Ordination is over, the Book of the Liturgy, called (...) is
delivered to the Presbyter, but without any words; and there is no mention of
it in their Rituals, either Printed or MSS. so likewise a parcel of consecrated
Bread is delivered by the Bishop to him afterward. And all the Form is, The
Divine Grace advances such an one to the Office of a Presbyter.

If we compare this with the Form in the Council of Florence, we shall find no
agreement either as to Matter or Form, in this Sacrament, between the Greek and
Latin Churches. For there the Matter is said to be that by which the Order is
conferred, viz. the delivery of the Chalice with Wine, and the Paten with the
Bread; and the Form, Receive the Power of offering Sacrifice for the Living and
the Dead. And it is hardly possible to suppose these two Churches should go
upon the same Tradition. I know what pains Arcudius has taken to reconcile
them; but as long as the Decree of Eugenius stands, and is received in the
Church of Rome, it is impossible. And Catumsyritus labors hard to prove, that
he has endeavored thereby to overthrow the whole Order of Priesthood in the
Roman Church.

4. Of Extreme Unction.
Bellarmin particularly appeals to the Greek Church for Bell. de Extr. Unit. l.
1. c. 4.
its consent as to this Sacrament; but if he means in the modern sense as it is
delivered by the Councils of Florence and Trent, he is extremely mistaken.

1. For the former says, it is not to be given but to such of whose death they
are afraid; and the Council of Trent calls it the Sacrament of dying Persons.
But the Greeks administer their Sacrament of Unction to Persons in health as
well as sickness, and once a year to all the People that will; which Arcudius
says, is not only done by the illiterate Arcud. de Concord. l. 5. c. 4.
Priests, but by their Patriarchs and Metropolitans, etc. and they look on then
as a Supplement to the ancient Penance of the Church; for they think the
partaking of the holy Oil makes amends for that: but this Arcudius condemns as
an abuse and innovation among them. But the original Intention and Design of it
was for the Cure and Recovery of sick Persons; as Arcudius confesses the whole
scope of the Office shows; and p. 389. c. 5. c. 7. p. 403.
in the next Chapter he produces the Prayers to that end. And the Greeks charge
the Latins with Innovation in giving this Sacrament to those Persons of whose
Recovery they have no hope.

2. The Council of Trent requires that the Oil of Extreme Con^. Tri^. de Extr.
(...), c. 1.

Catumsyr. Vera Concord. Tr. 1. p. 156. Arcu^. l. 5. ^ c. 2.


Unction be consecrated by a Bishop; and this the Doctors of the Roman Church,
says Catumsyritus, make essential to the Sacrament. But in the Greek Church
the Presbyters commonly do it, as Arcudius shows at large.

5. Of Matrimony.
The Council of Trent from making this a Sacrament, Conc. Trid. S^ss. 24. Can.
7.
denounces an Anathema against those who do not hold the Bond indissoluble,
even in the Case of Adultery. And Bellarmin urges this as his first Reason,
because it is a ^ell. de Matr. l. 1. c. 16.
sign of the Conjunction of Christ with his Church. But the Greek Church held
the contrary; and continues so to do, as both Bellarmin and Arcudius confess.

So that though there be allowed a consent in the Number of Sacraments among
the Modern Greeks, yet they have not an entire Consent with the Roman Church in
any one of them.

The Sense of other Eastern Churches about the Seven Sacraments.

But to show how late this Tradition of Seven Sacraments came into the Greek
Church, and how far it is from being an Universal Tradition, I shall now make
it appear that this Number of Sacraments was never received in the other
Christian Churches, although some of them were originally descended from the
Ancient Greek Church.

I begin with the most Eastern Churches, called the Christians of St. Thomas in
the East Indies. And we have a clear Proof that there was no Tradition among
them about the Seven Sacraments. For when Alexius Meneses, Archbishop of Goa,
undertook to reform them according to the Roman Church, (if that may be called
a Reformation) and held a Council at Diamper to that purpose, A. D. 1599. he
found that they had no Sacrament of Chrism, or Penance, or Extreme Unction, of
which they were utterly ignorant, says Jarricus from Antonius Pet. Jarric. Rer
J^dic. To. 3. p. 2. c. 12.
Goveanus, who was Prior of Goa, and published the whole proceedings. Which
Book was translated out of Portugese by Joh. Baptista a Glano into French, and
printed at Brussels, 1609. From whence the Author of the Critical History of
the Faith and Customs of the Eastern Nations has given an Account of these
things; and he says, Histoire Critique, chapter 8. p. 104.
they owned but three Sacraments, Baptism, Eucharist and Orders; that they knew
nothing of the Sacrament of Chrism or extreme Unction, and abhorred Auricular
Confession. p. 105.
But in excuse of them he says, that they joined Confirmation p. 112.
with Baptism, as other Eastern Churches did; that the Sacrament of Extreme
Unction as it is practiced in the Church of Rome is known only to the Latin
Church; p. 113.
but the Eastern Church had the Unction of S. James for p. 13.
the Cure of Diseases, as the Greek Church had.

Cotovicus affirms the same of the other Eastern Churches Cotov. Itin.
Hierosol. and Sir. p. 206.
called Chaldean, (who are under the same Patriarch with the Christians of S.
Thomas) that they knew nothing of the Sacraments of Confirmation and Extreme
Unction. This Patriarch is the same which is commonly called the Patriarch of
Babylon; whose Residence is at Mozal; but called of Babylon, because Sele^cia,
after the desolation of the true Babylon had the name given to it (as it were
^asie to prove, if it were pertinent to this design) and upon the destruction
of Sele^cia the Patriarch removed first to Bagdat and then to Mozal; whose
Jurisciction extends over all those Eastern Christians, which are called
Nestorian.

In the Abyssine Churches, Godignus says positively from those who had been
conversant among them, that Godign. de (...) (...). l. 1. ^. (...).
they knew nothing of the Sacraments of Chrism and Extreme Unction; and that
all the Confession they have is g^neral and rare; and that they have no Bishops
under ^. (...).
the Abuna, and believe the bond of Matrimony easily dissolved. So that the
Tradition of Seven Sacraments is wholly unknown to them, but as it was imposed
by the Roman M^ssionaries; which imposition was so ill received there and
brought such Confusion and Disorders among them, that they are for ever
banished.

In the Armenian Churches, Joh. Chernacensis a Latinized Armenian says, that
the Armenians owned not the Clem. Ga^an. Conc. Eccles. Arm. cum Romans c. 30. p.
516.
Seven Sacraments, that they knew nothing of Chrism and Extre^^ Unction. Here
we see a general consent as to the total ignorance of two of the Seven
Sacraments in these Churches. But Clemens Galanus, who had been Clem. Galan.
To. 3. p. 439.
many years a Missionary among the Armenians endeavors to prove that they had
the Tradition of the seven Sacraments; but very unsuccessfully. For he produces
none of their ancient Authors for it: but he names Vartanus whom he sets
himself to confute afterward; and he confesses, that he took away the
Sacrament of Penance, and made Burial of the Dead to be one of his seven. But
more than that, he says, the Armenian Churches have p. 636.
forbidden Extreme Unction as the Nestorians had done Auricular p. 605.
Confession. So that nothing like a truly Catholic Tradition can be produced
for the Number of seven Sacraments either in the Church of Rome or elsewhere,
within Bellarmin's own term of 500 years.

I am now to give an account when this Number of seven Sacraments, came into
the Church, and on what Occasions it was advanced to be a point of Faith.

The first I can find who expressly set down the Number of seven Sacraments, was
Hugo de S. Victore, who Hugo de S. Vict. de Offi^^ l. 1. c. 12.
lived in the twelfth Century, not long before Peter Lombard. But that there
was an Innovation made by him in this matter, I shall make appear by comparing
what he says with what others had delivered who were short of the Primitive
Fathers.

Rupertus Tuitiensis lived much about the same time in Germany that Hugo did at
Paris, and he gives a different Rup. Tuit. de Vict. Verbi. l. 12. c. 11.
Resolution of the Question about the Principal Sacraments: For he names no
more than Baptism, the Eucharist and the double Gift of the Holy Ghost; and,
says he, these three Sacraments are necessary instruments of our Salvation.
But Hugo says, there are seven principal Sacraments; (which sufficiently
shows, that he thought Hugo do Sac. l. 1. part. 9. c. 6, 7.
there were other Sacraments besides these; and so he expresses his mind in
another place, where he makes all symbolical Signs to be Sacraments,) but the
principal Sacram^nts he says, are those which convey Grace.

Fulbertus Carnotensis lived in France in the beginning Fulb. Carnot. Epist. 1.
of the tenth Century; and where he Discourses of the Sacraments he names no
more than Baptism and the Eucharist. He calls the Body and Blood two
Sacraments, and so did Rabanus Maurus before him. De Inst. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.


Who lived in the ninth Age, and was a Person of great Reputation; and he names
no more Sacraments than Rab. Maur. de Inst. Cler. l. 1. c. 24.
Baptism, and Chrism, and the Eucharist; where he proposes to treat of them;
and had as just an Occasion to have mentioned the rest, as Hugo had. But
Bellarmin says, he handled all wherein the Clergy were concerned, Bell. de
Sacr. l. 2. c. 27.
and therefore omitted none but Matrimony. But were not they concerned to know
whether it were a Sacrament or not? The Question is not whether he mentioned
the things, but whether he called them Sacraments; but I do not find Extreme
Unction so much as mentioned by him in the place he refers us to.

In the same ^ge, Walafridus Strabo, where he purposely Walaf. Strab. de Reb.
E^cl. c. 16, 17, 25.
discourses of the Sacraments names no more than Rabanus Maurus; and this had
been an inexcusable omission in such who treat of Ecclesiastical Offices; and
were to inform Persons of their duties about them. And therefore I lay much
more weight on such an omission in them than in any other Writers. I know
Paschasius Radbertus Pasch. Radb. de c^rp. and sang. Dom. c. 3.
mentions no more than three Sacraments, Baptism, Chrism and the Eucharist; but
Bellarmin and Sirmondus say he mentioned them for Example sake, because it was
not his business to handle the Number of Sacraments; but this Answer will by no
means serve for those who purposely treated of these matters; and therefore an
omission in them is an argument that they knew nothing of them.

And this Argument will go yet higher; for in the beginning of the seventh
Century, Isidore of Sevil treated Isid. Orig. 1. 6. de Officiis.
of these matters, and he names no more than Baptism, Chrism and the Eucharist;
and he tells us, they are therefore called Sacraments, because under the
covering of corporeal things a secret and invisible virtue is conveyed to the
pa^takers of them. And this very passage is entered into the Canon Law c. 1. q.
1 c. Multi Secularium, etc. and there it passes under the Name of Gregory I.
but the Roman Correctors restore it to Isidore.

But it may be objected, that Ivo Carnotensis made a Collection of Canons
before Gratian; who handles the Iro Decret 2. p. c. 73.
Sacraments in his first and second Part; and he seems to make the annual
Chrism to be a Sacrament; for which he quotes an Epistle of Fabianus, who says
it ought to be consecrated every year, quia novum Sacramentum est; and this, he
says, he had by Tradition from the Apostles. Which Testimony the modern
Schoolmen rely upon for a sufficient proof of this Apostolical Tradition. But
this Ysamb. ad. q. 72. Disp. 1. ^. 3.
Epistle is a notorious counterfeit, and rejected by all men of any tolerable
Ingenuity in the Church of Rome. Thus we trace the Original of some pretended
Apostolical Traditions into that Mass of Forgeries, the Decretal Epistles,
which was sent abroad under the Name of Isidore.

Ivo produces another Testimony from Innocentius I. Ivo ib. c. 75:
to prove that Extreme Unction was then owned for a kind of Sacrament, and
therefore ought not to be given to Penitents. If this Rule holds, then either
Matrimony was no Sacrament, or Penitents might not marry; but the Canonists say
even excommunicated Persons may marry, but one of them says, it is a strange
Sacrament excommunicated Persons are allowed to partake of. Alex. Consil.


But this genus est Sacramenti signifies very little to those who know how
largely the Word Sacrament was used in elder times, from Iertullian downwards.
But our Question is not about a kind of a Sacrament, but strict and proper
Sacraments; and if it had been then thought so, he would not have permitted any
to administer it; unless they will say it is as necessary to Salvation as
Baptism, which none do. It appears from hence, that there was then a Custom
among some in regard to S. James his Words, if Persons were sick, to take some
of the Chrism to anoint them, and to pray over them in hopes of their Recovery;
but this was no Sacrament of dying Persons, as it is now in the Church of Rome.

If it had been then so esteemed, S. Ambrose (or who-ever was the Author of the
Book of Sacraments) would not have omitted it, and the other supernumeraries,
when he purposely treats of Sacraments; the same holds as to S. Cyril of
Jerusalem. And it is a poor evasion to say, that they spoke only to
Catechumens; for they were to be instructed in the Means and Instruments of
Salvation as they make all Sacraments to be.

And it is to as little purpose to say, that they do not declare there are but
tw^; for our business is to enquire for a Catholic Tradition for s^ven true
and proper Sacraments,, as the Council of Trent determines under an Anathema.
But if we compare the Traditions for two and for seven together, the other will
be found to have far greater Advantage; not only because the two are mentioned
in the eldest Writers, where the seven are not; but because so many of the
Fathers agree in the Tradition, that the Sacraments were designed by the Water
and Blood which came out of our Savior's side. So S. Chrysostom, S. Cyril S.
Chrysostom. in Joh. hom. 87.
of Alexandria, Leo Magnus, but above S. Cyril. in Joh. l. 12.
all S. Augustine who several times insists Leo in Epist. ad Flavian.
upon this; which shows that they S. Aug. in Joh. Tr. 9. 15. in Ps. 40

De Ci^^it. Dei, l. 15. c. 26.

De Symbol. c. 6.


thought those two to be the true and proper Sacraments of Christianity;
however there might be other Mystical Rites which in a large sense might be
called Sacraments.

As to the Occasions of setting up this Number of seven Sacraments, they were
these.

1. Some pretty Congruities which they had found out for them. The Number seven
they observe was in request in the Levitical Law, as to Sacrifices and
Purifications. Naaman was bid to wash seven times. And Bellarmin in good
earnest concludes that the whole Scripture seemed to foretell the seven
Sacraments by those things. Bell. de Sacr. l. 2. c. 26.
But besides, he tells us of the seven things relating to natural Life which
these have an Analogy with; the seven sorts of sins these are a remedy against,
and the seven sorts of Virtues which answer to the seven Sacraments. But none
of all these prove any Catholic Tradition.

2. Making no difference between Mystical Rites continued in Imitation of
Apostolical Practices, and true and real Sacraments. Imposition of Hands for
Confirmation and Ordination is allowed to be a very just and reasonable
Imitation of them; and as long as the Miraculous Power of Healing Diseases
continued, there was a fair Ground for continuing the Practice mentioned by S.
James; but there was no Reason afterward to change this into quite another
thing, by making it a Sacrament, chiefly intended for doing away the Remainders
of Sin.

3. Advancing the Honor of the Priesthood; by making them so necessary for the
actual Expiation of all sorts of Sins, and in all conditions. For no Sacrament
is rightly administered by the Council of Trent without the Priest; and
therefore clandestine Marriages are declared void by it. And it pronounces an
Anathema against those who say any others than Priests can administer Extreme
Unction; however it appears that in the time of Innocentius 1. any might make
use of the Chrism when it was consecrated by a Bishop; but they are grown wiser
in the Church of Rome since that time; and as they have altered a Ceremony of
Curing into a Sacrament of Dying, so they have taken Care that none but Priests
shall perform that last Office, that the People may believe they can neither
live nor dye without them.

VI. Of Auricular Confession.
The Council of Trent declares, that the Universal Council. Trid. Sess. 14. de
Poenit. c. 5.
Church always understood that Christ did institute an entire Confession of
Sins; and that it is received by Divine Right to all who sin after Baptism,
because our Lord Jesus Christ before his Ascension into Heaven, did leave
Priests as his Vicars, to be Presidents and Judges, to whom all mortal sins
were to be made known, and of which they were by The Power of the Keys to give
Sentence, so as either to remit or retain them.

It farther says, That the most holy and ancient Fathers by a great and
unanimous Consent did use this secret Sacramental Ib.
Confession from the beginning.

And it denounces Anathema's,

1. Against him that denies the Sacrament of Penance to Can. 1.
be of Christ's Institution.

2. Against him that denies that our Savior's words, Receive 3.
ye the Holy Ghost, Whose sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. are to be
understood of the Power of remitting and retaining in the Sacrament of Penance,
as the Calick Church always understood them.

3. Against him that denies Confession to be a Part of it, or to have Divine
Institution, and to be necessary to Salvation; 4, 6, 7.
as it relates to all mortal though secret Sins.

Thus we see the Sense of the Council of Trent in this matter; and I shall now
make it evident there was no such Catholic Tradition, as is here pretended for
it, by the Confession of their own Writers.

1. As to the General Sense of the Church.

2. As to the Founding it on John 22. Those sins ye remit, etc.

1. As to the General Sense of the Church. Maldonat reckons up Seven several
Opinions among themselves about Maldonat de Sacr. Poenit. De Confess. c. 2.
Confession. 1. Of those who denied it to be of Divine Right, but held it to be
useful in the Church; and for this he quotes Rhenanus and Erasmus. 2. Of those
who make it to be only of Ecclesiastical Institution; and this, says he, is
the Opinion of all the Canonists. 3. Of those who thought it came in by
Apostolical Tradition; of which he reckons Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury,
4. Of some Divines who held it to be instituted only by St. James. 5. Of others
who held it to be of Divine Right, and not instituted by the Apostles, but
insinuated by Christ; and for this he quotes Alexander Hales, and Bonaventure.
6. Of some who thought it instituted in the Old Testament. 7, Of those who held
it instituted by Christ, but not as a Precept, but by way of Council; and for
this he mentions Scotus and his Followers.

Vasquez reckons up among those whose Opinions are Vasquez in 3. Th. To. 4. Q.
90. art. 1. n. 4.
not condemned, The Canonists, Erasmus, Bonaventure, Alexander Hales, and
Scotus, who all differed from the Council of Trent.

Suarez mentions three Opinions among them 1. Of Suarez in 3. p. Th. To. 4.
Disp. 35. 1.
those who said it was instituted in the Law of Nature. 2. Of those who
attributed it to the Law of Moses. 3 Of those who d^nyed any Institution of it
by way of Precept from Christ in the Law of Grace; and for this he quotes Hugo
de Sancto Victore, Alexander Hales, and Bonaventure, and they went upon this
Ground, that no such Institution could be proved either by Scripture or
Tradition.

Gregory de Valentia Confesses, some Catholic Authors Greg. de Valent. To. 4.
Disp. 7. Q. 9. Punct. 2.
denied the Divine Institution of Confession; for which he produces the
Canonists, and Erasmus and Rhenanus. But he thinks they were not guilty of
Heresy, because they were not obstinate; but that is not our business, which
is to show, that by their own confession there was not a constant Catholic
Tradition in the Church about it.

Natalis Alexander, who has lately pretended to answer Not. Alex. de Sacr.
Confess. p. 229.
Daille, confesses, that from the ninth to the thirteenth Age, many Catholics
did hold, that Confession to God alone was sufficient to obtain Remission of
sins; and he proves it from Lombard, Gratian and the Canonists. But he says it
was no heresy in them, the point not being yet settled by a general Council.

Boileau in his Answer to Daille cannot deny that in Hist. Confess. Auric. c. 29.
the time of Lombard and Gratian men held several ways about this matter; but
he answers with Thomas upon the Sentences; that it was an opinion then, but
since the Council of Lateran it is become a Heresy. But if it were no
heretical Opinion then, what becomes of Infallible Tradition? If the Church
defines by Tradition, that Tradition must be proved before the Definition,
otherwise it has no ground to proceed upon.

The Council of Lateran under Innocent III. (it seems) made it a Heresy to
deny this Sacramental Confession. Within much less than a Century before it,
lived Peter Lombard and Gratian. Peter Lombard made it his business to collect
a Body of Divinity out of the Sentences of the Fathers; and his work has been
universally esteemed in the Roman Church. When he comes to state this point of
Confession out of the Fathers, i. e. to give an account of the Tradition of the
Church about it; he tells us in the beginning, that learned men were of
different opinions; Lom. sent. l. 4. did. 17.
and for what reason? because the Doctors of the Church seemed to deliver not
only diverse but contrary things, i. e. they had no certain and constant
Tradition about them. And when he comes to the point of Confession to God only,
he quotes for it, besides Scripture, S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostem, and
Prosper, and against it S. Augustine and Leo, and concludes himself for the
latter; but says not a word more to show that the constant Tradition of the
Church had been for this opinion.

Gratian puts the same Question, and for Confession to Great. de Paenit. Did. 1.
God alone he quotes S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and Prosper, besides Scripture,
and argues largely for it after c. Convertimini, etc. Then he sets down the
Arguments on the other side from c. 38. and after c. 60. he sums up the force
of them, and again after c. 87. and when he has said all on one side and on
the other, he concludes after c. 89. that he left all to the Readers Judgment;
for both Opinions had wise and pious Defenders; and produces that saying as out
of Theodore's Penitential; that some think that we ought to confess only to
God, as the Greeks others that we ought to do it to the Priest too, as almost
all the Church besides; but then he adds, that Confession to God purges away
Sin, but that to the Priest shows how they are purged, i. e. by Contrition. So
the Gloss interprets it. Bellarmin thinks that, ut Groeci, was foisted into the
Canon, Bell. de poenit. l. 3. c. 5.
and I shall not dispute against it, provided that which answers to it, ut tota
fere sancta Ecclesta, be allowed to be so too, as the Roman Correctors do
confess.

Boileau has taken another course, for he says, this whole Distinction is
without ground attributed to Gratian; Hist. Confess. Auric. p. 388.
but how does he prove it? From Ant. Augustinus his Dialogue, where a MS. is
cited that this was not Gratian's, but an elder Author's. And what is gotten by
this? But the other answers, it must be Gratian 's, because of the citation out
of the Digests, and other Books of Civil Law then lately found. If this will
not do, he says, Gratian has many Errors, as the Roman Correctors observe.
Yes truly do they; and about this Point several times; for the Councils of
Lateran and Trent have otherwise determined. But what is all this to the
Tradition of the Church in Gratian's time?

Innocent III. in the Council of Lateran, enjoins strictly the Practice of
Confession once a year, under the Penalty of Excommunication, and of being
deprived of Christian Burial; but there is not a Word of the Churches Tradition
before, for the Ground of it. But finding several Opinions about it, and the
Waldenses then opposing it, he resolves by his Authority to bind all Persons to
it. But after this the Canonists allowed no more than Ecclesiastical
Institution for it; as is plain by the Gloss on the Canon Law, Did. 5. de
Poenit. Tit. In Poenitentia; but the Roman Correctours quote against it
Council. Trident. Sess. 14. c. 5. i. e. a Council some 100 years after, must
tell what the Tradition then was; but the Gloss says, the Greeks had no such
Tradition, and therefore were not bound to Confession. So that we have no
evidence for any Catholic Tradition in this matter, before the Lateran Council.

2. But the Council of Trent has gone beyond the Council of Lateran, and has
fixed the Divine Right of Confession on John 20. Whose sins ye remit, etc. and
therefore I am now to show, by the Confession of their own Writers, that this
has not been the Traditionary Sense of this Place.

Cajetan, not long before the Council first sat, in his Notes on this place
confesses, that no Precept of Sacramental Confession is contained in it. But
how should it be of Divine Right in the sense of the Council of Trent, if there
be no Command for it? Tes, by Cons quence, if they will obtain Remission of
Sins; but this can by no means be inferred from hence, because the Remission of
Sins by Baptism is implied in it; but none of them plead for particular
Confession before Baptism, in order to Remission; and therefore not after,
unless some Command of Christ made it more necessary after Baptism than before,
Vasquez says, that Cajetan means no more, than that it cannot Vasquez ubi
supr. Catharin. in Cajet. p. 446.
be proved out of this place; but Catharinus says, that neither there nor in
any other place does Cajetan allow, that Auricular Confession can be proved out
of Scripture.

Gabriel Biel confesses, he cannot find sufficient force to Biel in 4. sent.
Did. 17. q. 1. a. 1.
conclude the Necessity of Confession from the Power of Absolution here
granted; because it may be valid upon voluntary Confession of the Party; and
therefore he resolves it into an unwritten Tradition.

Guide Brianson takes great pains to prove it out of this Brianson q. 8. Doc.
1. f. 138.
place, but at last yields, that Christ's instituting such a Power, does not
bind Persons to confess their Faults to them that have it. For the Power of
retaining does not imply that no sins are retained which are not retained by
the Priest upon Confession; neither then does the Power of Absolution imply
that no sins are remitted but such as are confessed to a Priest. And therefore
he betakes himself as Biel does, to unwritten Tradition; and so does Nicol. De
Orbellis ad l. 4. Did. 17.

Almain in 4. Did. 17.


de Orbellis.

Jac. de Almain debates the matter at large; and he says only that it is a
probable Opinion, that this Confession is of divine Appointment; but he yields,
that Christ's granting a Power of Absolution, does not make it a duty to
confess to a Priest; and he says, it is a false proposition, that where a
Power of judging is given, others are bound to submit to it; for all that
follows is, that their Sentence is valid if they do submit.

But the force of what the Council of Trent deduces from this place, lies
wholly in this, as Vasquez observes, Vasquez ib. dub. 2.
that because Christ has given Authority to absolve, and they cannot exercise
that Authority without Confession, therefore Confession is hereby made
necessary. And he confesses, that scarce any have deduced the Argumert
effectually from this place. But he says one thing very observable, that if
this place be extended to Remission of Sins in Baptism, then it can never prove
the necessity of Sacramental Confession. And Greg. de Valentia as plainly owns,
that the Fathers did understand it of Baptism; he names Greg. de Valent. de
Necessit. Confess. c. 3.

Not. Alex. de Sacr. Confess. p. 22.

Cyprian ad Jub. Ep. 73.


S. Cyprian, and S. Ambrose; but Natalis Alexander allows S. Cyril of
Alexandria to have so understood it; and that Jansenius and Ferus followed him;
but besides these S. Augustine interprets this place as S. Cyprian had done. For
as S. Cyprian from hence infers the Power of Baptizing and granting Remission
of Sins in the Guides of the Church; so S. Augustine says, the Churches Charity
by the H^ly Ghost looses the Sins of those who are her Members, and retains
Aug. in Joh. Tr. 121.
the sins of those who are not. And it may be observed, that whereas St.
Matthew speaks of the Power of Baptizing granted to the Apostles; S. John
instead of that mentions this Power of remitting or retaining Sins, and S. Mark
and S. Luke speak of Baptism; to which the one S. Mark. 16. 16.

S. Luke 24. 47.


joins S^lvation; and the other Remission of Sins. And therefore this seems to
be meant by our Savior in the Words of S. John; and thus S. Peter exercised
this Power of loosing on the converted Jews, Act. 2. 38. and his Power of
binding on Simon Magus, Act. 8. 21.

Peter Lombard carries S. Augustin's meaning farther, Pet. Lomb. l. 4. Did. 18.
to the Power of Priests over the Sins of the Members of the Church; but then
he limits this Power, and makes it no more than declarative; as I have observed
already; and for this he quotes a notable passage of S. Jerome, Hieron. in
Matthew. c. 16.
who says, that Men are apt to assume too much to themselves under pretense of
this Power of the Keys, whereas God regards not the Sentence of the Priests but
the Life of the Penitents.

But Natalis Alexander thinks there is no binding Power with respect to
Baptism; Was there not as to Simon Magus? And as long as every year the Church
judged of the competency of Persons for it? When Christ spoke these words the
Church was wholly to be formed, and it was a great Power lodged with the
Apostles and their Successors to admit into the Church, or to exclude from it,
not as private Persons, but by Authority from Christ himself. But then this
Power is vain and idle in a constituted Church. By no means; they have still a
Power of casting out and taking in again; and of imposing such Acts on
Offenders, as may give satisfaction to the Church, whose Honor suffers, and
whose Discipline is broken. But the question is, Whether by Christ's
appointment under the Gospel no known mortal sin can be pardoned to baptized
Persons without Confession of it to a Priest? And whether these words of our
Savior do imply it?

Scotus is by no means satisfied with men's Reasoning out of this place, that
because Christ has given such a Power, Scot. in l. 4. Did. 17. q. unica.
therefore it is men's duty to confess their sins; For, says he, this only
implies the usefulness and efficacy of this Power if it be made use of; as in
Confirmation, none think themselves damned if they do not use it though it be
very useful; and therefore he goes another way to work, viz. by joining this
precept and that of loving God and our selves together with it. But how does
this prove that a man ought to take this particular way? Truly, Scotus here
shows his Sub^ilty. Suppose there be another way that is harder, and this be
found more easy, he thinks a man is bound to take the shortest and easiest
way, viz. by Confession and Absolution.

But for all this his heart did misgive him, and he could not but see, that
this proved nothing, unless this way of Confession were first proved to be a
secure way. And therefore he puts the Case, that if it be not proved by these
Words, it may be by S. James, Confess your faults one to another. No, says he,
this will not do; for which he gives this Reason, that it holds no more for
confession to a Priest than to any other; therefore, after all, he is willing
to resolve it into some unwritten Tradition, since there was no convincing
evidence for it either in this or any other place of Scripture. Which showed
they ran to Tradition, when they had nothing else to say.

Bonaventure denies that Christ himself app^inted the Bonav. in 4. Did. 17. q.
3.
Confession of sins; for which he gives this reason, lest it should prove an
occasion of sinning; ne ex verbis Domini daretur aliquibus recidivandi occasio;
but afterward he thinks the Apostles appointed it, and S. James published it;
which Scotus utterly denies. But to the place of S John, Bonaventure says it
was not enough to have it implied in the Priest's Power, because it being a
harder duty than Absolution, it required a more particular Command. Which was
but reasonably said; especially when Bellarmin after others, Bell. de Poen. l.
2. c. 12.
urges, that it is one of the most grievous and burdensome Precepts; but his
Inference from it is very mean, that therefore it must have a divine Command to
enforce it on the People; but Bonaventure's Argument is much stronger, that it
ought then to have been clearly expressed. But as to the Peoples yielding to
it, other accounts are to be given of that afterward.

Alexander Hales observes, that if Christ had intended a command of Confession,
John 20. it would have been expressed Alex. Sum. 3. p. q. 18. number. 3. art. 2.
to those who are to confess, and not to those who are to absolve; as he did to
those who were to be baptized, John 3. Except a man be born of water, etc. so
Christ would have said, except a man confess his sins, etc. and he gave the
same Reasons why Christ did not himself institute it, which Bonaventure does,
who used his very words.

And now who could have imagined that the Council of Trent would have attempted
to have made men believe that-it was the sense of the Universal Church that
Christ instituted Confession in John 20? when so many great Divines even of the
Church of Rome so expressly denied it; as I have made appear from themselves.

But now to give an account by what steps and degrees and on what occasions
this Auricular Confession came into the Church, these things are to be
considered.

1. In the first Ages, pu^lick, scandalous Offenders after Baptism, were by the
Discipline of the Church brought to public Penance; which was called
Exomologesis; which originally signifies Confession. And by this, Bellarmin
Bell. de Poen. l. 3. c. 6.
says the Ancients u^derstood either Confession alone, or joined with the
other parts of Penance; but Albaspineus shows, that it was either taken for the
whole course of Albasp. Obs. l. 2. c. 26.
public Penance, or for the last and solemn act of it, when the Bishop led the
Penitents from the entrance of the Church up to the B^dy of the Congregation,
where they expressed their abhorrence of their faults in the most penitent
manner, by their Actions as well as by Words. So that this was a real and
public Declaration of their sorrow for their sins, and not a Verbal or
Auricular Confession of them. The same is owned by La Cerda. But Boileau
pretends La Cerda. Advers. Sacr. c. 142. p. 2.

Hist. Confess. Auric. c. 4. p. 72.


that it had not this sense till after the Novatian Heresy and the Death of
Irenaeus; and that before that time it signified Confession according to the
sense of the Word in Scripture. This seems very strange, when Baronius himself
confesses, that Tertullian us^s it for that part of Baron. ad A. D. 56.
Penance which is called Satisfaction; and Bellarmin grants it is so used both
by Tertullian and Irenoeus; when he says the Woman seduced by Marcus,
afterward spent her days in Exmologesi. What! in continual Confession of Iren.
l. 1. c. 9.
her sin? No, but in Penitential Acts for it; and so Petavius understands it,
both in Irenoeus and Tertullian, Petav. Not. ad Epiphan. p. 71.

De la Penit. public, l. 2. c^. 13. n. 9.


and he says, it did not consist only or principally in Words but in Actions,
i. e. it was nothing of kin to Auricular Confession, which is a part of Penance
distinct from satisfaction. And to make these the same, were to confound the
different parts of the Sacrament of Penance, as the ^ouncil of Trent does
distinguish them.

But besides this, there were several other Circumstances. which do make an
apparent difference between these Penitential Acts and the modern notion of
Confession.

1. The Reason of them was different. For, as Rigaltius Rigalt. not. in. Tert.
de P^n.
observes, the penitential Rigor was taken up after great Numbers were
admitted into the Church; and a great dishonor was brought upon Christianity
by the looseness or inconstancy of those who professed it. There were such in
S. Paul's time in the Churches of Corinth, and elsewhere; but although he gives
Rules about such, yet he mentions no other than avoiding or excommunicating the
guilty Persons, and upon due Sorrow and Repentance receiving them in again; but
he imposes no necessity of Public or Private Confession in order to Remission;
much less of every kind of mortal sin, though it be but the breach of the tenth
Commandment, as the Council of Trent does; yet this had been necessary in case
he had thought, as that declares, that God will not forgive upon other terms.
And so much the rather, because the Evangelists had said nothing of it; and now
Churches began to fill, it was absolutely necessary for him to have declared
it, if it were a necessary condition of Pardon for sins after Baptism. But
although the Apostles had given no Rules about it, yet the Christian Churches
suffering so extremely by the Reproaches cast upon them, they resolved, as far
as it was possible, to take care to prevent any scandalous Offenses among them.
To this end, the actions of all Persons who professed themselves Christians
were narrowly watched; and their faults, especially such as were scandalous,
complained of; and then if they confessed them, or they were convicted of them,
a severe and rigorous Discipline was to be undergone by them before they were
restored to Communion; that their Enemies might see how far the Christians were
from encouraging such enormities as they were accused of. They were charged
with Thyestean Suppers and promiscuous mixtures; whereas, any Persons among
them who were guilty of Homicide or Adultery were discharged their society, and
for a great while not admitted upon any terms; and afterward, upon very
rigorous and severe terms. And besides these, to preserve the purity of their
Religion in times of Persecution, they allowed no Compliance with the Gentile
Idolatry; and any tendency to this, was looked upon as a degree of Apostasy,
and censured accordingly. And about these three sorts of sins the severity of
the Primitive Discipline was chiefly exercised; which shows, that it proceeded
upon quite different grounds from those of the Council of Trent about Auricular
Confession.

2. The method of proceeding was very different; for here was no toties quoties
allowed; that men may sin, and confess, and be absolved; and then sin the same
sin again, and confess again, and receive Absolution in the same manner. The
Primitive Church knew nothing of this way of dealing with Sinners upon
Confession. If they were admitted once to it that was all. So Pamelius himself
Pamel. not. 1. in Tert. de. Poenit.

Albasp. Obs. l. 2. c. 5.

Petav. ad Epiph. p. 236.

Append. ad Epiph. c. 3. p. 91.


grants, and produces several Testimonies of Fathers for it; and so does
Albaspineus and Petavius. Dare any say this is the sense of the Church of Rome
about Confession, that a man cannot be received a second time to Confess and be
absolved from the same sin? How then can they pretend any similitude between
their Confession and the ancient Exomologesis? Besides, none ever received
Absolution from the ancient Church till full satisfaction performed. But in the
Church of Rome, Absolution is given before Satisfaction; and although some have
complained of this, as a great abuse; yet they have been sharply answered, that
it is to call in question the Conduct of the Church for five hundred years; and
they may as well question many other things, which depend upon the Authority of
the Present Church.

3. The Obligation to Confession is very different from what it was in the
ancient Exomologesis. Now by the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, a person looks
on himself as bound in Conscience to confess every Mortal sin; but in the
Ancient Church none can imagine that persons were bound to undergo the
Exomologesis for every mortal sin, there being no Penitential Canons which did
ever require it; but they had respect to some particular sins, and the Penance
was proportioned to them.

We ought to take notice of two things with respect to the Discipline of the
Ancient Church, which will show the different notion it had of these things
from what is now current in the Church of Rome.

1. That it did not exclude those from all hopes of Salvation whom it excluded
from Penance; as may be seen in the Illiberitan Council, where many are wholly
shut out from the Church, whom we cannot think they (...). Illiber. c. 1, 2, 3,
etc.
thought incapable of Salvation. From whence it follows, that they did not look
on Confession and Absolution as a necessary condition of Salvation; but now in
the Church of Rome they allow Confession to all, because they think they cannot
otherwise be in a state of Salvation in an ordinary way. But in the Ancient
Church they could not look on the desire of Confession as necessary, for to
what purpose should they make that necessary when they denied the thing? But in
the Church of Rome, they make the desire necessary, because they hold the thing
it self to be so, if there be means to have it.

2. That the Penitential Canons never extended in the Primitive Church to all
those sins which the Church of Rome now accounts Mortal, and therefore
necessary to be confessed. The Council of Trent says expressly, they must
confess omnia and singula peccata mortalia -- etiam occulta -- and an Anathema
is denounced against him De Poenit. can. 7.
that denies it to be necessary to Remission of them. Now if we consider their
notion of mortal sins, we shall easily discern the vast difference between the
Obligation to Confession by the Council of Trent, and by the old Penitential
Canons. For mortal sins are not only all Voluntary Acts committed against the
known Laws of God, but against the Laws of the Church; and even venial sins may
become mortal by the Disposition of the Person, and by other circumstances,
which the Casuists set down at large; now the Council of Trent does expressly
oblige men, not only to relate the Acts themselves, but all Circumstances which
change the kind of Sin. And this is a racking the Consciences of Men far beyond
whatever we find in the old Penitential Canons; for, Petavius confesses that
many sins now accounted mortal, Petav. not. ad Epiph. p. 238.
had no Penance appointed for them by the old Canons; and therefore I need not
take any pains to prove it: If any one has a mind to be satisfied, he may see
it in Gregory Nyssen's Canonical Epistle, where he owns that several of those
sins, for which the Scripture excludes from Greg. Nyss. Epist. ad Let. c. 4, 5.
the Kingdom of Heaven, have no Canonical Penance prescribed them by the
ancient Canons of the Church. Which shows a mighty difference from the Rule of
the Council of Trent.

The most plausible place in Antiquity brought for all mortal sin, is that of
S. Cyprian, where he says, that some Cypr. de lap-^is, ^. 23.
confessed their very thoughts, though they had not proceeded to actual sin. It
is true, that he does speak of some such; but was it for sins of thought
against the tenth Command? No; but it is very plain, that he speaks of that sin
which was thought to imply a renouncing Christianity, and S Cyprian elsewhere
calls summum delictum, and the Sin against the Holy Ghost; viz. consenting to
any Act of gentile Idolatry; and yet Saint Cypr. Ep. 10.
Cyprian had much ado to persuade those who were actually guilty to submit to
due Penance for it; but they obtained Tickets from the Confessors, and were
admitted to communion without undergoing the Discipline of the Church, the
consequence whereof would be, that the Discipline would be lost, and the Church
overrun with Apostates; this makes S. Cyprian plead hard against such
practices, and among other arguments he uses this of the great tenderness of
some, who because they had entertained such thoughts of doing as others did,
for their own safety, they offered to unburthen their Consciences before them,
and desired remedy for small Wounds; how much more ought they to confess their
faults whose wounds are greater? This is the whole force of his reasoning;
where the Thought and Act relate to the same sin; and that said to be no less
than denying Christ, and sinning against the Holy Ghost. But there is no parity
in the case of other sins; which even S. Cyprian calls minora delicta, being
against men Cypr. Ep. 12.
immediately; and there is no intimation in him that ever the thoughts of those
sins were discovered, or that Persons were under any obligation by the Rules of
the Church to do it.

2. Private Offenders were sometimes advised in those first Ages for the ease
of their Consciences to make Confession of their sins; of which we see an
instance as to the Practice in one Case in S. Cyprian's time. And Tertullian
compares such Persons who avoid it, to those who have such secret Ulcers that
they choose rather to perish than to discover them. Now in Cases of this nature
he advises to Confession and public penitential Acts, that so they may in the
Judgment of the Church have the secret Wounds of their Consciences healed. And
this is that which Origin does advise to in such Cases, to seek out a wise
spiritual Physician, and to make known his inward Orig. in Levit. Hom. 2. in
Psalm. 37. Hom. 2. in Luc. Hom. 17.
distemper to him, and to follow his advice and direction, as to the Method of
Cure. Now this we never oppose; but the only Question is, whether it be
necessary for all Persons, and for every Mortal Sin, to make Confession of it
to the Priest, that it may be forgiven; and Origin never once supposes this;
for he mentions several other ways for the Remission of Sins after Baptism, by
Martyrdom, by Alms, by forgiving and converting others, by great Love to God,
and in the last place he brings in this of a Laborious Penance and Confession.
Either the former ways are sufficient without this, or not; if they are, then
this is not necessary to the Remission of all mortal Sins; if not, to what
purpose does he mention so many ways, when this one is sufficient without them
and all those are insufficient without this? For Boileau confesses, that no
mortal sins according to them can be remitted, Hist. Confess. Auric. c. 5. n. 8.
where there is not at least the desire of this. But Origin shows the different
ways of obtaining Remission, or else he does not answer the difficulty; which
was that the Jews had several sorts of Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sins, to
which we have none answerable under the Gospel, Yes, says Origin, Baptism
answers to one sort, Martyrdom to another, Alms to a third, etc. and last of
all, Penance to the Offering baked in the Frying Pan. From whence it is plain,
that he looked on this as one particular way proper to some Cases, and not as a
general Method for the Remission of all mortal Sins. But he urges that Origin
quctes Scripture for the Confession of Sins, as necessary, Hom. 2. in Psalm. 37.
But what Scripture? Even the Words of the Psalmist, I will confess my Iniquity.
And was Confession to a Priest necessary under the Law? How then can those
words prove it necessary under the Gospel? Although therefore Origin might
think it very convenient in some cases for Penitents to unload their
Consciences by Confession to a Spiritual Physician, yet we find no proof of any
necessity of it, as to all mortal Sins. It is confessed, that public Faults,
either confessed or proved, had public Penance appointed for them by the
Penitential Canons; but Boileau, after Arnauld, pleads, that even secret Sins
being mortal, were not thought remissible by the Keys of the Church, without
public Penance. But this can never be proved to have been the Doctrine of the
Ancient Church, and it is unreasonable to suppose; for then, all Persons must
have undergone public Penance who had any mortal Sin, and it must have been
frequently born by the same Persons, both which are inconsistent with the
Ancient Discipline. But they saw there was no other way to maintain the
Necessity of Confession, but by this. For they could find none but public
Penance, and that by the Penitential Canons was prescribed only for some
particular scandalous Sins; and therefore they fansied, that Persons who
committed other faults, were bound to confess them privately, and to undergo
public Penance for them. I do not deny, but some great Penitents, for secret
Faults, would of their own accord submit to the public Discipline; but this
was a voluntary Act in them, that by this means they might assure themselves
the More of the sincerity of their own Repentance; and it being looked on as an
Act of Humility and Piety, it made it go down the better with Voluntary
Penitents.

3. For the sake of such Voluntary Penitents in great Churches, whose Cases
required particular and private Examination and Direction, there was a
Penitentiary appointed, whose Office it was to receive their Confessions, and
to direct and order the Method of their Penance. Of this we have a famous
Instance in the Church of Constantinople, in the time of Nectarius, about which
so much pains has been taken for different purposes. That which seems most
probable to me, is, that the Penitentiary was appointed to examine and judge of
such Penitential Causes which were brought before him, (not being notorious,)
and to give sentence according to the Canons; but especially of Voluntary
Confessions of Persons, whose Consciences were oppressed with the Guilt of
Secret Sins; and to those he was to appoint Penance without revealing their
Faults. Where the Facts were notorious and scandalous, I suppose the ancient
Discipline of the Church (part whereof is to be seen in the Canonical Epistles)
to Pandect. Canon. Vol. 2.
have still continued at Constantinople, as well as in other Churches. But
there were many private miscarriages, wherein great Prudence and Judgment was
required, both to determine the Penance, and to manage it so, that it did not
break out into an open Scandal. And for Cases of this Nature the Penitentiary
was appointed; to whom all Persons might resort in private cases, and open
their Consciences to him, and take his Directions how to perform their
Penitential Acts. So it was with that Person of Quality at Constantinople, who
gave occasion to the abolishing the Office of Penitentiary, both there, and in
all the Eastern Churches. She first went to the Penitentiary, as a voluntary
Penitent, and confessed her Faults to him, and took his directions; and while
she was performing her Penance in the Church, the Fact was committed with the
Deacon, which she afterward confessed to the Penitentiary. Who being enraged
at the Deacon, in probability through his desire to have him punished, the Fact
came to be discovered, and the People to be highly offended: And it is not
reasonable to suppose that the Penitentiary put her upon a public Confession
of her secret fault; but that it came out by his means; and therefore Nectarius
thought fit no longer to put such a Trust into any Man's hand, which through
his discovery might redound to the Dishonor of the Church, as that did.

What the effect was of abolishing this Office, is the great Question, whether
the taking away public or private Confession. If the Historians may be
believed, it was the Necessity of making any Confession at all in secret; for
the Right of receiving such Confessions, was devolved upon the Penitentiary;
therefore when his Office was put down, where the Case was not notorious, every
one must be left to his own Conscience; and that both Socrates Socr. l. 5. c.
19.

Soz. l. 7. c. 16.


and Sozomen affirm was the consequence of it. If only public Confession was
taken away, as some imagine, a secret Confession was still continued, how was
it possible for the Historians to mistake the matter so grossly, by making that
the consequence of it? For, is every Man left to his own Conscience, where he
is bound to go to Confession before he partakes of the Eucharist? And why
should public Penance be taken away on this occasion, where there seems to
have been none; for that Person underwent to public Penance upon her former
Confession, for then her Penance would not have been done in the Church, but
out of it, among the Penitents. But as the former was voluntary, so was the
latter too; for here was no Accuser but her self; and for what Reason should
public and solemn Penance for notorious Cri^^es, be taken away for the sake of
the discovery of a Secret Confession? Whether the punishment of the Deacon were
the Occasion of its coming out, or whatever it was, it seems evident to me,
that she was not obliged to any public Consession; because Sozomen says, the
Penitentiary was chosen for his Gravity, Silence and Wisdom; but what Silence
was there, if the Confessions were to be made public. And on the other side,
it is impossible to conceive, that if all Persons were then obliged to confess
all mortal Sins after Baptism, that one Penitentiary should be sufficient in so
vast a City as that of Constantinople was. Therefore I think it most probable,
that the case of notorious and scandalous Offenders stood as it did, and so
continued in S. Chrysostom's time; but this Office of Penitentiary relating to
voluntary and secret Offenders was taken away; because a greater Scandal came
to the Church by the discovery, when such a public Disgrace made the Fact
become notorious. And so this Act of Nectarius in taking away the
Penitentiary's Office, and the Approbation of it by other Churches following
the Example, evidently proves, that they did not look on Confession of s^^cret
Sins, as necessary to the Remission of them.

4. As the taking away the Penitentiary's Office showed the Sense of the Church
at that time against the Necessity of Confession in order to Pardon, so it did
likewise in order to the partaking of the Eucharist. For Socrates says, that
Eudaemon gave that Counsel to Nectarius, that Socr. l. 5. c. 19.
he should remove the Penitentiary, and give every one leave to pass J^dgment
on himself in his own Conscience, and so to partake of the Mysteries. The same
is affirmed by Sozomen. Which respects not the public Discipline about Soz. l.
7. c. 16.
Notorious Offenders, but the private Applications made by scrupulous Persons
and secret Offenders to the Penitentiary in order to a right preparation for
the Eucharist. And it is very probable, that it was then believed by many, that
they could not be duly fitted for that Sacrament, unless they had first
unburthened their Consciences by a voluntary Confession to the Penitentiary,
and followed his Directions. But this Office being taken away, the Question now
is, whether it were thought necessary to confess privately to any other? The
Council of Trent declares, Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 7. Can. 11.
that Sacramental Confession is necessary to a worthy partaking of the
Eucharist, to every one that is conscious to himself of any mortal sin; and
whosoever holds the contrary is declared excommunicate ipso facto. But these
Historians plainly deny it, and they are justified by S. Chrysostom, who speaks
to the very Case; not about C^techumens, but such as would fit themselves for
the Holy Eucharist. And he several times declares, that a man needs not reveal
his sins to any but to God alone, in order to it. Nothing can be more
Emphatical than what he says to that purpose. For this Cause S. Paul says,
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that (...). S. Chrysostom. To. 6. p.
837. Hom. 8. d^ Poenit. Him. 28. in 1 ad Corin^^.
Bread, and drink of that Cup; he does not lay open the secret Ulcer; he does
not bring the Accusation into a Theater; he appoints no Witnesses of thy
Transgressions; pass judgment within thine own Conscience, there examine thy
faults, and call thy self to an account for the ^ins of thy Life, where ^o^e
but God is present, who sees all things; amend thy faults, and so with a pure
Conscience draw near to the holy Table, and partake of the Sacrifice there
offered.

But left this should be thought one of those sudden eloquent heats which
Petavius says, are hardly capable of Petav. Not. ad Epiphan. p. 244.
good sense, if too strictly examined; we find him very cooly delivering the
same Doctrine in his Exposition of those words of S. Paul. Than which nothing
can be more inconsistent with the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome,
which makes Confession of our Sins to a Priest a necessary Preparation for the
Eucharist. Catharinus says, that if the Church had not limited the time, yet
every Person Cathar. c. Cajetan. p. 453.
would be bound to confess to a Priest, as often as he communicated. And
although he knew no mortal sin by himself, yet he would deserve the severest
Censure for not confessing, because he took upon himself to be his own Judge.
Can any 451.
thing be more contrary to S. C^rysostom than this? Boileau confesses, that S.
Chrysostom does not here refer at Hist. Confess. Auric. p. 201.
all to Confession to a Priest; then it follows, that he thought it not
necessary to right participation of the Holy Eucharist. Here he speaks not of
daily Examination of Conscience by the faithful; but of the solemn Judgment of
Conscience by way of due Preparation; and so justifies the Fact of Nectarius in
taking away the Penitentiaries Office. But we are not to suppose so great and
so zealous a Man would have done it against his Conscience, as he must, if he
still thought Confession to a Priest necessary; and he does not say, they need
not go now to the Penitentiary, but that they need not diselose their sins to
any. Not to a multitude, or in a theatrical manner, as some expound it; but to
none but God, which excludes the knowledge of a sin^le Priest, as well as of a
great number. I n^ed not insist on the other places in S. Chrysostom to that
purpose, since these are sufficient for my design.

Cassian was a Disciple of S. Chrysostom, and he supposes Cassian. Collat. 20.
c. 8.
Confession to God alone to be sufficient for Remission of Sin, where mere
modesty hinders men from consessing to men. Boileau answers, that he does not
speak of Sacramental Confession made to Priests; but of an Ascetick Confession
among Hist. Confess. Auric. c. 18. p. 286.
the M^nks. But he speaks of a Confession to God as sufficient for Remission of
Sins, and therefore must exclude the Necessity of any other.

5. After the taking away the Penitentiary's Office, the Public Discipline of
the Church, as to open and scandalous Offenders continued for some time in the
Eastern as well as the Western Churches. No one speaks more fully to this than
S. Chrysostom; which makes me wonder at those who say the public Penance was
taken away by Nectarius, for in his 82. Homily on S. Matthew, toward the
Conclusion he insists very much upon it; and not only charges the People not to
come with their sins upon them; but he speaks to those who ministered, to deny
the Eucharist to open Offenders. And he says, it would be charged as a great
Fault upon them, if they knew such and permitted them to communicate. But how
shall we knew them? I speak not, says he, of those who are not, but of those
who are known; and if any such did thrust themselves in, he bid them not be
afraid to deny them; and if they durst not, he tells them, they should bring
them to him, and he would rather lose his life than give that Sacrament to such
unworthy receivers. But still he says he speaks of open and notorious
Offen^ers. Which shows plainly, that even S. Chrysostom never thought the
public Discipline was changed; since he declares so much Resolution to
maintain it. And this could not be spoken by him while he was a Presbyter at
Antioch, but after he came to the Sea of Constantinople. There was no doubt
some alteration as to the Penitents, after the taking away the Penitentiary;
but it was no more than his Office was concerned in. The old Penitential Canons
remained still in force and were executed, as Occasion served; as appears by
the Canons in Trullo so long after S. Chrysostom's time which refer to them. If
all the public Discipline had been laid aside so long before, to what purpose
do those Bishops speak of them, as if they were still in force? See Canon 44,
46, 53, 54, 87. In the last Canon indeed they leave it to those who had the
Power of binding and loosing to temper the severity of the Canons as they
should judge convenient; but does it hence follow, that the ancient Discipline
as to public Offenders was destroyed? S. Chrysostom himself several times S.
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 71.

In 2 Ep. ad. Cor. Hom. 18.

Hom. 3 in Ep. ad Ephesians.


mentions those who were in the state of Penitents and the Prayer that was made
for them; to what purpose, in case the whole Order of Penitents was taken away?
He likewise speaks of the charge for the Penitents to go out. What a mockery,
were this, if there were no Public Discipline then left? And lest it should be
said, that these things were said by him at Antioch, before the fact of
Nectarius, I have showed already that the latter Homilies on S. Matthew were
made by him at Constantinople; and in his Liturgy there used the dismission of
the Penitents was continued.

6. While the public Discipline was kept in the several Churches none were
enjoined to undergo it, but open and public Offenders. The Evidence being so
clear in Antiquity for the public Penance of those who were bound to give the
Church satisfaction before they received Absolution from it; there was a
necessity found by some learned Men of the Roman Communion to set up a new
Hypothesis, viz. that by the Ancient Rules of the Church all Persons conscious
to themselves of secret si^s were bound to undergo public Penance for the
Remission of their sins. The occasion of the debate was this. Some in the
Church of Rome held no more necessary in case of mortal Sin to prepare men for
Communion than Confession to a Priest and Absolution; others saw the fatal
Petav. de la Penitence public, l. 5. chapter 10. p. 64.
Consequence of this, and therefore insisted on the Necessity of Penance; both
Parties made their Appeal to the Ancient Church; and both were mistaken. For,
on the one side, there was no such Doctrine then held that Confession and
Absolution did sufficiently prepare Persons for the Eucharist; and on the
other, there was no good Evidence that any were enjoined public Penance for
secret faults. But in the Case of such sins, the Confession was left to God in
Secret; and a true and hearty Contrition for them was thought the best as well
as most necessary Preparation for the Eucharist.

Monsr. Arnauld saw well enough that without his Arn. de freq. Communione,
Part. 2. c. 3. p. 205.
Hypothesis, it was impossible to prove the Necessity of Confession in the
Ancient Church; for he yields that the Church did not use the Power of the Keys
but in Public. On the the other hand, Petavius urges, that on the Petav. l. 2,
c. 5. n. 3.
same Ground that they would reduce, as they pretended, the Ancient Discipline
they must make many other alterations in the Church, and so justify the
Reformers. But Monsr. Arnauld was defective in his Proofs, as Petavius at large
shows; not when he proves that the Penance was public; but that all Persons
under mortal sins were bound to undergo it. For Petavius makes it appear, that
all such as are accounted mortal si^s in the modern sense, were not then
thought necessary to be expiated by public Penance; but only such as were
notorious and scandalous, and he at large answers all Monsr. Arnauld's l. 6. c.
2, etc.
Arguments. Notwithstanding which Morinus took up Monsr. Arnauld's Opinion, and
without any Morin. Com. de Poenit. l. 10. c. 17.
color charges it on Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, that ^e first in his
Penitential appointed public Penance to be only for public Offenses. But the
learned Editor of the Abstract of Theodore's Penitential, has fully vindicated
him in this matter. Theod. Vind. p. 61, etc.


But after these, Boileau resumes the Opinion of Monsr. Arnauld, and lays it
for the Foundation of his History of Auricular Confession. But he grants, that
all the solemn Hist. Confess^. Auric. c. 2.
and ceremonial Penance imposed by the Penitential Canons did not extend to all
kind of mortal sins, but chiefly to Idolatry, Adultery and Homicide; but this
he insists upon, that some part of this public Penance, viz. Exclusion from
the Communion was inflicted on Persons guilty of secret mortal sins. But this
will by no means do his business; for he is to prove that no secret mortal sin
could be forgiven without Confession to a Priest; and that all persons were
required by the ancient Church in case they were conscious to themselves of any
such sins, to make them known, and to undergo public Penance for them, before
they could obtain Remission of them. We do not deny that Persons under Trouble
of Conscience for secret sins, were from time to time advised to resort to
their Guides, to make known their Cases to them, and to take their Directions;
we do not deny that such Persons might be required by such Guides to withdraw
themselves from joining in the most solemn Acts of public Communion till they
had manifested the sincerity of their Repentance, by Fastin^, and Prayers, and
other penitential Acts; we do not deny, that some of these Persons might either
by Advice or of their own Accord join themselves with the public Penitents, as
is well known in the Case of Fabiola at Rome so much magnified by S. Jerome; but
this is the thing we desire to see proved, that no sin whatsoever of a mortal
nature (as it is defined in the Church of Rome) was then thought capable of
Remission by the penitential Acts of the Party, (especially by true Contrition)
without Confession to a Priest and Absolution from him. And this is the true
state of the Case; and I can find nothing produced by him to this purpose which
deserves to be considered.

7. As the public Discipline declined, Persons were exhorted to make private
Confession of their sins; if they could not be brought to public Penance.
Thence in the Greek Church came the Penitentials of Johannes Jejunator (who
first took upon himself the Title of Ecumenical Patriarch in the time of
Mauritius to the great Offense of the Bishops of Rome) and of some others after
him.

Morinus grants that there was a great alteration in the Joh. Morin. Com de
Poen. l. 6. c. 22, 23.
Greek Church about this matter; he thinks it began with the business of the
Penitentiary, but after the public Discipline was disused, instead of that, he
says, came up a secret Confession and Penance; which was left to the c. 23. n.
1, 2.
honesty, and piety of the Penitent, and not required by any Canonical
Authority among them; and so he says it continued from the time of Nectarius
to this day, as to the People. So that we have a plain Confession from him,
that there is no Rule in the Greek Church requiring this secret Confession of
Sins in order to the forgiveness of them. But it is observable concerning the
modern Greeks, that if Persons do make Confession among them, they think
themselves obliged to keep to the old Penitential Canons, and blame Joh.
Jejunator for receding from them; for Simeon of Thessalonica says, they had
them from the Fathers, and the Fathers by Tradition down from the Apostles. But
although they are therein mistaken, yet they show how different their Tradition
is from that of the Roman Church, which thinks it self under no such
obligation, but allows Absolution to be granted upon Confession, and a right of
Communion without Penance performed, for which there is no color, as to any
ancient Tradition either of the Eastern or Western Church.

In the Western Church we find the public Discipline fallen to decay in the
beginning of the ninth Age, and Charles the Great summoning several Councils
for putting things into as good an Order as they would then bear. In the second
Council of Cavaillon, A. D. 813. we find a Complaint, Can. 25. that the old
Canonical Penance was generally disused; and neither the ancient Order of
Excommunicating or Absolving was observed. Which is a plain and ingenuous
acknowledgment that they had gone off from the ancient Tradition of the Church;
and therefore they pray the Emperor's Assistance, that the public Discipline
might be restored for public Offenders, and the ancient Canons be brought into
use again. From whence it follows, that at that time notorious Offenders
escaped with private Confession and Penance; and even that was done by halves,
can. 32. and some thought it not necessary to do it at all, can. 33. And upon
this Occasion, they do not declare it necessary for the Remission of Sins to
confess even the most secret mortal Sins to a Priest; but very fairly say, that
both are useful; for Confession to God purges the Sin; and to the Priest,
teaches men how their sins may be purged. For God who is the Author and giver
of Health, gives it often by the Inv^sible Operation of his Power, and often
by the means of Physicians.

Boileau yields, that there were some then in the Roman Hist. Confess. Auric.
c. 25. n. 3.
Church, who denied Confession to Men to be necessary, but he says, they were
Adversaries and Rebels. This had been a good Answer, if the Council had called
them so; which it does not, but on the contrary declares, that God does often
forgive sin immediately without the Priests Interposition, or else the latter
Clause signifies nothing. And the most it says before, is, that Confession to
a Priest is useful in the Church; which is not the the thing disputed by us,
but the Necessity of it; and his Critical Observations of Utrumque signify
just nothing, unless he had proved that the Council had before said that both
were necessary, which it does not. He does not deny, that the Opinion c. 29. p.
387.
of the Sufficiency of Confession to God alone did continue in the Church to
the time of the Council of Lateran, and that it gave Occasion to the Canon,
which enforced the Necessity of Confession to a Priest; but he adds, that
learned and pious Men may have false Opinions before the Judgment of the
Church. So that at last we find Universal Tradition is given up, and the
Necessity of Auricular Confession is resolved into the Authority of the Roman
Churches Definition, or rather, the Pope's Declaration of it, either with or
without the Consent of the Lateran Council. But he says, The Fathers did not
speak so exactly of the Trinity before the Council of Nice; nor the Greek
Fathers of Grace and Predestination before S. Augustine. If this be true, it is
impossible to prove either of those great Points merely by Tradition; for those
Fathers either delivered the sense of the Church, or they did not; if they
delivered the sense of the Church, then either the sense of the Church was
doubtful, or they did not understand it; if the sense of the Church were
doubtful, then it is plain those Doctrines could not be proved by Tradition; if
the sense of the Church were not doubtful, but the Fathers did not understand
it, then how is it possible that the Churches Tradition should be an Infallible
Guide, when even the Fathers of the Church were mistaken about it? But I have
sufficiently proved, that not only before, but even after the Council of
Lateran there was no Universal Tradition for the Necessity of Auricular
Confession.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some BOOKS Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S.
Paul 's Churchyard.
A Bational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion, being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer by T. C. Wherein the True Grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the False discovered; the Church of England vindicated from the Impu^ation of
Scism; and the most important particular Controversy between us and those of
the Church of Rome thoroughly examined: By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. and Dean
of S. Paul's, Folio. the Second Edition.

Origines Britiannicae: Or the Antiquity of the British Churches; with a
Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in
vindication of the Bishop of S. Asaph. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of S.
Paul's, Folio.

The Rule of Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. S. entitled, Sure
footing, etc. by John Tillorson D. D. to which is adjoined, A Reply to Mr. J.
S.'s third Appendix. etc. by Edward Stillingfleet. D. D.

A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of P's.

A second Letter to Mr. G. in answer to two Letters lately published concerning
the Conference at the D. of P's.

Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulary Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, upon his
Consensus Veterum, etc. wherein the absurdity of his Method, and the weakness
of his Reasons are shown; His false Aspersions upon the Church of England are
wiped off, and her Faith concerning the Euch^rist proved to be that of the
primi^ive Church: Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileau's French
translation of, and Remarks upon Bertram.

An Answer to the Compiler of Nubes Testium: Wherein is shown, That Antiquity
(in relation to the Points in Controversy set down by him) did not for the
first five hundred Years Believe, Teach and Practice as the Church of Rome does
at present Believe, Teach and Practice; together with a Vindication of Veteres
Vindicati from the late weak and disingenuous Attempts of the Author of
Transubstantiation Defended by the Author of the Answer to Mr. Sclater of
Putney.

A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in answer to his Letter to a Peer of
the Church of England; wherein the Postscript to the Answer to the Nubes
Testium, is Vindicated, and Father Sabran's Mistakes farther discovered.

A second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in Answer to his Reply.

A Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the Compiler of
Nubes Testium in answer to a late pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the
Divines of the Church of England.

Scripture and Tradition Compared, in a Sermon preached at Guild-Hall-Chapel
Nov. 27. 1687. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of S. Paul's, the second
Edition.

A Discourse concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in
Answer to J. S. his Catholic Letters. by Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of
St. Paul's.

An Historical Examination of the Authority of General Councils, showing the
false Dealing that has been used in the publishing of them, and the Difference
amongst the Papists themselves about their Number. The second Edition with
Corrections and Alterations.

AN APPENDIX, In Answer to some late Passages of J. W. of the Society of Jesus,
concerning the Prohibition of Scripture in Vulgar Languages by the Council of
Trent.
SInce the Publication of the foregoing Book, I have met with a Reflection upon
it made by J. W. in the Preface to a Treatise lately Reprinted by him. Wherein,
he observes that a great part of the Objections made against them are either
grounded on mistakes, or touch points of Discipline not of Faith, which alone
they are bound to defend. This last Clause I could not but wonder at, since the
new Title of his Book is, A Defense of the Doctrine and Holy Rites of the Roman
Catholic Church, etc. Why should I W. take such needless pains to defend the
Rites of the Church, if they are bound to defend nothing but Points of Faith? I
had thought the Honor and Authority of the Church had been concerned in its
Commands and Prohibitions, as well as in its Definitions and Decrees. And
although it be not pretended, that the Church is Infallible in Matters of
Discipline; yet it is a strong Prejudice against any pretense to Infallibility
in a Church, if it be found to err notoriously in any thing of general
Concernment to the Catholic Church.

But how comes my late Book to be made an Example? As for instance, (says he)
I find in a Book newly Published, with this Title, The Council of Trent
Examined and Disproved by Catholic Tradition, that for 15 Pages together Dr.
St. labors to prove that there is no Catholic Tradition against Translating
Scripture into Vulgar Languages. Whereas I expressly say, that the Prohibition
of reading the Scripture so translated without a particular License, was that
which I undertook to show could not be justified by any Catholic Tradition;
And that there was a General Consent of the Catholic Church, not merely for
the Translations of Scripture into Vulgar Languages, but for the free use of
them by the People. Which I made out by these Particulars,

1. That wherever the Christian Religion prevailed, the Scripture was
Translated into the Vulgar Language for the Peoples benefit. Which I proved
from the Ancient Italick Versions before St. Jerome's time, the Gothic,
Persian, Armenian, Syriack, Coptick and Aethiopick Translations; without the
least prohibition of the Common use of them.

2. That where a Language grew into Disuse among the People there the Scripture
was Translated into the Tongue which was better understood. And for this I
instanced in the Arabic Versions after the prevalency of the Saracens in the
Eastern and Southern Parts, and after the Moors coming into Spain.

3. That even after the Primitive Times, Christian Princes and Bishops did take
Care that the People should read the Scriptures in their own Language. For
Princes, I instanced in Ludovicus Pius and Alfred; for Bishops, in Waldo Bishop
of Fressing, Methodius and Cyrill, etc.

4. That the Pope himself in the 9th Century did approve of it; and for a
Reason common to all times and Churches, viz. that All People and Languages
were to praise God, and that God himself had so commanded.

5. That Gregory VII. was the first Person who forbad the use of Scripture and
Divine Offices in the Vulgar Tongue, and was not ashamed to own that the Church
saw cause to alter several things from what they were in the Primitive Church.

6. That upon the setting up the Inquisition by Innocent III. this Prohibition
took place in France and Spain, and other Places.

7. That some noted Divines of the Church of Rome have highly commended it; and
said that the taking of it away would be pernicious and destructive to Faith
and Devotion.

8. That the Prohibition in the Church of Rome is built on the Authority of the
Council of Trent, which appointed the Index to be made, in which the fourth
Rule forbids all Persons the use of the Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue without
a particular License, and whosoever presumes to do it is to be denied
Absolution.

9. From hence it follows, that the Council of Trent is evidently disproved, as
to Catholic Tradition, for any Foundation of such a Prohibition.

And what now says J. W. against all this? He would gladly know against whom I
dispute. Against J. S. and all such who would make the World believe the
Council of Trent did proceed upon Catholic Tradition. To prove I am mistaken,
he tells me in his 6th Chap. I may find an Account of several new Translations
of Scripture into Vulgar Tongues, made by Catholics and approved in the Roman
Church. Then he mentions an English Translation made by the Rhemish and Doway
Colleges; and in French by the Doctors of Lovain; and some others. What now
follows from hence? Is it any Mistake in me to say, There was such a
Prohibition of Reading the Scripture in the Church of Rome, and enforced by the
Rule made by Appointment of the Council of Trent? This had been indeed to the
purpose if it could have been proved. I do not deny, that there have been such
Translations made, where it was found impossible to hinder all Translations;
and the use of them have been connived at or allowed to some particular
persons, whom they were otherwise secure of. But such Translations are like the
Galenists allowing some Chemical Medicines to their Patients; they declare
against their use as dangerous; but if the Patient will have them, then pray
take them of my Apothecary, who is a very honest man and prepares mischievous
Medicines better than another. This is just the Case of the Church of Rome, as
to Translations of Scripture; If we ask their Opinion in general, whether
Translations be allowable or not, their Answer has been formerly very free and
open, by no means; for they are very dangerous and mischievous things. And here
besides those I have already mentioned, I could produce many more to the same
purpose. But alas! these men lived before the Age of Mis-representing and
Expounding. Now all is Mistake on our side, and Infallibility on theirs. We
cannot for our hearts understand their Doctrines or Practices aright, although
we take never so much pains and care to do it. One would think by the present
way of dealing with us, that the Church of Rome were like the New Name on the
White Stone, which no man knows Apoc. 2. 17.
but he that has it; and so it were impossible for any else to understand it,
but such as are in it. I thought my self pretty secure from Mistaking, when I
pitched on the Council of Trent for my Guide. But it seems, I am mistaken here
too: How so? Did not the Council of Trent appoint the Congregation of the Index
at first, Sess. 18? Did it not own that the Matters of it were prepared before
its Dissolution? And if there were a Prohibition of the free use of the
Scripture in Vulgar Languages by the Rules of the Index, is not the Council of
Trent justly chargeable with that Prohibition? Especially when the Title in the
Roman Edition is Regulae Indicis Sacrosanctoe Synodi Tridentinoe jussu editoe.

Jacob. Ledesma was one of the same Accedit ad hoc, locupletissimum
Testimonium, atque Decretum ex Indice librorum prohibitorum per Patres a
Tridentina Synodo delectos conscripto and Authoritate Sanctiss. D. nostri Pii
4. P. M. comprobato Regula. 4. Jac. Ledesma. De Divin. Script. quavis lingua
non legend. c. 51.
Society with J. W. and he frankly owns the Prohibition of reading the
Scripture, made by the Rule of the Index, to have been done by the Authority of
the Council of Trent.

The Faculty at Paris in the Articles sent to Gregory XIII. against the
Translation of Rene Benoit; several times own the Rules of the Index as done by
the Council of Trent. Quacunque Authoritate transferantur in Vulgarem linguam
Biblia and edantur, vetat idem sacrosanctum Concilium ea passim sine discrimine
permitti.

The same Ledesma goes farther, and vouches the Authority of the Council of
Trent in this matter, from the Decree Sess. 23. c. 8. where it forbids all the
Parts of the Mass to be in the Vulgar Tongue. Which could not be reasonable, if
the Scripture were allowed to be translated. Alphonsus a Castro, thinks the
case so alike, that a prohibition Alphons. a Castro de heret. Punit. l. 3. c. 6.
of one amounts to a prohibition of the other too, because the greater Part of
the Office is taken out of the Scriptures, and if the Scripture may be
translated, he says, it must follow that Divine Offices ought to be in the
vulgar Tongue. But to return to the Index.

The Congregation of the Index was (as is said) established by the Council in
the 18. Session as the Council it self owns in the last Session; and withal,
that the Rules of it were then formed, but because of the multiplicity Council.
Trid. Sess. 25. c. 15.
and variety of the Books, the matter of the Index was referred to the Pope,
and to be published by his Authority, as likewise the Catechism, Missal and
Breviary. So that the Rules of the Index have the same Authority in the Church
of Rome with the Roman Catechism, Missal and Breviary.

Pius IV. in his Bull, when he first set forth the Index A. D. 1564. owns that
it was finished by the Fathers appointed by the Council of Trent, but it was
remitted to him by the Council, that it might be approved by him and published
by his Authority. And he strictly commands the Rules of it to be observed under
pain of Mortal Sin; and Excommunication, ipso jure. After him Clement VIII. in
his Quod Indice and Regulis confectisper Patres a Generali Synod T^identina
dele^^os sanci^um est -- Praeter ea quae T^dentinorum Patrum Regul^s
supradictis decreta sunt.
Instructions about the Rules of the Index owns them to be made by the Fathers
of the Council of Trent, And the same Pope is so far from renewing the Power of
granting Licenses to read the Scripture in the vulgar Languages, that he
declares against them. For by the 4th Rule of the Index, the Ordinary and
Inquisitor by the Advice of the Parish Priest or Consessor might permit Persons
to read the Bible in the vulgar Language, so the Translation were made by
Catholic Authors; and it was apprehended by some, that the new Printing the
Rule might be giving new Authority to Bishops and Inquisitors to grant
Licenses, therefore the Pope declares against it; and says it was contrary to
the Command and use of the Roman Church and Inquisition, which ought to be
inviolably observed. In pursuance of this we find in the Roman Index of
prohibited Books, these words, Bidlia vulgari quocunque idiomate conscripta; i.
e. All Bibles in vulgar Languages are prohibited. Therefore I cannot understand
how the giving License to Persons since the Declaration of Clemens VIII. is
consistent with the Duty which Persons of that Communion owe to the Authority
of the Roman See, unless they can produce a Revocation of the Bull of Clemens
VIII. and some latter Explications of the fourth Rule which take away the force
of his. But instead of that, Alexander VII. who published the Index again,
after Clement VIII. owns that the first Index was made by Authority of the
Council of Trent: Qui sacrosancti Concilii Tridentini auctoritate prodierat.
and it is observable that in his Bull A. D. 1664. he not only prefixes the
Rules of the Index, but the Observations and Instruction of Clement VIII. and
confirms all by his Apostolical authority; and injoyns the punctual Observation
of the Orders contained therein inviolably; under the same pains which were
expressed in the Bull of Pius IV. Therefore as far as I can understand, the
Faculty of granting Licenses to read the Translations of the Bible is taken
away as far as the Pope's authority can do it.

To what purpose then are we told of some modern Translations, as long as the
use of them is forbidden by the Pope's Authority? And no Ordinaries can have
Authority to grant Licenses against the Popes solemn Declaration to the
contrary; nor can any of that Communion with good Conscience make use of them.

But I am told there are Translations approved in the Roman Church. By whom
have they been approved? By the Pope, or the Congregation of the Index? I do
not sind any such Approbation given to any of them. But on the contrary even in
France, such Translations have been vehemently opposed by the Bishops and
Divines there, as being repugnant to the Sense of the Roman Church. And this is
apparent by a Book published by Order of the Gallican Clergy, A. D. 1661.
Where-in it is said that it was the common and unanimous Sense and Practice of
all Orthodox E quibus pateat fuisse semper communem and unanimem Orthodoxorum
omnium sensum ac usum; divinos Libros ac Officia Ecclesiastica, vernaculo
Idiomate neutiquam reddendi; utpote Christianae Reipubl. damnosum, ac rudibus
and imperit is scandali occasionem praebens. Collectio Auctorum Version. vulg.
damnant. Monit. ad Lector.
Persons, that neither the Scriptures nor divine Offices ought to be put into
Vulgar Languages, it being injurious to the Christian Church, and giving
Occasion of Offense to the weak and unlearned. How then can we imagine that
such Translations should not only be allowed but approved among them?

And besides the entire Treatises there collected against them, of Card.
Hosius, Lizetius, Spiritus Roterus, Ledesma, etc. and the Fragments and
Testimonies of several others; we have a particular account of the proceedings
of the Sorbon as to this matter.

In the Censure of Erasmus, Dec. 17. 1527. the Sorbon declared Vulgar
Translations of Scripture to be dangerous and pernicious.

The like Declaration had been made before A. D. 1525. and that all
Translations of the Bible, or of the Parts thereof ought rather to be
suppressed than tolerated.

A. D. 1607. The Faculty again declared, that it did not approve any
Translations of Scripture into the Vulgar Language.

But J. W. instances p. 26. in some Translations that have been approved; as a
French Translation by the Doctors of Lovain. But in the French Collection
before mentioned, I find, that A. D. 1620. Dec. 1. a debate arose in the
Faculty at Lovain about it; and the Faculty declared that it by no means
approved of it.

Another is of Rene Benoit; which was so far from being approved, that it was
first condemned by the Faculty at Paris, and then sent to Rome to be condemned
by the Pope; which was effectually done; and Gregory XIII. directed his Bull to
the Faculty of Divinity in Paris, Nov. 3. A. D. 1575. Biblia supradicta omnine
prohibemus, and ab Ecclesia Catholicae sub Anathemate rejicimus.
wherein he does expressly forbid this Translation, and reject it with an
Anathema.

And yet this very Translation of Rene Benoit is one of those made by
Catholics and approved in the Roman Church; which J. W. refers me to. One of
us two must needs be under a great Mistake, but to whom it belongs I leave the
Reader to determine.

The sense of the Gallican Clergy in this matter does fully appear by the
Representation which they sent to Alexander VII. about the Translation of the
Missal into French. Which was done by Voisin a Doctor of the Faculty, and was
published at Paris by the Permission of Cardinal de Retz Archbishop there, and
had the Approbation of some Doctors of the Sorbon. The rest of the Bishops and
Clergy highly resented this matter, and Assembled together to consult about it,
Nov. 29. 1660. where they proposed two things to be considered. 1. The matter
of Right, whether such a Translation were to be permitted or not. 2. The matter
of Fact, whether this were a good Translation or not. The debate was adjourned
to Dec. 3. and from thence to the 7th on which they came to a Resolution to
suppress it. And a Circular Letter was sent to all the Bishops to forbid the
use of it under pain of Excommunication; and the King desired to interpose his
Authority in it. Dec. 9. they agreed to send an account of the whole matter to
the Pope in the name of the Gallican Clergy; wherein they declare their great
dislike of it, as contrary to the Custom of the Church, and as pernicious to
the Souls Illam omnim i^p^ob^m^^ tanquan ab Eccl siae consuctudine alienam, nec
niji cum ingenti animarum perni^ie conjunction.
of Men. And in the Body of it, they say that they look on the Translations of
Scripture into vulgar Languages as the great occasion of the Northern Heresies;
and quote Vincentius Lerinensis, saying that the Scripture is the Book of
Heretics. And after add, that they bad sent to the Pope their Condemnation of
all Translations of Scripture and Divine Offices into the Vulgar Languages.
This was subscribed by the General Assembly of the Clergy, Jan. 7. 1661.

The Pope sent a Brief in Answer, which was received Feb. 25. wherein he very
Tragically complains that some Sons of Perdition in France had to the ruin of
Souls, and in Contempt of the Churches Laws and Practice, arrived to that
degree of madness as to translate the Roman Missal into French. And he charges
the doing of it not only with Novelty, but Disobedience, Sedition, Schism,
etc. and declares that he abhorred and detested it; and for ever damned,
reprobated and forbad it, under pain of Excommunication; and requires all
Persons to deliver up their Books to the several Ordinaries that they might be
burnt.

I now desire J. W. to inform me whether we are bound to believe that in France
Translations of Scripture into the vulgar Language are allowed and approved? I
am really so unwilling to mistake, that I take the best care I can to be
rightly informed. I have no design either to deceive others, or to be deceived
my self; and therefore have not trusted to second-hand Evidence; but searched
and considered the Authors themselves, whose Testimonies I rely upon. I am
certain I have fallen into no wilful mistake, but have truly and impartially
stated things according to the clearest Evidence I could find; and therefore I
think it some what hard to be told, that our Objections are grounded on
Mistakes, and especially as to this matter about the Prohibition of reading
Scripture in the Vulgar Language; for I hope I have made it appear not only
that there is such a Prohibition but that it is founded on the Authority of the
Council of Trent.

And if it be so, then it serves my main design, viz. to prove that it went off
from Catholic Tradition, for if there were so many Translations of old without
the least prohibition, and there be since the Council of Trent, so severe a
one, backed with the Pope's Authority, here must be a very great change in
Tradition. For that is accounted pernicious and mischievous to the Souls of
men, which before was accounted useful and beneficial to them. If the
Physicians in one Age should condemn the common Reading of Hippocrates and
Gale^ as destructive to the Health of men's bodies, which those of former Ages
extremely commended, would not any one say, there was a great Change in the
Opinions of Physicians, and that they did by no means hold to the Judgment of
those before them? If the common Lawyers should now say Littleton's Tenures is
a Book very unfit to be read by young Lawyers, that it fills their heads with
seditious and dangerous Principles, and therefore ought to be taken out of
their hands; would not any one say, here is a wonderful Change, for no such
thing was ever apprehended before, but the Book was thought very useful and
proper to instruct Students in some fundamental Points of the Law?

When Manna was rained from Heaven in the Wilderness for 40. years, and for 30.
of them every man gathered his own share and proportion, and ate of it as he
saw cause; would it not have been thought a strange alteration among them, if
after 30. years a set of Physicians should have risen up and told the People
it was true, Manna was Angels food, but if they had not great care in the
taking it, and used it promiscuously, it would turn them to Devils; or at least
it would fill them with such distempers, as they would never be able to reach
to Canaan? This might be pretended to be great Care and Tenderness of them, in
these new Physicians; but on the other side, they would tell them, they had
done very well with their eating Manna for 30. years together; and there had
been no such distempers among them, but such as humane nature is always subject
to; that such an alteration might be of worse Consequence than their common use
of Manna; for so it was at first appointed and so it had continued, and they
could not tell but their new Physicians might be worse to them than their old
distempers; and they could never believe that could be so hurtful which God
himself had appointed for their food.

The former Discourse makes the Application needless.

But after all, it is said: This is but a point of Discipline and not of Faith;
and in such the Church may change her Measures. To that I answer,

1. It is more than a point of Discipline, for it is changing the Rule of Faith
with respect to the People. While the Scriptures were in the hands of the
People, they resolved their Faith into the Word of God, as it was delivered to
them and understood by them. But when that is taken out of their hands and they
are bid to Trust to the Churches Testimony for matters of Faith; they have a
different Resolution of their Faith and a different Ground and Reason of
believing. For they cannot ground their Faith upon a written Rule who are
incapable of understanding it.

2. It is no matter of Discipline to overthrow the design of publishing the
Scripture for the universal Benefit of the Church of God. And this the
Jansenists have well proved in Defense of their Translation of the New
Testament against the Prohibitions of it. For, say they, the Prohibition of
reading the Scripture under pain of Excommunication, is it self Dialogue 1. p.
26. 29.
contrary to the Gospel and ought not to be obeyed. For Bread and nourishment
is not more necessary to preserve the Life of the Body, than the Word of God is
to uphold the Life of the Soul. That for men to speak of so much danger in
reading the Scripture is to reflect very dishonourably on the Providence and
Groodness of God; for it was by means of Trans^ations in Vulgar Languages that
God's Word came to be kno^ to the World, and the Gospel was at first published
in those Tongues, which were most generally understood. And therefore those do
manifestly oppose the design and method of Providence for advancing the Gospel,
who decry Translations of Scripture, as pernicious to the Souls of Men. And
farther, that such a prohibition, p. 63.
is a Contempt of our Lord Jesus Christ and a design to suppress the Gospel;
and a Contradiction to the Will and Command of God; A Contempt of the
Scripture, which was intended to be understood by all, A Contempt both of
Councils and Fathers, which looked on the Scripture as the best Judge of
Controversies, and who advised all believers to a continual reading of the Word
of God.

If after all this, the Council of Trent could so notoriously err not only
against Scripture and Reason, but Tradition too in such a Matter of Concernment
to the Souls of Men, as this is, it will be hardly possible to persuade Men, it
could not as well err in any Point of Faith. And it renders the whole
proceeding suspicious as to particular Points, when the Rule of Faith is so
industriously kept out of the hands of the People. For those who follow their
Instructions, are never ashamed to produce their Credentials.

As to what J. W. says in his Book concerning Jupiter, Dialogues in Answer to
T. G. Part. 4.
etc. I had answered it so fully many years since, that I have Reason to expect
a Reply to what I had there said in my own Vindication, before I can think it
fit to trouble the World with needless Repetitions. And it were hard for me to
be put to Answer again to the same things, when a Person will not take the
pains to see whether he were not Answered already.

THE END.

