^REN^CUM.

A VVEAPON-SALVE FOR THE Churches Wounds, OR THE DIVINE RIGHT OF Particular
forms of CHURCH GOVERNMENT: Discussed and examined according to the Principles
of the law of Nature, the positive Laws of God, the practice of the Apostles,
and the Primitive Church, and the judgment of reformed Divines.

Whereby a Foundation is laid for the Churches peace, and the accommodation of
our present differences.

Humbly tendered to Consideration.

By Edward Stillingfleete, Rector of Sutton in Bedfordshire.

The Second Edition. With an APPENDIX concerning the power of Excommunication
in a Christian Church.

Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 5. Si
ad decidendas hodierna^ controversias -- jus divinum a positivo seu
Ecclesiastico candid^ separaretur; non videretur de iis quae sunt absolute
necessaria, inter pios aut moderatos viros longa aut aeris contentio futura.
Isaac. Casaub. ep. ad Card. Perron. Multum refer^ ad re^inendam Ecclesiarum
pacem inter ea quae jure divino praecepta sunt, and quae non sunt, accurate
distinguere. Grot. de Imper. sum Potestat. circa sacra. cap. 11. London,
Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix, in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the
little North door. 1662.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Write not to increase the Controversies of the times, nor to foment the
differences that are among us; the one are by far too many, the other too great
already. My only design is to allay the heat and abate the fury of that Ignis
sacer, or Erysipelas of contention, which has risen in the face of our Church,
by the overflowing of that bilious humor which yet appears to have too great
predominancy in the spirits of men. And although with the poor Persian I can
only bring a hand full of water, yet that may be my just Apology, that it is
for the quenching those flames in the Church, which have caused the bells of
Aaron to jangle so much, that it seems to be a work of the greatest difficulty
to make them tunable. And were this an Age wherein any thing might be wondered
at, it would be matter of deserved admiration, to hear the noise of these Axes
and Hammers so much about the Temple, and that after these nigh twenty years
carving and hewing, we are so rude and unpolished still, and so far from being
cemented together in the unity of the Spirit and the bond of Peace. May we not
justly fear that voice, Migremus hinc, when we see the Vail of the Temple so
rent asunder, and the Church its self made a Partition wall to divide the
members of it? And since the wise and gracious God has been pleased (in such
an almost miraculous manner) so lately to abat^ the Land-flood of our civil
intestine Divisions, how strange must it needs seem, if our sacred Contentions
(if Contentions may be called sacred) like the waters of the Sanctuary, should
rise from the Ankle to the Knee, till at last they may grow unpassable? Must
only the fire of our unchristian animosities be like that of the Temple, which
was never to be extinguished? However I am sure it is such a one as was never
kindled from Heaven, nor blown up with any breathings of the Holy and Divine
Spirit. And yet that has been the aggravation of our Divisions, that those
whose duty it is to lift up their voices like Trumpets, have rather sounded an
Allarm to our contentious spirits, then a Parley or Retreat, which had been far
more suitable to our Messengers of Peace. In which respect it might be too
truly said of our Church, what is spoken of the Eagle in the Greek Apologue:

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Eagle saw her breast was wounded sore,
She stood and weeped much, but grieved more:
But when she saw the dart was feathered, said,
Woo's me, for my own kind has me destroyed.
It is not so long since that version of the vulgar Latin, Psalm. 68. 15. inter
Domini cleros* might have been sadly rendered to lie among the pots: and Pierius
Valerianus might have met with too many Examples to have increased his Book De
Literatorum Infoelicitate; and in the next age it might have been true again
what Matthew Paris observes of the Clergy in the Conquerours time; adeo
literatura carebant ut caeteris stupori esset qui Grammaticam didic^sset. But
blessed be God who has freed us from that Daemonium meridianum of Ignorance
and Barbarism; may we be but as happily delivered from the plague of our
divisions and animosities! Than which, there has been no greater scandal to
the Jews, nor opprobrium of our Religion among Heathens and Mahumetans, nor
more common objection among the Papists, nor any thing which has been more
made a pretense even for Atheism and Infidelity. For our Controversies about
Religion have brought at last even Religion it self into o Controversy, among
such whose weaker judgments have not been able to discern where the plain and
unquestionable way to Heaven has lain in so great a Mist as our Disputes have
raised among us. Weaker heads when they once see the battlements shake, are apt
to suspect that the foundation its self is not firm enough; and to conclude, if
any thing be called in question, that there is nothing certain. And truly it
cannot but be looked on as a sad presage of an approaching Famine, not of
bread, but of the Word of the Lord, that our lean Kine have devoured the fat,
and our thin ears the plump and full; I mean; our Controversies and Disputes,
have eaten so much out the Life and practice of Christianity. Religion has
been so much rarefied into aerie Notions and Speculations, by the distempered
heat of men's spirits, that its inward strength, and the Vitals of it have been
much abated and consumed by it. Curiosity, that Green Sickness of the Soul,
whereby it longs for novelties, and loathes sound and wholesome Truths, has been
the Epidemical distemper of the Age we live in. Of which it may be as truly
said as ever yet of any, that it was saecolum f^rtile religionis, sterile
pietatis; I fear this will be the Character whereby our Age will be known to
Posterity, that it was the Age wherein men talked of Religion most, and lived
it least. Few there are who are content with the Dimensum which God has set
them; every one almost is of the Spanish Iesu^tes mind; Beatus qui praedicat
verbum inauditum, seeking to find out somewhat whereby he may be reckoned, if
not among the Wise, yet among the Disputers of this World. How small is the
number of those sober Christians, of whom it may be said as Lucian of his
Parasites, (...), they were not at leisure to be sick of this pica (1 Timothy ^
4.) such as longed more to taste of the Tree of Life, then of the Tree of
Knowledge: and as Zenophon speaks of the Persians, (...), they consume the
fomes morbi, the root of the distemper by their serious endeavors after peace
and holiness. But instead of this, the generality of men let all their Religion
run up into Briars and Thorns, into Contentions and Parties, as though Religion
were indeed sacramentum militiae, but more against Fellow Christians then the
unquestionable hindrances of men's Eternal Happiness. Men being very loath to
put themselves to the trouble of a Holy Life, are very ready to embrace any
thing which may but dispense with that; and if but listing men's selves under
such a party, may but shelter them under a disguise of Religion, none more
ready then such to be known by distinguishing names; none more zealous in the
defense of every tittle and punctilio that lies most remote from those
essential duties wherein the Kingdom of God consists, viz. Righteousness and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. And hence all the several parties among us
have given such glorious names only to the outward Government of the Church;
the undoubted practice of the Apostles, the Discipline of Christ, the order of
the Gospel, and account only that the Church where their own method of
Government is observed; just as the Historian observes of Brutus and Cassius,
Ubicunque ipsi essent praetexentes esse Rempublicam, they think the Church can
never be preserved but in that V^ssel they are embarked in: As though Christ
could not have caused his flock to rest* sub Meridie, unless the Pars Donati
had been in the South. And from this Monopolizing of Churches to parties, has
proceeded that strange uncharitableness toward all who come not up to every
circumstance of their way and method, which is a piece of Prudence like that of
Brutus, who when he had raised those flames in the Commonwealth, was
continually calling Caesar Tyrant; Ita enim appellari Caesarem, facto ejus
expediebat. So when men have caused such lamentable Divisions in the Church, by
their several parties and factions, it concerns them to condemn all others
beside themselves, le^t they most of all condemn themselves for making
unnecessary Divisions in the Church of God. This uncharitableness and ill
opinion of all different parties, only gathers the fuel together, and prepares
combustible matter, which wants nothing but the clashing of an adverse party,
acted upon Principles of a like Nature, to make it break out into an open
flame. And such we have seen, and with sadness and grief of heart felt it to be
in the Bowels of our own Church and Nation, by reason of those violent
Calentures and Paroxysms of the spirits of men, those heart-burnings and
contentions which have been among us, which will require both time and skill to
purge out those noxious humors which have been the causes of them. I know no
prescriptions so likely to effect this happy end, as an Infusion of the true
spirits of Religion, and the Revulsion of that extravasated blood, into its
proper channels: Thereby to take men off from their e^ger pursuit after ways
and parties, Nations and Opinions, (wherein many have run so far, that they
have left the best part of their Religion behind them) and to bring them back
to a right understanding of the nature, design and principles of Christianity.

Christianity, a Religion, which it is next to a miracle men should ever
quarrel or fall out about; much less that it should be the occasion, or at
least the pretense, of all that strife and bitterness of spirit, of all those
comentions and animosities which are at this day in the Christian World. But
our only comfort is, that whatever our spirits are, our God is the God of
peace, our Savior is the Prince of peace; and that* Wisdom which this
Religion teaches, is both pure and peaceable. It was that which once made our
Religion so amiable in the judgment of imrartial heathens, that nil nisi
justum suadet and lene, the Court of a Christians Conscience was the best Court
of Equity in the world. Christians were once known by their (...), the
b^nignity and sweetness of their disposition, by the Candor and Ingenuity of
their spirits, by their mutual love* forbearance, and condescension toward one
another. But, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Evangelici, Either
this is not the practice of Christianity, or it was never calculated for our
Meridian* wherein men's spirits are of too high an elevation for it. If pride
and uncharitableness, if divisions and strifes* if wrath and envy, if
animosities and cont^ntions were but the marks o^ true Christians, Diogenes
^^^^er need light his Lamp at noon to find out such among us. But if a Spirit
of meekness, gentleness, and condescension, if a stooping to the weakness and
infirmities of others, if a pursuit after peace even when it flies from us, be
the indispensable duties and the characteristical notes of those that have more
then the name of Christians, it may possibly prove a difficult inquest to find
out such for the crowds of those who shelter themselves under that glorious
name. Whence came it else to be so lately looked on as the way to advance
Religion, to banish Peace, and to reform men's manners by taking away their
lives? whereas in those pure and primitive times when Religion did truly
flourish, it was accounted the greatest instance of the piety of Christians not
to fight but to dye for Christ. It was never thought then that Bellona was a
nursing Mother to the Church of God, nor Mars a God of Reformation. Religion
was then propagated, not by Christians shedding the blood of others, but by
laying down their own. They thought there were other ways to a Canaan of
Reformation besides the passing through a Wilderness of Confusion, and a red
Sea of blood. Origin could say of the Christians in his time, (...). They had
not yet learnt to make way for Religion into men's mind, by the dint of the
sword, because they were the Disciples of that Savior who never pressed
Followers as men do Soldiers, but said, If any man will come after me, let him
take up his Cross (not his sword) and follow me. His was (...), his very
commands showed his meekness; his Laws were sweet and gentle Laws; not like
Draco's that were writ in blood, unless it were his own that gave them.

His design was to ease men of their former burdens, and not to lay on more;
the duties be required were no other but such as were necessary, and withal
very just and reasonable. He that came to take away the insupportable yoke of
Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to gall the necks of his
Disciples with another instead of it. And it would be strange, the Church
should require more then Christ himself did; and make other conditions of her
Communion, then our Savior did of Discipleship. What possible reason can be
assigned or given, why such things should not be sufficient for Communion with
a Church, which are sufficient for eternal salvation? And certainly those
things are sufficient for that, which are laid down as the necessary duties of
Christianity by our Lord and Savior in his Word. What ground can there be why
Christians should not stand upon the same terms now which they did in the time
of Christ and his Apostles? Was not Religion sufficiently guarded and fenced in
them? Was there ever more true and cordial Reverence in the Worship of God?
What Charter has Christ given the Church to bind men up to, more then himself
has done? or to exclude those from her Society, who may be admitted into
Heaven? Will Christ ever thank men at the great day for keeping such out from
Communion with his Church, whom he will vouchsafe not only Crowns of Glory to,
but it may be aureolae too, if there be any such things there? The grand
Commission the Apostles were sent out with, was only to teach what Christ had
commanded them. Not the least intimation of any Power given them to impose or
require any thing beyond what himself had spoken to them, or they were directed
to by the immediate guidance of the Spirit of God. It is not, Whether the
things commanded and required be lawful or no? It is not, Whether
indifferencies may be determined or no? It is not, How far Christians are bound
to submit to a restraint of their Christian liberty? which I now inquire after,
(of those things in the Treatise its self); but, Whether they do consult for
the Churches peace and unity who suspend it upon such things? How far either
the example of our Savior or his Apostles does warrant such rigorous
impositions? We never read the Apostles making Laws but of things supposed
necessary. When the Council of Apostles met at Jerusalem, for deciding a Case
that disturbed the Churches peace, we see they would lay no other burden (...),
besides these necessary things, Acts 15. 29. It was not enough with them that
the things would be necessary when they had required them, but they looked on
an antecedent necessity either absolute or for the present state, which was the
only ground of their imposing those commands upon the Gentile-Christians.
There were after this great diversities of practice and varieties of
Observations among Christians, but the Holy Ghost never thought those things
fit to be made matters of Laws to which all parties should conform; All that
the Apostles required as to these, was mutual forbearance and condescension
toward each other in them. The Apostles valued not indifferencies at all, and
those things it is evident they accounted such, which whether men did them or
not, was not of concernment to Salvation. And what reason is there why men
should be so strictly tied up to such things, which they may do or let alone,
and yet be very good Christians still? Without all Controversy, the main
inlet of all the Distractions, Confusions, and Divisions of the Christian
World, has been by adding other conditions of Church Communion then Christ
has done. Had the Church of Rome never taken upon her to add to the Rule of
Faith, nor imposed Idolatrous and superstitious practices, all the injury she
had done her self had been to have avoided that fearful Schism which she has
caused throughout the Christian World. Would there ever be the less peace and
unity in a Church, if a diversity were allowed as to practices supposed
indifferent? yea there would be so much more as there was a mutual forbearance
and condiscension as to such things. The Unity of the Church is an Unity of
love and affection, and not a bare uniformity of practice or opinion. This
latter is extremely desirable in a Church: but as long as there are several
ranks and sizes of men in it, very hardly attainable, because of the different
persuasions of men's minds as to the lawfulness of the things required; and it
is no commendation for a Christian to have only the civility of Procrustes, to
commensurate all other men to the bed of his own humor and opinion. There is
nothing the Primitive Church deserves greater imitation by us in, then in that
admirable temper, moderation, and condescension which was used in it, toward
all the members of it. It was never thought worth the while to make any
standing Laws for Rites and Customs that had no other Original but Tradition,
much less to suspend men her his communion for not observing them. Hist. Eccl.
l. 7. c. 19.
(...), as Sozomen tells us. They judged it, and that very justly, a foolish
and frivolous thing, for those that agree in the weighty matters of Religion,
to separate from one another communion for the sake of some petty Customs and
Observations. (...). For Churches agreeing in the same Faith, often differ in
their Rites and Customs. And that not only in different Churches, but in
different places belonging to the same Church; for, as he tells us, many Cities
and Villages in Egypt, not only differed from the Customs of the
Mother Church of Alexandria, but from all other Churches besides in their
public Assemblies on the Evenings of the Sabbath, and receiving the Eucharist
after dinner. This admirable temper in the Primitive Church might be largely
cleared from that liberty they allowed freely to dissenters from them in
matters of practice and opinion: as might be cleared from Cyprian, Austine,
Jerome and others; but that would exceed the bounds of a Preface. The first who
brake this Order in the Church, were the Arrians, Donatists and Circumcellians,
while the true Church was still known by his pristine Moderation and sweetness
of deportment toward all its members. The same we hope may remain as the most
infallible evidence of the conformity of our Church of England to the
Primitive, not so much in using the same rites that were in use then, as in not
imposing them, but leaving men to be won by the observing the true decency and
order of Churches, whereby those who act upon a true Principle of Christian
ingenuity may be sooner drawn to a compliance in all lawful things, then by
force and rigorous impositions, which make men suspect the weight of the thing
it self when such force is used to make it enter. In the mean time what cause
have we to rejoice, that Almighty God has been pleased to restore us a Prince
of that excellent Prudence and Moderation, who has so lately given assurance
to the World, of his great indulgence toward all that have any pretense from
Conscience to differ with their Brethren! The only thing then seeming to
retard our peace, is, the Controversy about Church Government, an unhappy
Controversy to us in England, if ever there were any in the World. And the
more unhappy, in that our contentions about it have been so great, and yet so
few of the multitudes engaged in it, that have truly understood the matter they
have so eagerly contended about. For the state of the controversy, as it
concerns us, lies not here, as it is generally mistaken, What Form of
Government comes the nearest to Apostolical practice; but, Whether any one
individual form be founded so upon Divine Right, that all Ages and Churches are
bound unalterably to observe it? The clearing up of which by an impartial
inquiry into all the grounds produced for it, being of so great tendency to an
accommodation of our present differences, was the only motive which induced me
to observe Aristotle's wild Politics, of exposing this deformed conception to
the entertainment of the wide World. And certainly they who have espoused the
most the interest of a jus divinum, cannot yet but say, that if the opinion I
maintain be true, it does exceedingly conduce to a present settlement of the
differences that are among us. For then all parties may retain their different
opinions concerning the Primitive form, and yet agree and pitch upon a form
compounded of all together as the most suitable to the state and condition of
the Church of God among us: That so the peoples interest be secured by consent
and suffrage, which is the pretense of the congregational way, the due power of
Presbyteries asserted by their joyntconcurrence with the Bishop, as is laid
down in that excellent model of the late incomparable Primate of Armagh: and
the just honor and dignity of the Bishop asserted, as a very laudable and
ancient constitution for preserving the Peace and Unity of the Church of God.
So the Learned Is. Casaubon describes the Polity of the Primitive Church;
Episcopi in singulis Ecclesiis constituti cum suis Prebyteriis, and propriam
sibi quisque peculiari cura, and universam omnes in commune curantes,
admirabilis cujusdam Aristocra^iae speciem referebant. My main design
throughout this whole ^reatise, is to show that there can be no argument drawn
from any pretense of a Divine Right, that may hinder men from consenting and
yielding to such a form of Government in the Church, as may bear the greatest
correspondency to the Primitive Church, and be most advantagiously conduceable
to the peace, unity and settlement of our divided Church. I plead not at all
for any abuses or corruptions incident to the best form of Government through
the corruption of men and times. Nay I dare not harbor so low apprehensions of
persons enjoying so great dignity and honor in the Church, that they will in
any wise be unwilling of themselves to reduce the Form of Church Government
among us to its Primitive state and order, by retrenching all Exorbitances of
Power, and restoring those Presbyteries which no law has forbidden, but only
through disuse have been laid aside. Whereby they will give to the world that
rare example of self-denial and the highest Christian prudence, as may raise an
honorable opinion of them even among those, who have hitherto the most
slighted so ancient and venerable an Order in the Church of God, and thereby
become the repairers of those, otherwise irreparable, breaches in the Church of
God. I conclude with the words of a late learned, pious and moderate Prelate in
his Via media; I have done, and now I make no other account, but that it will
fall out with me, as it does commonly with him that offers to part a fray; both
parts will perhaps drive at me for wishing them no worse than peace. My
ambition of the public tranquillity shall willingly carry me through this
hazard: let both beat me, so their quarrel may cease: I shall rejoice in those
blows and scars which I shall take for the Churches safety.

The Contents of the Chapters.
PART. I.
CHAP. I. THings necessary for the Churches peace, must be clearly revealed.
The Form of Government not so, as appears by the remaining controversy about
it. An evidence thence, that Christ never intended any one Form as the only
means to peace in the Church. The Nature of a divine Right discussed. Right in
general either makes things lawful, or else due. For the former, a
nonprohibition sufficient; the latter, an express command. Duty supposes
Legislation and promulgation. The Question stated. Nothing binds unalterably
but by virtue of a standing Law, and that two fold. The Law of Nature, and
positive Laws of God. Three ways to know when Positive Laws are unalterable.
The Divine right arising from Scripture-examples, divine acts, and divine
approbation, considered. p. 1. CHAP. II. SIX Hypotheses laid down as the basis
of the following Discourse. 1. The irreversible Obligation of the Law of
Nature, either by humane or divine positive Laws in things immediately flowing
from it. 2. Things agreeable to the Law of nature may be lawfully practiced in
the Church of God enlarged into five subservient Propositions. 3. Divine
positive Laws con^erning the manner of the thing whose substance is determined
by the Law of nature, must be obeyed by virtue of the obligation of the natural
Law. 4. Things, undetermined both by the natural and positive laws of God, may
be lawfully determined by the supreme authority in the Church of God. The
Magistrates power in matters of Religion, largely asserted and cleared. The
nature of Indifferency in actions stated. Matters of Christian liberty are
subject to restraints, largely proved. Proposals for accommodation as to
matters of Indifferency. 5. What is thus determined by lawful authority, does
bind the Consciences of men subject to that authority; to obedience to those
determinations. 6. Things thus determined by lawful authority, are not thereby
made unalterable, but may be revoked, limited, and changed by the same
authority. p. 27 CHAP. III. HOW far Church Government is founded upon the Law
of nature. Two things in it founded thereon. 1. That there must be a Society of
men for the Worship of God. 2. That this Society be governed in the most
convenient manner. A Society for Worship manifested. Gen, 4. 26. considered.
The Sons of God and the sons of men who? Societies for worship among Heathens
evidenced by three things, 1. Solemnity of Sacrifices; sacrificing how far
natural. The antiquity of the Feast of firstfruits largely discovered. 2. The
Original of Festivals for the honor of their Deities. 3. The s^crecy and
solemnity of their mysteries. This further proved from man's sociable nature,
the improvement of it by Religion, the honor redounding to God by such a
Society for his Worship. p. 72 CHAP. IV. THE second thing the Law of Nature
dictates, that this Society be maintained and governed in the most convenient
manner. A further inquiry, what particular Orders for Government in the Church
come from the Law of Nature. Six laid down, and evidenced to be from thence.
First, a distinction of some persons, and their superiority over others, both
in power and order, cleared to be from the Law of Nature. The power and
application of the power distinguished; this latter not from any Law of Nature
binding, but permissive: therefore may be restrained. Peoples right of chosing
Pastors considered. Order distinguished from the form and manner of Government:
the former Natural, the other not. The second is, that the persons employed in
the Service of God, should have respect answerable to their employment, which
appears from their Relation to God as his Servants; from the persons employed
in this work before positive Laws. Masters of Families the first Priests. The
Priesthood of the firstborn before the Law discussed: The Arguments for it
answered. The Conjunction of Civil and Sacred Authothority largely showed,
among Egyptians, Grecians, Romans, and others. The ground of Separation of them
afterward, from Plutarch and others. p. 85 CHAP. V. THE third thing dictated
by the Law of Nature is the solemnity of all things to be performed in this
Society, which lies in the gravity of all Rites and Ceremonies, in the composed
temper of mind. Gods Worship rational. His Spirit destroys not the use of
Reason. The Enthusiastic spirit discovered. The circumstantiating of fit times
and place for Worship. The seventh day on what account so much spoken of by
Heathens. The Romans Holy*dayes. Cessation of labor upon them. The solemnity
of Ceremonies used. (...), silence in devotions. Exclusion of unfit persons.
Solemnity of Discipline, Excommunication among the Jews by the sound of a
Trumpet, among Christians by a Bell. p. 93 CHAP. VI. THE fourth thing dictated
by the Law of Nature, that there must be a way to end controversies arising,
which tend to break the peace of the Society. The nature of Schism considered.
The Churches Power as to Opinions explained. When separation from a Church may
be lawful. Not till communion becomes sin; Which is, when corruptions are
required as conditions of Communion. Not lawful to erect new Churches, upon
supposition of corruption in a Church. The ratio of a fundamental article
explained; it implies both necessity and sufficiency in order to salvation.
Liberty of judgment and authority distinguished. The latter must be parted
with in religious Societies as to private persons. What way the Light of nature
directs to, for ending Controversies. First in an equality of power, that the
less number yield to the greater; on what Law of Nature that is founded.
Secondly, In a subordination of power, that there must be a liberty of Appeals.
Appeals defined. Independency of particular Congregations considered. Elective
Synods. The Case paralleld between Civil and Church Government. Where Appeals
finally lodge. The power of calling Synods, and confirming their Acts, in the
Magistrate. p. 104. CHAP. VII. THE fifth thing dictated by the Law of Nature;
That all that are admitted into this Society, must consent to be governed by
the Laws and Rules of it. Civil Societies founded upon mutual Consent; express
in their first entrance, implicit in others born under Societies actually
formed. Consent as to a Church necessary; the manner of Consent determined by
Christ, by Baptism and Profession. Implicit consent supposed in all Baptized;
explicit declared by challenging the Privileges, and observing the Duties of
the Covenant. Explicit by express owning the Gospel when adult, very useful
for recovering the credit of Christia nity. The Discipline of the primitive
Church cleared from Origin* Justin Martyr, Pliny, Tertullian. The necessary
re^^^^^^es of Church membership, whether Positive signs of Grace* nothing
required by the Gospel beyand reality of profession* Ex^^^^^t^ Co^^^^^^, how
far necessary* not the formal Constitution of a Church* proved by sever^^
arguments. p. 132. CHAP. VIII. THE last thing dictated by the Law of Nature,
is, that every offender against the Laws of this Society, is bound to give an
account of his actions to the Governors of it, and submit to the censures
inflicted upon him by them. The original of penalties in Societies. The nature
of them, according to the nature and ends of Societies. The penalty of the
Church no civil mulct; because its Laws and ends are different from civil
Societies. The practice of the D^u^ds and C^rce^ae in e(...)n. Among the Jews,
whether a mere civil or sacr(...)y. The latter proved by six Arguments. Cherem
Col Bo what? Objections answered. The original of the mistake showed The first
part concluded. p. 141
PART. II.
CHAP. I. THE other ground of divine Right considered* viz. Gods positive
Laws, which imply a certain knowledge of Gods intention to bind men
perpetua^ly. As to which the arguments drawn from Tradition, and the practice
of the Church in after ages, proved invalid by several* arguments. In order to
a right stating the Question, some Concessions laid down. First, That there
must be some form of Government in the Church, is of divine right. The notion
of a Church explained, whether it belongs only to particular Congregations?
which are manifested not to be of Gods primary intention, but for our
necessity. Evidence for National Churches under the Gospel A National
Church Government necessary. p. 150 CHAP. II. THE second Concession is, That
Church Government must be administered by officers of Divine appointment. To
that end, the continuance of a Gospel Ministry fully cleared from all those
arguments* by which positive Laws are proved immutable. The reason of its
appointment continues; the dream of a ^aeculum Spiritus sancti discussed; first
broached by the Mendicant Friars upon the rising of the Waldenses, now embraced
by Enthusiasts. Its occasion and unreasonableness showed* Gods declaring the
perpetuity of a Gospel Ministry, Matthew. 28. 20. explained. A Novel
interpretation largely refuted. The world to come What? A Ministry necessary
for the Churches continuance, Ephesians. 4 12. explained and vindicated. p. 158
CHAP. III. THE Question fully stated. Not what Form of Government comes the
nearest to the Primitive practice, but whether any be absolutely determined.
Several things propounded for resolving the Question. What the Form of
Church Government was under the Law. How far Christians are bound to observe
that. Neither the necessity of a superior Order of Church Officers nor the
unlawfulness can be proved from thence. p. 170 CHAP. IV. WHether Christ has
determined the Form of Government by any positive Laws. Arguments of the
necessity why Christ must determine it, largely answered, as First, Christ's
faithfulness compared with Moses, answered and retorted* and thence proved that
Christ did not institute any Form of Government in the Church, because he gave
no such Law for it, as Moses did. And we have nothing but general Rules which
are appliable to several Forms of Government. The Office of Timothy and Titus,
What it proves in order to this question; the lawfulness of Episcopacy showed
thence, but not the necessity. A particular form how far necessary, as Christ
was Governor of his Church; the Similitudes the Church is set out by, prove
not the thing in question. Nor the difference between civil and
Church Government; nor Christ setting Officers in his Church, nor the
inconvenience of the Churches power in appointing new Officers. Every Minister
has a power respecting the Church in common, which the Church may determine,
and fix the bounds of Episcopacy, thence proved lawful. The argument from the
Scriptures perfection answered. p. 175 CHAP. V. WHether any of Christ's actions
have determined the Form of Government? All Power in Christ's hands for
Governing the Church: What order Christ took in order thereto when he was in
the World. Calling the Apostles, the first action respecting outward
Government: Three steps of the Apostles calling, to be Disciples; in their
first mission; in their plenary Commission. Several things observed upon them
pertinent to our purpose. The Name and Office of Apostles cleared; An equality
among them proved during our Saviors life. Peter not made Monarch of the
Church by Christ. The pleas for it answered. The Apostles Power over the
seventy Disciples considered, with the nature and quality of their Office,
Matthew. 20. 25, 26. largely discussed and explained. It excludes all civil
power; but makes not all inequality in Church Officers unlawful* by the
difference of Apostles and Pastors of Churches, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. fully
inquired into. No evidence for any one Form from thence* because equally
applied to several. What the offenses are, there spoken of? What the Church
spoken to? Not an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the Jews, nor yet the civil
Sanhedrin, as Erastus and his followers explain it: nor a Consistorial or
Congregational Church under the Gospel; but only a select company for ending
private differences among Christians. p. 200 CHAP. VI. THe next and chief thing
pleaded for determining the Form of Church Government, is Apostolical practice;
two things inquired into concerning that; what it was? how far it binds? The
Apostles invested with the power and authority of governing the whole Church of
Christ by their Commission* John 20. 21. Matthew. 28. 19. What the Apostles did
in order to Church Government before Pentecost. (...) explained. No division of
Provinces made among the Apostles then; made appear by several Arguments.
Whether Paul and Peter were con^ined, one to the circumcision, the other to the
uncircumcision, and different Churches erected by them in the same Cities? What
course the Apostles took in settling the Government of particular Churches.
Largely proved that they observed the customs of the Jewish Synagogue. The
model of the Synagogue Government described. Whether peculiar Ordination for
the Synagogue Officers? The service of the Synagogue set forth, with the
Officers belonging to it. Grounds proving that the Apostles copied forth the
the Synagogue model. Community of names and customs between Jews and
Christians then. Forming Churches out of Synagogues: Whether any distinct
Coetus of Jewish and Gentile Christians in the same Cities? Correspondency of
the Church with the Synagogue, in the orders of public Service. In the custom
of Ordination. Ierom explained. The power of Ordination* in whom it lodges in
the Christian Church. The opinions of Ierom and Aerins considered. The name of
Presbyters and Bishops explained. Three general considerations touching
Apostolical practice. 1. That we cannot attain to such a certainty of
Apostolical practice, as thereon to ground a divine right. The uncertainty of
Apostolical practice as to us fully discovered, 1. From the equivalency of the
names which should determine the controversy. 2. In that the places in
controversy may without incongruity be understood of the different forms. 3.
From the defectiveness, ambiguity, partiality and repugnancy of the Records of
Antiquity, which should inform us what the Apostolical practice was. These
fully discoursed upon. The testimonies of Eusebius, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Hilary, Ierom, and Ignatius discussed; and these two last proved not to
contradict each other. Episcopacy owned as a humane Instituiion by the sense of
the Church. 2. Consideration. That in all probability the Apostles did not
observe any one fixed course of settling Church Government; but settled it
according to the several circumstances of time, places, and persons. Several
things premised for clearing it. This Opinion, though seemingly New, is proved
at large to be most consonant to antiquity, by the several Testimonies of
Clemens Romans Alexandrinus, Epiphanius (whose Testimony is corrected, explained,
and vindicated) Hilary and diverse others. This Opinion of great consequence
toward our* present peace. No foundation for Lay Elders, either in Scripture
or Antiquity. 3. Consideration* Mere Apostoli^al practice, if supposed, founds
not any divine right, proved by a fourfold Argument. The right of Tithes
resolved upon the same Principles with that of Church Government. Rites and
Institutions Apostolical grown quite out of use among the several contending
parties. p. 230. CHAP. VII. THE Churches Polity in the ages after the Apostles
considered. Evidences thence that no certain unalterable Form of
Church Government was delivered to them. 1. Because Church Power did enlarge as
the Churches did. Whether any Metropolitan Churches established by the
Apostles. Seven Churches of Asia, whether Metropolitical; Philippi no
Metropolis either in Civil or Ecclesiastical sense. Several degrees of
enlargement of Churches. Churches first the Christians in whole Cities, proved
by several arguments; the Eulogiae an evidence of it. Churches extended into
the neighbor territories by the preaching there of City Presbyters; thence
comes the subordination between them. Churches by degrees enlarged to
Diocesses; from thence to Provinces. The Original of Metropolitans and
Patriarchs. 2. No certain Form used in all Churches. Some Churches without
Bishops, Scots, Goths. Some with but one Bishop in their whole Country
Scythian, Ethiopian Churches how governed. Many Cities without Bishops.
Diocesses much altered. Bishops discontinued in several Churches for many
years. 3. Conforming Ecclesiastical Government to the civil in the extent of
Diocesses. The suburbicarian Churches what. Bishops answerable to the civil
Governors. Churches power rises from the greatness of Cities. 4. Validity of
Ordination by Presbyters in places where Bishops were. The case of Ischyras
discussed* instances given of Ordination by Presbyters not pronounced null. 5.
The Churches prudence in managing its affairs, by the several Canons,
Provincial Synods, Codex Canonum. p. 346 CHAP. VIII. AN Inquiry into the
Judgment of Reformed Divines concerning the unalterable Divine Right of
particular Forms of Church Government: wherein it is made appear, that the most
emine nt Divines of the Reformation did never conceive any one Form necessary;
manifested by three arguments. 1. From the judgment of those who make the Form
of Church Government mutable, and to depend upon the wisdom of the Magistrate
and Church. This cleared to have been the judgment of most Divines of the
Church of England since the Reformation. Archbishop Cranmers judgments with
others of the Reformation in Edward the Sixth, time, now first published from
his authentic MS. The same ground of settling Episcopacy* in Queen Elizabeth's
time. The judgment of Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bridges, Dr. Lo, Mr.
Hooker, largely to that purpose, in King James his time. The Kings own Opinion.
Dr. Sut^^ffe. Since of Grakanthorp, Mr. Hales, Mr. Chillingworth. The Testimony
of Foreign Divines to the same purpose. Chemnitius, Zanchy. French Divines,
Peter Moulin, Fregevil, Blondel, Bochartus, Amyraldus. Other learned men,
Grotius, Lord Bacon, etc. 2. Those who look upon equality as the Primitive
Form, yet judge Episcopacy lawful. Aug^stane Confession, Melanchthon, Articuli
Smalcaldici. Prince of Anhalt, Hyperius, Hemingi^s: The practice of most
Foreign Churches. Calvin and Beza both approving Episcopacy and Diocesan
Churches. Salmatius, etc. 3: Those who judge Episcopacy to be the Primitive
Form, yet look not on it as necessary. Bishop Jewel, Fulk, Field, Bishop
Downam, Bishop Bancroft, Bishop Morton, Bishop Andrews, Saravia, Francis Mason,
and others. The Conclusion hence laid in Order to Peace. Principles conducing
thereto. 1. Prudence must be used in Church Government, at last confessed by
all parties. Independents in elective Synods, and Church Covenants, admission
of Members, number in Congregations. Presbyterians in Classes and Synods,
Lay Elders, etc. Episcopal in Diocesses, Causes, Rites, etc. 2. That Prudence
best, which comes nearest Primitive practice. A Presidency for life over an
Ecclesiastical Senate showed to be that Form; in order to it. Presbyteries to
be restored. Diocesses lessened. Provincial Synods kept twice a year. The
reasonableness and easiness of accommodation showed. The whole concluded. p.
383. 384.
A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds: OR, The Divine Right of particular
Forms of Government in the Church of God, discussed and examined, according to
the Principles of the Law of Nature, the Positive Laws of God, the Practice of
the Apostles, and the Primitive Church: and the Judgment of Reformed Divines.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
Things necessary for the Churches Peace, must be clearly revealed. The Form of
Church Government not so, as appears by the remaining Controversy about it. An
Evidence thence, that Christ never intended any one Form, as the only means to
Peace in the Church. The Nature of a Divine Right discussed. Right in general
either makes things Lawful, or else Due. For the former, a Non-prohibition
sufficient; the later, an Express Command. Duty supposes Legislation and
Promulgation. The Question stated. Nothing binds unalterably but by virtue of a
standing Law, and that twofold; The Law of Nature and Positive Laws of God.
Three ways to know when Positive Laws are unalterable. The Divine Right arising
from Scripture-Examples, Divine Acts, and Divine Approbation, considered.

HE that imposes any matter of Opinion upon the 1.
belief of others, without giving Evidence of Reason for it, proportionable to
the confidence of his Assertion, must either suppose the thing propounded, to
carry such unquestionable Credentials of Truth and Reason with it, that none
who know what they mean can deny it entertainment; or else that his own
understanding has attained to so great perfection, as to have authority
sufficient to oblige all others to follow it. This latter cannot be presumed
among any who have asserted the freedom of their own understandings, from the
dictates of an Infallible Chair: but if any should forget themselves so far as
to think so, there needs no other argument to prove them not to be Infallible
in their Assertions, then this one Assertion, that they are infallible; it
being an undoubted Evidence that they are actually deceived* who know so little
the measure of their own understandings. The former can never be pretended in
any thing which is a matter of Controversy among men, who have not wholly
forgot they are Reasonable Creatures, by their bringing probable arguments for
the maintaining one part of an opinion as well as another. In which case,
though the Arguments brought be not convincing for the necessary entertaining
either part to an unbiassed understanding, yet the difference of their Opinions
is Argument sufficient, that the thing contended for is not so clear as both
parties would make it to be on their own side; and if it be not a thing of
necessity to salvation, it gives men ground to think, that a final decision of
the matter in controversy, was never intended as a necessary means for the
Peace and Unity of the Church of God. For we cannot with any show of reason
imagine, that our Supreme Law giver and Savior, who has made it a necessary
duty in all true members of his Church, to endeavor after the Peace and Unity
of it, should suspend the performance of that duty upon a matter of Opinion,
which when men have used their utmost endeavors to satisfy themselves about,
they yet find, that those very grounds which they are most inclinable to build
their Judgments upon, are either wholly rejected by others, as wise and able
as themselves; or else, it may be, they erect a far different Fabric upon the
very same foundations. It is no ways consistent with the Wisdom of Christ in
founding his Church, and providing for the Peace and Settlement of it, to leave
it at the mercy of men's private judgments, and apprehensions of things, than
which nothing more uncertain, and thereby make it to depend upon a condition
never like to be attained in this world, which is the agreement and Uniformity
of men's Opinions. For as long as men's faces differ, their judgments will. And
until there be an Intellectus Averroisticus, the same understanding in all
persons, we have little ground to hope for such an Universal Harmony in the
Intellectual World; and yet even then the Soul might pass a different judgment
upon the colors of things, according to the different tincture of the several
Optick-Glasses in particular bodies, which it takes a prospect of things
through. Reason and Experience then give us little hopes of any peace in the
Church, if the unity of men's judgments be supposed the condition of it: the
next inquiry then is, how the Peace of the Church shall be attained or
preserved, when men are under such different persuasions; especially if they
respect the means, in order to a Peace and Settlement. For the ways to Peace,
like the fertile soils of Greece, have been oft-times the occasion of the
greatest quarrels. And no sickness is so dangerous as that when men are sick of
their remedy, and nauseate that most which tends to their recovery. But while
Physicians quarrel about the Method of Cure, the Patient languisheth under
their hands; and when men increase Contentions in the behalf of Peace, while
they seem to Court it, they destroy it. The only way left for the Churches
Settlement and Peace under such variety of apprehensions concerning the Means
and Method, in order to it, is to pitch upon such a foundation, if possible to
be found out, whereon the different Parties retaining their private
apprehensions, may yet be agreed to carry on the same work in common, in order
to the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church of God. Which cannot be by leaving
all absolutely to follow their own ways; for that were to build a Babel instead
of Salem, Confusion instead of Peace; it must be then by convincing men, that
neither of those ways to peace and order, which they contend about, is
necessary by way of Divine Command, (though some be as a means to an end) but
which particular way or form it must be, is wholly left to the prudence of
those in whose Power and Trust it is to see the Peace of the Church be secured
on lasting Foundations. How nearly this concerns the present Debate about the
Government of the Church, any one may quickly discern. The main Plea for Forms
of Government in the Church, is their necessity, in order to its Peace and
Order, and yet nothing has produced more disorder and confusion then our
Disputes about it have done. And our sad experience still tells us, that, after
all our Debates, and the Evidences brought on either side, men yet continue
under very different apprehensions concerning it. But if we more strictly
enquire into the causes of the great Distances and Animosities which have risen
upon this Controversy, we shall find it has not been so much the difference
of Judgments concerning the Primitive Form of Government, which has divided
men so much from one another, as the prevalency of Faction and Interest in
those whose Revenues have come from the Rents of the Church, and among others
of greater Integrity it has been the Principle or Hypothesis which men are apt
to take for granted, without proving it; viz. that it is in no case lawful to
vary from that Form, which by obscure and uncertain conjectures, they conceive
to have been the Primitive Practice. For hereby men look upon themselves as
obliged by an unalterable Law, to endeavor the Establishment of that Idea of
Government, which oft-times Affection and Interest, more then Reason and
Judgment, has formed within them; and so likewise bound to over throw any
other Form not suitable to those Correspondencies which they are already
engaged to maintain. If this then were the Cause of the Wounds and Breaches
this day among us, the most successful Weapon-salve to heal them, will be, to
anoint the Sword which has given the Wound, by a seasonable inquiry into the
Nature and Obligation of particular Forms of Government in the Church. The main
Subject then of our present Debate will be, Whether any one particular Form of
Church Government be settled upon an unalterable Divine Right; by virtue whereof
all Churches are bound perpetually to observe that Individual Form? or, whether
it be left to the Prudence of every particular Church to agree upon that Form
of Government which it judges most conducible within its self to attain the
end of Government, the Peace, Order, Tranquillity, and Settlement of the
Church. If this latter be made fully appear, it is then evident that, however
men's judgments may differ concerning the Primitive Form of Government, there
is yet a sure ground for men to proceed on in order to the Churches Peace.
Which one Consideration will be motive sufficient to justify an attempt of
this Nature, it being a Design of so great Importance, as the recovery of an
advantageous piece of ground, whereon Different Parties may with safety not
only treat, but agree in order to a speedy Accommodation.

We come therefore closely to the business in hand, and, for. 2.
the better clearing of our passage, we shall first discuss the Nature of a
Divine Right, and show whereon an unalterable Divine Right must be founded, and
then proceed to show how far any Form of Government in the Church is settled
upon such a Right. Right in the general is a relative thing, and the
signification (...) Arist Ethic. l. 5. c. 6*
and import of it must be taken from the respect it bears to the Law which
gives it. For although in common acception it be often understood to be the
same with the Law its self, as it is the rule of actions (in which sense Ius
naturae, gentium, civil, is taken for the several Laws of Nature, Nations, and
particular States) yet I say Ius, and so Right, is properly something accruing
to a person by virtue of that Law which is made, and so jus naturae is that
right which every man is invested in by the Law of Nature, which is properly
jus personae, and is by some called jus activum, which is defined by Grotius to
be Qualitas moralis personae competens ad aliquid just habendum aut agendum*
by Lessius to be Potestas Legitima ad rem aliquam Grot. de jure b^lli and pac.
lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 4. L^ss. de justit. and jure l. 2. c. 2. Dub. 1. Etymol.
Philol. voc. jus.
obtinendam, etc. So that by these descriptions, Right is that Power which a
man has by Law to do, have, or obtain any thing. But the most full description
of it is given by Martinius, that it is adhaerens personae necessitas vel
potestas recta ad aliquid agendum, omittendum, aut permittendum, that whereby
any person lies under a necessity of doing, omitting or suffering a thing to
be, or else has a lawful authority of doing, etc. For we are to consider that
there is a twofold Right, either such whereby a man has Liberty and Freedom
by the Law to do any thing; or such whereby it becomes a man's necessary duty to
do any thing. The opening of the difference Etymol. l. 5. cap. 3.
of these two, and the different influences they have upon persons and things,
is very useful to our present purpose: Ius then is first that which is justum;
so Isidore, Ius dictum quia justum est. So what ever is just, men have right to
do it: Now a thing may be said to be just either more generally, as it
signifies any thing which is lawful, or in a more restrained sense, when it
implies something that is equal and due to another. So Aristotle distributes
(...) into (...). Ethic. l. 5. cap. 2.
The former sense of it is here only pertinent, as it implies any thing which
may be done according to Law, that is, done jure, because a man has right to
do it. In order to this we are to observe, that an express Positive Command is
not necessary to make a thing lawful, but a non-prohibition by a Law is
sufficient for that. For it being the Nature of Laws to bound up men's Rights,
what is not forbidden by the Law is thereby supposed to be left in men's power
still to do it. So that it is to little purpose for men to seek for Positive
Commands for every particular action to make it lawful; it suffices to make
any action lawful, if there be no Bar made by any direct or consequential
prohibition; unless it be in such things whose lawfulness and goodness depend
upon a mere Positive Command. For in those things which are therefore only
good, because commanded, a Command is necessary to make them lawful, as in
immediate positive acts of Worship toward God; in which nothing is lawful any
further then it is founded upon a Divine Command. I speak not of Circumstances
belonging to the Acts of Worship, but whatever is looked upon as a part of
Divine Worship, if it be not commanded by God himself, it is no ways acceptable
to him, and therefore not lawful. Mat. 15 9. Isa. 29. 11.
So our Savior cites that out of the Prophet* In vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men, which the Chaldee Paraphrast
and Syriack version render thus, Reverentia quam mihi exhibent est ex praecepto
and documento humano, plainly imputing the reason of Gods rejecting their
worship, to the want of a Divine Command for Tertull. de Orat. cap. 12 v.
Herald. digress. lib. 2. cap. 2. in Tertull.
what they did. And therefore Tertullian condemns all those things to be vacuae
observationis and superstitioni deputanda, as superstitious, which are done
sine ulli^s Dominici a^t Apostolici praecepti autoritate, without the Warrant
of Divine Command. Although even here we may say too, that it is not merely the
want of a Divine Precept which makes any part of Divine Worship uncommanded by
God unlawful, but the General Prohibition, that nothing should be done in the
immediate Worship of God, but what we have a Divine Command for. However, in
matters of mere Dece^cy and Order in the Church of God, or in any other civil
action of the lives of men, it is enough to make things lawful, if they are not
forbidden. But against this, that a Non-prohibition is warrant enough to make
any thing lawful, this Objection will be soon leavied, that it is an Argument
ab authoritate negative, and therefore is of no force: To which I answer* that
the Rule, if taken without limitation, upon which this Objection is founded, is
not true; for although an Argument ab authoritate negative, as to matter of
Fact avails not, yet the Negative, from Authority, as to matter of Law and
Command, is of great force and strength. I grant the Argument holds not here;
we do not read that ever Christ or his Apostles did such a thing, therefore it
is not to be done; but this, we read of no Law or Precept commanding us to do
it, therefore it is not unlawful not to do it; and we read of no Prohibition
forbidding us to do it, therefore it may be lawfully done; this holds true and
good, and that upon this twofold Reason. First, From Gods Intention in making
known his Will; which was not to record every particular fact done by himself,
or Christ, or his Apostles, but it was to lay down those general and standing
Laws, whereby his Church in all Ages should be guided and ruled: And in order
to a perpetual obligation upon the Consciences, there must be a sufficient
promulgation of those Laws which must bind men. Thus in the case of
Infant Baptism, it is a very weak unconcluding Argument to say that Infants
must not be baptized, because we never read that Christ or his Apostles did it;
for this is a Negative in matter of Fact; but on the other side, it is an
Evidence that Infants are not to be excluded from Baptism, because there is no
Divine Law which does prohibit their admission into the Church by it; for this
is the Negative of a Law; and if it had been Christ's intention to have excluded
any from admission into the Church, who were admitted before as Insants were,
there must have been some positive Law whereby such an Intention of Christ
should have been expressed; For nothing can make that unlawful which was a duty
before, but a direct and express Prohibition from the Legislator himself* who
alone has power to re^cind as well as to make Laws. And therefore
Antipaedobaptists must, instead of requiring a Positive Command for baptizing
Infants, themselves produce an express Prohibition excluding them, or there can
be no appearance of Reason given, why the Gospel should exclude any from those
privileges, which the Law admitted them to. Secondly, I argue from the
intention and end of Laws, which is to circumscribe and restrain the Natural
Liberty of man, by binding him to the observation of some particular Precepts.
And therefore where there is not a particular Command and Prohibition, it is in
Nature and Reason supposed that men are left to their Natural freedom; as is
plain in Positive Humane Laws; wherein men by compact and agreement for their
mutual good in Societies, were willing to restrain themselves from those things
which should prejudice the good of the Community; this being the ground of men's
first enclosing their Rights and common Privileges, it must be supposed, that
what is not so enclosed, is left common to all as their just Right and
Privilege still. So it is in Divine Positive Laws, God intending to bring some
of Mankind to happiness, by conditions of his own appointing, has laid down
many Positive Precepts, binding men to the practice of those things as duties
which are commanded by him. But where we find no Command for performance, we
cannot look upon that as an immediate duty, because of the necessary relation
between Duty and Law; and so where we find no Prohibition, there we can have no
ground to think that men are debarred from the liberty of doing things not
forbidden. For as we say of Exceptions, as to General Laws and Rules, that an
Exception expressed firmat regulam in non exceptis, makes the Rule stronger in
things not expressed as excepted; so it is as to Divine Prohibitions; as to the
Positives, that those Prohibitions we read in Scripture make other things
not-prohibited to be therefore lawful, because not expressly forbidden. As Gods
forbidding Adam to taste of the fruit of one Tree, did give him a liberty to
taste of all the rest. Indeed, had not God at all revealed his Will and Laws to
us by his Word, there might have been some Plea why men should have waited for
particular Revelations to dictate the goodness or evil of particular actions,
not determined by the law of nature; but since God has revealed his will,
there can be no reason given why those things should not be lawful to do, which
God has not thought fit to forbid men the doing of. Further we are to observe,
that in these things which are thus undetermined in reference to an obligation
to duty, but left to our natural liberty as things lawful, the contrary to that
which is thus lawful, is not thereby made unlawful. But both parts are left in
men's power to do, or not to do them; as is evident in all those things which
carry a general equity with them, and are therefore consonant to the Law of
Nature, but have no particular obligation, as not flowing immediately from any
dictate of the natural Law. Thus community of goods is lawful by the law and
principles of nature; yet every man has a lawful right to his goods by
dominion and propriety. And in a state of Community it was the right of every
man to impropriate upon a just equality, supposing a preceding compact and
mutual agreement. Whence it is that some of the Schoolmen say, that although
the Law of Nature be immutable, as to its precepts and prohibitions, yet not as
to its demonstrations (as they call them;) as, Do as you would be done to,
binds always indispensably; but, that in a state of nature all things are
common to all, This is true, but it binds not men to the necessary observance
Alex. Alensis. part. 3. q. 27. m. 3.
of it. These which they call Demonstrations are only such things as are
agreeable to nature, but not particularly commanded by any indispensable
precept of it. Thus likewise it is agreeable to nature, that the next of the
kindred should be heir to him who dies intestate; but he may lawfully wave his
interest if he please. Now to apply this to our present case; According to this
sense of jus for that which is lawful, those things may be said to be jure
divino, which are not determined one way or other by any positive Law of God,
but are left wholly, as things lawful, to the prudence of men to determine
them, in a way agreeable to natural light, and the general Rules of the Word of
God. In which sense I assert any particular form of Government agreed on by the
Governors of the Church, consonant to the general Rules of Scripture, to be by
Divine Right, i. e. God by his own Laws has given men a power and liberty to
determine the particular form of Church Government among them. And hence it may
appear, that though one form of Government be agreeable to the Word, it does
not follow that another is not; or, because one is lawful, another is unlawful:
but one form may be more agreeable to some parts, places, people and times,
then others are. In which case that form of Government is to be settled which is
most agreeable to the present state of a place, and is most advantagiously
conducible to the promoting the ends of Church Government in that place or
Nation. I conclude then according to this sense of jus, that the Ratio
regiminis Ecclesiastici is juris divini naturalis, that is, that the reason of
Church Government is immutable, and holds in all times and places, which is the
preservation of the peace and unity of the Church; but the modus regiminis
Ecclesiastici, the particular form of that Government is juris divini
permissivi, that both the Laws of God and Nature have left it to the Prudence
of particular Churches to determine it. This may be cleared by a parallel
Instance. The reason and the Science of Physic is immutable, but the
particular prescriptions of that Science are much varied, according to the
different tempers of Patients. And the very same reason in Physic which
prescribes one sort of Physic to one, does prescribe a different sort to
another, because the temper or disease of the one calls for a different method
of cure; yet the ground and end of both prescriptions was the very same, to
recover the Patient from his distemper. So I say in our present case; the
ground and reason of Government in the Church is unalterable by divine right;
yea, and that very reason which determines the particular forms: but yet, these
particular forms flowing from that immutable reason, may be very different in
themselves, and may alter according to the several circumstances of times, and
places, and persons, for the more commodious advancing the main end of
Government. As in morality there can be but one thing to a man in genere summi
boni, as the chief good, quo tendit and in quod dirigit aroum -- to which he
refers all other things; yet there may be many things in genere boni
conducentis, as means in order to attaining that end. So though
Church Government vary not as to the ground, end, and reason of it; yet it may,
as to the particular forms of it: As is further evident, as to forms of Civil
Government: though the end of all be the same; yet Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy, are in themselves lawful means for the attaining the same common
end. And as Alensis determines it, in the case of Community of goods by the Law
of Nature, that the same reason of the Law of Nature which did dictate
Community of goods to be most suitable to man in the state of Innocence, did in
his fallen estate prescribe a propriety of goods, as most agreeable to it; so
that herein the modus observanti^^ dissered, but the ratio praecepti was the
same still; which was man's comfortable enjoyment of the Accommodations of life:
which in Innocence might have been best done by Community; but in man's
degenerate condition, must be by a Propriety. So the same reason of
Church Government may call for an Equality in the persons, acting as Governors
of the Church in one place, which may call for Superiority and subordination in
another.

Having now dispatched the first sense of a Divine Right,. 3.
I come to the other, which is the main seat of the Controversy, and therefore
will require a longer debate. And so jus is that which makes a thing to become
a duty: so jus quasi jussum, and jussa jura, as Festus explains it, i. e. that
whereby a thing is not only licitum, in men's lawful power to do it or no, but
is made d^bitum, and is constituted a duty by the force and virtue of a Divine
Command. Now man's obligation to any thing as a duty, does suppose on the part
of him from whose authority he derives his obligation, both legislation and
promulgation. First there must be a Legislative Power commanding it; which if
it respects only the outward actions of a man in a Nation imbodied by Laws, is
the supreme Magistrate; but if the obligation respect the consciences of all
men directly and immediately, then none have the power to settle any thing by
way of an universal standing Law, but God himself: Who by being sole Creator
and Governor of the World, has alone absolute and independent Dominion and
Authority over the souls of men. But besides Legislation, another thing
necessary to man's obligation to duty, is, a sufficient promulgation of the Law
made; Because though before this there be the ground of obedience on man's part
to all Gods Commands, yet there must be a particular Declaration of the Laws,
whereby man is bound in order to the determination of Man's duty. Which in
Positives is so absolutely necessary, that unless there be a sufficient
promulgation and declaration of the will of the Lawgiver, man's ignorance is
excusable in reference to them; and so frees from guilt and the obligation to
punishment. But it is otherwise in reference to the dictates of the natural
Law, wherein though man be at a loss for them, yet his own contracted pravity
being the cause of his blindness, leaves him without excuse. Hence it is said
with good reason, that though man under the Moral Law, was bound to obey
Gospel-precepts, as to the reason and substance of the duties by them
commanded, as Faith, Repentance from dead works, and New Obedience; yet a more
full and particular revelation by the Gospel was necessary, for the particular
determination of the general acts of obedience, to particular objects under
their several Modifications expressed in the Gospel. And therefore Faith and
Repentance under the Moral Law, taken as a transcript of the Law of Nature,
were required under their general notion as acts of obedience, but not in that
particular relation which those acts have under the Covenant of Grace. Which
particular determination of the general acts to special objects under different
respects, some call New Precepts of the Gospel, others New Light; but taking
that light as it has an influence upon the consciences of men, the difference
is so small, that it deserves not to be named a Controversy.

But that which I am now clearing is this, that whatsoever binds Christians as
an universal standing Law, must be clearly revealed as such, and laid down in
Scripture in such evident terms, as all who have their senses exercised
therein, may discern it to have been the will of Christ, that it should
perpetually oblige all believers to the Worlds end, as is clear in the case of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper. But here I shall add one thing by way of
caution; That there is not the same necessity for a particular and clear
revelation in the alteration of a Law unrepealed in some circumstances of it,
as there is for the establishing of a New Law. As to the former, viz. the
change of a standing Law as to some particular circumstance, a different
practice by persons guided by an infallible spirit is sufficient; which is the
case as to the observation of the Lords day under the Gospel: For the fourth
Command standing in force as to the Morality of it, a different practice by the
Apostles may be sufficient for the particular determination of the more ritual
and occasional part of it, which was the limitation of the observation of it to
that certain day. So likewise that other Law standing in force, that persons
taken into Covenant with God should be admitted by some visible sign,
Apostolical practice, clearly manifested, may be sufficient ground to conclude
what the mind of Christ was, as to the application of it to particular persons;
and what qualifications are requisite in such as are capable of admission, as
in the case of Infants. Whereby it is clear why there is no particular Law or
command in reference to them under the Gospel, because it was only the
application of a Law in force already to particular persons, which might be
gathered sufficiently from the Apostles practice, the Analogy of the
dispensation, the equal reason of exclusion under the Law, and yet
notwithstanding the continual admission of them then into the same
Gospel-Govenant; Circumcision being Romans 4. 8.
the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. But this by the way, to prevent
mistakes. We must now by parity of reason say, that either the former Law, in
those things wherein it was not typical, must hold in reference to the form of.
Government in the Church of Christ; or else that Christ by an universal Law
has settled all order in Church Government among the Pastors themselves; or
else that he has left it to the prudence of every particular Church, to
determine its own form of Government, which I conceive is the direct state of
the Question about Divine Right, viz. Whether the particular form of Government
in the Church be settled by an universal binding Law or no?

But for a further clearing the state of the Question, we. 4.
must consider what it is that makes an unalterable Divine Right, or a standing
Law in the Church of God: for those who found forms of Government upon a Divine
Right, do not plead a Law in express terms, but such things from whence a
Divine Right by Law may be inferred. Which I now come to examine; and that
which I lay down as a Postulatum, or a certain conclusion according to which I
shall examine others ^ssertions concerning Divine Right, is, That nothing is
founded upon a Divine Right, nor can bind Christians directly or
consequentially as a positive Law, but what may be certainly known to have come
from God, with an intention to oblige Believers to the worlds end. For either
we must say, it binds Christians as a Law when God did not intend it should; or
else Gods intentions to bind all Believers by it, must be clearly manifested.
Now then, so many ways and no more as a thing may be known to come from God
with an intention to oblige all perpetually, a thing may be said to be of an
unalterable Divine Right; and those can be no more then these two; Either by
the Law of Nature, or by some positive Law of God: Nothing else can bind
universally and perpetually but one of these two, or by virtue of them, as
shall be made appear. I begin with the Law of Nature. The Law of Nature binds
indispensably, as it depends not upon any arbitrary constitutions, but is
founded upon the intrinsecal nature of good and evil in the things themselves,
antecedently to any positive Declaration of Gods Will. So that till the nature
of good and evil be changed, that Law is unalterable as to its obligation.
When, I say, the Law of Nature is indispensable, my meaning is, that in those
things which immediately flow from that Law by way of precept, as the three
first Commands of the Moral Law, no man can by any positive Law be exempted
from his obligation to do them; neither by any abrogation of the Laws
themselves, nor by derogation from them, nor interpretation of them, nor change
in the object, matter, or circumstance, whatsoever it be. Now although the
formal reason of man's obedience to the precepts of this Law, be the conformity*
which the things commanded have to the Divine Nature and goodness, yet I
conceive the efficient cause of man's obligation to these things, is to be
fetched from the Will, Command, and Pleasure of God: Not as it is taken for an
arbitrary positive will, but as it is executive of Divine purposes, and as it
ingraves such a Law upon the hearts of men. For notwithstanding man's Reason,
considered in it self, be the chiefest instrument of discovery what are these
necessary duties of humane nature (in which sense Aristotle defines a Natural
Law to be that which (...), has every where the same force and strength,
Ethic. l. 5. cap. 10.
i. e. as Andronicus Rhodius very well interprets it, (...), among all that
have the free use of their reason and faculties) yet I say, it is not bare
Reason which binds men to the doing of those things commanded in that Law, but
as it is expressive of an Eternal Law, and deduceth its obligation from thence.
And so this Law, if we respect the rise, extent, and immutability of it, may be
called deservedly the Law of V. Seldom. de jure Not. apud* Eb^ae lib. 1. c. 7
and 8. Mol. de just and Iur. p. 1 disp. 3. Alphons. de leg. pur* l. 2. c. 14.
Nature; but if we look at the emanation, efflux, and original of it, it is a
Divine Law, and so it is called by Molina, Alphonsus a Castr^^, and others. For
the sanction of this Law of Nature, as well as others, depends upon the Will of
God, and therefore the obligation must come from him, it being in the power of
no other to punish for the breach of a Law, but those who had the Legislative
Power to cause the obligation to it. It appears then from hence, that whatever
by just consequence can be deduced from the preceptive Law of Nature, is of
Divine Right, because from the very nature of that Law (it being indispensable)
it appears that God had an intent to oblige all persons in the world by it.

The second way whereby we may know what is of Divine. 5.
Right, is by Gods positive Laws; for God being the Supreme Governor of the
World, has the Legislative Power in his hands, to bind to the performance of
what duties be please, which carry no repugnancy in them to his Divine Nature
and Goodness. Hence arise all those positive Laws of God which we have in
Scripture; for God's end in his written Law was, that man should have a Copy of
all Divine constitutions by him, that he might therein read what his duty was
toward his Maker. The Precepts of the Law of Nature, are by the Jews called*
(...) and (...) absolutely, without any addition; because they are of such
things as do perpetually bind, which because they are known to all by natural
light, they sometimes call them (...) praecepta scientia; and being that their
righteousness is so evident and apparent, they call them (...) verba
rectitudinis: but the clearest difference between the precepts of the Law of
Nature, and other positive commands, is that which the famous Is. Casaubon
takes notice of out of the Jewish Doctors. Exercit. Eccles. advers. Ba^. exer.
16. sect. 43.
Observant doctissimi e Rabbinis, inter (...) and (...) han^ esse differentiam,
quod Mitsvoth, sive pr^ceptorum ratio aperta est, ut, Deum cole, Honora patrem
and matrem; at Chukim, statuta sive decreta earum rerum esse dicunt quarum
(...) ratio soli Deo sit nota, ut Circumcisionis and similium. The reason of
the Laws of Nature is evident, but of positive Laws there is no reason to be
given (...) non est alia S^id. de jure Not. apud Ebr. l. 1. cap. 10.
praeter decretum regis, no other account to be given of them but the will of
God. The Laws of Nature are by the LXX. often called (...), and so used, Romans
2. 16. by Justin Martyr, (...). by Josephus, (...) Colloq. ^um Tryph. Jud^o.
Origin. lib. 16. cap. 10. V. G^ot. in Luc. 1. 6.
but Gods positive Laws are called (...): thence we read of Zachary and
Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. (...), etc. walking in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of God blameless, and those are called (...), by S. Paul, Ephesians.
2. 15. the Law of Commandments in Ordinances. Now although this difference be
not always observed in the words in Scripture, yet there is a vast difference
between the things themselves, though both equally commanded by God. That which
is most to our present purpose to observe, is, that Positives being mutable and
alterable in themselves, a bare Divine Command is not sufficient to make them
immutable, unless there be likewise expressed, that it is the Will of God that
they should always continue. This was that which the Jews stumbled at so much,
and do to this day; because they are assured their Law came once from God,
therefore it must of necessity have a perpetual obligation: as may be seen in
their two great Doctors Maimonides and Abarbinel, who both of Maimon. de
fundam. legis, cap. 9. sect. 1. Abarb. de Capit. fidei. cap. 8. p. 29. Ed.
Vorstii.
them make the Eternity of the Law one of the Fundamental Articles of their
Creed. But Abarbinel splits this Article into two; whereof the first is, that
the Law of Moses shall never be changed; the other, that no other Law shall
come instead of it. The original of which grand error is from want of
observing the difference between things commanded by God, some of which are
good, and therefore commanded; others commanded, and therefore good. In which
latter, if the reason of the Command cease, the Command its self obliges no
longer. As the Ceremonial Law was to be their (...), which is not meant in
regard of the sharp severe nature of the Law to drive them Gal. 3. 24.
unto Christ, as it is by many interpreted; but the Law is a Paedagogue in
regard of its tutorage and conduct, as it signified him whose office it was to
conduct Noblemens Children to the School (as a learned man observes.) This
being then the office of the Law, when the Church was now entered into Christ's
School, the office of this Paedagogue then ceased. And so the Ceremonial Law
needed no abrogation at all* exspiring of its self at Christ's coming, as Laws
made for the times of war do when peace comes. Only because the Jews were so
hardly persuaded that it should exspire (the believing Jews conceiving at first
the Gospel came rather to help them to obey the Law of Moses then to cancel the
obligation of it) therefore it was necessary that a more honorable burial
should be given to it, and the Apostles should pro rostris declare more fully
that believers were freed from that yoke of Ceremonies, under which the neck of
their forefathers had groaned so long. It appears then that a positive Law
coming from God does not merely by virtue of its being enacted by God, bind
perpetually all persons, unless there be a Declaration of Gods Will adjoined,
that it should do so.

It will be here then well worth our inquiry to find out. 6.
some (...) or notes of difference whereby to know when positive laws bind
immutably, when not; I shall ^ay down these following. First, when the same
reason of the Command continues still, then we cannot conceive how that which
was instituted upon such an account as remains still, should not have the same
force now which it had at first. That positive Law under which Adam was in his
state of Innocence touching the forbidden fruit, did not bind any longer then
his fall; because the reason of the Command ceased, which was the trial of man's
obedience: For which, God made choice of a very facile and easy Command,
according to that rule of Politicians In minimis obedientiae periculum faciunt
Legislatores, of which they give this rational account, Quia legislatoris ad
obedientiam obligantis potius habenda est ratio, quam rei de qua lex est lata:
thence arose that Law of the Ephori at Sparta, barbam tondere, to which no
other reason was annexed but this, obtemperare legibus, to learn them to obey
the Laws. This was Gods aim in that easy Command given to Adam, to make
thereon an experiment of man's willingness to obey his Maker, and wherein man
soon lost that Obsequii gloria, as he in Tacttus calls it, which, as Pliny
says, is in to major quod quis minus velit. But had this Law been a standing
Law for all mankind, it would have continued its obligation still; but since,
we see that it was only a personal, temporary, probative precept; for no sooner
was man fallen but its obligation ceased. So likewise those precepts of the
Judicial Law which immediately respected the Commonwealth of the Jews as such,
their obligation reaches not to Christians at all, nor (as it is generally
conceived) to the Jews themselves, when out of the Consines of their own
Country, because the reason of those Laws does neither descend to Christians,
nor did travel abroad with the Jews. But those judicial Laws which are founded
upon common equity to bind still, not by virtue of that Sanction, but by virtue
of common principles of equity, which certainly in the present shortness of
humane reason cannot be fetched from a clearer Fountain then those Laws which
once came from the Fountain of Goodness: none of whose constitutions can any
ways be supposed to deviate from the exactest rules of Justice and Equity. And
upon this very ground too, some part of the fourth Commandment is abrogated,
and the other continues to bind still; For the reason of the Ceremonial and
occasional part is ceased, and the reason of what was Moral, continues.
Therefore the Schoolmen say right of the Sabbath day, Cultus est a natura,
modus a lege, virtu^ a Gratia. Nature dictates that God should be worshipped,
the Law informs what day and time to spend in his worship, Grace must enable us
to perform that worship on that day in a right manner. And because the same
reason for Gods Worship continue^ still, therefore it is a Precept of the
Natural Law, that God should be worshipped. What time precisely must be spent
in Gods Worship (as one day in seven) though the reason be evident to nature of
it when it is made known; yet it is hard to conceive that Nature could have
found out the precise determination of the time. Although I must confess the
general consent of Nations, as to the seventh part, (if it were fully cleared)
would speak fair to be the voice of Nature, or at least a tradition received
from the Sons of Noah, which, if so, will be an evidence of the observation of
the Sabbath before the Children of Isreal's being in the Wilderness. But
granting that the seventh part of time was a positive Law of God, yet I say it
binds immutably, because there is as strong a reason for it now as ever, and
Ratio immutabilis praecepti, facit praeceptum immutabile. This I take to be the
sense of those who distinguish between morale positivum, and morale natural,
i. e. that some things are so moral, that even Nature its self can discover
them, as that God should be worshipped. Other things are so moral, that though
the reason of them be founded in Nature, yet there wants Divine Revelation to
discover them to us; but when once discovered, are discerned to be very
agreeable to common principles of reason: And these when thus discovered, are
as immutably obligatory as the other, because the reason of them is immutable.
And of this nature, is the determination of the particular time for Gods
worship, and limitation of it to one day in seven. But what was in that Precept
merely occasional, as the first and original ground of its limitation to the
seventh in order, Gods resting on that day from the work of Creation, and the
further Genesis 22. Deuteronomy. 5. 15
ground of its inforcement to the Jews, viz. their deliverance out of Egypt;
these being not immut^ble, but temporary and occasional, may upon as great
ground given, and approved of God for that end (as is evident by the Apostles
practice) be sufficient reason of the alteration of the seventh day to the
first day of the week. By this may briefly be seen how irrationally those
speak, who say we have no further ground for our observation of the Lords day
now, then for other arbitrary Festivals in the Church, viz. The Tradition of
the Church of God. I grant, the Tradition of the Church does acquaint us with
Apostolical practice, but the ground of our observation of the Lords day, is
not the Churches Tradition, but that Apostolical practice conveyed by Universal
Tradition (which setting aside the Festivals observed upon the Lords days, can
very hardly be ^ound for any other.) But supposing Universal Tradition for
other Festivals; I say, here Tradition is not only used as a testimony and
instrument of conveyance, as in the other case of the Lords day; but is it self
the only argument, and the very ground of the original observation: Between
which two, what a wide difference there is, let any rational man judge. But for
a further clearing this observation, we must consider, that the reason of the
Command, which we say is the measure of its obligation, must not be fetched
from men's uncertain conjectures (among whom dreams often pass for reasons) but
it must be either expressed in the Law its self, or deducible by apparent and
easy collection from it; as is plain in the Decrees of the Apostles about
things strangled, Act 15. 29.
and offered to Idols, where the reason of the Command is plainly implied, to
wit, for present compliance with the Jews; and therefore no sooner did the
reason of the Command cease, but the obligation of it ceased too: but of this
more afterward. This is one way then to discern the difference between
positive Laws, as to the obligation of them, by the ground and reason of the
Command. And therefore it is well observed by Divines (which further confirms
what I now prove) that no Command does bind against the reason of the Command;
because it is not the words, but the sense and reason of a Command which has
the greatest obligatory force. Therefore Tully tells us, that the ratio juris
and legislatoris consilium, Ora^. ^^^ ^. Cae^iu.
is the best Interpreter of any Law; who excellently and largely proves, that
the reason of the Law is the Law, and not the words. So much for the first Rule.

Secondly, Another way to know when Positive Laws are. 7.
immutable, is, when Gods Will is expressly declared that such Laws shall bind
immutably. For it being granted on all hands, that God may bind us to those
things which are left indifferent by the Law of Nature, and likewise for what
term he please; the only inquiry left, is to see in his Word whether he has so
bound us or no; and, if he has, whether he has left it in man's power to
revoke his Laws. For as to Positive Laws expressly laid down in Scripture, the
ground of which is only as the Jews speak (...) the will of the King, i. e.
Gods own pleasure, without any reason or occasion of it else expressed, or
necessarily implied; these do bind immutably, unless the same Power which
commanded them, does again revoke them. For we cannot in any wise conceive that
the wise God should after the declaring his own will, leave it in the power of
any corrupt fallible* Being to determine, or dispense with the obligation of
his own Laws. Which to do, and instead of them to enforce others immediately
upon the Consciences of men, as standing Laws, is an attempt beyond that of the
Giants against heaven (or the men at Babel*) that being only an affectation of
reaching heaven, but this an actual usurpation of Gods supreme and legislative
power and authority. But though man has nor, God always reserves to himself a
power to relax, interpret, and dispense with his own positive Laws, which imply
no repugnancy to his own nature. And this power is always to be understood in
all Laws to be reserved to God, where he has not himself declared that he will
not use it* which is done either by the annexing an Oath on a Promise, which
the Apostle calls the two immutable things in which it is impossible Heb. 6. 1^.
for God to lie. For though God be free to promise, yet when he has promised,
his own nature and faithfulness binds him to performance; in which sense I
understand those who say, God in making promises is bound only to himself, and
not to men; that is, that the ground of performance arises from Gods
faithfulness. For else if we respect the right coming by the promise, that must
immediately respect the person to whom it is made, and in respect of which we
commonly say that the promiser is bound to performance. But the case is
otherwise in penal Laws, which though^ never so strict; do imply a power of
relaxation in the Legislator: because penal Laws do only constitute the
debstum poenae* and bind the sinner over to punishment, but do not bind the
Legislator to an actual execution upon the debt. Which is the ground that the
person of a Mediator was admittable in the place of fallen man, because it was a
penal Law, and therefore relaxable. But because the debt of punishment is
immediately contracted upon the breach of the Law, therefore satisfaction was
necessary to God as Lawgiver, either by the person himself, or another for
him; because it was not consistent with the holiness of Gods nature and his
wisdom as Governor, to relax an established Law, without valuable
consideration* Now for the third kind of Gods Laws, besides promissory and
penal, viz such as are merely positive respecting duties, which become such by
virtue of an express command: these, though they be revocable in themselves,
yet being revocable only by God himself, and his own power, since he has
already in his Word fully revealed his Will, unless therein he has declared
when their obligation shall cease, they continue irreversible. This is the case
as to the Sacraments of the New Testament, which being commands merely
positive, yet Christ commanding Christians as Christians to observe them, and
not as Christians of the first and second Ages of the Church, his mind can be
no otherwise interpreted concerning them, then that he did intend immutably to
bind all Christians to the observance of them. For all though the Socinians say,
that Baptism Catech. Racov. cap. 4.
was only a Rite instituted by Christ for the passing men from Judaism and
Gentilism to Christianity, yet we are not bound to look upon all as reason that
comes from those who profess themselves the admirers of it. For Christ's
Command nowhere implying such a limitation; and an outward visible profession
of Christianity being a duty now, and the Covenant entered into by that Rite of
initiation, as obligatory as ever, we have no reason to think that Christ's
command does not reach us now, especially the promise being made to as many as
God shall call, and consequently the same duty required Acts 3. 38.
which was then in order to the obtaining of the same ends. A third way to
discern the immutability of positive Laws, is, when the things commanded in
particular are necessary to the being, succession, and continuance of such a
Society of men professing the Gospel, as is instituted and approved by Christ
himself. For Christ must be supposed to have the power himself to order what
Society he please, and appoint what Orders he please to be observed by them;
what Rites and Ceremonies to be used in admission of Members into his Church,
in their continuing in it; in the way, means, manner of ejection out of it; in
the preserving the succession of his Church, and the administration of
Ordinances of his appointment. These being thus necessary for the maintaining
and upholding this Society, they are thereby of a nature as unalterable, as the
duty of observing what Christ has commanded is. How much these things concern
the resolution of the Question proposed, will appear afterward. Thus we have
gained a resolution of the second thing, whereon an unalterable Divine Right is
founded; viz, either upon the dictates of the Law of Nature, concurring with
the rules of the written word; or upon express positive Laws of God, whose
reason is immutable, or which God has declared shall continue, as necessary to
the being of the Church.

The next thing is to examine the other pretenses which are 8^
brought for a Divine Right; which are either Scripture* examples, or Divine
acts, or Divine approbation. For Scriptureexamples: First; I take it for
granted on all hands, that all Scripture examples do not bind us to follow
them; such are the Mediatory acts of Christ, the Heroical acts of extraordinary
persons, all accidental and occasional actions. Example does not bind us as
an example; for then all examples are to be followed, and so we shall of
necessity go, qua itur, non qua eundum, walk by the most examples, and not by
rule. There is then no obligatory force in example it self. Secondly, there
must be then some rule fixed to know when examples bind, and when not; for
otherwise there can be no discrimination put between examples which we are to
follow, and which to avoid. This rule must be either immediately obligatory,
making it a duty to follow such examples, or else directive, declaring what
examples are to be ^ollowed: And yet even this latter does imply, as well as
the former, that the following these examples thus declared, is become a duty.
There can be no duty without a Law making it to be a duty, and consequently, it
is the Law making it to be a duty to follow such example, which gives a Divine
Right to those examples, and not barely the examples themselves. We are bound
to follow Christ's example, not barely because he did such and such things, (for
many things he did we are not bound to follow him in) but because he himself
has by a command made it our duty to follow him in his humility, patience,
self-denial, Matthew. 11. 21. 1 John 2. 6. 1 Pe^. 2^* 22.
etc. and in whatever things are set out in Scripture for our imitation. When
men speak then with so much confidence, that Scripture-examples do bind us
unalterably, they either mean that the example it self makes it a duty, which I
have shown already to be absurd; or else that the moral nature of the action
done in that example, or else the Law making it our duty to follow the example,
though in its self it be of no moral nature. If the former of these two, then
it is the morality of the action binds us, without its being incarnate in the
example: For the example in actions not moral, binds not at all, and therefore
the example binds only by virtue of the morality of it; and consequently, it is
the morality of the action which binds, and not the example. If the latter, the
rule making it our duty, then it it is more apparent that it is not the example
which binds necessarily, but that rule which makes it a duty to follow it; for
examples in indifferent things do not bind without a Law making it to be a
duty: And so it evidently appears, that all obligatory force is taken off from
the examples themselves, and resolved into one of the two former, the moral
nature of the action, or a positive Law. And therefore those who plead the
obligatory nature of Scripture-examples, must either produce the moral nature
of these examples, or else a rule binding us to follow those examples.
Especially, when these examples are brought to found a New positive Law,
obliging all Christians necessarily to the end of the world. Concerning the
binding nature of Apostolical practice, I shall discourse largely afterward.
The next thing pleaded for a Divine Right, is by Divine Acts. As to this* ^t is
again evident that all Divine Acts do not constitute such a Right; therefore
there must be something expressed in those Acts when such a Divine Right
follows them; whence we may infallibly gather, it was Gods intention they
should perpetually oblige: as is plain in the cases instanced in the most for
this purpose; as Gods resting on the seventh day making the Sabbath perpetual:
For it Genesis 2. 2.
was not Gods resting that made it the Sabbath, for that is only expressed as
the occasion of its institution; but it was Gods sanctifying the day, that is,
by a Law setting it apart for his own service, which made it a duty. And so
Christ's resurrection was not it which made the Lords day a Sabbath of Divine
Right; but Christ's resurrection was the occasion of the Apostles altering only
a circumstantiall part of a moral duty already; which being done upon so great
reasons, and by persons endued with an insallible spirit, thereby it becomes
our duty to observe that moral command in this limitation of time. But here it
is further necessary to distinguish between acts merely positive, and acts
donative or legal. The former con^er no right at all, but the latter do; not
barely as acts, but as legal acts, that is, by some declaration that those
acts do conserr right. And so it is in all donations, and therefore in Law the
bare delivery of a thing to another does not give a legal title to it, without
express transferring of dominion and propriety with it. Thus in Christ's
delivering the Keys to Peter and therest of the Apostles, by that act I grant
Matthew. 16. 19. 18. 18.
the Apostles had the power of the Keys by Divine Right; but then it was not
any bare act of Christ which did it, but it was only the declaration of Christ's
will conferring that authority upon them. Again, we must distinguish between a
right confer^'d by a donative act, and the unalterable nature of that Right;
for it is plain there may be a Right personal as well as successive,
derivative, and perpetual. And therefore it is not enough to prove that a
Right was given by any act of Christ, unless it be made appear it was Christ's
intention that Right should be perpetual if it oblige still. For otherwise the
extent of the Apostolical Commission the power of working miracles, as well as
the power of the Keys (whether by it we mean a power declarative of duty, or a
power authoritative and penal) must continue still, if a difference be not
made between these two; and some rule sound out to know when the Right
conferred by Divine Acts is personal, when successive. Which rule thus found
out, must make the Right unalterable, and so concerning us, and not the bare
donative act of Christ* For it is evident, they were all equally conferred upon
the Apostles by an act of Christ: and if some continue still, and others do
not, then the bare act of Christ does not make an unalterable Divine Right. And
so though it be proved that the Apostles had superiority of order and
jurisdiction over the Pastors of the Church by an act of Christ; yet it must
further be proved, that it was Christ's intention that superiority should
continue in their successors, or it makes nothing to the purpose. But this
argument I confess, I see not how those who make a necessary Divine Right to
follow upon the acts of Christ, can possibly avoid the force of. The last thing
pleaded for Divine Right, is Divine approbation; but this least of all
constitutes a Divine Right: For if the actions be extraordinary, Gods
approbation of them as such, cannot make them an ordinary duty. In all other
actions which are good, and therefore only commendable, they must be so, either
because done in conformity to Gods revealed Will, or to the nature of things
good in themselves. In the one, it is the positive Law of God, in the other the
Law of Nature, which made the action good, and so approved by God, and on that
account we are bound to do it. For God will certainly approve of nothing but
what is done according to his Will revealed, or natural; which Will and Law of
his, is that which makes any thing to be of Divine Right, i. e. perpetually
binding, as to the observation of it. But for acts of merely positive nature,
which we read Gods approbation of in Scripture, by virtue of which approbation
those actions do oblige us; in this case, I say, it is not Gods mere
approbation that makes the obligation, but as that approbation, so recorded in
Scripture, is a sufficient testimony and declaration of Gods intention to
oblige men: And so it comes to be a positive Law, which is nothing else but a
sufficient declaration of the Legislators will and intention, to bind in
particular actions and cases. Thus now we have cleared whereon a necessary and
unalterable Divine Right must be founded; either upon the Law of Nature, or
some positive Law of God, sufficiently declared to be perpetually binding.

CHAP. II.
Six Hypotheses laid down, as the basis of the following Discourse. 1. The
irreversible obligation of the Law of Nature, either by humane, or Divine
positive Laws, in things immediately flowing from it. 2. Things agreeable to
the Law of Nature may be lawfully practiced in the Church of God, where there
is no prohibition by positive Laws; enlarged into 5 subservient Propositions.
3. Divine positive Laws, concerning the manner of the thing whose substance is
determined by the Law of Nature, must be obeyed by virtue of the obligation of
the natural Law. 4. Things undetermined, both by the natural and positive Laws
of God, may be lawfully determined by the supreme authority in the Church of
God. 5. What is th^^ determined by lawful authority, does bind the consciences
of men* subject to that authority. to obedience to those determinations. 6.
Things thus determined by lawful authority, are not thereby made unalterable,
but may be revoked, limited, and changed by the same authority.

HAving showed what a Divine Right is, and whereon it is 1.
founded; our next great inquiry will be, How far Church Government is founded
upon Divine Right, taken either of these two ways. But for our more distinct,
clear, and rationa^^ proceeding, I shall lay down some things, as so many
Postulata or general Principles and Hypotheses, which will be as the basis and
foundation of the following Discourse; which all of them concern the obligation
of Laws, wherein I shall proceed gradually, beginning with the Law of Nature,
and so to Divine positive Laws; and lastly, to speak to humane positive Laws.
The first Principle or Hypothesis which I lay down, is, Hypoth. 1.


That where the Law of Nature does determine any thing by way of duty, as
flowing from the principles of it, there no positive Law can be supposed to
take off the obligation of it. Which I prove, both as to humane positive Laws
and Divine: First as to humane. For first, the things commanded in the Law of
Nature, being just and righteous in themselves, there can be no obligatory Law
made against such things. Nemo tenetur ad impossible, is true in the sense of
the Civil Law, as well as in Philosophy; as impossible is taken for turpe, and
turpe for that which is contrary to the dictates of Nature. A man may be as
well bound not to be a man, as not to act according to principles of reason*
For the Law of Nature is nothing else but the dictate of right reason,
discovering the good or Grot. de jure bell^, etc. lib 1. c^p. 1. s. 10.
evil of particular actions, from their conformity or repugnancy to natural
light. Whatever positive Law is then made directly infringing and violating
natural principles, is thereby of no force at all. And that which has no
obligation in it self, cannot dissolve a former obligation. Secondly, the
indispensablenesse of the obligation of the Law of Nature, appears from the end
of all other Laws, which are agreed upon by mutual compact, which is, the
better to preserve men in their rights and privileges. Now the greatest rights
of men, are such as flow from Nature its self, and therefore, as no Law binds
against the reason of it, so neither can it against the common end of Laws.
Therefore, if a humane positive Law should be made, that God should not be
worshipped, it cannot bind, being against the main end of Laws, which is to
make men live together as reasonable creature^, which they cannot do, without
doing what Nature requires, which is, to serve God who made it. Again, it
overturns the very foundation of all Government, and dissolves the tie to all
humane Laws, if the Law of Nature does not bind indispensably: for otherwise,
upon what ground must men yield obedience to any Laws that are made? Is it not
by virtue of this Law of Nature, that men must stand to all compacts and
agreements made? If Laws take their force among men from hence, they can bind
no further then those comp^cts did extend; which cannot be supposed to be, to
violate and destroy their own natures. Positive Laws may restrain much of what
is only of the permissive Law of Nature (for the intent of positive Laws, was
to make men abate so much of their natural freedom, as should be judged
necessary for the preservation of humane Societies) but against the obligatory
Law of Nature, as to its precepts, no after-Law can derogate from the
obligation of it. And therefore it is otherwise between the Law of Nature and
positive Laws, then between Laws merely civil: for as to these the rule is,
that posterior derogat priori, the latter Law cassats and nulls the obligation
of the former; but as to natural Laws and positive, prior derogat posteriori,
the Law o^ Nature, which is first^, takes away the obligation of a positive
Law, if it be contrary to it. As Iustellus observe it was in the primitive
Church, -- in reference to the obligation of the Canons of the Councils, that
such as Pr^sat. in Cod. Canon. Eccl. A^ric. p. 14.
were inserted in the Codex Canonum, being of the more ancient Councils, did
render the obligation of later Canons invalid, which were contrary to them,
unless it were in m^tte^s of small moment. We see then, that supposing the Law
of Nature does not continue obligatory, the obligation of all humane positive
Laws will fall with it, (as the superstructure needs must when the foundation
is removed) for if any other Law of Nature may be dissolved, why not that
whereby men are bound to stand to Covenants and contracts made? and if that be
dissolved, How can the obligation to humane Laws remain, which is founded upon
that basis? And so all civil Societies are thereby overturned. Thirdly, it
appears from the nature of that obligation which follows the Law of Nature, so
that thereby no humane Law can bind against this; for humane Laws bind only
outward humane act^ons directly, and internal acts only by virtue of their
necessary connection with, and influence upon outward actions, and not
otherwise; but the Law of Nature immediately binds the soul and conscience of
man: And therefore obligatio naturalis, and nexus conscientiae, are made to be
the same by Lessius, Suar^z, and others. For Lessius d^sputing, Whether Less.
de just. and jure l. 2. c. 19. d^b. 3. n. 12. Suarez de leg. lib. 2: cap. 9.
sect. 6.
a Will made without solemnity of Law, does bind in conscience or no? He proves
it does by ^his argument, from the opinion of the Lawyers, that without those
solemnities there does arise from it a natural obligation, and the hresae ab
Intestato, who is the next of Kin, is bound to make it good; therefore it does
bind in conscience. So then there arises a necessary obllgation upon
conscience, from the dict^tes of the Law of Nature, which cannot be removed by
any positive Law. For although there lie no action in the civil Law against the
breach of a merely natural Law, as in the former case of succession to a Will
not legally made; in covenants made without conditions expressed, in recovery
of debt^ from a person to whom money was lent in his Pupillage without consent
of his Tutor; in these cases though no action lie against the persons, yet this
proves not that these have no obligation upon a man, but only that he is not
responsible for the breach of moral honesty in them before civil Courts. In
which sense those Lawyers are to be understood, which deny the obligation of
the Law of Nature. But however conscience binds the offender over to answer at
a higher tribunal, before which all such offenses shall be punished. Thus then
we see no positive humane Law can dispense with, or dissolve the obligation of
the Law of nature. Much less; Secondly, can we suppose any positive Divine Law
should. For although Gods power be immense and infinite to do what pleases
him, yet we must always suppose this power to be conjoined with goodness, else
it is no divine power: and therefore posse malum, non est posse, it is no
power, but weakness to do evil; and without this posse malum, there can be no
alteration made in the nature of good and evil; which must be supposed, if the
obligation of the natural Law be dispensed with. Therefore it was well said by
Origin, when C^lsus objected it as the common speech of the Orig. lib. 3. C.
Celsum. p. 154. ed. Co^. ^
Christians, That with God all things are possible, that he neither understood
how it was spoken, nor what these all-things are, nor how God could do them:
and concludes with this excellent speech, (...), We say, says he, that God can
do all things, which are reconcilable with his Deity, Goodness, and Wisdom.
And after adds, That as it is impossible for honey to make things bitter, and
light to make things obscure, so it is for God to do any thing that is unjust.
(...). For the power of doing evil is directly contrary to the Divine Nature,
and that Omnipotency which is consistent with it. To the same purpose he speaks
elsewhere, (...), C. Celsum l. 5. p. 147.
God wills nothing unbecoming himself: And again, (...). We affirm that God
cannot do evil actions: for if he could, he might as well be no God. For if God
should do evil, he would be no God. So then though God be omnipotent, yet it
follows not that he can therefore dissolve the obligation of the preceptive Law
of nature, or change the natures of good and evil. God may indeed alter the
properties of those things from whence the respects of good and evil do result,
as in Abraham's offering Isaac, the Israelites taking away the Egyptians
Jewels; which God may justly do by virtue of his absolute dominion; but the
change here, is not in the obligation of the Law, but in the things themselves.
Murder would be an intrinsecal evil still; but that which was done by
immediate and explicit command from God, would have been no murder. Theft had
been a sin still, but taking things aliena^ed from their properties by God
himself, was not Theft. We conclude then, what comes immediately from the Law
of nature by way of command binds immutably and indispensably. Which is the
first Hypothesis or Principle laid down.

The second Hypothesis is, That things which are either deducible 2.
from the Law of Nature, or by the light of Nature discovered to be very
agreeable to it, may be lawfully practiced in the Church of God, if they be not
otherwise determined by the positive Laws of God, or of lawful humane
authority. We shall first inquire into the nature of these things, and then
show the lawfulness of doing them. For the nature of these things: we must
consider what things may be said to be of the Law of nature. They may be
reduced to two heads, which must be accurately distinguished. They are either
such things which Nature dictates to be done, or not to be done necessarily and
immutably; or else such things as are judged to be very agreeable to natural
light, but are subject to positive determinations. The former are called by
some jus naturae obligativum; by others jus naturae proprium, whereby things
are made necessarily duties or sins; the latter jus naturae permissivum, and
reductivum, for which it is sufficient if there be no repugnancy to natural
light. From these two arise a different obligation upon Covarr. c. 10. de
tesi^m^n. 11^.
men; either strict, and is called by Covarr^vias, obligatio ex* justitia, an
obligation of duty and justice; the other larger, obligatio ex communi
aequitate, or ex honestate morali; an obligation from common equity, that is,
according to the agreeableness of things to natural light, The former I have
shown already to bind indispensably, but these latter are subject to positive
Laws. For our better understanding the obligation of these (which is more
intricate then the former) we shall consider men under a double notion, either
in a state of absolute liberty, which some call a state of Nature; or else in a
state wherein they have restrained their own liberty by mutual compacts, or are
determined by a higher Law. These things premised, I lay down these
Propositions.

1. In a state of absolute liberty, before any positive Laws were superadded to
the natural, Whatsoever was not necessarily determined by the obligatory Law
of Nature, was wholly left to men's power to do it or not, and belongs to the
permissive Law of Nature. And thus all those things which are since determined
by positive Laws, were in such a supposed state, left to the free choice of a
man's own will. Thus it was in men's power to join in civil Society with whom
they pleased, to recover things, or vindicate injuries in what way they judged
best, to submit to what constitutions alone they would themselves, to choose
what form of Government among them they pleased, to determine how far they
would be bound to any Authority chosen by themselves, to lodge the legislative
and coercive Power in what persons they thought fit, to agree upon punishments
answerable to the nature of offenses. And so in all other things not repugnant
to the common light of reason, and the dictates of the preceptive part of the
Law of Nature.

2. A state of absolute liberty, not agreeing to the nature of man considered
in relation to others; it was in men's power to restrain their own liberty upon
compacts so far as should be judged necessary for the ends of their mutual
Society. A state of Nature I look upon only as an imaginary state, for better
understanding the nature and obligation of Laws. For it is confessed by the
greatest Assertors of it, that the relation of Parents and Children cannot be
conceived in a state of natural liberty, Hobs de civ. cap. 1* s. 11. Ann.
because Children as soon as born are actually under the power and authority of
their Parents. But for our clearer apprehending the matter in hand, we shall
proceed with it. Supposing then all those former rights were in their own
power, it is most agreeable to natural reason, that every man may part with his
right so far as he please for his own advantage. Here now, men finding a
necessity to part with some of their Rights, to defend and secure their most
considerable Ones, they begin to think of Compacts one with another (taking
this as a Principle of the Natural Law, and the Foundation of Society, That all
Covenants are to be performed:) When they are thus far agreed, they then
consider the terms upon which they should enter into Society one with another.
And here men divest themselves of their original liberty, and agree upon an
Enclosure of Properties, and the Fences of those Properties; I mean, upon
living together in a civil state, and of the Laws they must be ruled by. This
is apparently agreeable to Natural Reason, the things being in their own power,
which they agree to part with.

Men entering upon Societies by Mutual Compacts, things. 3.
thereby become good and evil, which were not so before. Thus Prop. 3.
he who was free before to do what and how he pleased, is now bound to obey
what Laws he has consented to; or else he breaks not only a Positive Law, but
that Law of Nature, which commands Man to stand to Covenants once made, though
he be free to make them. And therefore it is observable, that the doing of
things that were lawful before Covenants made, and things thereby determined,
may be so far from being lawful after, that the doing of them may contradict a
Principle of the Obligatory Law of Nature. Thus in a state of liberty, every
one had right to what he thought fit for his use; but Propriety and Dominion
being introduced, which was a free voluntary act, by men's determining Rights,
it now becomes an offense against the Law of Nature, to take away Paulus l. 1.
D. de ^urtis. V^pian. lib. Post. D. de verb sig.
that which is another man's. In which sense alone it is, that Theft is said to
be forbidden by the Law of Nature. And by the same reason, he that resists and
opposes the lawful Authority, under which he is born, does not only offend
against the Municipal Laws of the place wherein he lives, but against that
Original and Fundamental Law of Societies, viz standing to Covenants once made.
For it is a gross mistake, as well as dangerous, for men to imagine, That every
man is born in a state of Absolute Liberty, to choose what Laws and Governors
he please* but every one being now born a Subject to that Authority he lives
under, he is bound to preserve it as much as in him lies: Thence Augustus had
some reason to say, He was the best Citizen, qui praesentem reipublicae statum
mutari ^^^ vult, That does not disturb the present state of the Commonwealth;
and who, as Alcibiades says in Thucydides, (...) V. Grot. de jure belli. etc.
lib. 2. cap. 4* sect. 8.
endeavors to preserve that form of Government he was born under. And the
reason of it is, that in Contracts and Covenants made for Government, men look
not only at themselves, but at the benefit of Posterity; if then one Party be
bound to maintain the Rights of the others Posterity, as well as of his person,
the other party must be supposed to oblige his Posterity in his Covenant to
perform Obedience; which every man has power to do, because Children are at
their Parents disposal; And Equity requires, that the Covenant entered should be
of equal extent to both parties: And if a man does expect Protection for his
Posterity, he must engage for the Obedience of his Posterity too, to the
Governor^ who do legally protect them. But the further prosecution of these
things belongs to another place to consider of; my purpose being to treat of
Government in the Church, and not in the State. The sum of this is, that the
Obligation to the performance of what things are determined (which are of the
permissive Law of Nature) by Positive Laws, does arise from the Obligatory Law
of Nature. As the Demonstration of the particular Problemes in the
Mathematics, does depend upon the Principles of the Theoremes themselves; and
so whoever denies the truth of the Problem, deduced by just Consequence from
the Theoreme, must consequentially deny the truth of the Theoreme its self: So
those who violate the particular Determinations of the Permissive Law of
Nature, do violate the Obligation of the Preceptive part of that Law: Obedience
to the other being grounded on the Principles of this.

4. God has Power by his Positive Laws to take in and determine as much of the
Permissive Law of Nature as he please, which being once so determined by an
Universal Law, is so far from being lawful to be done, that the doing of them
by those under an Obligation to his Positive Laws, is an offense against the
Immutable Law of Nature. That God may restrain man's Natural Liberty, I suppose
none who own Gods Legislative Power over the world can deny: especially
considering that men have power to restrain themselves; much more then has
God, who is the Rector and Governor of the World. That a breach of his positive
Laws is an offense against the common Law of Nature, appears hence; because man
being Gods creature, is not only bound to do what is in general suitable to the
principles of reason in flying evil, and choosing good; but to submit to the
determinations of Gods will, as to the distinction of good from evil. For being
bound universally to obey God, it is employed that man should obey him in all
things which he discovers to be his will: whose determination must make a thing
not only good, but necessary to be done, by virtue of his supreme authority
over men. This then needs no further proof, being so clear in its self.

5. Lastly, What things are left undetermined by divine positive Laws, are in
the Churches power to use, and practice according as it judges them most
agreeable to the rule of the Word. That things undetermined by the Word are
still lawful, evidently appears: because what was once lawful, must have some
positive Law to make it unlawful, which if there be none, it remains lawful
still. And that the Church of God should be debarred of any privilege of any
other Societies, I understand not; especially if it belong to it as a Society
considered in its self, and not as a particular Society constituted upon such
accounts as the Church is. For I doubt not but to make it evident afterward,
that many parts of Government in the Church belong not to it as such in a
restrained sense, but in the general notion of it, as a Society of men imbodyed
together by some Laws proper to its self; Although it subsist upon a higher
foundation, viz. of divine institution, and upon higher grounds, reasons,
principles, ends; and be directed by other Laws immediately then any other
Societies in the World are.. 4.


The third Hypothesis is this; Where the Law of Nature determines the thing,
and the Divine Law determines the manner and circumstances of the thing, there
we are bound to obey the divine Law in its particular determinations, by virtue
of the Law of Nature in its general obligation. As for instance, the Law of
Nature binds man to worship God; but for the way, manner, and circumstances
of Worship, we are to follow the positive Laws of God: because as we are bound
by Nature to worship him, so we are bound by virtue of the same Law to worship
him in the manner best pleasing to himself. For the light of Nature, though it
determine the duty of worship, yet it does not the way and manner, and though
acts of pure obedience be in themselves acceptable unto God, yet as to the
manner of those acts, and the positives of worship, they are no further
acceptable unto God then commanded by him. Because in things not necessarily
determined by the Law of Nature, the goodness or evil of them lying in
reference to Gods acceptance, it must depend upon his Command, supposing
positive Laws to be at all given by God to direct men in their worship of him.
For supposing God had not at all revealed himself in order to his worship;
doubtless it had been lawful for men not only to pray to God, and express
their sense of their dependence upon him; but to appoint ways, times and
places for the doing it, as they should judge most convenient and agreeable to
natural light. Which is evident from the Scripture its self as to places: for
as far as we can find, sacrificing in high places, Judge. 6. 18 1 Samuel 7. 1, 4.
16. 9. 10. 3. 2 Samuel 15. 18, etc.
(that is, such as were of men's own appointment) was lawful, till the Temple
was built by Solomon; as appears by the several examples of Gedeon, Samuel,
David, and others. Indeed after the place was settled by Gods own Law, it became
wholly sinful: but if so before, we should not have read of Gods accepting
sacrifices in such places as he did Gedeons, nor of the Prophets doing it, as
Samuel and David did. It is a disputable case about Sacrifices, Whether the
offering of them came only from natural light, or from some express command:
the latter seems far more probable to me, because I cannot see how natural
light should any wise dictate that God would accept of the blood of other
creatures as a token of man's obedience to himself. Exerci^* in Genesis 42.
And Rivet gives this very good reason why the destruction of any thing in
sacrifice cannot belong to the Law of Nature, because it is only acceptable as
a sign, and token of obedience, and not simply as an act of obedience; and this
sign signifying ex instituto (for man's destroying the life of a beast can never
naturally signify man's obedience to God) and therefore it must have some
positive Law; for those which signify only by institution, and not naturally,
cannot be referred to a dictate of the Law of Nature. To which purpose it is
further observable, that God does so often in Scripture slight the offering of
Sacrifices, in respect of any inherent virtue or goodness in the action its
self, or acceptablenesse to God upon the account of the thing done. In which
sense God says, He that kills a bullock, is as if he slew a man; and he that
Isa. 66. 3.
Sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck, etc. For what is there more
in the one then in the other, but only Gods appointment, which makes one
acceptable and not the other? So that it is no ways probable that God would
have accepted Abels sacrifice rather then Cains, had there been no command for
their sacrificing. For as to mere natural light, Cains Sacrifice Genesis 4 3, 4.
seems more agreeable to that then Abels; Cains being an Eucharistical offering
without hurt to other creatures, but Abels was cruentum Sacrificium a Sacrifice
of blood. But the chief ground of Abels acceptance, was his offering in faith,
as the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us: Now says is a Heb. 1^. 4.
higher principle then natural light, and must suppose divine Revelation, and
so a divine Command as the Principle and ground of his action. Moses his
silence in reference to a Command, is no argument there was none, it not being
his design to write at large all the particular precepts of the Orall Law, but
to deduce the Genealogy of the Patriarchs down from Adam and the Creation. But,
supposing a Command given from God determining modes and circumstances of such
things of which the substance depends on a natural Law, men are as well bound
to the observation of them after their revelation, as the other before. The one
being a Testimony of their obedience to God as clear and full as the other;
yes, and so much the clearer evidence of obedience, in that there could be no
argument for the performing of those things but a divine Command. And even in
doing things intrinsecally good, the ground of purely religious obedience is,
because God commands men to do those things more then that they are good in
themselves: Doing a thing because most suitable to nature, speaking morality;
but doing because God commands it, speaks true Religion and the obedience of
Faith. For as the formal reason of the act of Faith is a divine Testimony
discovered to our understandings, so the formal principle of an act of
spiritual obedience is a divine Command inclining the will, and awing it to
performance. So far then as divine Law determines things, we are bound to
observe them from the dictates of the natural Law.

The fourth Hypothesis: In things which are determined both. 5.
by the Law of Nature, and divine positive Laws, as to the substance and
morality of them, but not determined as to all circumstances belonging to them;
it is in the power of Lawful authority in the Church of God to determine them,
so far as they judge them tend to the promoting the performance of them in due
manner. So that not only matters wholly left at liberty as to the substance of
them are subject to humane Laws and Constitutions, but even things commanded in
the divine Law, in reference to the manner of performance, if undetermined by
the same Law, which enforce the duty. Thus the setting apart some time for Gods
Worship, is a dictate of the natural Law: that the first day of the week be
that time, is determined under the Gospel; but in what places, at what hours,
in what order, decency and solemnity this Worship shall be then performed, are
circumstances not determined in Scripture, but only by general Rules; as to
these then so they be done in conformity to those Rules, they are subject to
humane positive determinations. But this is not an hypothesis in the Age we
live in to be taken for granted without proving it: some denying the Magistrate
any power at all in matters of Religion; others granting a defensive,
protective power of that Religion which is professed according to the Laws of
Christ, but denying any determining power in the Magistrate concerning things
left undetermined by the Scripture. This Hypothesis then has landed me into a
Field of Controversy, wherein I shall not so much strive to make my way
through any opposite party, as endeavor to beget a right understanding between
the adverse parties, in order to a mutual compliance; which I shall the rather
do, because if any Controversy has been an increaser and fomenter of
heart-burnings and divisions among us, it has been about the determination of
indifferent things. And, which seems strange, the things men can least bear
with one another in, are matters of liberty: and those things men have divided
most upon, have been matters of uniformity, and wherein they have differed
most, have been pretended things of Indifferency. In order then to laying a
foundation for peace and union. I shall calmly debate what power the Magistrate
has in matters of Religion, and how far that power does extend in determining
things left undetermined by the Word. For the clear understanding the first of
these, we shall make our passage open to it by the laying down several
necess^ry distinctions about it, the want of considering which has been the
ground of the great confusion in the handling this Controversy. First then, we
must distinguish between a power respecting Religion in its self, and a power
concerning Religion as it is the public owned and professed Religion of a
Nation. For although the Magistrate has no proper power over Religion in its
self, either taking it abstractly for the Rule of Worship, or concretely for
the internal acts of Worship; for he can neither add to that Rule nor dissolve
the obligation of it; nor yet can he force the consciences of men, (the chief
seat of Religion) it being both contrary to the nature of Religion its self,
which is a matter of the greatest freedom and internal liberty, and it being
quite out of the reach of the Magistrates Laws, which respect only external
actions as their proper object; for the obligation of any Law can extend no
further then the jurisdiction and authority of the Legislator, which among men
is only to the outward actions. But then, if we consider Religion as it is
publicly owned and professed by a Nation, the supreme Magistrate is bound by
virtue of his office and authority, not only to defend and protect it, but to
restrain men from acting any thing publicly tending to the subversion of it,
So that the plea for liberty of conscience, as it tends to restrain the
Magistrates power, i^ both irrational and impertinent; because liberty of
conscience is the liberty of men's judgments, which the Magistrate cannot
deprive them of. For men may hold what opinions they will in their minds, the
Law takes no cognizance of them: but it is the liberty of practice and venting
and broaching those opinions which the Magistrates power extends to the
restraint of. And he that has the care of the public good, may give liberty
to, and restrain liberty from men, as they act in order to the promoting of
that good; And as a liberty of all opinions tends manifestly to the subverting
a Nations peace, and to the embroyling it into continual confusions, a
Magistrate cannot discharge his office unless he has power to restrain such a
liberty. Therefore we find plainly in Scripture that God imputes the increase
and impunity of Idolatry as well as other vices to the want of a lawful
Magistracy, Judges 17. 5, 6. where the account given of Micahs Idolatry was,
because there was no King in Israel; which implies it to be the care and duty
of Magistrates to punish and restrain whatever tends to the opposing and
subverting the true Religion. Besides, I cannot find any reason pleaded against
the Magistrates power now, which would not have held under David, Solomon, Asa,
Iehosophat, Hezekias, Josias, or other Kings of the Jews, who asserted the
public profession, to the extirpation to what opposed it. For the plea of
Conscience (taken for men's judgments going contrary to what is publicly owned
as Religion) it is indifferently calculated for all Meridians, and will serve
for a Religion of any elevation. Nay, stiff and contumacious Infidels or
Idolaters may plead as highly (though not so truly) as any, that it goes
against their judgments or their conscience to own that Religion which is
established by authority. If it be lawful then to restrain such
notwithstanding this pretense, why not others, whose doctrine and principles
the Magistrate judges to tend in their degree (though not so highly) to the
dishonouring God, and subverting the profession entertained in a Nation? For, a
man's own certainty and confidence that he is in the right, can have no
influence upon the Magistrate judging otherwise; only if it be true, it will
afford him the greater comfort and patience under his restraint; which was the
case of the primitive Christians under persecutions: The Magistrate then is
bound to defend, protect, and maintain the Religion he owns as true, and that
by virtue of his office, as he is Custos utriusque tabulae; The maintainer of
the honor of Gods Laws, which cannot be if he suffer those of the first Table
to be broken without any notice taken of them. Were it not for this power of
Magistrates under the Gospel, how could that promise be ever made good, that
Kings shall be nursing Fathers to the Church of God? unless Isa. 49. 23.
they mean such Nursing Fathers as Astyages was to Cyrus, or Amulius to Romulus
and Remus, who exposed their nurslings to the Fury of wild Beasts to be
devoured by them. For so must a Magistrate do the Church, unless he secure it
from the incursion of Heretics, and the inundation of Seducers. But so much
for that which is more largely asserted and proved by others. The Magistrate
then has power concerning Religion, as owned in a Nation.

Secondly, We must distinguish between an external and objective power, about
matters of Religion; and an internal formal power, which some call an
Imperative and Elicitive power, others a power of Order, and a power of
Jurisdiction, others potestas Ecclesiastica, and potestas circa Ecclesiastica,
or, in the old distinction of Constantine, (...), Eusebius. vit: Constant. l. 4.
c. 24.
a power of things within and without the Church; the sense of all is the same,
though the terms differ. The internal, formal, Elicitive power of Order,
concerning things in the Church, lies in authoritative exercise of the
Ministerial Function, in preaching the Word, and administration of Sacraments;
but the external, objective, Imperative power of Jurisdiction, concerning the
matters of the Church, lies in a due care and provision, for the defense,
protection, and propagation of Religion. The former is only proper to the
Ministry, the latter to the Supreme Magistracy: For, though the Magistrate has
so much power about Religion, yet he is not to usurp the Ministerial Function,
nor to do any proper acts belonging to it. To which the instance of Uzzias is
pertinently applied. But then this takes nothing off from the Magistrates
power; for it belongs not to the Magistrate imperata facere, but imperare
facienda, as Grotius truly observes, De Imp. sum* Potest. cap. 2. l. 1.
not to do the things commanded, but to command the things to be done. From
this distinction we may easily understand, and resolve that so much vexed and
intricate Question, concerning the mutual subordination of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical In Iud. c. 19.
power: For, as Peter Martyr well observes, these two powers are some ways
(...), are conversant several ways about the same thing; but the Functions of
both of them must be distinguished: For the Pastors of the Church are not to
administer Justice, but it is their duty to declare how Justice should be
rightly administered, without partiality, or oppression. So, on the other side,
the Magistrate must not preach the Gospel, nor administer Sacraments; but
however, must take care that these be duly done by those to whose Function it
belongs: But for a clearer making it appear, these things are to be considered;
both in a Magistrate, and Minister of the Gospel. In a Magistrate, the Power it
self, and the Person bearing that Power: The power it self of the Magistrate is
no ways subordinate to the Power of the Ministry: Indeed, if we consider both
Powers, in reference to their objects, and ends, there may be an inferiority of
Dignity, as Chamier calls Panstrat. Cath. Tom. 2. l 15. cap. 6.
it, in the civil power to the other, considered abstractly; but considering it
concretely, as lodged in the persons, there is an inferiority of Subjection in
the Ecclesiastical to the Civil. But still the person of the Magistrate, though
he is not subject to the power of the Ministers, yet both as a Christian, and
as a Magistrate, he is subject to the Word of God, and is to be guided by that
in the Administration of his Function. So on the other side, in a Minister of
the Gospel, there are these things considerable; the Object of his Function,
the Function its self, the Liberty of exercising it, and the Person who does
exercise it. As for the Object of this Function, the Word and Sacraments, these
are not subject to the Civil Power, being settled by a Law of Christ; but then
for the Function its self, that may be considered, either in the Derivation of
it, or in the Administration of it. As for the derivation of the power and
authority of the Function, that is from Christ, who has settled and provided by
Law, that there shall be such a standing Function to the end of the world, with
such authority belonging to it: But for the Administration of the Function, two
things belong to the Magistrate: First, to provide and take care for due
administration of it; an^ to see that the Ministers preach the true Doctrine,
though he cannot lawfully forbid the true Doctrine to be taught; and that they
duly administer the Sacraments, though he cannot command them to administer
them otherwise then Christ has delivered them down to us: This for due
Administration. Secondly, in case of maladministration of his Function, or
scandal rendering him unfit for it, it is in the Magistrates power, if not
formally to depose, yet to deprive them of the liberty of ever exercising their
Function within his Dominions; as Solom^n did Abiathar, and Justinian
Sylverius, as Constantius did Vigilius: For the liberty of exercise of the
Function is in the Magistrates power, though a right to exercise it be derived
from the same power from which the Authority belonging to the Function was
conveyed. And then lastly, as to the persons exercising this Function, it is
evident, As they are members of a Civil Society as well as others, so they are
subject to the same Civil Laws as others are. Which as it is expressly affirmed
by Chrysostom, on Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers;
that is, says he, (...), Be he an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, In loc. To. 3.
Ed. Ae^on. p. 189. Ed. 1607.
Priest, Monk, be he who he will: So it is fully, largely, irrefragably proved
by our Writers against the Papists; especially by the learned Is. Casaubon in
his piece de liberate Ecclesiastica. So then we see what a fair, amicable, and
mutual aspect these two powers have one upon another, when rightly understood,
being far from clashing one with the other; either by a subjection of the Civil
Power to the Ecclesiastical, or the Civil powers swallowing up and devouring
the peculiarity of the Ministerial Function. And upon these grounds, I suppose,
Beza and Erastus may, as to this, shake hands; So that the Magistrate do not
usurp the Ministerial Function, De Episcop. Constable. Magn.
which Videlius calls Papatus politicus; nor the Ministers subject the Civil
power to them, which is Papatus Ecclesiasticus.

Thirdly, we distinguish between an absolute Architectonical 7.
and Nomothetical Power, independent upon any other Law, and a Legislative
Power, absolute as to persons, but regulated by a Higher Law. The former we
attribute to none but God; the latter belongs to a Supreme Magistrate, in
reference to things belonging to his power, either in Church or Commonwealth.
By an Architectonical, Nomothetical Power, we mean that power which is
distinguished from that which is properly called Political. The former lies in
the making Laws Aristot. Ethic. lib. 6. c. 6.
for the good of the Commonwealth; the latter in a due execution and
administration of those Laws for the Common Good. This we have asserted to the
Magistrate already: We now come to assert the other; where we shall first set
down the bounds of this power, and then see to whom it belongs. First, then we
say not, that the Magistrate has a power to revoke, rep^al, or alter any
Divine positive Law; which we have already shown. Secondly, we say not, that
the Magistrate by his own will may constitute what new Laws he please for the
Worship of God. This was the fault of Jeroboam who made Israel to sin, and
therefore by the Rule of Reason must be supposed to sin more himself: So
likewise Ahab, Ahaz, and others. Religion is a thing settled by a Divine Law;
and as it is taken for the Doctrine and Worship of God, so it is contained in
the Word of God, and must be fetched wholly from thence. But then thirdly, The
Magistrate by his power, may make that which is a Divine Law already, become
the Law of the Land. Thus Religion may be incorporated among our Laws, and the
Bible become our Magna Charta. So the first Law in the Codex Theod. is about
the believing the Trinity, and many others about Religion are inserted into it.
Now as to these things clearly revealed in the Word of God, and withal
commanded by the Civil Magistrate, although the primary obligation to the doing
them, is from the former determination by a Divine Law; yet the Sanction of
them by the Civil Magistrate, may cause a further obligation upon Conscience
then was before, and may add punishments and rewards not expressed before. For
although when two Laws are contrary the one to the other, the obligation to the
Higher Law takes away the obligation to the other; yet when they are of the
same Nature, or subordinate one to the other, there may a New Obligation arise
from the same Law, enacted by a New Authority. As the Commands of the Decalogue
brought a New Obligation upon the Consciences of the Jews, though the things
contained in them, were commanded before in the Law of Nature: And as a Vow
made by a man, adds a new ^ye to his Conscience, when the matter of his Vow is
the same with what the Word of God commands; and renewing our Covenant with God
after Baptism, renews our Obligation: So when the Faith of the Gospel becomes
the Law of a Nation, men are bound by a double Cord of duty to entertain and
profess that Faith. Fourthly, in matters undetermined by the Word, concerning
the External Polity of the Church of God, the Magistrate has the power of
determining things, so they be agreeable to the Word of God. This last Clause
is that which binds the Magistrates power, that it is not absolutely
Architectonicall, because all his Laws must be regulated by the general rules
of the Divine Law- But though it be not as to Laws, yet I say it is as to
persons; that is, that no other persons have any power to make Laws, binding
men to obedience, but only the civil Magistrate. This is another part of the
Controversy between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, about the power of
determining matters belonging to the Churches Government: But there is here no
such breach between those two, but what may be made up with a distinction or
two* We distinguish then between a power declarative, of the obligation of
former Laws; and a power authoritative, determining a New Obligation; between
the office of counselling and advising what is fit to be done, and a power
determining what shall be done; between the Magistrates duty of consulting, in
order to the doing it, and his deriving his authority for the doing it. These
things premised, I say: First, that the power of declaring the obligation of
former Laws, and of consulting and advising the Magistrate for settling of New
Laws, for the Policy of the Church, belongs to the Pastors and Governors of
the Church of God. This belongs to them, as they are commanded to teach what
Christ has commanded Matthew. 28. 18.
them; but no authority thereby given to make new Laws to bind the Church; but
rather a tying them up to the commands of Christ already laid down in his Word.
For a power to bind men's consciences to their determinations; lodged in the
Officers of the Church, must be derived either from a Law of God giving them
this right, or else only from the consent of parties. For any Law of God, there
is none Heb. 13. 17.
produced with any probability of reason, but that, Obey those that are over
you in the Lord. But that implies no more then submitting to the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Gospel, and to those whom Christ has constituted as Pastors
of his Church, wherein the Law of Christ does require obedience to them, that
is, in looking upon them, and owning them in their relation to them as Pastors.
But that gives them no authority to make any new Laws or Constitutions, binding
men's consciences any more then a Command from the Supreme authority that
inferior Magistrates should be obeyed, does imply any power in them to make
new Laws to bind them. But thus far I acknowledge a binding power in
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, though they neither bind by virtue of the matter,
nor of the authority commanding (there being no legislative power lodged in the
Church) yet in respect of the circumstances and the end, they should be obeyed,
unless I judge the thing unlawful that is commanded, rather then manifest
open contempt of the Pastors of the Church, or being a scandal V. Pe^^,
Ma^tyr. in 1 Samuel 14. Whitaker, ^ cont. 4. q. 7. Cameron. de Eccles. p. 386.
To. 1. op.
to others by it. But as to the other power, arising from mutual compact and
consent of Parties, I acknowledge a power to bind all included under that
compact, not by virtue of any Supreme binding power in them, but from the free
consent of the parties submitting; which is most agreeable to the Nature of
Church Power, being not coactive but directive; and such was the confederate
discipline of the primitive Church, before they had any Christian Magistrate:
And thence the decrees of Councils were called Canons, and not Laws. Secondly,
Though it be the Magistrates duty to consult with the Pastors of the Church, to
know what is most agreeable to the Word of God, for the settlement of the
Church; yet the Magistrate does not derive his authority in commanding things
from their sentence, decree, and judgment; but does by virtue of his own power
cause the obligation of men to what is so determined, by his own enacting what
shall be done in the Church. The great use of Synods, and Assemblies of Pastors
of Churches, is to be as the Council of the Church unto the King, in matters
belonging to the Church, as the Parliament is for matters of civil concernment.
And as the King, for the settling civil Laws, does take advice of such persons
who are most versed in matters of Law; so by proportion of reason, in matters
concerning the Church, they are the fittest Council, who have been the most
versed in matters immediately belonging to the Church: In the management of
which affairs, as much, if not more prudence, experience, judgment,
moderation, is requisite, as in the greatest affairs of State. For we have
found by doleful experience, that if a fire once catch the Church, and Aarons
Bells ring backward, what a Combustion the whole State is suddenly put into,
and how hardly the Churches Instruments for quenching such fires, lachrymae and
preces Ecclesiae, do attain their end. The least peg served up too high in the
Church soon causes a great deal of discord in the State, and quickly puts men's
spirits out of Tune. Whereas many irregularities may happen in the State, and
men live in quietness and peace. But if Pha^tons d^ive the Chariot of the Sun,
the World will be soon on fire. I mean such in the Church whose brains like the
Unicorns run out into the length of the Horn* Such who have more fury then
zeal, and yet more zeal then knowledge or Moderation. Persons therefore whose
calling, ^temper, office, and experience, has best acquainted them with the
State-actions* Policy of the primitive Church, and the incomparable Prudence
and Moderation then Used, are fittest to debate, consult, deliberate, and
determine about the safest expedients for repairing breaches in a divided,
broken, distracted Church. But yet, I say, when such men thus assembled have
gravely and maturely advised and deliberated what is best and fitted to te
done* the force, strength, and obligation of the things so determined does
depend upon the power and authority of the Civil Magistrate: for taking the
Church as incorporated into the civil Lib. 2. c. Parmen.
state, as Ecclesia est in republica, non respublica in Ecclesia, according to
that known speech of Optatus Milivetanus, so, though the object of these
constitutions, and the persons determining them, and the matter of them be
Ecclesiastical, yet the force and ground of the obligation of them is wholly
civil. So Peter Martyr expressly; Nam, quod ad potestatem ^a 1 Samuel 8. Loc.
Com. Class. 4. c. 5^* sect. 11.
Ecclesiasticam attinet, satis est civilis Magistratus: is enim ^urare debet ut
omnes officium faciant. (But for the judgment of the reformed Divines about
this, see Vedelius de Episcopatis Constant. M -- and Officium Magistratus
Christiani, annexed to Grotius de Imper. etc.) I therefore proceed to lay down
the reason of it. First, That whereby we are bound either to obedience, or
penalty upon disobedience, is the ground of the obligation; but it is upon the
account of the Magistrates power that we are either bound to obedience, or to
submit to penalties upon disobedience. For it is upon the account of our
general obligation to the Magistrate, that we are bound to obey any particular
Laws or Constitutions: Because it is not the particular determinations made by
the civil Magistrate, which do immediately bind Conscience, but the general Law
of Scripture requires it as a duty from us, to obey the Magistrate in all
things lawful. Obedience to the Magistrate is due immediately from Conscience;
but obedience to the Laws of the Magistrate comes not directly from Conscience
but by virtue of the general obligation. And therefore disobedience to the
Magistrates Laws is an immediate sin against Conscience, because it is against
the general obligation; but obedience to particular Laws arises not
immediately from the obligation of Conscience to them in particular, but to the
Magistrate in general. So that in things left lawful and undetermined by the
Word, where there arises no obligation from the matter, it must arise from our
subjection and relation to the Magistrate; and what is the ground of obedience,
is the cause of the obligation. Secondly, He has only the power of obligations
who has the power of making Sanctions to those Laws. By Sanctions, I mean
here, in the sense of the civil Law, eas legum parts, quibus poenas
constituimus adversus eos qui contra leges fecerint; those parts of the Law
which determine the punishments of the violaters of it. Now it is evident that
he only has power to oblige who has power Papin. l. 41 D. de poenis Hot^oman.
Com. v. juris v: sanct. Cicero ad Ar^ic. l. 3. ep. 23.
to punish upon disobedience. And it is as evident, that none has power to
punish but the civil Magistrate; I speak of legal penalties which are annexed
to such Laws as concern the Church. Now there being no coercive or coactive
power belonging to the Church as such, all the force of such Laws as respect
the outward Polity of the Church, must be derived from the civil Magistrate.
Thirdly, He who can null and declare all other obligations void, done without
his power, has the only power to oblige. For whatsoever destroys a former
obligation, must of necessity imply a power to oblige, because I am bound to
obey him in the abstaining from that I was formerly obliged to: But this power
belongs to the Magistrate. For suppose, in some indifferent Rites and
Ceremonies, the Church representative, that is, the Governors of it pro
tempore, do prescribe them to be observed by all, the Supreme power f^rbids the
doing of those things, if this does not null the former supposed obligation, I
must inevitably run upon these absurdities. First, that there are two supreme
powers in a Nation at the same time. Secondly, that a man may lie under two
different Obligations as to the same thing; he is bound to do it by one power,
and not to do it by the other. Thirdly, the same action may be a duty and a
sin; a duty in obeying the one power, a sin in disobeying the other. Therefore
there can be but one power to oblige, which is that of the Supreme Magistrate.

Having thus far asserted the Magistrates due power and. 8.
Authority, as to matters of Religion; we proceed to examine the extent of this
power, in determining things left at liberty by the Word of God, in order to
the Peace and Government of the Church. For our clear and distinct proceeding,
I shall ascend by these three steps: First, to show that there are some things
left undetermined by the Word. Secondly, that these things are capable of
positive Determinations and Restraint. Thirdly, that there are some bounds and
limits to be observed in the stating and determining these things. First, That
there are some things left undetermined by the Word: By Determining here, I do
not mean determining whether things be lawful or no; for so there is no Rit^ or
Ceremony whatsoever, but is determined by the Scripture in that sense, or may
be gathered from the application of particular actions, to the general Rules of
Scripture: but by Determining, I mean, whether all things concerning the
Churches Polity and Order be determined as Duties or no: viz. that this we are
bound to observe, and the other not. As for instance, what time, manner,
method, gesture, habit, be used in preaching the Word; whether Baptism must be
by dipping or sprinkling; at what day, time, place, the Child shall be
baptized, and other things of a like Nature with these. Those who assert any of
these as duties, must produce necessarily the Command making them to be so: For
Duty and Command have a necessary respect and relation to one another. If no
Command be brought, it necessarily follows, that they are left at liberty. So
as to the Lords Supper Calvin says, whether the Communicants take the Bread
themselves, or receive it being given them; whether they should Institut. l. 4.
cap. 17. s. 43. and cap. 15. s. 19.
give the Cup into the hands of the Deacon, or to their next Neighbor; whether
the Bread be leavened or not, the Wine red or white, nihil refert, it matters
not; Haec indifferentia sunt and in Ecclesiae liberate posita; they are
matters of indifferency, and are left to the Churches liberty. But this matter
of Indifferency is not yet so clear as it is generally thought to be; we shall
therefore bare the ground a little by some necessary distinctions to see where
the root of indifferency lies: Which we shall the rather do, because it is
strongly asserted by an Honorable person, that there is no Indifferency in the
things themselves, which are still either unlawful or necessary, (if lawful at
this time, in these circumstances) but all indifferency lies in the darkness
and shortness of our understandings, which may Nature of Episc. chap. 5.
make some things seem so to us. But that Honorable person clearly runs upon a
double mistake. First, that Indifferency is a medium participationis of both
extremes, and not only negationis, viz. that, as intermediate colors partake
both of black and white, and yet are neither; so in morality, between good and
bad, there is an intermediate entity, which is neither, but indifferent to
either: Whereas the Nature of Indifferency lies not in any thing intermediate
between good and bad, but in some thing undetermined by Divine Laws, as to the
necessity of it; so that if we speak as to the extremes of it, it is something
lying between a necessary duty, and an intrinsecal evil. The other mistake, is,
that throughout that Discourse he takes Indifferency as Circumstantiated in
Individual actions, and as the morality of the action is determined by its
Circumstances; whereas the proper notion of Indifferency lies in the Nature of
the action, considered in its self abstractly; and so these things are employed
in an indifferent action. First, absolute undetermination; as to the general
nature of the act by a Divine Law, that God has left it free for men to do it
or no. Secondly, that one part has not more propension to the Rule then the
other; for if the doing of it comes nearer to the rule then the omission; or on
the contrary, this action is not wholly indifferent. Thirdly, that neither part
has any repugnancy to the Rule; for that which has so, is so far from being
indifferent, that it becomes unlawful: So that an indifferent action is therein
like the Iron accosted by two Loadstones on either side of equal virtue, and so
hovers in medio, inclining to neither; but, supposing any degree of virtue
added to the one above the other, it then inclines toward it: or as the
Magnetical Needle about the Azores, keeps its self directly parallel to the
Axis of the world without variation, because it is supposed then to be at an
equal distance from the two Great Magnets, the Continents of Europe and
America: But no sooner is it removed from thence, but it has its variations.
So indifferency, taken in specie, as to the Nature of the act, inclines neither
way; but supposing it lie under Positive Determinations, either by Laws or
Circumstances, it then necessarily inclines either to the Nature of Good or
E^il.

Neither yet are we come to a full understanding of the Nature of indifferent
actions; we must therefore distinguish between indifferency, as to goodness,
necessitating an action to be done; and as to goodness, necessary to an action
to make it good: For there is one kind of goodness propter quam fit actio, in
order to which the action must necessarily be done; and there is another kind
of goodness sine qua non been fit actio, necessary to make an action good when
it is done. As following after peace has such a goodness in it, as
necessitates the action, and makes it a necessary duty: but handling a
particular Controversy is such an action, as a man may let alone without sin
in his course of studies; yet when he does it, there is a goodness necessary to
make his doing it a good action, viz. his referring his study of it to a right
end, for the obtaining of truth and peace. This latter goodness is twofold,
either bonitas directionis, as some call it, which is, referring the action to
its true end; in reference to which, the great Controversy among the
Schoolmen, is about the indifferency of particular actions, viz. Whether a
particular direction of a man's intention to the ultimate end, be not so
necessary to particular actions, as that, without that, the action is of
necessity evil, and with it good; or whether without that an V. Forbes. Iren.
lib. 1. cap. 13.
action may be indifferent to good or evil, which is the state of the Question
between Thomas and Scotus, Bonaventure and Durandus; but we assert the
necessity of at least an habitual direction, to make the action in individuo
good, and yet the act in its self may notwithstanding be indifferent, even in
individuo, as there is no antecedent necessity lying upon men's Consciences for
the doing of it; because men may omit it, and break no Law of God. Besides
this, to make an action good, there is necessary a bonitas Originis, or rather
Principii, ^^ good Principle, out of which the action must flow; which must be
that Faith, which whatsoever is not of, is sin; as the Apostle tells us. Which
we must not so understand, as though in Rom 14. 23.
every action a man goes about, he must have a full persuasion that it is a
necessary duty he goes about; but in many actions that Faith is sufficient,
whereby he is persuaded upon good ground, that the thing he goes about is
lawful; although he may as lawfully omit that action; and do either another, or
the contrary to it. There may be then the necessity of some things in an action
when it is done to make it good, and yet the action its self be no ways
necessary, but indifferent, and a matter of Liberty. This may be easily
understood by what is usually said of Gods particular Actions, that God is free
in himself either to do or not to do that action (as suppose the Creation of
the World) but when he does it, he must necessarily do it with that goodness,
holiness, and wisdom, which is suitable to his Nature: So may many actions of
men be in themselves indifferent, and yet there must be a concomitant necessity
of good intention and Principle to make the action good. But this concomitant
necessity does not destroy the Radical Indifferency of the action it self; it
is only an antecedent necessity from the obligation of the Law, is that which
destroys indifferency. So likewise it is as to evil; there is such an evil in
an action, which not only spoils the action, but hinders the person from the
liberty of doing it, that is, in all such actions as are intrinsecally evil;
and there is such a kind of evil in actions, which though it spoils the
goodness of the action, yet keeps not from performance; which is such as
arises from the manner of performance, as praying in hypocrisy, etc. doing a
thing lawful with a scrupulous or erring Conscience. We see then what good and
evil is consistent with indifferency in actions, and what is not. And that the
Nature of Actions, even in individuo, may be indifferent, when as to their
Circumstances they may be necessarily determined to be either good or evil. As
Marrying, or not Marrying, as to the Law of God, is left at liberty, not making
it in its self a necessary duty, one way or other; but, supposing particular
Circumstances make it necessary, pro hic and nunc, yet the Nature of it remains
indifferent st^ll; and supposing Marriage, it is necessary it should be in the
Lord, and yet it is not necessary to make choice of this person rather then of
that, so that not only the absolute indifferency of the action is consistent
with this concomitant necessity, but the full liberty, both of contradiction,
and contrariety. Again, we must distinguish between an Indifferency, as to its
Nature, and Indifferency, as to its use and end; or between an indifferency as
to a Law, and indifferency as to order and peace: Here I say, that in things
wholly indifferent in both respects, that is, in a thing neither commanded nor
forbidden by God, nor that has any apparent respect to the Peace and Order of
the Church of God, there can be no rational account given, why the Nature of
such indifferencies should be altered by any Humane Laws and Constitutions. But
matters that are only indifferent as to a Command, but are much conducing to
the Peace and Order of a Church, such things as these, are the proper matter of
Humane Constitutions concerning the Churches Polity: Or rather, to keep to the
words of the Hypothesis it self, where any things are determined in general by
the Word of God, but left at Liberty, as to manner and Circumstances, it is in
the power of Lawful Authority in the Church of God to determine such things, as
far as they tend to the promoting the good of the Church.

And so I rise to the second step, which is, That matters of. 9.
this Nature may be determined and restrained. Or, that there is no necessity,
that all matters of Liberty should remain in their primary indifferency. This I
know is asserted by some of great Note and Learning; that in things which God
has left to our Christian Liberty, man may not restrain us of it, by
subjecting those things to Positive Laws; but I come to examine, with what
strength of reason this is said, that so we may see, whether men may not yield
in some lawful things to a restraint of their Christian Liberty, in order to
the Peace of the Church of God: Which I now prove by these Arguments. First,
What may be lawfully done when it is commanded, may be so far lawfully
commanded, as it is a thing in it self lawful; but matters of Christian Liberty
may be lawfully done when they are commanded to be done, though it were lawful
not to do them before that Command. The truth of the Proposition appears,
because Lawful Authority may command any thing that may be lawfully done.
Because nothing can exempt from obedience to a lawful Magistrate, but the
unlawfulness of the thing commanded; and therefore nothing can debar the
Magistrate from commanding these things; for nothing can hinder him from
Commanding, but what may hinder the Subject from Obedience. I grant in many
cases it may be lawful to obey, when it is very inconvenient for the Magistrate
to command: but inconveniency and unlawfulness are two things; nay, and in some
cases a man may lawfully obey when he is unlawfully commanded; but then the
matter of the Command it self is unlawful. As in executing an unjust Sentence,
granting that a Princes Servants may lawfully do it, especially when they know
it not; yet in that case, the ground of their lawful obedience, is the ground
of the Magistrates lawful Command, which is the supposed Justice of the
Execution. But that which makes the Magistrates Command unlawful, is the
intrinsecal evil of the thing its self. So for unlawful Wars, though the
Subjects may lawfully obey, yet the Prince sins in commanding, not but that he
has right to command so far as they are bound to obey, which is only in things
lawful: but that which in this case alters the matter, is, the Princes knowing
his cause to be unjust. So that however the Proposition holds in things not
manifestly unjust. But however this be, it is hereby granted, that the things
may be lawfully done, when they are restrained by the Magistrates Command: and
by that it appears, that liberty may be restrained, else it could not be lawful
to act under that restraint, not as it respects the things themselves, but
under that formality, as they are the restraint of that which ought to be left
free. The Restraint however then is lawful, as to the persons acting under
Authority, who are the Subjects of this liberty, though it were granted
unlawful as to the authority doing it. Which former is sufficient for my
purpose, viz. that Christian liberty, as to the subjects of it, may be lawfully
restrained. Secondly, A lesser duty cease to be a duty, when it hinders from
the performance of greater; but the preserving Christian liberty is a lesser
duty, which may hinder the peace of the Church, which is a greater; therefore
in that case it may be restrained. The Major is granted by Divines and
Casuists; when duties stand in competition, the lesser cease to bind, as is
evident, in that God will have mercy rather then sacrifice. Positives yield to
morals and naturals. Thence the obligation of an Oath cease, when it hinders
from a natural duty; as the Corban among the Jews Great. de jure belli and
pacis. lib. 2. cap 13. sect. 7.
from relief of Parents. And therefore Grotius says, that an Oath taken
concerning a thing lawful, if it does hinder majus bonum morale, the
obligation of that Oath cease. Now that preserving-liberty is a lesser duty
then the looking after the peace of the Church, is evident, because the one is
only a matter of liberty, and left undetermined by the Word; and the other a
matter of necessity, and absolutely, and expressly required of all, as a duty as
much as possibly lies in them to endeavor after. Thirdly, If an occasional
offense of weaker Brethren may be a ground for restraining Christian liberty;
then much more may commands from lawful authority do it; but the offense of
weaker Brethren may restrain Christian liberty, as to the exercise of it, as
appears by the Apostles discourse, Romans 14. 21. The reason of the consequence
lies here, that a case of mere offense, which is here pleaded toward weak
Brethren, cannot have that obligation upon Conscience, which a known duty of
obeying lawful Authority, in things in themselves lawful, has* Nay further,
insisting only on the Law of scandal, I would fain know, whether it be a
greater offense and scandal to Christians consciences, to infringe the lawful
authority of the Magistrate, and to deny obedience to his commands, in things
undetermined by the Law of God; or else to offend the Consciences, that is, go
against the judgments of some well-meaning, but less-knowing Christians. Or
thus, whether in the matter of scandal, it be a greater offense to go against
the judgments of the weaker and more ignorant, or the more knowing and able;
when the one have only their own weak apprehension to byasse them, the other
are backed by and grounded upon an established Law. And whether it be not a
greater scandal to Religion to disobey a Christian Magistrate, then it is to
offend some private Christians. Let these things be examined, and then let us
see whether the argument will not hold a majori; if the Law of scandal as to
private Christians may restrain liberty, then may a command from the Magistrate
do it. Fourthly, I argue thus, If the nature of Christian-liberty may be
preserved under the restraint of the exercise of it, then it is not against the
nature of Christian-liberty to have the exercise restrained; but the former is
true; and therefore the latter. Now that the nature of Christian-liberty may be
preserved under the restraint of its exercise, I prove by these arguments.

First, Because the nature of Christian-liberty is founded. 10.
upon the freedom of judgment, and not the freedom of practice. The case is
the same in moral and natural liberty as in Christian. Now we say truly, that
the radical liberty of the soul is preserved, though it be determined to a
particular action. For the liberty of the Will lying in the power of
determining its self either way (as it is generally thought) the actual
determination of the Will does not take away the internal power in the soul;
and in that respect there may be a potentia faciendi where there is not
possibilit as effectus, a power of doing when there is no possibility the thing
should be done, when the event is otherwise determined by a divine decree, as
in breaking the bones of Christ upon the Cross. So it is in reference to
Christian liberty; though the exercise of it be restrained, yet the liberty
remains: because Christian-liberty lies in the freedom of judgment; that is,
in judging those things to be free which are so; so that if any thing that is
in its self free, be done by a man with an opinion of the necessity of doing it
antecedent to the Law commanding it, or without any Law prescribing it, thereby
his Christian liberty is destroyed; but if it be done with an opinion of the
freedom and indifferency of the thing it self, but only with a consequential
necessity of doing it, supposing the Magistrates command, he retains the power
of his Christian-liberty still, though under the restraint of the exercise of
it. And therefore it would be well observed, that the opinion of the necessity
of any one thing undetermined by Scripture, destroys Christian-liberty more
then a Magistrates command does. And by this reason, they that hold any one
posture at receiving the Lords Supper necessary (as sitting, leaning, kneeling)
do all equally destroy their own Christian-liberty as to these things which are
undetermined by the Word. So a Magistrate when commanding matters of
Christian-liberty, if in the preface to the Law he declares the thing necessary
to be done in its self, and therefore he commands it, he takes away as much as
in him lies our Christianliberty. And in that case we ought to hold to that
excellent Rule of the Apostle, Stand fast therefore in the liberty Gal. 5. 1.
wherewith Christ has set you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke
of bondage. But if the Magistrate declare the things to be in themselves
indifferent, but only upon some prudent considerations for peace and order, he
requires persons to observe them, though this brings a necessity of obedience
to us, yet it takes not away our Christian-liberty. For an antecedent D.
Sanderson. de oblig. cons. prael. 6. s. 5.
necessity expressed in the Law (as a learned and excellent Casuist of our own
observes) does not necessarily require the assent of the practical judgment to
it; which takes away our liberty of judgment, or our judgment of the liberty
of the things; but a consequentiall necessity upon a command supposed, does
only imply an act of the Will, whereby the freedom of judgment and conscience
remaining, it is inclined to obedience to the commands of a superior Law. Now
that liberty does lie in the freedom of Judgment, and not in the freedom of
Practice, and so is consistent with the restraint of the exercise of it;
appears both in the former case of scandal, and in the actions of the Apostles
and primitive Christians complying with the Jews in matters of liberty; yea
which is a great deal more, in such ceremonies of which the Apostle expressly
says, that if they observed them, Christ Gal. 5. 2.
would profit them Nothing; and yet we find Paul himself circumcising Timothy
because of the Jews. Certainly then Acts 16. 3.
however these ceremonies are supposed to be not only mortuae but mortiferae
now the Gospel was preached, and the Law of Christian-liberty promulged; yet
Paul did not look upon it, as the taking away his liberty, at any time when it
would prevent scandal among the Jews, and tend to the furtherance of the
Gospel, to use any of them. It was therefore the opinion of the necessity of
them was it which destroyed Christian-liberty; and therefore it is observable,
that where the opinion of the necessity of observing the Judaicall Rites and
Ceremonies was entertained, the Apostle sets himself with his whole strength to
oppose them, as he does Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. Coloss. 2. 16, 18, 19.
in his Epistles to the Galatians and Colossians. Whom yet we find in other
places, and to other Churches, not leavened with this doctrine of the necessity
of Judaicall Rites, very ready to comply with weak Brethren, as in his Epistles
to the Romans and Corinthians. From which we plainly see, that it was Romans 14.
3, 6, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 24.
not the bare doing of the things, but the doing them with an opinion of the
necessity of them, is that which infringeth Christian-liberty, and not the
determination of one part above the other by the Supreme Magistrate, when it is
declared not to be for any opinion of the things themselves as necessary, but
to be only in order to the Churches peace and unity. Secondly, It appears that
Liberty is consistent with the restraint of the exercise of it; because the
very power of restraining the exercise of it, does suppose it to be a matter of
liberty, and that both antecedently and consequentially to that restraint.
Antecedently, so it is apparent to be a matter of liberty, else it was not
capable of being restrained: Consequentially, in that the ground of observance
of those things when restrained, is not any necessity of the matter, or the
things themselves; but only the necessity of obeying the Magistrate in things
lawful and undertermin'd by the Word: which leads to another argument.
Thirdly, Men's obligation to these things, as to the ground of it, being only in
point of contempt and scandal, argues that the things are matter of liberty
still. I grant the Magistrates authority is the ground of obedience, but the
ground of the Magistrates command is only in point of contempt and scandal,
and for preserving order in the Church: For I have already showed it to be
unlawful, either to command or obey; in reference to these things, from any
opinion of the necessity of them, and therefore the only ground of observing
them, is to show that we are not guilty of contempt of the power commanding
them, nor of scandal to others that are offended at our not observing them.
Tota igitur religio est in fugiendo scandalo and vitando Controv. 4. quaest. 7.
cap. 2.
contemptu, says our learned Whitaker: All our ground of obedience is the
avoiding scandal and contempt of authority. To the same purpose Pet. Martyr,
speaking of the obligation of Ecclesiastical Laws: Non obstringunt si
removeatur In 1 Samuel 14.
contemptus and scandalum: So that non-observance of indifferent things
commanded, when there there is no apparent contempt or scandal, do not involve
a man in the guilt of sin: as suppose a Law made that all public prayer be
performed kneeling, if any thing lies in a man's way to hinder him from that
posture, in this case the man offends not; because there is no contempt or
scandal: So if a Law were made that all should receive the Lords Supper
fasting, if a man's health calls for somewhat to refresh him before, he sins not
in the breach of that Law. And therefore it is observable which Whitaker takes
notice of in the Canons of the Councils of the primitive Church, that though
they did determine many things belonging to the external Polity of the Church,
yet they observed this difference in their Censures or Anathema's; That in
matte^s of mere order and decency they never pronounced an Anathema, but with
the supposition of ^pp^rent contempt; and inserted, Si quis contra
praesumpserit, si quis contumaciter contra fecerit: but in matters of Doctrine
or Life, fully determined by the Law of God, they pronounced a simple Anathema,
without any such clause inserted. Now from this, we may take notice of a
difference between Laws concerning indifferencies in civil and Ecclesiastical
matters: That in civils the Laws bind to indifferencies without the case of
contempt or scandal, because in these the public good is aimed a^, of which
every private person is not fit to judge, and therefore it is our duty either
to obey or suffer; but in Ecclesiastical constitution, only peace and order is
that which is looked at, and therefore, Si nihil contra (...) feceris, non
teneris illis, is the rule here. If nothing tending to apparent disorder be
done, men break not those Laws: For the end and reason of a Law is the measure
of its obligation. Fourthly, Men's being left free to do the things forbidden,
either upon a repeal of the former Laws, or when a man is from under obligation
to that authority which commands them, argues them still to be matters of
liberty, and not matters of necessity. That Laws respecting indifferent things
may be repealed, I cannot imagine that any have so little reason as to deny,
upon a different state of affairs from what it was when they were first
enacted; or when they cannot attain the ends they are designed for, the peace
and order of the Church, but rather tend to imbroil it in trouble and
confusion: And that when men are from under the authority imposing them, men
are at their own liberty again, must necessarily be granted, because the ground
of restraint of that liberty was the authority they were under; and therefore
the cause being taken away, the effects follows. Therefore for men to do them
when authority does not impose them, must imply an opinion of the necessity of
the things themselves, which destroys Christianliberty. Aug. e^. 118. ad
Ianuar.
Whence* it was resolved by Augustine in the case of Rites, that every one
should observe those of that Church which he was in: which he says, he took
from Ambrose. His words are these, Nec disciplina ulla *in his melior gravi
prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat, quo agere viderit Ecclesiam, ad
quamcunque forte devenerit. Quod enim neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos
mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro little inter quos vivitur
societate servandum est. He tells us, He knew no better course for a serious
prudent Christian to take in matters of Rites and Customs, then to follow the
Churches example where he is: for whatsoever is observed neither against faith
or manners, is a matter in its self indifferent, and to be observed according
to the custom of those he lives among. And after, acquaints us that his Mother
coming to Milan after him, and finding the Church there not observe the
Saturday-fast as the Church of Rome did, was much perplexed and troubled in her
mind at it (as tender, but weak consciences are apt to be troubled at any thing
contrary to their own practice); she for her own satisfaction sends her Son to
Ambrose, then Bishop of the Church there, who told him he would give him no
other answer but what he did himself, and if he knew any thing better, he would
do it. Augustine presently expects a command from him to leave off Saturday
fasts: instead of that; Ambrose tells him; Cum Romam veni^, jejuno sabbato; cum
hic sum, non jejuno. Sic etiam tu ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem
serva; si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, n^^ quenquam* tibi. When I am at Rome
I fast on the Sabbath, but at Milan I do not. So thou likewise, when thou
come to any Church, observe its custom, if thou would neither be an
offense to them, nor have them be so to thee. A rare and excellent example of
the piety, prudence, and moderation of the primitive Church: far from rigid
imposing indifferent customs on the one side; from contumacy in opposing mere
indifferencies on the other. Which judgment of Ambrose, Augustine says, he
always looked on as often as he thought of it, tanquam caeleste oraculum, as
an Oracle come from Heaven; and concludes with this excellent Speech, which if
ever God intend peace to his Church, he will make men understand: Sensi enim
saepe dolens and gemens, mult as infirmorum perturbationes fieri per quorundam
fr^trum contentiosam obstinationem, and superstitiosam timiditatem; qui in
rebus hujusmodi, quae neque Scripturae sanctae autoritate, neque universal is
Ecclesiae traditione, neque vitae corrigendae utilitate ad certum possunt
terminum pervenire (perducere*) tantum quia subest qualiscunque ratiocinatio
cogitantis, aut quia in sua patria sic ipse consuevit, aut quia ibi vidis ubi
peregrinationem suam quo remotiorem a suis, eo doctiorem factam putat, tam
litigiosas excitant qu estiones ut nisi quod ipsi faciunt, nihil rectum
existiment. I have often, says he, found it to my grief and sorrow, that the
troubles of weaker Christian^, have been caused by the contentious obstinacy of
some on the one hand, and the superstitious fearfulness of others on the
other* in things which are neither determined by the authority of the holy
Scriptures, nor by the custom of the universal Church, nor yet by any
usefulness of the things themselves, in order to the making men's lives better;
only for some petty reason in a man's own mind, or because it has been the
custom of their Countrey^ or because they have found in those Churches, which
they have thought to be the nearer to truth, the further they have been from
home, they are continually raising such quarrels and contentions, that they
think nothing is right and lawful, but what they do themselves. Had that
blessed Saint lived in our age, he could not have uttered any thing more true,
nor more pertinent to our present state: which methinks admirers of antiquity
should embrace for its authority, and others for the great truth and reason of
it. Did we but set up those three things as Judges between us in our matters of
Ceremonies, The Authority of the Scriptures, the practice of the Primitive
Universal Church, and the tendency of them to the reforming men's lives; how
soon might we shake hands, and our controversies be at an end! But as long as
contentious obstinacy remains on one side, and a superstitious fearfulness on
the other (for superstition may as well lie in the imagined necessity of
avoiding things indifferent, as in the necessary observing of things which are
not) we may find our storms increase, but we are not like to see any Land of
Peace. How happy might we be, did men but once understand that it was their
duty to mind the things of peace! How little of that Dust might still and quiet
our most contentious frayes!

Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescunt.
But in order to so happy and desirable an Union and accommodation, I shall
not need to plead much from the nature of the things we differ about; the
lowness of them in comparison of the great things we are agreed in, the
fewness of them in comparison of the multitude of those weighty things we
ought most to look after, the benefits of union, the miseries of division,
which if our lamentable experience does not tell us of, yet our Consciences
may; I shall crave leave humbly to present to serious consideration some
proposalls for accommodation: which is an attempt which nothing but an earnest
desire of peace can justify, and I hope that will: which here falls in ^s the
third step of my designed Discourse, about the bounds to be set in the
restraint of Christian-liberty,

The first is, that nothing be imposed as necessary, but. 11.
what is clearly revealed in the Word of God. This there is the highest reason
and equity for, since none can have command immediately over Conscience, but
God himself, and what ever is imposed as necessary, does immediately bind
Conscience. And whatever binds men's conscience^ with an opinion of the
necessity of it, does immediately destroy that Christian-liberty which men are
necessarily bound to stand fast in, and not be entangled with any yoke of
bondage. Not only the yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, but whatever yoke pincheth,
Gal. 5. 2.
and galls as that did, with an opinion of the necessity of doing the thing
commanded by any but the Word of God. Which the Apostle calls Dogmatizing,
Coloss. 2. 20 and v. 16. Let no man judge you in meat and drink; ne Praepositi
quidem vestri, says Whitaker; these impositions he calls v. 22. the
commandments and doctrines of men. And such he calls a Snare, 1 Corinthians. 7. 23.
which was the making an indifferent thing, as Coelibate, necessary. Laqueus est
quicquid praecipitur ut necessarium, quod liberum esse debet. So that though
obedience be necessary to ind^fferent things when commanded; yet it must
always be liber a conscientia, quoad res ipsas legum, no obligation to be laid
upon Conscience to look upon the things as necessary.

Secondly, That nothing be required, nor determined, but what is sufficiently
known to be indifferent in its own nature. The former proposal was in
reference to the manner of imposing, this respects the nature of the things
themselves. The only difficulty here is, How a thing may be sufficiently known
to be indifferent; because one man looks upon that as indifferent, which
another does not. The most equal way to decide this Controversy, is to make
choice of such Judges as are not interested in the quarrel: And those are the
sense of the Primitive Church in the first 4 Centuries, who were best able to
judge whether they looked upon themselves as bound by any command of Scripture
or no; and withal the Judgment of the Reformed Churches: So that what shall
be made appear to be left indifferent, by both the sense of the Primitive
Church, and the Churches of the Reformation, may be a matter determinable by
Law, and which all may be required to conform in obedience to.

Thirdly, That whatever is thus determined be in order only to a due
performance of what is in general required in the Word of God, and not to be
looked on as any part of Divine Worship or Service. This is that which gives
the greatest occasion of offense to men's Consciences, when any thing is either
required; or if not, yet generally used and looked on as a necessary part or
concomitant of Gods Worship, so that without it the Worship is deemed
imperfect. And there is great difference to be made between things indifferent
in their own nature, and indifferent as to their use and practice. And when the
generality of those who use them do not use them as Indifferent, but as
necessary things, it ought to be considered, whether in this case such a use be
allowable till men be better informed of the nature of the things they do. As
in the case of the Papists about Image Worship, their Divines say, that the
Images are only as high teners of Devotion, but the worship is fixed on God;
but we find, it is quite otherwise in the general pract^se of people who look
at nothing beyond the Image. So it may be, bating the degrees of the offense,
when matters of indifferency in themselves are by the generality of people not
looked on as such, but used as a necessary part of divine Service. And it would
be considered whether such an abuse of matters supposed indifferent being
known, it be not scandalum datum to continue their use without an effectual
remedy for the abuse of them.

Fourthly, That no Sanctions be made, nor mulcts or penalties be inflicted on
such who only dissent from the use of some things whose lawfulness they at
present scruple, till sufficient time and means be used for their information
of the nature and indifferency of the things, that it may be seen whether it be
out of wilful contempt and obstinacy of spirit, or only weakness of
Conscience and dissatisfaction concerning the things themselves that they
disobey. And if it be made evident to be out of contempt, that only such
penalties be inflicted as answers to the nature of the offense; I am sure it is
contrary to the Primitive practice, and the Moderation then used, to suspend or
deprive men of their ministerial function for not conforming in Habits,
Gestures, or the like. Concerning Habits, Walafridus Strabo expressly tells us,
There was no De rebus Eccles. cap. 14.
distinction of Habits used in the Church in the Primitive times. Vestes
sacerdotales per incrementa ad eum* qui nunc habetur, aucta sunt ornatum. Nam
primis temporibus communi vestimento induti, Missas agebant, sicut and hactenus
quidam Orientalium facere perhibentur. And therefore the Concilium Gangrense
condemned Eustathius Sebastenus for making a necessity of diversity of habits
among Christians for their profession, (...), Can. 14 in Cod. Can. in V^n.
Eccles. can. 71. Salm. Not. in Tertul. de Pall o. 76. Ant. Cercocthius in
Salmas. p. 11. Eus^b. lib. 6. cap. 20.
it being acknowledged both by Salma sius and his great Adversary Petavius,
that in the Primitive times the Presbyters did not necessarily wear any
distinct habit from the people, although the former endeavors to prove, that
commonly they did in Tertullians time; but yet that not all the Presbyters, nor
they only did use a distinct habit, viz. the Pallium Philosophicum, but all the
Christians who did (...), as Socrates said of Sylvanus Rhet^r, all that were
(...) among them, stricter Professors of Christianity; among which most of the
Presbyters were. And Origin in Eusebius expressly speaks of Heraclas a Presbyter
of Alexandria, that for a long time (...), he used only the common Garment
belonging to Christians, and put on the Pallium Philosophicum for the study of
the Grecian Learning, after that Christianity began to lose in height what it
got in breadth: instead of the former simplicity of their garments as well as
manners, and their (...) came in the use of the byrri, Penulae Dalmaticae, and
so daily increasing, as Strabo says. I say not this in the least to condemn
any distinction of habit for mere decency and order, but to show it was not the
custom of the Primitive times to impose any necessity of these things upon
men, nor to censure them for bare disuse of them. He must be a great stranger
in the Primitive Church that takes not notice of the great diversity of Rites
and Customs used in particular Churches, without any censuring those who
differed from them; or if any by inconsiderate zeal did proceed so far, how ill
it was resented by other Christians. As Victor's excommunicating the
Quarto-decimani, for which he Eusebius. l. 5. So^rat. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23.
is so sharply reproved by Irenaeus, who tells him, that the Primitive
Christians who differed in such things, did not use to abstain from one
another communion for them; (...); as Socrates tells us; Those that agree in
the same Faith, may differ among themselves in their Rites and Customs, as he
largely shows in a whole Chapter to that purpose; as, in the observation of
Easter, some on the fourteenth day of April, others only upon the Lords Day,
but some of the more Eastern Churches differed from both. In their Fasts, some
observed Lent but for one day, some two, some three weeks, some six weeks,
other seven: and in their Fasts some abstained from all kind of living
creatures, others only from fresh, eating fish, and others ^oul: others
abstained from fruit and eggs: others eat only dry bread, others not that
neither. And so for their public Assemblies; Some communicating every Lords
day, others not. The Church of Alexandria had its public Meetings and Sermons
every fourth day of the week, as he tells us. The same Church made the public
Readers and Interpreters, either of the Catechumeni, or of the baptized,
differing therein from all other Churches. Several Customs were used about
Digamy, and the Marriage of Ministers in several Churches. So about the time of
Baptism, some having only one set time in the year for it, as at Easter in
T^h^ssaly; others two, Easter, and Dominica in Albis, so called from the white
garments of the baptized. Some Churches in Baptism used three dippings, others
only one. Great differences about the time of their being Catechumeni, in some
places longer, in others a shorter time. So about the Excommunicate, and
degrees of penance (as they are called) their Flentes, audientes, succumbentes,
consistentes, the Communio peregrinae, the several Chrismes in vertice, in
pectore, in some places at Baptism, in some after. So for placing the Altar (as
they Metaphorically called the Communion Table) it was not constantly toward
the East; for Socrates affirms, that Cap. 23. l. 5.
in the great Church at Antiochia, it stood to the West end of the Church; and
therefore it had (...), a different Eccles. hist. l. 10. cap. 4.
positure from other Churches. And Eusebius says out of the Panegyrist, that
in the New Church built by Paulinus at Tire, the Altar stood (...) in the
middle. These things may suffice for a taste at present, of which more largely
elsewhere (God willing) in due time. We see the Primitive Christians did not
make so much of any Uniformity in Rites and Ceremonies; nay I scarce think any
Churches in the Primitive times can be produced, that did exactly in all things
observe the same customs: Which might especially be an argument of moderation
in all, as to these things, but especially in pretended Admirers of the
Primitive Church. I conclude with a known saying of Austin, Indignum est ut
propter ea quae nos Deo neque digniores, neque indigniores possunt facere, alii
alios vel condemnemus, vel judicemus. It is an unworthy thing for Christians to
condemn and judge one another for those things which do not further us at all
in our way to Heaven.

Lastly, That Religion be not clogged with Ceremonies. They when multiplied too
much, if lawful, yet strangely eat out the heart, heat, life, vigor of
Christianity. Christian Religion is a plain, simple, easy thing. Christ
commends his Yoke to us by the easiness of it, and his burden by the lightness
of it. It was an excellent testimony which Amm. Marcellinus a Heathen gave to
Christianity, when speaking of Constantius, Religionem Christianam rem
absolutam and simplicem a^^li superstitione confudit, That he spoiled the
beauty of Christianity, by musting it up in Superstitious observations. And it
is as true which Erasmus said in answer Eras. in declar. ad Cens. Paris. art.
14.
to the Sorbonists, Quo magis in corporalibus ceremoniis haeremus, hoc magis
vergimus ad Iudaismum. External Ceremonies teach us backward, and bring us back
from Christ to Moses; which is fully proved as to the Papists, by our Learned
Rainolds and Mr. De Croy: But we need no further Evidence Cons. with Heart.
chap. 8. Div. 8. De Croy 3. Conformity, part. 2
then a bare perusal of Durandus Mimatensis his Rationale Divinorum officiorum.
By Ceremonies, I mean not here matters of mere decency and order, for order
sake; which doubtless are lawful (if the measure of that order be not the pomp
and glory of the world, but the gravity, composure, sobriety, which becomes
Christianity) for when the Jews were the most strictly tied up by a Ceremonial
Law, they did introduce many things upon the account of order and decency: as
the building Synagogues, their hours of Prayer, their Parashoth and Haphtaroth,
the Sections of the Law and Prophets; the continuation of the Passover fourteen
days by Hezekiah, when the Law required but seven: the Feast of Purim by Esther
and Mordecai: the Fasts of the 4. 5. 10 month under the Captivity; the Feast
of Dedication by the Maccabees. The use of Baptism in Proselyting, washing the
feet before the Passover, imitated and practiced by our Savior: So that
matters of Order and Decency are allowable and fitting; but Ceremonies properly
taken for actions significative, and therefore appointed because significative,
their lawfulness may with better ground be scrupled. Or, taking Ceremony, in
Bellarmines description of it, to be actio externa, quae De Sacram. lib. 2. c.
29.
non aliunde est bona and laudabilis, nisi quia fit ad Deum colendum: And in
this sense it will be hard to manifest any thing to be lawful, but what is
founded upon a Divine Precept; if it be not a matter of Order, and so no
Ceremony. And as for significative Ceremonies, concerning matter of Doctrine or
Fact, a learned Dr. puts us in mind of the old Rule, Dr. Ham. of Superstition,
sect. 39.
that they be paucae and salubres, and the fewer, the more wholesome: for, as
he observes from Aristotle in Insect^le Animals, the want of blood was the
cause they run out into so many legs. I shall conclude this whole Discourse
with another Speech of S. Austin, very pertinen^ to our present purpose. Ep.
119. ad Ian. cap. 19.
Omnia itaque talia quae neque sanctarum Scripturarum autoritatibus
continentur, nec in Con^iliis Episcoporum statuta inveniuntur, nec consuetudine
universae Ecclesiae roborata sunt, sed diversorum locorum diversis moribus
innumerabiliter variantur, ita ut vix aut omnino nunquam inveniri possint
causae, quas in eis instituendis secuti sunt homines, ubi facultas tribuitur,
sine ulla dubitatione resecanda existimo. All such things which are neither
founded on the authority of the Scriptures, nor determined by General Councils
(for so he must be understood) nor practiced by the Catholic Church, but vary
according to the customs of places, of which no rational account can be given;
^ssoon as men have power to do it, I judge them to be cut off without any
scruple: For which definitive sentence of his, he gives this most sufficient
Reason; Quamvis enim neque hoc inveniri possit, quomodo contra fidem sint;
ipsam tamen religionem (quam paucissimis and manifestissimis celebrationem
sacramentis misericordia. Dei liberam esse voluit) servilibus oneribus premunt,
ut tolerabilior sit conditio. Iudaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus libertatis non
agnoverint, legalibus tamen sarcinis, non humanis praesumptionibus
subjiciuntur: For although we cannot positively say, how such things as these
do manifestly i^^pugn our Faith, yet in that they load our Religion with such
servile burdens, (which the mercy of God has left free for all other
observations, but the celebration of some few and most clear Sacraments) that
they make our condition worse then that of the Jews; for they, although
strangers to Gospel Liberty, had no burdens charged upon them by the
Constitutions of men, but only by the Law and Commands of God: Which Sentence
and Reason of his, I leave to the most Impartial Judgment of every true sober*
minded Christian. And thus I am at last come through this Field of Thorns and
Thistles; I hope now to find my way more plain and easy. So much for the
fourth Hypothesis. The two next will be discharged with lesser trouble.

Hypoth. 5. What is left undetermined both by Divine Positive. 12.
Laws, and by Principles deduced from the Natural Law, if it be determined by
lawful Authority in the Church of God, does bind the Conscience of those who
are subject to that Authority, to Obedience to those Determinations. I here
suppose, that the matter of the Law be something not predetermined* either by
the Law of Nature, or Divine Positive Law^; for against either of these no
Humane Law can bind the Conscience: For if there be any moral evil in the thing
Commanded, we are bound to obey God rather than men; in which case, we do not
formally and directly disobey the Magistrate, but we choose to obey God before
him. And, as we have already observed, a former Obligation from God or Nature
destroys a latter; because God has a greater Power and Authority over men's
Consciences, then any Humane Authority can have: And my Obedience to the
Magistrate being founded upon a Divine Law, it must be supposed my duty to obey
him first, by virtue of whose Authority I obey another; then, the other whom I
obey, because the former has commanded me. If I am bound to obey an Inferior
Magistrate, because the Supreme requires it; if the Inferior command me any
thing contrary to the Will and Law of the Supreme, I am not bound to obey him
in it, because both the derives his Power of Commanding, and I my Obligation to
Obedience, from the Authority of the Supreme, which must be supposed to do
nothing against it self. So it is between God and the Supreme Magistrate; By
him Kings reign; God when he gives them a Legislative Power, does it cumulative
non privative, not so as to deprive himself of it, nor his own Laws of a
binding force against his; So that no Law of a Magistrate can in reason bind
against a Positive Law of God. But what is enacted by a Lawful Magistrate, in
things left undetermined by Gods Laws, does even by virtue of them bind men to
Obedience, which require Subjection to the Romans 13. 5.
Higher Powers for Conscience sake. So that whatsoever is left indifferent,
Obedience to the Magistrate in things indifferent is not: And if we are not
bound to obey in things undetermined by the Word, I would ^ain know wherein we
are bound to obey them? or what distinct Power of Obligation belongs to the
Authority the Magistrate has over men? For all other things we are bound to
already by former Laws; therefore either there must be a distinct Authority
without Power to oblige, or else we are effectually bound to whatsoever the
Magistrate does determine in lawful things. And if it be so in general, it must
be so as to all particulars contained in that general, and so in reference to
matters of the Church, unless we suppose all things concerning it to be already
determined in Scripture: which is the thing in Question, and shall be largely
discussed in its due place.

Sixthly. Hypoth. 6. Things undetermined by the Divine. 13.
Law, Natural and Positive, and actually determined by lawful Authority, are
not thereby made unalterable, but may be revoked, limited, and changed,
according to the different ages, tempers, inclinations of men, by the same
Power which did determine them. All Humane Constitutions are reversible by the
same Power which made them: For the Obligation of them, not arising from the
matter of them, but from the Authority of the Person binding, are consequently
alterable, as shall be judged by that Power most suitable to the ends of its
first promulgation. Things may so much alter, and times change, that what was a
likely way to keep men in Unity and Obedience at one time, may only inrage them
at another: The same Physic which may at one time cure, may at another only
inrage the distemper more. As therefore the Skill of a Physician lies most in
the application of Physic to the several tempers of his Patients: So a wise
Magistrate, who is, as Nicias said in Thucydides, (...), The Physician to cure
the Hist. lib. 6. Spartian. in Adriano.
distempers of the body Politic; and considers (as Spartian tells us Adrian
used to say in the Senate, Ita se Rempub. gesturum, ut sciret populirem esse,
non propriam) that the Peoples Interest is the main care of the Prince, will
see a necessity of altering, reforming, varying many Humane Constitutions,
according as they shall tend most to the ends of Government, either in Church
or State. Thence it is said of the several Laws of Nature, Divine, and Humane;
that Lex naturae potest poni, sed non deponi, Lex divina nec poni nec deponi,
Lex humana and poni and deponi. The Law of Nature may be laid down (as in case
of Marriage with Sisters in the beginning of the world) but not laid aside; the
Law of God can neither be laid down, nor laid aside; but Humane Laws, both may
be laid down, and laid aside. Indeed, the Laws of the Medes and Persians, are
said to be unalterable, but (if it be meant in the sense it is commonly Dan. 6.
8.
understood in) yet that very Law which made them unalterable (for they were
not so of their own Nature) was an alterable Law, and so was whatever did
depend upon it. I conclude then, whatever is the subject of Humane
Determination, may lawfully be altered and changed, according to the wisdom
and prudence of those in whose hands the care of the Public is. Thus then, as
those things which are either of Natural or Christian Liberty, are subjected to
Humane Laws and restraints, so those Laws are not irreversible; but if the
Fences be thrown down by the same Authority which set them up, whatever was
thereby enclosed, returns to the Community of Natural Right again. So much for
these Hypotheses, which I have been the longer in explaining and establishing,
because of the great influence they may have upon our present Peace, and the
near concernment they have to this whole Discourse, the whole Fabric of which
is erected upon these Foundations.

CHAP. III.
How far Church Government is founded upon the Law of Nature. Two things in it
founded thereon. 1. That there must be a Society of men for the Worship of God.
2. That this Society be governed in the most convenient manner. A Society for
Worship manifested, Genesis 4. 26. considered. The Sons of God, and the Sons of
Men, who? Societies for Worship among Heathens evidenced by three things. 1.
Solemnity of Sacrifices; Sacrificing how far Natural; the antiquity of the
Feast of first fruits, largely discovered. 2. The Original of Festivals for the
Honor of their Deities. 3. The Secrecy and Solemnity of their Mysteries. This
further proved from Man's Sociable Nature, the improvement of it by Religion,
the Honor redounding to God by such a Society for his Worship.

HAving now laid our Foundation, we proceed to raise. 1.
a superstructure upon it. And we now come closely to inquire how far
Government in the Church is founded upon an unalterable Divine Right? That we
have found to be built upon a double Foundation, the Dictates of the Law of
Nature, and Divine Positive Laws. We shall impartially inquire into both of
them, and see how far Church Government is settled upon either of these two. I
begin then with the Law of Nature. Two general things, I conceive, are of an
unalterable Divine Right in reference to this: First, That there be a Society
and joining together of men for the Worship of God: Secondly, That this Society
be governed, preserved, and maintained in a most convenient manner. First, That
there must be a Society of men joining together for the Worship of God. For the
Dictate of Nature being common to all, that God must be served, Nature requires
some kind of Mutual Society for the joint performance of their common duties.
An Evidence of which Dictate of Nature, appears in the first mention we find of
any Public Society; so that a Society for Religious Worship was as ancient as
the first Civil Societies we have any Records of. Nay, the very first Public
Society we read of, was gathered upon this account. For we read in the early
days of the world that the Charter for this Society was soon made use of, Genesis
4. 26. In the days of Enosh men began to call upon the Name of the Lord. Now
Enosh was Seths Son, whom Adam had given to him in the place of Abel; and
as soon as the number of men did increase, that men grew into Societies, they
then had their public societies for Gods Worship. For we cannot understand
that place absolutely, as though God had not been called on before, but now he
was called on more signally and solemnly; when men were increased that they
began to imbody themselves into Societies, Coepit congregare populum ad
tractandum simul Dei cu^tum, says Pererius. Tunc coeptum est populariter coli
Deus, Mariana. Invocare, i. e. palam colere, Emanuel Sa. relating all to the
public societies being then gathered for the worship of the true God. From
which time in all probability did commence that Title of those who joined in
those societies that they were called (...) The sons of God which we read of
soon after. Genesis 6. 2. as they are distinguished from the (...) sons of men:
which Titles as I am far from understanding in the sense of the Fathers taking
them for the Angels, (which in likelihood they took from that supposititious
piece going under the name of Enochs Prophecy); so I cannot understand them as
commonly they are taken, for mere discretive Titles of the posterity of Seth
and Cain; as though all that came of Seth were the Sons of God, and all of Cain
were the sons of men. For as there certainly were many bad of Seths Posterity,
because the flood destroyed all of them, Noah only and his Family excepted: so
there might be some good of the other, vice being no more enta^ld then virtue
is; and Jewels may sometimes lie in a heap of dung: and so this name of the
sons of God might be appropriated to those who joined themselves to those
Societies for Gods worship. In which sense some understand the very words of
the Text (...) then began men to be called by the Not in Maim. de Idol c. 1.
sect. 1.
Name of the Lord: which I suppose is the sense of Aquila who thus renders the
place, (...), although it be brought by Dionys. Vossius to justify the former
interpretation of the words. This sense, if the construction of the words will
bear it (which Drusius questions, but others V Chamier: Panstrat. Cath. To. 2.
l. 9. c. 9. s. 9. Amam. An. tib. Bibl. l. 2. p. 228.
are much for it, and Theodoret, The French, and Piscator so render it) seems
most genuine and natural; and not at all impugning what I have formerly
gathered from the words, but implying it; For this distinction of Names and
Titles did argue a distinction of Societies among them. I am not ignorant that
the generality of Jewish Expositors and many of their followers, do carry the
sense of the words quite another way, from the ambiguity of the signification
of (...) which V. Seldom. de Diis Syris Proleg. p. 28. and 44. Abodazara cap. 1.
may be interpreted as well to Profane as Begin, and so they read it, tunc
prophanatum est ad invocandum nomen Domini, Then men profaned the Name of the
Lord: And accordingly Maimonides begins Idolatry (...) from the days of Enosh.
But the words will scarce bear this construction, as Vossius upon him observes;
and besides, there is no mention at all of the name of any false Gods, but only
of the true one. So much then for the first original of this Society for
Religion, which we see began as soon as there was matter for a Society to be
gathered up of. Some indeed derive this Society Birtram. de Polit. Iud. cap. 2.
p. 12. Franz. Sch. Sacrif. disp. 2. Coppenb. Sch. Sacrif. p. 14.
a great deal higher; and because we read that Abel and Cain brought their
sacrifices, they thence infer, that it was to Adam, who was the public Priest
then, and performed all public duties of worship in his own person, and so was
indeed Occumenicall Bishop of the whole world, and yet had but four persons or
but few more for his Charge. Such a Diocese we might be content to allow him
that pleads for the same Office, and derives his Title somewhat higher then
Adam; For Pope Boniface the eighth proved there must be but one chief Priest,
and so one Pope, because it is said, Genesis 1. 1. That God created the world in
Principio, not in Principiis; mark the number; therefore there must be but one
beginning, and so one Bishop, and not many. What excellent Disputants an
Infallible* Chair makes men! Much good may his argument do him.

As a further evidence, How much Nature dictates that such a Society there
should be for Divine Worship, we shall. 2.
inquire into the practice of men in their dispersion after the Flood. And what
we find unanimously continued among them, under such gross Idolatry as they
were given to, and which did arise not from their Idolatry as such, but from
the general nature of it as a kind of Worship, we have reason to look upon as
one of those planks which has escaped the common shipwreck of humane nature by
the fall of man. And so though that argument from the general consent of
Nations owning a way of Worship though a false one, in order to the proving the
existence of God be slighted by some, yet Socinus prael. cap. 2.
there is this double evidence in it to prove it, more then is generally taken
notice of, and beyond the bare testimony its self given by that consent. First,
From men's being so easily imposed upon by false Religions, in that they are so
soon gulled into Idolatry; it argues there are some Jewels in the World, or
else men would never be deceived with counterfeits; It argues that a Child has
a Father, who is ready to call every one that comes to him, Father; So it
argues there is some natural instinct in men toward the Worship of God, when
men are so easily brought to worship other things instead of God. We see no
other creatures can be so imposed upon; we read of no Idolatry among the
Brutes, nor that the Bees though they have a King and honor him, did ever bow
their Knees to Baal, or worship the Hive instead of him. If men had no journeys
to go, others need not be sworn as the Athenians were, not to put them out of
their way. If there were no inclinableness to Religion, all cautions against
Idolatry were superfluous: there is then from men's proness to error, as to the
person and object of Worship, an evidence of natural (...), an instinct within
toward the act of Worship; And as when I see sheep flock together, even in
their wanderings, I may easily gather that though they are out of their proper
pastures, yet they are of a tame and sociable nature; So when we see Societies
for Worship were preserved among men after they were degenerated into Idolatry;
it is an evident argument that such associating together for the general
nature of the act, does flow from the nature of man. Secondly* All men's
agreeing in some kind of Worship, though differing as to the object and manner
of it, is an evidence it comes from Nature, because it plainly evinces it could
be nothing taken up out of design, received by custom, nor conveyed by
tradition, because even among those whose interests and designs have been
contrary to one another, and could have no mutual compacts to deceive their
people, have all agreed in this thing, though almost in all other things they
have strangely differed. All other Customs and Traditions, are either changed,
or lost among several Nations; as the rude barbarous Northern Nations, that in
their inrodes and incursions upon other places, have left in process of time,
almost all other customs but only their Religion behind them. This sticks
closer then Saladines black shirt, or the old Monks clothes, which they put
not off till they dyed, Nay even those Nations, who openly, and as by a Law,
violate the other received dictates of Nature, do yet maintain and hold up
this. Those that have had the least of commerce and converse with civilized
people, have yet had their societies for worship: And when they could find no
gods to worship, they would rather make then want them. The Egyptians would
rather spoil their Sallets then be without gods; and they that whipped their
gods, yet had them still. They who had no sense of another life, yet would pray
to their gods for the good things of this: and they that would not pray that
the gods would do them good, yet would that they might do them no hurt: So that
in the most prodigious Idolatry, we have an argument for Religion; and in the
strange diversities of the ways of worship, we have an evidence how natural a
society for worship is. This, to show the validity and force of the Argument
drawn from Consent of Nations, even in their Idolatry.

Three things I shall evidence these Societies for Worship 3.
among the Heathens by; the solemnity of their Sacrifices, their public
Festivals, and their secret Mysteries, all which were instituted peculiarly in
honor of their gods: It being necessary in such Societies for Worship to have
some particular Rites, whereby to testify the end of such Societies to be for
the honor of their Deity; and to distinguish those solemnities from all other.
First then for Sacrifices; Paulus Scrutin. Scrip. part. 2. did. 3. cap. 11.
Burgensis observing how this custom spread all the World over, concludes from
thence that it was natural to men. In qualibet aetate, and apud quaslibet
hominum nationes, semper fuit aliqua sacrificiorum oblatio. Quod autem est apud
omnes, natural est. Thus far I confess sacrificing natural, as it was a
solemn and sensible Rite of Worship; but if he meant by V. Porphyr. (...).
En^ytlop. ad ^ram Nonarii Terrig. c. 9. p. 96.
that, the destroying of some living creatures to be offered up to God, I both
deny the universal practice of it, and its being from the dictate of Nature:
and I rather believe with Fortunius Licetus, that it was continued down by
Tradition, from the sacrifices of Cain and Abel before the flood, or rather
from Noah's after; which might the easier be, because Nature dictating there
must be some way of worship, and it being very agreeable to Nature it should be
by sensible signs, all Nations having no other Rule to direct them, were
willing to observe that Rite and Custom in it, which was conveyed down to them
from their Progenitors; But let us see what reason Burgensis gives; Ratio
naturalis dictat, ut secundum naturalem inclinationem, homines ei quod est
supra omnes, subjectionem exhibeant, secundum modum homini convenientem. Qui
quidem modus est, ut sensibilibus signis utatur, ad exprimendum interiorem
conceptum, sicut ex sensibilibus cognitionem accipit invisibilium. Unde ex
naturali ratione procedit, quod homo sensibilibus signis utatur, offerens eas
Deo in signum subjectionis and honoris ad similitudinem eorum qui Dominis suis
aliquid offerunt in recognitionem Dominii. But all this will extend no further,
then that it is very agreeable to natural reason, that as man attains the
knowledge of invisible things by visible, so he should express his sense of
invisible things by some visible signs, thereby declaring subjection to God as
his Lord and Master; as Tenants express their Homage to their Lord by offering
something to them. And I withal acknowledge, that as to oblations without
blood, they seem indeed very natural: Whence we shall somewhat largely
discover the antiquity of the Feasts of first fruits, which were the clearest
acknowledgement of their dependence upon God, and receiving these things from
him. Aristotle tells us, (...). Nicomach. l. 8.
That the most ancient sacrifices and Assemblies appear to have been upon the
in-gathering of fruits, such as the sacrifices of first fruits to the gods
were. To the same purpose Porphyrius, De Abstin. lib. 2. s. 27.
(...). The first sacrifices were of first fruits. And Horace,

Agricolae prisci fortes, parvoque beati
Condita post frumenta, levantes tempore festo
Corpus, and ipsum animum spe finis dura ferentes, Ep. ad Aug.

Cum sociis operum and pueris and conjuge fida,
Tellurem porco, Sylvanum lacte piabant.
Although he be not so express for offering the very fruits of the earth; yet
it is evident from him, that their great festivals in honor of their gods;
were immediately after Harvest, and that they had great Assemblies for that
purpose, and did then solemnly sacrifice. And from these solemnities came the
original of Tragedies and Comedies, as Horace intimates, and is largely showed
by Isaac Casaubon in his Treatise de Satyrica Lib. 1. c. 1.
Poesi. But to fetch this yet a little higher, and so bring it downwards; The
first sacrifice we read of in Scripture, was this of the fruits of the earth
(unless the skins which Adam clothed himself with, were of the beasts
sacrificed, as some conjecture:) Cains sacrifice was (...) an oblation of the
Genesis 4. 2.
fruits of the earth: in all probability the first fruits, as Abel offered the
firstborn of the Cattle to the Lord: This seems to have been at some solemn
time of sacrificing, which is employed in (...) At the end of days. In process
of time we render it; but the Jews understand it at the end of the V.
Ainsworth, in loc.
year: Days in Scripture being often put for Years; which Interpretation if we
follow, we find a very early observation of the Anniversary Festival of
First Fruits; But however this be, we have by unquestionable tradition, that no
Festival was more anciently, nor more universally observed, then this of
offering the First fruits to God of their increase. The Jews were bound up so
strictly to it by their Law, Leviticus 23. 14. that they were to eat nothing of
their crop till the offering of first fruits was made. And Porphyrius tells us
out of Hermippus, De abstin. l. 4. s. 22.
that one of the Laws made for the Athenians by Triptolemus, was, (...), To
feast the gods with their fruits: Of which Xenocrates there gives a twofold
reason; sense of gratitude to the gods, and the easiness at all times to offer
up these; by which he supposed the custom would continue longer. Draco
afterward puts this among his (...), V. petit. ad Log, Act. p. 3.
his unalterable Laws, (...) To worship their gods with their first fruits.
Besides which, for other Greeks we have the testimony of Plutarch, (...).
Quaest. Grac. q. 6
The most of the Grecians, says he, in their most ancient sacrifices did use
barley, the first fruits being offered by the Citizens: and therefore the
Opuntii called their chief Priest (...), because he gathered in the
first fruits. The manner of offering the first fruits among them, was much of
the same nature with the Mincha among the Jews, which Levit. 3* 13.
was of fine flower mingled with oil for a burnt-offering to the Lord: The word
there used implies the bruising the ears of Corn in a Mortar, because they were
as yet moist, and could not be ground hard as Corn was. Whence, because it was
not all brought to flower, the Cake was called (...) and (...). It is called by
the Sept^agint (...). So I suppose it should be read, which in our great Bibles
is (...), and it is called by the Greeks (...), which word is frequently used
by Homer, and Apollonius Rhodius, whom I forbear to transcribe; it being so
obvious; which is expounded both by the excellent Scholiast on Apollonius, and
by Eustathius and the short Scholiast on Homer, to be (...). Iliad. (...) 449
A^g. 1. v. 409, etc*
Barley and Salt mixed together. To which among the Romans the Mola salsa
answered, of which Festus: Est far tostum and sale conspersum, as the Mincha
under the Law, was always salted with salt, Levit. 2. 13. This Mola salsa
among the Romans, had originally relation to the first fruits: For the custom
of offering up first fruits among them, was as ancient as their institution of
religious Rites; as Pliny fully Hist. Nature. lib. 18. c. 2.
informs us, Numa instituit Deos fruge colere, and mola salsa supplicare; atque
ut author est Hemina, far torrere: which likewise answers to the Jewish Mincha,
which was to be (...) tosta in igne, parched in the fire: For which purpose
Levit. 2. 14.
Numa instituted the Fornacalia, which were farris torrendi feriae, the feasts
of first fruits among them, the parching the Corn being in order thereto, For
as Pliny adds, ac ne ^egustabant novas fruges, aut vina antequam sacerdotes
primitias libassent: which may be exactly rendered in the very words of the Law,
Leviticus 23. 14. But though the Mola salsa came V. Saubertum de sacris. c. 19.
originally from hence, it afterward came to be used in most sacrifices,
thence the word immolare to sacrifice, again Parallel to the Mincha
accessorium, as some call it among the Jews, which was used in other
sacrifices; and was distinct from the Mincha per se, which of it self was an
oblation to the Lord. From this offering up bruised Corn, some derive the name
of Ceres from (...) which signifies as much, and was Vossius de 1 ^ol, l 2.
cap. 59.
required, Leviticus 2. 14. thence Ovid l. 8 Met. Primitias frugum Cereri, sua
vina ^yaeo. But besides Ceres, they offered their first fruits among the Greeks
to Hora, Diana, Apollo, Gr^c. Fer.
Vesta, as may be seen in Meursius in (...). Thus we see how these three
Nations did agree not only in the observation of the Feast of First Fruits, but
very much in the ceremonies of their offering too. Only this difference may be
observed between them, The Romans did mix their Mola salsa with water, the Jews
their Mincha with oil only; The Greeks did not bruise the Corn in their (...),
but only mixed salt with the grains of Corn. But the Jews and Romans both
brui^ed and parched it, before they offered it up for the first fruits. Thus
much to show the antiquity and observation of the offering up of the
first fruits among the most ancient and civilized Nations. Which though it may
seem a Digression, yet I hope not wholly unacceptable, it being likewise the
offering of my First Fruits, and therefore the more seasonable.

Proceed we now to other Festivall-solemnities to see what. 4.
evidences of a Society for worship we find in them. And for this, it is
apparent that the first original of Festivals among the Heathen was for the
honor of the Gods. Upon which account a grave and prudent Author accounts the
observation of some Festivalls natural; because Nature does dictate the
necessity of some Society for the worship of God. For thus Strabo (...). Geogr.
l. 10.
It was the custom of all Nations (who are comprehended under his words) to
have Festival days for the honor of their Gods, which Nature its self
dictates. Hence the Greeks, as Athenaeus observes, (...), used to say, that
their Gods begged them all their playdays. After telling us of the mirth and
jollity used after their sacrifices, Deipnosoph. lib. 9.
which was always the second course at these Festivalls, thence the Jews
called their High Festival days (...) good days, or days of Mirth. We read of
few Nations but had these Festival Solemnities for the honor of their Gods.
The Persians had theirs for their God Mithras: The Babylonians, Deipnos. l* 14.
cap. 10. V. Meursi^ Graec. Arist. Castellon. (...). Hospin. de Festis. M^^h
Benther de Fastis.
says Athenaeus out of Berosus, had their Feast Sacaea, which Casaubon would
have called Sesacaea, because Babylon in Scripture is called (...) Sesac, as
the Ludi Romani were from Rome. It is to no purpose to mention the Festivals
observed by the Greeks and Romans in honor of their Gods, being so many, that
whole books have been composed of them. That which I observe from hence, is,
that Societies for the Worship of God are Natural; because of their solemn
resting from their ordinary labor upon days appointed for the honor of their
Gods: Thereby showing, they looked upon those as peculiar days, and themselves
as peculiar Societies upon those days, from what they were at other times. One
thing more evidenceth this among them; their solemn and secret Mysteries, which
were Societies on purpose, as pretended, for this very end, in honor of their
Gods. Their (...), as they were wont to call them, preserved with the greatest
secrecy by the (...). Their great and lesser Eleusinian, Samothracian,
Cotyttian, Mithriacal Mysteries, to which none were admitted without passing
through many degrees, (...), before they came to be (...) perfectly initiated.
Wherein they were much imitated by the Christians Exercit. in Bar. 16. s. 42.
sed vide Gothofred. in Tim. 3. 16. S^lmas. in hist. Aug. p. 31. 33. Suidas inv.
Mithras. No^^us in Naz* S^clit. p. 132. M^^rsium in Eleusi^is.
in the Celebration of the Lords Supper, about the fourth or fifth Century, as
is largely showed by Casaubon in a most learned Diutriba on this Subject in his
Exercitations; to which I refer the Reader. We see what strict Rules they had
for Admission of any into these pretendedly Sacred, but truly most impious
Societies. In those of Mithras, as Suidas and Nonnus tell us, they passed
through eighty degrees, before they were thoroughly initiated, and seldom
escaped with life. However, we may gain from them this general notion, that
they looked on a peculiar distinct Society, as necessary for the worship and
honor of the Deity they served. Thus we see a posteriori how a distinct Society
for Gods Worship appears to be a Dictate of Nature.

We shall now see if we can evidence a priori, that it is a Dictate of Nature,
that there must be some Society for the Worship of God. Three things will make
that appear. First, The sociableness of Man's Nature. Man is (...), a Creature
that loves to herd it self with those of his own kind, (...). Aristol. Nicom.
l. 8. c. 1.
If a man had all other comforts of life, and wanted Society, he would not
think his life worth leading, as Aristotle observes, who further takes notice
of the sociableness of man's Nature, (...), from the general commendation that
is given to courteous and affable men. I deny not, but in the entering into a
Civil State or Society, either fear, or profit, might be a main inducement to
it; but though it be an inducement, yet there must be supposed an
inclinableness to a Society; or a Commonwealth might be as soon set up among
Tigers, as Men. So that they have very little ground of Reason, who from the
external inducements of fear, or profit, in entering into Civil Societies, do
conclude against the sociableness of Man's Nature. If then Man's Nature be
sociable in all other things, then Nature will tell men, they ought to be so in
things of common concernment to them all, and which is every ones work or duty,
as Religion is; if in other things men are sociable, much more in this: For
Secondly, Religion gives a great improvement to man's sociable Nature; and
therefore Plutarch well calls Religion (...). A Foundation that knits and
joints Societies Moral. advers. Colotem.
together. And thence wisely observes, that in the Constitution of Laws, (...):
the first and greatest thing to be looked at, is, the Religion established, or
the Opinions men entertain of the Gods. To which he subjoyns this excellent
reason, (...): That it is more impossible for a Commonwealth either to be
formed or subsist without Religion, then a City to si and without Foundations.
Thence, a prudent Statesman called Religion, Lord Bacon Essay of a King.
the best Reason of State. It appears then evidently both from reason and
experience, that Religion has a great influence upon the modelling and
ordering Civil Societies, whence, as the same Moralist observes, Lycurgus did,
as it were, consecrate the Lacedaemonians with Religious Rites, as Numa the
Romans, Ion the Athenians, and Deucalion the Hellens. Whence some half-witted
men (but I know not whether more defective in wit, or grace) have (observing
the great influence Religion has to keep men in order) been ready to look upon
it as only a Politic device, to awe men with greater ease. It is not here a
place largely to Examine and Refute this unworthy pretense. Only I adjure them
by their only Goddess, Reason, to tell me whence come men to be (...), as
Plutarch expresses it, To be so easily awed by the hopes and fears of another
life more then other creatures are? Why are they at all affected with the
discourse of them? Why cannot they shake off the thoughts of these things when
they please? Are not men hereby made the most miserable of creatures? For no
other creature can be persuaded that it shall ever quench its thirst in those
Rivers of pleasures, nor make its bed in everlasting flames. The beasts of
Sardinia that have their only refreshment by the Dew of Heaven, yet have never
any hopes to ^ome there. The Lion never keeps from his prey by the thoughts and
fears of a great Tribunal. But suppose only mankind of all creatures should be
liable to be thus imposed on, as is pretended: How comes it to pass that in no
age of the world this Imposture has not been discovered, confuted, and shaken
off by some people as wise as themselves? Or have there never been any such in
the world? But whence come some men then to be wiser then others? Whence come
some to know things which all the Reason in the World could never find out,
without Revelation? Whence comes a power to do any thing above the course of
Nature, if there be nothing but Nature? Or are all men deceived that believe
such things? If so, then there must be somewhat that must deceive men; men
would not deceive themselves, and they could not be so long imposed upon by
other men; there must be then some evil spirit must do it; and whence should
that come? from Nature too? but then whence comes Nature its self? from its
self too, or some thing 'else. Did it make it self, or was it made by a greater
Power then it? if it made its self, it must be and not be at the same time; it
must be as producing, and not be as produced by that Act. And what is become of
our Reason now? There must be then a Supreme, Eternal, Infinite Being, which
made the world and all in it; which has given Nature such a Touch of its own
immortality and dependence upon God, that Reason capable of Religion is the
most proper distinctive Character of man from all Inferior beings. And this
Touch and Sense being common to the whole Nature; they therefore incline more
to one another Society in the joint performance of the common Duties, due from
them to their Maker. And so Religion not only makes all other Bonds firm
(which without it are nothing, as Oaths, Covenants, Promises, and the like,
without which no civil Society can be upheld) but must of its self be supposed
especially to tie men in a nearer Society to one another* in reference to the
proper Acts belonging to its self. Thirdly, it appears from the greater honor
which redounds to God by a sociable way of Worship. Nature that dictates that
God should be worshipped, does likewise dictate that worship should be
performed in a way most for the honor and glory of God. Now this tends more to
promote Gods honor, when his service is owned a^ a public thing, and men do
openly declare and profess themselves his Subjects. If the honor of a King
lies in the publicly professed and avowed obedience of a multitude of
Subjects; it must proportionably promote and advance Gods honor more to have a
fixed, stated Worship, whereby men may in a Community and public Society
declare and manifest their homage and fealty to the supreme Governor of the
World. Thus then we see the light of Nature dictates there should be a society
and joining together of men for and in the Worship of God.

CHAP. IV.
The second thing the Law of Nature dictates, that this society be maintained
and governed in the most convenient manner. A further inquiry, what particular
Orders for Government in the Church come from the Law of Nature. Six laid down,
and evidenced to be from thence. First, a distinction of some persons, and
their superiority over others, both in power and order, cleared to be from the
Law of Nature. The power and application of the power distinguished; this
latter not from any Law of Nature binding, but permissive: therefore may be
restrained. Peoples right of chosing Pastors considered. Order distinguished
from the form and manner of Government: the former Natural, the other not. The
second is, that the persons employed in the Service of God, should have respect
answerable to their employment, which appears from their Relation to God as his
Servants; from the persons employed in this work before positive Laws. Masters
of Families the first Priests. The Priesthood of the first born before the Law
discussed: The Arguments for it answered. The Conjunction of Civil and Sacred
Authothority largely showed, among Egyptians, Grecians, Romans, and others. The
ground of Separation of them afterward, from Plutarch and others.

THe second thing which the Light of Nature dictates, in. 3.
reference to Church Government, is, That the Society in which men join for the
Worship of God, be preserved, mantained, and governed in the most convenient
manner. Nature, which requires Society, does require Government in that
Society, or else it is no Society. Now we shall inquire what particular Orders
for Government of this Society established for the Worship of God, do flow from
the light of Nature, which I conceive are these following.

First, To the maintaining of a Society, there i^ requisite a Distinction of
Persons, and a Superiority of Power and Order, in some over the other. If all
be Rulers, every man is sui juris, and so there can be no Society, or each man
must have power over the other, and that brings confusion. There must be some
then invested with Power and Authority over others, to rule them in such things
wherein they are to be subordinate to them; that is, in all things concerning
that Society they are entered into. Two things are employed in this: First
Power: Secondly Order. By Power, I mean a right to Govern; by Order, the
Superiority of some as Rulers, the Subordination of others as ruled. These two
are so necessary, that no Civil Society in the World can be without them: For
if there be no Power, how can men Rule? If no Order, how can men be ruled, or
be subject to others as their Governors? Here several things must be heedfully
distinguished. The Power from the Application of that Power, which we call the
Title to Government. The Order it self from the form or manner of Government.
Some of these I Assert as absolutely necessary to all Government of a Society,
and consequently of the Church, considered without positive Laws; but others to
be accidental, and therefore variable. I say then that there be a Governing
Power in the Church of God, is immutable, not only by Virtue of Gods own
Constitution, but as a necessary result from the dictate of Nature, supposing a
Society: But whether this Power must be derived by Succession, or by a free
Choice, is not at all determined by the Light of Nature; because it may be a
lawful Power, and derived either way: And the Law of Nature as binding, only
determines of necessaries. Now in Civil Government, we see that a lawful Title
is by Succession in some places, as by Election in other. So in the Church
under the Law, the Power went by lineal Descent, and yet a lawful Power: And on
the other side, none deny (setting aside positive Laws) but it might be as
lawful by choice and free Election. The main Reason of this is, that the Title
or Manner of conveying Authority to particular Persons, is no part of the
preceptive Obligatory Law of Nature, but only of the permissive; and
consequently is not immutable, but is subject to Divine or Humane positive
Determinations, and thereby made alterable* And supposing a Determination,
either by Scripture or lawful Authority, the exercise of that Natural Right is
so far restrained as to become sinful, according to the third Proposition under
the 2. Hypoth. and the 5. Hypoth. So that granting at present, that people have
the Right of choosing their own Pastors; this Right being only a part of the
Permissive Law of Nature, may be lawfully restrained and otherwise determined,
by those that have lawful authority over the people, as a Civil Society,
according to the 5. Hypoth. If it be pleaded that they have a right by divine
positive law, that law must be produced it being already proved, that no bare
Example, without a Declaration by God that such an Example binds, does
constitute a Divine Right which is unalterable. We say then, that the manner of
investing Church Governors in their Authority, is not Determined by the Law of
Nature; but that there should be a Power Governing, is (supposing a Society) of
the immutable Law of Nature, because it is that without which no Society can be
maintained. And this is one of those things which are of the Law of Nature, not
in an abs^lute state of Liberty; but supposing some Acts of Men which (once
supposed) become immutable, and indispensable. As supposing Propriety, every
Man is bound to abstain from what is in another Possession, without his
consent, by an immutable Law of Nature; which yet supposes some Act of Man,
viz. the voluntary introducing of Propriety by consent: So supposing a Society
in being, it is an immutable dictate of the Law of Nature, that a Power of
Government should be maintained and preserved in it.

So I say for the second thing, Order. This, as it implies the. 2.
Subordination of some in a Society to others as their Rulers, is immutable and
indispensable; but as to the Form whereby that Order should be preserved, that
is, whether the Government should be in the hands of one or more, is no wise
Determined by the Obligatory Law of Nature; because either of them may be
lawful and useful for the ends of Government, and so neither necessary by
that Law: For as to the Law of Nature, the Case is the same in Civil and
Religious Societies; Now who will say, that according to the Law of Nature, any
form of Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, is unlawful. These
things are then matters of Natural Liberty, and not of Natural necessity, and
therefore must be examined according to positive Determinations of Divine and
Humane Laws, where we shall speak of it. This then is clear as to our purpose,
That a power in the Church must be constantly upheld and preserved, fitly
qualified for the ends of Government, is an immutable Law; so that this power
be lodged in some particular Persons to act as Governors, and so distinct from
others, as subordinate to them; but whether the Power of Government come from
People by Election, or from Pastors by Ordination, or from Magistrates by
Commission and Delegation; whether one, two, or all these ways, is not
determined by Natural Law, but must be looked for in Gods positive Laws; if
not there neither to be found, we must acquiesce in what is determined by
lawful Authority. The same I say again, as to forms of Government, whether the
Power of sole Jurisdiction, and Ordination, be invested in one person above the
rank of Presbyters, or be lodged in a College acting in a p^rity of Power, is
a plea must be removed from the Court of common Law of Nature, to the Kings
Bench; I mean to the positive Laws of God, or the Supreme power in a
Commonwealth: There being no Statutes in the Law of Nature to determine it: it
must be therefore Placitum Regis, some positive Law must end the controversy.
We therefore traverse the Suit here, and shall enter it at the other Court.

The second thing dictated by the Law of Nature, is, That the persons employed
in the immediate Service of God, and entrusted with the Power of governing the
Society appointed for that end, should have respect paid them answerable to the
Nature of their employment. This appears to have foundation in the Law of
Nature, being easily deducible from one of the first principles of that Law,
that God is to be worshipped; if so, then those whose employment is chiefly to
attend upon himself, ought to have greater Reverence then others. By the same
Reason in Nature, that if we do honor the King himself, the nearer any are to
the Kings Person in attendance and employment, the greater honor is to be
showed them. The ground of which is, that the honor given to servants as such,
is not given to their persons, but to their Relation, or to the one only upon
the account of the other; and so it does not fix and terminate upon themselves,
but rebounds back, and reflects upon the Original and Fountain of that Honor,
the Prince himself: So if any be honored upon the account of their immediate
employment in the service of God, it is God who is chiefly honored, and not
they; it being the way men have to express their honor to God, by showing it
proportionably and respectively to those who either represent him, or are
employed by him. (...) as Chrysostom speaks in this very case. The honor
p^sseth through Homil. 65. in Genesis ^7. 26. Tom. 1. p. 506. Ed. Savil.
them to God himself. Where he largely proves this very thing from the
Egyptians sparing the Lands of their Priests; and argues at least for an
equality of honor, from reason, to be given to those who serve the true God.
Nay, he is so far from looking upon it as part of their superstition, that he
mounts his argument a pari, to one a minori ad majus, (...), that is, As much
as truth exceeds error, and the servants of God do the Idol-priests; so much
let the honor we give to them, exceed that which was given by the Heathen to
theirs: But we have a further evidence of the honourablenesse of this
employment, by the light of Nature, from the persons employed in this work,
before any positive Laws did restrain it: For I say not, that the Law of Nature
does dictate, that the function of those employed in this work should be
differenced from all other; that is done by Divine positive Laws; but the
honor of those in that function is from the Law of Nature: which appears
hence, in that in the eldest times, those who had the greatest authority civil,
had likewise the sacred conjoined with it. For as Aristotle rightly observes,
that the original Politic. lib. 1. cap. 2.
of civil Government was from private families: so in those families, before
they came to associate for more public worship, the Master of the family was
the Priest of it. Thence Genesis 8. 20. 18. 19. ^2. 2. 31. 54. Job 4^ 8.
we read of Noah's sacrificing, Abraham's duty to instruct his family, and his
own command for offering up his Son: we read of Jacobs sacrificing, and Jobs,
and so of others. Every Master of the family then was the High Priest too, and
governed his family, not only as such, but as a religious Society.

Afterward (from what institution we know not; but certainly. 4.
the reason of it, if it were so, was to put the greater honor upon the eldest
son) it is generally conceived, that the firstborn had the Priesthood of the
Family in their possession, till the time of the Leviticall Law. The Jewish
Doctors V. Seldom. de success. ad leo. Heb. cap. 5. Origin cap. 15. p. 69.
think that was the Birthright which Jacob procured from his Father, and which
Abraham gave to Isaac, when it is said, that he gave him (...) all that he had:
For says Postellus, if it be meant in a literal sense, how could he give
those gifts to his other Sons which are mentioned before? Wherefore he
conjectures, by that All, is meant the spiritual knowledge of Christ, which he
calls Intellectus generalis; which might be more proper to him as Priest of the
family. But the plain meaning is no more, than, when Abraham had bestowed
Legacies on his other Children, he left Isaac haredem ex ass, his lawful
heir: I am unwilling to deny a Tradition so generally received, among both
Jewish and Christian Writers, as the Priesthood of the firstborn before the
Law; but this I say, I cannot yet find any other ground for it but Tradition*
no place of Scripture giving us sufficient evidence for it, and many against
it. That which serves sufficiently for the consutation of it, is that
observation of Theodoret, (...)* It is to be observed, Qu. 108. in Genesis
that the younger are always preferred before the firstborn. Which he takes
notice of from the case he there speaks to of Ephraim and Manasses; and so runs
it up to Abel preferred before Cain, Seth before Iapheth, Abraham before his
elder brethren, Isaac before Ismael, Jacob before Esau, Judas and Joseph before
Reuben, Moses before Aaron; and David before V. Isidor. Pel. lib. 2. ep. 47.
and 48. ad fi^*
the rest of his Brethren; (although that was after the Law). That place which
gives the greatest countenanc^ to the opinion is, Numbers 3. 41. And thou shall
take the Levites for me instead of the firstborn: where it seems, that the
firstborn were formerly the Priests, in whose room the Levites were taken. But
with submission to better judgments, I can see nothing employed in this place,
but only that God having delivered their firstborn in Egypt, Exodus 12. 23.
and calling for them to be sanctified to him, Exodus 13. 2. upon the account of
the propriety he had in them, in a peculiar manner, by that deliverance (and
not on the account of any special service, for many were very unfit for that
by reason of age* and which is observable, God requires as well the firstborn
of beasts both to be sanctified and redeemed, Numbers 3 41.) therefore God now
settling a way of Worship, he gave the Israelites liberty to redeem them, and
instead of them pitched on the Tribe of Levi for his own service. Another plac^
is Exodus V. Seldom. de success. ad Pontis. ebr. cap. 1. sed and V. eum de
Syned. lib. ^. cap. 16.
24. 5. where the young men are mentioned that offered burntoffering. It is
confessed that the Chaldee Paraphrast and Arabic Version understand here the
Firstborn; but however the place implies no more then that they were employed
to bring the sacrifices, for so the Septuagint render it. (...), or else that
they were employed as the Popae only to kill the Sacrifices; for we see the
sprinkling of the blood which was the main thing intended here as a foederal
rite, was done by Moses himself, who was the High, priest of the people as well
as Prince, till Aaron and his sons were set a part, which was not till Exodus
28. 1, 2. and yet Aaron was three years elder then Moses, Exodus 7. 7. which is
an evidence that Aaron as firstborn was not the Priest; for till his
consecration, Moses and not Aaron performed the offices of Priesthood. Thence
we read, Psalm 99. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests. For although the word
(...) be sometimes attributed to those in civil authority, 1 as 2 Samuel. 8.
18. compared with 1 Chronicles. 18. 17. and 2 Samuel 26. 26. Genesis 41. 50. Exodus 2.
16. Job 12. 19. yet there is no* reason so to understand it of Moses: And
further, the ground why (...) was attributed to both Prince and Priest before
the Law, was, because the same person might be both; as the Priests of Egypt
were Princes too, Genesis 41. 50. But for Moses, we read not only of the V. Seldom
de Syned. l 2. cap. 2. s. 3.
title, but the proper offices of Priests attributed to him, as sacrificing,
Exodus 24. 5. consecrating Aaron and his sons, Exodus 29. 35. and therefore
Aben Ezra upon that Psalm forecited, calls him (...) the High Priest.

This Priesthood of Moses leads us to another evidence of. 5.
the honor of those who were employed in the service of God, which is that
when Families increased and many associated into a Commonwealth, though the
private service might belong to the master of the Family, yet the public,
before positive Laws restraining it, was most commonly joined with the civil
power. That Melchizedek was both King and Priest in Salem; if with the Jews we
conclude he was Some (which we have little reason for) it will be a greater
evidence, Sem being then the greatest Potentate Living. But we pass from him
to other Nations after the dispersion, to see where the power over religious
Societies was generally held. In Egypt we find Plut. de I^. and Osi^id. Str.
Geog. l 17. Quest. Romans 110. Politic. l. 3. cap. 10. 11. l. 6. cap. 8. lib. 3.
c. 4. Herod. l. 6. V. C^ag. de rep Laced. lib. 2. c. 2.
that their Priests were often made Kings, as Plutarch observes out of
Hecataeus, and is confessed by Strabo, Diodorus, and others. Of the Greeks the
same Plutarch gives us a large testimony, that among them (...), the Priesthood
was accounted of equal dignity with the Kingdom. The same does Aristotle in
several places of his Politics: and particularly of the Spartans, of whom
Herodotus adds, that the Priesthood of Jupiter Coelestis and Lacedaemonius did
always belong to the Kings own person. For the old Latins, Virgils Anius is
sufficient: and among the Romans after the powers were separated, the Pontifex
Max. had royal state, his cella'curulis and Lictores, as the Consuls had, only
their Priests meddled not in civil affairs, of which Plutarch gives a double
reason; the impossibility of minding both employments as they should do, and so
must either Qu. Romans 110.
(...), neglect the Worship of the Gods, or else (...), wrong the people with
the neglect of the administration of justice. The other reason is, because
those that were employed in civil affairs, were put upon execution of justice;
and it was no ways fit a man should come reeking from the blood of Citizens,
to go and sacrifice to the Gods: This conjunction of civil and sacred power is
attested by Strom. l. 7. ep. 121. Geog. l. 14. S^eton. in Aug. c. 31. V.
Casaub. in l. and Seld. de Syned l. 1. ^. 10.
Clemens Alexandrinus of the most civilized Heathens; so likewise by Synesius
of the most ancient Nations, by Strabo of the Ephesians, by the Roman
Historians of the Roman Emperors, who from Augustus to Gratian, and some say
after, continued the title of Pontifex Maximus among the rest of the Imperial
Honors. Thus much then may serve to manifest how the Honor of those persons
who are im(...)e service of God, and the Governme(...) is a dictate of the Law
of (...)

CHAP. V.
The third thing dictated by the Law of Nature, is the solemnity of all things
to be performed in this Society; which lies in the gravity of all Rites and
Ceremonies, in the composed temper of mind. Gods worship rational. His spirit
destroys not the use of reason. The Enthusiastic Spirit discovered. The
circumstantiating of fit time and place for Worship. The seventh day, on what
account so much spoken of by Heathens The Romans Holy days. Cessation of
labor upon them. The solemnity of Ceremonies used. (...), Silence in
Devotions. Exclusion of unfit persons. Solemnity of discipline: Excommunication
among the Jews by the sound of a Trumpet, amongst Christians by a Bell.

THe next thing in reference to religious Societies which 1.
Nature dictates, is, That all things, either pertaining to the immediate
worship of God, or belonging to the Government of that Society, be performed
with the greatest solemnity and decency that may be. Which dictate arises from
the nature of the things themselves; which being most grave and serious, do
require the greatest gravity and seriousness in the doing of them. And
therefore any Ceremonies, Actions, or Gestures, which tend to the discomposing
men's Spirits, are upon that account to be exploded out of any religious
Societies, as being so directly repugnant to the Nature, design, and
performance of religious duties. Wherefore that is the standing Rule of all
instituted Ceremonies, by the Law of Nature in the Worship of God, that they be
such as tend immediately to the advancing the serenity, tranquillity, and
composure of their minds who observe them; and not such which in their own
nature, or by continual custom of the users of them, do either rarifie men's
spirits too much into a superficial lightness and vanity of spirit; or el^e
sink them too much below the command of reason, into the power of unruly
passions. A clear and composed spirit, is only fit for converse with things of
so high a Nature. That Region which is nearest Heaven, is the freest from
clouds and vapors, as well as those dancing Meteors, which hover about in a
light uncertain motion. It strangely unbecomes the Majesty of religious worship
to have any thing vulgar, trivial, much more ridiculous in it. The Worship of
God is (...), a rational Romans 13. 1.
worship, as well in regard of that real on which should moderate and govern
the manner of service, as in regard of those faculties which should be most
^mployed in it; or the foundation which the service has upon the dictates of
men's natural reason.

And as Nature tells us, there should be nothing too light or. 2.
superficial, so neither any thing whereby men are carried beyond the bounds
of their own reason: For what men do at such a time, is not their own proper
act, but is more properly to be ascribed to the power, strength, and excess of
a Melancholy fancy, or else to a higher Enthusiasticall spirit, which then
actuates and informs their sancies: And therefore it has been well observed,
as a Characteristicall difference between the true Prophetical spirit, and the
false and counterfeit; that the one leaves men in the free use of their reason
and faculties; the other alienates them by Panick fears, tremblings, and
consternations both of body and mind. To which purpose many evidences are
brought by a late learned Mr. Smiths dis. 6. of Prophecy, chap. 4.
Writer, in his Discourse of Prophecy out of the Heathen and Christian Authors.
These latter discovering the vanity of the Montanisticall spirit by this one
observation: which besides the Authors there cited, ( viz. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Strom. ^. Eccl. hist. l. 5. 17* praes. in I^. Nahum. Habak.
Ch^ys. in 1. Cor. Hom. 29. Epiph. haeres. 48. Ezekiel. 4. 14.
Miltiades in Eusebius, Ierom and Chrysostom) may appear from Epiphanius, who
largely and excellently discourses on this Subject, when he discovers the
folly of Montanus and his followers: And gives this reason why they could be no
true Prophets; for those that were so, had (...). A great consistency of sense,
reason, and discourse; and instanceth in Isaiah and Ezekiel: for says he,
(...). A true Prophet had always the free use of his reason and faculties, and
spoke from the spirit of God with consistency and coherence of Discourse. But
it was quite otherwise with the M^ntanists, (...) (...). They were always
trembling both in body and mind; used no consequence of reason in discourse;
their words had no proper sense, but were all dark, intricate and obscure. An
exact description of a late prevailing Sect among us, who have their names from
those consternations they were wont to fall into, and whose language carries as
much obscurity with it, as any of the followers of Montanus could wrap up
theirs into. Only, instead of Montanus his Paraclete, they tell us of a Light
within, whose office is much of the same nature with the other; And one of the
great errors of Montanus was, the adhering to Enthusiasms and revelations
beyond and beside the written Word; which is the Helena of our late
Opinionists, because it gives a liberty for venting any conceptions of their
own brains, under the pretense and disguise of a Light within. But we see
hence, how far such tremblings and consternations of body and mind are from a
true, sober, Prophetic spirit: and how those Christians who lived in the time
when the Spirit of Prophe^y had not yet left the Church of Christ (as appears
by Origin, Tertullian, and others:) Orig. c. Celsum, lib. 2. p. 62. l. 3. p.
124. Tertull. de an. c. 9.
yet they always looked upon any violent ecstasy, or fury, as an evidence of a
false Prophet. And therefore Tertullian, when grown a Proselyte of Montanus,
endeavors strongly to remove that apprehension of the exstaticall fury of
Montanus, and Prisca, and Maximilla, granting, if it were true, that it was a
mark of a false and counterfeit prophetical spirit. The true Prophets I grant
of old, were by the strength of the impression of their visions upon their
Animal spirits, sometimes thrown into a fit of trembling; but then it was not
continually so, and when it was, it might be rather a prefent astonishment from
so strange and unwonted sight (as is Dan. 10. 11. Habak 3. 16. Procop. Gaz. in
1 Reg. 1^. Ed. Meursii.
common in such cases) or else from the strong apprehension they had of the
dismal judgments God threatened to the people* but however, it never took from
them the free use of their reason and faculties, which were always conversant
about the matters reveased unto them. But as Proo^pius Gaz^^^ observes of the
false Prophets, (...), they were acted like mad m^^* Which he takes notice of
upon occassion o^ Sa^^^ prophe^ying when the evil spirit came upon him; and
interprets with the Jewish Writers, of a madness rather then true Prophecy.
Such as that of Cassandra when she is brought in by Lycophron,

(...) Lycop^r. Alex. p. 2.

(...)
Utt'ring a strange confused noise,
Much like unto black Sphinx's voice.
(...), says Tz^tzes, that is (...), which is fully described by Lucan, of one
pretending Enthusiasm:

-- sub pectore ficta qui^to
Verba refert, nullo confus a murmr voci^,
Instinctam sacro mentem testata furore.
And soon after,

-- non rupta trementi
Verba sono, nec vox antri complere capacis
Sufficiens spatium --
Whereby he discovers her, not to be a true Enthusiast, because she used not
such a strange confused voice and tremblings as they did who were their proper
Enthusiasts, as the Sybils and the Pythian prophetess. By this we see, that
these Earthquakes of violent passions are caused by the Prince of the air, and
not by the gentle breathings of the Divine Spirit: That these convulsions of
men's spirits, are not the consequents of the inhabitation of the good Spirit,
but of the violent intrusion of the evil one: That that temper of mind is most
suitable to Religion, which is as well free from the bleaknesse and turbulency
of passion, as the saint gleams of Lightness and Vanity.

But a further solemnity then this is required by the dictates of Nature too,
which lies in the circumstantiating of time and place, and a dedication of both
to the end of Worship. That these are very consonant to natural Reason, appears
by the universal consent of all Nations agreeing: in any form of the Worship
of a Deity: who have all had their set-times, and fixed places to perform this
Worship in. I shall not insist as some have done, that the Seventh day has
been particularly and solemnly observed for the worship of God by the consent
of Nations: Although there be many probable arguments and plausible testimonies
brought for a peculiarity of honor to, if not service on, the Seventh-day, out
of Josephus, Joseph. c. App. l. 2. Eusebius. Praep. l. 13. cap. 12. Tertul. Apol.
c. 16. c. Notion. l. 1. c. 13. Lamprid. vit. Alex. Sever. Seneca ep. 95.
Tibullus. eleg. 3. l. 1. Lucian. Pseudol. p. 893. ed. Paris.
Aristobulus, Iudaeus (and by him from Linus, Hesiod, Homer) Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Lampridius, Seneca, Tibullus, and many others. From
which Testimonies, it appears that some kind of reverence and honor was given
to the Seventh-day; but whether that day was the seventh of the week, or the
seventh of the month; (which was consecrated among the Greeks to Apollo, upon
which the (...) and (...), and the seventh of every month were observed in
honor of him;) whether the title of (...) did belong to the seventh as one of
the (...) or (...), Festival or inauspicious days (for it was common to
both)? Whether observed by any public religious custom, or by some private
superstition, are things too large to inquire into, too difficult now to
determine, and not necessary for my present purpose; It being sufficient in
order to that, if they had any set times at all for worship, which shows how
solemn the worship of God ought to be. And this is not denied by any; it being
so necessary a consectary from the duty of Worship that there must be a time
for performance of it. And not only in general that there must be some time,
but a sufficient proportion of time to be consecrated to the public exercise
of piety, both from the consideration of man's obligation to divine service from
his nature, from the weight and concernment of the things that time is employed
in, and the inward sense of immortality upon the soul of man. But then what
this proportion of time must exactly be, I see not how mere natural light could
determine it, but it would rather suggest it to be highly reasonable to wait
for and expect such a determination from the supreme Rector and Governor of
the world. It being far more fit for the Master to prescribe unto the servant
what proportion of service he expects from him, then that the servant should
both divide and choose his own time, and the proportion of service which he
owes to his Master. Nay it being so much more reasonable for us to wait for
Gods order, then for a servant for his Masters, as Gods power and Dominion over
the creature is greater then that of a Master over his servant; as it is the
voice and sense of nature that Gods commands cannot otherwise be but just,
holy, reasonable and good: which may be otherwise from men; as the acceptance
of our persons with God, lies not barely in the work done; but in the doing it
out of obedience to the commands of God; which is otherwise with men* as, God
can give strength to perform what he commands, which man cannot: which things
considered make it evident to be highly reasonable that God himself should
prescribe the proportion of time, and not man's nature. But when God has thus
determined it, nature cannot but assent to that particular determination, that
in consideration of the works of God, it is most reasonable that rather one day
in a week, then one in a month, should be dedicated to Gods service; that the
seventh day of the week upon Gods resting on that day and sanctifying it,
should be the precise day, unless some reason equivalent to that of the first
institution, and approved by God for that end, be the ground of its alteration
to another of the seven, which is the reason of the change under the Gospel.

As an evidence of the solemnity of times for worship, the. 4.
Romans as well as other Nations had their several feriae; their days set
apart for the honor of their Gods. In which Macrobius tells us the Priests
held them polluted, si indictis conceptisque Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 16.
opus aliquod fieret; praeterea regem sacrorum flamines que non licebat videre
feriis opus fieri, and ideo per praeconem denuntiabatur ne quid tale ageretur,
and praecepti negligens multabatur. If any work were done upon those days of
Rest, the day was polluted; and the person punished, unless it were as Umbro
there affirms, in order to the honor of their Gods, or for necessaries of
life. To which purpose Scaevola answered him that asked, what work must be done
upon the Feria: Quod pratermissum noceret, What would be spoiled by letting
alone; as taking an Ox out of a ditch, strengthening a beam like to fall and
ruin men; and thence Maro allowed it lawful to wash sheep if it were to cure,
and not only to cleanse them.

Balautumque gregem fluvio mersare salubri. By which last word, Macrobius says
it was only lawful to do it for healing them, and not in order to gain.
Servius informs Servius Honor. in Virgil. Georgic. 1.
us likewise that the Priests when they went to sacrifice, sent their servants
before to bid all Tradesmen leave working, ne pro negotio suo and ipsorum
oculos and Deorum ceremonias attaminent; Feria enim operae Deorum creditae
sunt; Lest by following their work they both offend them and the Gods too: For
these Holy Days are devoted to the service of the Gods. Festus says that upon
their dies religiosi, nisi quod necesse est, Festus V. religios.
nefas habetur facere; nothing but works of pure necessity were to be done, But
by dies religiosi, probably he means the dies atr^ and nefasti; their ominous
unlucky days, as they accounted them. But however, Macrobius distinguishes
the days among the Romans into Dies festi, profesti, and intercisi. The Festi
were dedicated to the Gods, the Profesti to their own works, the Intercisi were
divided between both, at some hours of which it was lawful to follow their
civil employments, at others not. Nam cum hostiacaeditur, fari nefas est;
inter caesa and porrecta, fari licet; rursus cum adoletur, non licet. While the
sacrifice was killing no Courts of Judicature were opened (in which the Praetor
might fari tria verba solemnia, Do, dico; addico, thence called dies fasti) but
between the killing the sacrifice and offering up the entrails (called Porrecta
from porricere, which was verbum sacrificale pervetustum, says Turnebus,
Advers. l. 24. c. 13.
an old word belonging to sacrificing, exta Di^s cum dabant, porricere
dicebant, Varro) then it was lawful to open the Courts; but again when the
sacrifice was offered, it was not. By which we see as from the light of Nature,
that what days and times, whether weekly, monthly or Anniversary, were
designed De Re Rust. l. 1. c 29.
and appointed as dies Festi, for the service of God, were to be spent wholly
in order to that end, and not to give some part to God, and take others to
themselves: as they were wont to do in their sacrifices, to offer up some part
to the Gods, and feast upon the rest themselves, as Athenaeus tells us that
Conon and Alcibiades offered such Hecatombs to the Gods, that they entertained
the people upon the remainders Dei^nos. l. 1.
of them. And from hence we may see how far short of natural light their
Religion falls, who make no scruple of spending a great part of the days
devoted to Gods worship in following either their employments or recreations:
Which latter seem more directly to impugn the end of such time appointed then
the other, in as much as recreations tend more to the ratifying men's spirits;
and evaporating them into lightness and vanity, and so discomposing them for
the duties of spiritual worship, then men's serious and lawful callings do.
But further, we observe, among the Romans several sorts of days appointed for
public worship. Macrobius reckons up Saturn. l. 1. c. 16.
four sorts of them, Stative, Conceptivae, Imperativae, and Nundinae. Stativae,
were the set festival days observed every year by the whole people, and
marked for that end in their Fasti. Such were the Agonalia, Carmentalia,
Lupercalia, which are marked with red Letters in the Fasti consulares, or De
jure Not. apud Heb. l. 3. cap. 15. De Idolol. c. 14.
the Calendarium Romanum, by Ios. Scaliger called Calendarium Colotianum, which
may be seen at large in Mr. Seldom: besides which, their other anniversary
festivals are there set down: which Tertullian says, being all put together,
Pentecostem implere non poterunt, make not up the number of fifty; and so not
so many as our Lords Days in a year are. Conceptivae, were such festivals as
were annually observed, but the days of the keeping them were every year
determined by the Magistrates of the Priests, as Latinae, Sementivae,
Paganalia, Compitalia. Imperativa, were such as the Consuls or Praetors did
command at their own pleasure. Such were their solemn supplications in times of
trouble, and their days of Triumph and Thanksgiving for Victories. The
Nundinae were those which returned every ninth day, and therefore the Letter by
which they observed the return of the ninth day, was H. as among us Christians
G. which because it notes the return of the Lords Days, we call the Dominical
Letter. These Nundinae were the days when the Country people brought in their
wares into the City to be sold, which were anciently observed as festival
days, sacred to Jupiter, but by the Lex Hortensia were made Dies fasti, for
determining the Controversies that might arise among the people in their
dealings; as the Court of Pyepowder was instituted among us upon the same
account. So much for the solemnity of time used in the service of God.

Another evidence of the solemnity of Wo^ship, was the extraordinary. 5.
care of the Heathens in preparing themselves for it, by cleansing and
purifying themselves with water, for which Hom. Iliad. Apoll. Argon. l. 1.
Casaub. ad Th^o. (...). Saub de sacri. cap. 12. Paus. l. 2. Matthew. 27. 24.
Casaub. ad Bar. exer. 16. s. 75. ^aro^. ad An. Christi 34 M^ntacutius Orig.
Eccles. 10. 1. l. 2. p. 388. Vossius Harm. Evang. l. ^. cap. 5. V. M^yerum de
P^patu, Romans l. 1. c. 32. 5 De Croy. Conf. 1. c. 33. Ov^d. Fast. lib. 2.
purpose they had their (...) for cleansing their hands, and their (...) and
(...) standing at the porch of their Temples for their whole bodies, which
custom was generally observed by the Heathens, as is very obvious in the
several Writers of their Customs in sacrificing; besides which they observed
likewise this washing with water, by way of lustration and expiation of their
faults, as Triclinius the Sholiast on Sophocles tells us, it was an ancient
custom when men had murdered others, (...), to wash their hands in expiation
of their guilt; as Orestes did in Pausanias after the killing his mother, and
some think Pilate in the Gospel did so for the same end; but his was only to
declare his innocence, and not to expiate his sin, as is observed by many upon
that place. But however, from hence we may take notice of the Spring and
Fountain of the Popes Holy Water: which was consecrated by Numa long before
Alexander 1. to whom Polydore Virgil and others attribute the first use of it
in the Christian Church: And as the use of it, and the manner of sprinkling it
is the same among the Papists, as it was among the Heathen; so likewise the end
of it: witness the old Rhyme,

Hac aqua benedicta, deleat mihi mea delicta. Which may be sufficiently
answered with the Ce^sure of a Heathen;

Ah nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedi^
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua!
Too easy souls who think the spots of blood
Can be washed out with every watery flood.
But from this I pass to the solemnity in their Worship it self, evidenced by
the general silence commanded in it; which appears by Horace's Favete,
linguis, Ovids Ore favent populi nunc cum venit aurea pompa; Virgils fida
silentia sacris; Festus' s V. Brisson. de sormulis lib. 1. p. 8.
Linguam pascito, i. e. coerceto; The Egyptians setting Harpocrates his Image
in the entrance to their Temples, and the Romans placing the Statue of Angerona
on the Altar of Volupia. The Greeks had their (...) which did (...), as Julius
Pollux tells us, which Plautus calls facere O ^^omist. c. lib. ^. c. 12.
audientiam, to command silence: much as the Deacons afterward did in the
Primitive Church, who were wont to command silence by their Orarium, and were
thence called (...) among the Christians (for though (...), as applied to the
Bishop and Presbyters, did signify (...) and (...), to preach; yet as it was
applied to the Deacons, it employed V. Leon. 5. Allatium de Marthece, vet.
Eccles. p. 45, etc.
only their commanding silence in order to the prayers of the Catechumeni,
called (...), as Aristenus observes on Council. Carthag. can. 106. But this by
the way.) The formula used by the Greeks in commanding silence was, (...) to
which Aristonicus the Fiddler alluded when in the Market place of Mylassa, a
Town in Caria, he saw many Temples, and but few Citizens, he cried out (...)
instead of (...) Athenaeus Deipnos. l. 8. c. 8.
But I pass these things over, as being commonly known, only observing from
them the solemnity of their public devotions; which is further seen in their
solemn excluding unfit persons from partaking with them in their sacrifices. Of
which Virgil, Ovid, Statius, Silius Italicus, and others among the V. Apud
Briss. de sormulis, l. 1. and apud Seld. de Syned. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Romans speak; and the Lictor in some Sacrifices stood up, says Festus, and
cried aloud, Hostis, mulier, vinctus, exesto, i. e. extra esto: and to keep
unfit persons the better ff, the Flamines had a Commentaculum, a kind of Rod in
their hands. Among the Greeks the old form continued from Orpheus or
Onomacritus his Orphaica, (...). and those that sacrifice, asked (...), the
other answered (...). From Suidas in (...).
all these things laid together, we see the great solemnity used by them in
their worship, which considered in its self, was not the product of
superstition, but a dictate of the Law of Nature. And it seems most natural to
the acts of discipline, that they should be performed in the most public
solemn manner, and not in any private C^andestine way: which being so done, often
times lose the designed effect of them, in making men sensible and ashamed of
those miscarriages which made them deserve so sharp and severe a censure.
Thence among the Jews, their solemn sentence of the greater excommunication was
pronounced by the sound of a Trumpet; and so they say Meroz was excommunicated
with 400. Trumpets: Ioh. Coch. Excerpt. Gen Saubed. cap 1. p. 146. Vostius in
Pir^e Elicsest p 2. 6. Seldom de Syned. l. 1. cap. 7.
and the same number they report was used in excommunicating Jesus of Nazareth,
which was usually done by the Magistrate, or the Rector of the University: as
they tell us a story of a man coming to buy flesh at Pombeditha (which was one
of the three Universities of the remaining Jews in Chaldea after the return
from Captivity, the other were Sora and Neharda) but offering some opprobrious
language to R. Iehuda then Governor of the University, he makes no more to do,
but prolatus tubis hominem excommunicavit, brings out his Trumpets and
excommunicates him. And as the use of Bells, since their invention, did supply
the former use of Trumpets in calling the Congregation together (which I
suppose was the account of using Trumpets in excommunicating from the
Congregation) so it seems the Bells were sometimes used to ring men out of, as
well as into the Church; thence the solemn Monkish curse, cursing men with
Bell, Book and Candle, which can have no other sense but from this practice. So
much shall suffice to show the soundation which the solemnity of Worship, and
the acts belonging to it, have in the dictates of Nature manifested by the
voice and consent of Nations, for herein vox Populi is vox Naturae, as at other
times it is Vox Dei.

CHAP. VI.
The fourth thing dictated by the Law of Nature, that there must be a way to
end Controversies arising, which tend to break the peace of the Society. The
nature of schis^^ considered; Liberty of judgment and authority distinguished;
the latter must be parted within religious Societies as to private persons.
What way the light of Nature directs to, for ending Controversies, in an
equality of power, that the less number yield to the greater: on what Law of
Nature that is founded. In a subordination of power that there must be a
liberty of Appeals defined. Independency of particular Congregations
considered. Elective Synods. The Original of Church Government as to
Congregations. The case paralleld between Civil and Church Government. Where
Appeals finally lodge. The power of calling Synods, and confirming their acts
in the Magistrate.

THe fourth thing which Nature dictates in reference to a. 1.
Church-society, is, That there must be a way agreed upon to determine and
decide all those Controversies arising in this Society, which immediately tend
to the breaking the peace and unity of it. We have seen already that natural
reason requires a disparity between persons in a society: To form and
constitute a Society, there must be order and power in some, there must be
inferiority and subjection in others answering to the former; And by these we
suppose a Society to be now modeld. But Nature must either be supposed
defective in its designs and contrivements as to the necessaries required for
the management of them; or else there must likewise be employed a sufficient
provision for the maintenance and preservation of the Societies thus entered
into. It is no wise agreeable to the wisdom of Nature to erect a Fabric with
such materials, which though they may lie one upon the other, yet if not fitly
compacted together, will fall in pieces again as soon as it is set up: nor yet
to frame a body with mere flesh and bones, and the superiority of some members
above the other; for unless there be joints and sinews and ligatures to hold
the parts together, the dissolution (will immediately) follow the formation of
it. The end and design of Nature is, preservation and continuance, and
therefore things necessary in order to that, must be employed in the first
design of the being of the thing; so that at least, as to its self, there be no
defect in order to that. This must in reason be supposed in all Societies, that
when they are first entered, it must be upon such terms as may be sufficient to
maintain and keep up those Societies in that peace and order which is requisite
in order to the continuance of them. For what diseases are to bodies, Age and
fire are to buildings, that divisions and animosities are to Societies, all
equally tending to the ruin and destruction of the things they seize upon. And
as bodies are furnished by Nature, not only with a receptive and concoctive
faculty, of what tends to their nourishment, but with an expulsive faculty of
what would tend to the ruin of it. So all civil bodies must not only have
ways to strengthen them, but must have likewise a power to expel and disperse
those noxions humors and qualities which tend to dissolve the frame, compages
and constitution of them. A power then to prevent mischiefs is as necessary in
a Society, as a power to settle things in order to the advancement of the
common good of Society. This therefore the Church as a religious Society must
likewise he endowed with, viz. a power to maintain its self, and keep up peace
and unity within its self: which cannot otherwise be supposed (considering the
bilious humor in men's natures, not wholly purged out by Christianity) without
some way to decide Controversies which will arise, disturbing the peace of it.
For the clearing of this, which much concerns the power and government of the
Church, we shall consider what the controversies are which tend to break the
Churches peace: and what way the Law of nature finds out for the ending of
them, Which we are the more necessitated to speak to, because nothing has
begotten controversies more then the power of determining them has done.

The Controversies then which tend to break the peace of. 2.
a religious Society, are either matter of different practice, or matter of
different opinion. The former, if it comes from no just and necessary cause,
and ends in a total separation from that Society the person guilty of it was
joined with, is justly called Schism; which (as (...) it*) is an
Ecclefiasticall sedition, as Sedition i^ a Lay Schism; both being directly
contrary to that communion and friendlinesse which should be preserved in all
Societies. The latter, if impugning somewhat fundamental, in order to the end
of constituting religious Societies, or being a lesser matter, if wilfully
taken up, and obstinately maintained, is called Here sit; which two are seldom
seen out of each others company., and when they are together, are like the
blind and same man in the Fable, the one lent the other eyes, and the other
lent him feet: one to find out what they desired, the other to run away with it
when they had it. The Heretic he uses his eyes to spy out some cause or
pretense of deserting Communion* the Schismatic he helps him with his leg^ to
run away from it; but between them both, they rob the Church of its peace and
unity. But in order to the making clear what the Churches power is in reference
to these, we are to take notice of these things. First, That the Church has no
direct immediate power over men's opinions: So that a matter of mere different
opinion lies not properly within the cognizance of any Church power; the reason
of it is this, because the end of power lodged in the Church, is to preserve
the peace and unity of its self: now a mere different opinion does not violate
the bonds of Society; for, Opinionum di^er sitas and opinantium unitas non sunt
(...), Men may preserve communion under different apprehensions. So long then*
as diversity of opinion tends not to the breaking the quiet and tranquillity of
the Church of God, a man may safely enjoy his own private apprehensions, as to
any danger of molestation from Church*Governours; That is, so long as a man
keeps his opinion to himself, and has the power of being his own Counselor.
It is not the difference of opinion formally considered when it is divulged
abroad that is punishable, but the tendency to Schism, which lies in the
div^lging of it, and drawing others away from the received Truths: For the
opinion its self is an internal act of the mind, and therefore is punishable
by no external power, as that of the Magistrate or Church is; as no internal
action is under the jurisdiction or authority of a Magistrate, any further then
as necessarily conjoined with the outward action, or as it has a direct
influence upon it. The case of blasphemy, which is a thing of the highest
nature in this kind, is not punishable by men, as blasphemy implies low and
undervaluing thoughts of God; but as being a thing divulged (else no formal
blaspemy) it tends apparently to the dishonor of God, and consequently to the
breaking in pieces all such Societies, whose great foundation is the belief of
the Majesty and glory of God. So Idolatry under the Law was punished, as it was
immediately destructive of that obedience which men did owe to the true God.
And under the Gospel, it is not mere difference of opinion, judgment, and
apprehension, which lays men open to the Censures of that power which
moderates and rules a religious Society; but the endeavor by difference of
opinion to alienate men's spirits one from another, and thereby to break the
Society into fractions and divisions, is that which makes men liable to
restraint and punishment. From whence it follows, that where the peace and
unity of the Church may be preserved, and yet men keep up different
apprehensions of things, there is nothing deserving any severe animadversion
from the Rulers of that Society: For a power corrective, and vindictive, must
suppose something acted contrary to the Laws and Rules of the Society, and the
end of committing that power into the hands of Governors: now here is nothing
of that nature; for the Laws of mutual Society are observed; and the end of
Church Government is to see ne quid Ecclesia detrimenti capiat, lest the Church
as a Society be any ways prejudiced: which cannot be while men maintain that
love, affection, and communion which becomes the members of such a Society. The
unity then required in the Church, is not an unity of judgment and
apprehension among the members of it, which though it be their duty to
endeavor after, yet it is no further attainable by men's endeavors then
perfection is; and Unio Christianorum in this sense, is one of the Jewels
belonging to the Crown of Heaven. There, is no necessity then of inquiring
after an infallible Judge of Controversies, unless we had some promise and
assurance from Christ, that the members of his Church should never differ in
their judgments from one another, and then what need of an infallible Judge?
and if Christ had appointed an infallible Judge, he would infallibly have
discovered it to the minds of all sober men; or else his infallibility could
never attain its end: For while I question whether my Judge be infallible or
no, I cannot infallibly assent to any of his determinations. And where there is
no ground for an infallible Judge, for any to pretend to it, is the worst of
supposable errors, because it renders all others incurable by that
apprehension, and takes away all possibility of repentance while men are under
that persuasion. The Unity then of the Church, is that of Communion, and not
that of Apprehension; and different opinions are no further liable to censures,
then as men by the broaching of them, do endeavor to disturb the peace of the
Church of God.

That then which seems most liable to censures in a Church, 3.
is Schism, as being immediately destructive of that communion which should be
maintained in a religious Society. But as to this too, we must observe
something further, and not to think and judge every thing to deserve the name,
which is by many called Schism; it being well observed by a very learned and
judicious Divine; that Heresy and Schism, as they are commonly used, are two
Theological scare-crows, with which, they Tract of Schism, 1642.
who use to uphold a party in Religion, use to fright away such, as making
enquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if it appear either
erroneous or suspicious. For as Plutarch reports of a Painter, who having
unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all Cocks and Hens, that so the
imperfection of his Art might not appear by comparison with nature; so men
willing for ends, to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder an
enquiry into it, by way of comparison of somewhat with it, peradventure truer,
that so the deformity of their own might not appear. Thus he* Schism then, as
it imports a separation from communion with a Church-society, is not a thing
intrinsecally and formally evil in it self, but is capable of the differences
of good and evil according to the grounds, reasons, ends, and circumstances
inducing to such a separation. The withdrawing from Society, is but the
materiality of Schism; the formality of it must be fetched from the grounds on
which that is built. It is therefore a subject which deserve a strict inquiry,
what things those are which may make a withdrawing from a religious Society, to
which a man is joined, to be lawful: For as it is a great sin on the one hand,
unnecessarily to divide and separate from Church-society; so it is an offense
on the other side, to continue communion when it is a duty to withdraw it. For
the resolving this knotty and intricate Question, I shall lay down some things
by way of premisall, and come closely to the resolution of it.

First, Every Christian is under an obligation to join in Church-society with
others, because it is his duty to profess himself a Christian, and to own his
Religion publicly, and to partake of the Ordinances and Sacraments of the
Gospel, which cannot be without society with some Church or other. Every
Christian as such, is bound to look upon himself as the member of a body, viz.
the visible Church of Christ; and how can he be known to be a member, who is
not united with other parts of the body? There is then an obligation upon all
Christian^* to engage in a religious Society with others, for partaking of the
Ordinances of the Gospel. It has been a case disputed by some (particularly by
Grotius the supposed Author of a little Tract, An semper sit communicandum per
symbolu? when he designed the Syncretism with the Church of Rome) whether in a
time when Churches are divided, it be a Christians duty to communicate with any
of those parties which divide the Church, and not rather to suspend communion
from all of them. A case not hard to be decided; for either the person
questioning it, does suppose the Churches divided to remain true Churches, but
some to be more pure then others, in which case, by virtue of his general
obligation to communion, he is bound to adhere to that Church which appears
most to retain its Evangelicall purity; Or else he must suppose one to be a
true Church, and the other not; in which the case is clearer, that he is bound
to communicate with the true Church: or he must judge them alike impure, which
is a case hard to be found; but supposing it is so, either he has joined
formerly with one of them, or he is now to choose which to join with; if he be
joined already with that Church, and sees no other but as impure as that, he is
bound to declare against the impurity of the Church, and to continue his
communion with it; if he be to choose communion, he may so long suspend till he
be satisfied, which Church comes nearest to the primitive constitution, and no
longer. And therefore I know not whether Chrysostomes act were to be commended,
who after being made a Deacon in the Church of Antioch by Meletius, upon his
death, because Flavianus came in irregularly as Bishop of the So^^at. hist.
Eccles. lib. 6, cap. 3.
Church, would neither communicate with him, nor with Paulinus another Bishop
at that time in the City, nor with the Meletians, but for three years time
withdrew himself from communion with any of them. Much less were the (...) or
the Haesitantes as the Latins called them, to be commended, who after the
determination of the Council of Chalcedou against Entyches, because of great
differences remaining V. Petavii. Diotrib. de Po^est. Consa, and com. usurp.
cap. 4
in Egypt and the Eastern Churches, followed Zenoes Henoticum, and would
communicate neither with the Orthodox Churches, nor Eutychians. But I see not
what censure J^^ome could in ^urr, who going into the Diocese of Antioeh, and
finding the Churches there under great divisions, there being besides the Arian
Bishop, three others in the Church of Antioch, Meletius, Paulinus, and Vitalis,
did so long suspend communion with any of them, till he had satisfied himself
about the occasion of the Schism, and the innocence of the persons and Churches
engaged in it. But if he had withdrawn longer, he had offended against his
obligation to join in Church-society with others, for participation of
Gospel Ordinances; which is the necessary duty of every Christian.

Secondly, Every Christian actually joined in Church-society. 4.
with others, is so long bound to maintain society with them, till his
communion with them becomes sin. For nothing else can justify withdrawing from
such a Society, but the unlawfulness of continuing any longer in it. Supposing
a Church then to remain true, as to its constitution and essentials, but there
be many corruptions crept into that Church; whether is it the duty of a
Christian to withdraw from that Church because of those corruptions, and to
gather new Churches only for purer administration, or to join with them only
for that end? This, as far as I understand it, is the state of the Controversy
between our Parochial Churches, and the Congregationall. The resolution of
this great Question must depend on this; Whether is it a sin to communicate
with Churches true as to essentialls, but supposed corrupt in the exercise of
discipline? For Parochial Churches are not denied to have the essentialls of
true Churches by any sober Congregational men. For there is in them the true
Word of God preached, the true Sacraments administered, and an implicit
Covenant between Pastor and People, in their joining together. All that is
pleaded then, is corruption, and defect in the exercise and administration of
Church order and Discipline. Now that it is lawful for Christians to join with
Churches so defective, is not only acknowledged by Reverend Mr. Norton in his
answer to Apollius, but largely and fully proved. For Respons. ad Syllog.
Quest. cap. 16.
which he lays down five Propositions which deserve to be seriously
considered, by all which make that a plea for withdrawing from society with
other Churches. First, A Believer may lawfully join himself in communion with
such a Church, where he cannot enjoy all the Ordinances of God; a^ in the
Jewish Church, in our Saviors time, which refused the Gospel of Christ, and
the baptism of John; and yet our Savior bids us hear the Scribes and Pharisees
sitting in Moses Chair, which hearing, says he, does imply conjunctionem
Ecclesiae Iudaicae, a joining with the Jewish Church: and so with Churches
rejecting an article of faith; in the Church of Corinth the doctrine of the
Re^^^rection, in the Churches of Galatia the doctrine of Ju(...)ion by faith;
but the Apostle nowhere requires separation on that account from them.
Secondly* A Believer may lawfully join in communion with such a Church, in
which some corruption in the worship of God is tolerated without Reformation.
As the offering on High Places from Solomon to Hez^kiah in the Church of Judah,
observation of Circumc^sion, and the necessity of keeping the Ceremonial Law in
the Churches of Gala^ia. Thirdly, A Believer may lawfully join himself in
communion with such a Church in which such are admitted to Sacraments, who give
no evident signs of grace, but seem to be Lovers of this World; which he
proves, because it is every ones main duty to examine himself, and because
another sin is no hurt to him, and therefore cannot keep him from his duty;
and then by men's coming unworthily, non polluitur communio, licet minuitur
consolatio, the communion i^ not defiled, though the comfort of it be
diminished. He brings instance from the Church of Corinth, among whom were many
scandalous, and had not repented, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. So in the Jewish Church
which lay under great corruptions, when 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Cor. 6. 4. -- 15.
our Savior and his Apostles communicated with it. Fourthly, Although a
Believer join with such a Church, he is not therefore bound with the guilt, nor
defiled with the pollutions of others; which he proves, because it is lawful
to do it, and so he contract: no guilt by it. Fifthly, A Believer that has
joined himself to such a Church, is not bound to withdraw, and separate from
such a Church under pain of guilt if he does it not, because it implies a
contradiction to be lawful to join to such a Church, and yet unlawful to
continue in its communion; for that speaks it to be a Church, and this latter
to be no Church; and by that he does imply it to be unlawful to separate from
any Society which is acknowledged to be a true Church, Thus for that learned
and Reverend man, by whom we see that the received Principles of the sober and
moderate part of those of that persuasion, are not at such a distance from
others, as many imagine. We see then that communicating with a Church not so
pure as we desire, i^ no sin by the arguments by him produced. And how it
should be then lawful to withdraw from such a Church, merely for purer
communion, I (...)stand not. This I am sure was not the case of our Churches in
their separation from the Church of Rome: the main ground of which was the sin
of communicating with that Church in her Idolatry and Superstition, and the
impossibility of communicating with her, and not partaking of her sins, because
she required a profession of her errors, and the practice of her Idolatry as
the necessary conditions of her communion; in which case it is a sin to
communicate with her.

And this leads me now to a closer resolution of the case of 5.
withdrawing from Churches in which men have formerly been associated, and the
grounds which may make such a withdrawing lawful. In order to that we must
distinguish between these things. First, Between corruptions in the doctrine of
a Church, and corruptions in the practice of a Church. Secondly, Between
corruptions whether in doctrine, or practice, professed and avowed by a Church,
and required as conditions of communion in all members of it, and corruptions
crept in, and only tolerated in a Church. Thirdly, Between non-Communion as to
the abuses of a Church, and a positive and total separation from a Church, as
it is such. From these things I lay down these following Propositions.

First, Where any Church is guilty of corruptions, both in doctrine and
practice, which it avoweth and professes, and requires the owning them as
necessary conditions of communion with her, there a non-communion with that
Church is necessary, and a total and positive separation is lawful and
convenient. I have said already that the necessity and lawfulness of this
departing from communion with any Church is wholly to be resolved by an inquiry
into the grounds and reasons of the action it self. So that the matter of fact
must of necessity be discussed, before the matter of Law as to separation from
the Church be brought into debate. If there be a just and necessary cause for
separation, it must needs be just and necessary; therefore the cause must be
the ground of resolving the nature of the ^ction. Schism then is a separation
from any Church upon any slight, trivial, unnecessary cause; but if the cause
be great and important, a Departure it may be, Schism it cannot be. They who
define Schism to be a voluntary separation from the Church of God; if by
voluntary, they mean that where the will is the cause of it: the definition
stands good and true; for that must needs be groundless and unnecessary as to
the Church it self: but if by voluntary be meant a spontaneous departing from
communion with a Church, which was caused by the corruptions of that Church,
then a separation may be so voluntary, and yet no Schism: for though it be
voluntary, as to the act of departing, yet that is only consequentially,
supposing a cause sufficient to take such a resolution; but what is voluntary
antecedently, that it has no other Motive but faction and humor, that is
properly Schism, and ought so to be looked upon. But in our present case, three
things are supposed as the causes and motives to such a forsaking communion.
First, Corruption in Doctrine; the main ligature of a religious Society is the
consent of it in Doctrine with the rule of Religion, the Word of God. Therefore
any thing which tends to subvert and overthrow the foundation of the gathering
such a Society (which is the profession and practice of the true Religion)
yields sufficient ground to withdraw from communion with those who profess and
maintain it. Not that every small error is a just ground of separation, for
then there would be no end of separation, and men must separate from one
another, till knowledge comes to its perfection, which will only be in glory;
but any thing which either directly or consequentially does destroy any
fundamental article of Christian faith. Which may be as well done by adding to
fundamental articles, as by plain denying them. And my reason is this: because
the very ratio of a fundamental article does imply, not only its necessity to
be believed and practiced (and the former in reference to the latter, for
things are therefore necessary to be known, because necessary to be done, and
not e contra) but likewise its sufficiency as to the end for which it is called
Fundamental. So that the articles of faith called Fundamental, are not only
such as are necessary to be believed, but if they be, are sufficient for
salvation to all that do believe them. Now he that adds any thing to be
believed or done as fundamental, that is necessary to salvation, does thereby
destroy the sufficiency of those former articles in order to salvation; for if
they were sufficient, how can new ones be necessary. The case will be clear by
an Instance. Who assert the satisfaction of Christ for sinners to be a
fundamental article, and thereby do imply the sufficiency of the belief of
that in order to salvation; now if a Pope or any other command me to believe
the meritoriousnesse of good works with the satisfaction of Christ as necessary
to salvation, by adding this he destroys the former as a fundamental article:
for if Christ's satisfaction be sufficient, how can good works be meritorious?
and if this latter be necessary, the other was not; for if it were, what need
this be added! Which is a thing the Papists with their new Creed of Pius the
fourth would do well to consider: and others too, who so confidently assert
that none of their errors touch the foundation of faith. Where there is now
such corruption in Doctrine supposed in a Church; withdrawing and separation
from such a Church, is as necessary as the avoiding of her errors, and not
partaking of her sins is. Thence we read in Scripture, of rejecting such as are
heretics, and withdrawing from their society, which will as well hold, to
Churches as to persons, and so much the more, as the corruption is more
dangerous, and the relation nearer of a member to a Church, then of one man to
another: And from the reason of that command, we read in Ecclesiastical
History, that when Eulalius, Euphronius, and Placentius were constituted
Bishops of Antioch, being Arrians, many both of the Clergy and people,
Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 22.
who resolved to adhere to the true faith, withdrew from the public meetings,
and had private Assemblies of their own. And after, when Leontius was made
Bishop of Antioch, who Id. l, 2. cap. 24.
favored the Arrians, Flavianus and Diodorus, not only publicly reproved him
for deserting the Orthodox faith, but withdrew the people from communion with
him, and undertook Lib. 2. c. 17. Advers.
the charge of them themselves: So when Foelix was made Bishop of Rome, none of
the Church of Rome would enter into the Church while he was there. And
Vincentius haeres. cap. 16.
Lyrinensis tells us a remarkable story of Photinus Bishop of Syrmium in
Pannonia, a man of great abilities and same, who suddenly turned from the true
faith, and though his people both loved and admired him, yet when they
discerned his errors, Quem antea quasi arietem gregis sequebantur, eundem
deinceps veluti lupum fugere coeperunt, Whom they followed before as the leader
of the flock, they now run away from as a devouring woolf. This is the first
thing which makes separation, and withdrawment of communion, lawful and
necessary, viz. corruption of Doctrine. The second is Corruption of practice: I
speak not of practice, as relating to the civil conversation of men, but as it
takes in the Agenda of Religion. When Idolatrous customs, and superstitious
practices are not only crept into a Church, but are the prescribed devotion of
it: Such as the adoration of the Eucharist (chiefly insisted on by Mr. Daille
in his Apology, as a cause of separation from the Church of Rome) invocation of
Saints and Angels, worshipping Images, and others of a like nature, used among
the Papists, which are of themselves sufficient to make our separation from
them necessary. But then thirdly, as an accession to these two, is the public
owning and professing them, and requiring them, as necessary conditions of
communion, from all the members of their Church which makes our withdrawing
from them unavoidably necessary, as long as we judge them to be such
corruptions as indeed they are. For men not to forsake the belief of errors,
supposing them to be such, is impossible: and not to forsake the practice and
profession of them upon such belief, were the highest hypocrisy: and to do so,
and not to forsake the communion of that Church where these are owned, is
apparently contradictious (as Mr. Chilling worth well observes) seeing the
condition of communion Answ. to the Pref. p. 16. s. 22.
with it is, that we must profess to believe all the doctrines of that Church,
not only not to be errors, but to be certain and necessary truths: So that on
this account, to believe there are any errors in the Church of Rome, is
actually, and ipso facto, to forsake the communion of that Church; because the
condition of its communion is the belief that there are none: And so that
learned and rational Author there fully proves, that those who require
unlawful and unnecessary conditions of communion, must take the imputation of
Schism upon themselves, by making separation from them just and necessary. In
this case, when corruptions in opinion or practice are thus required, as
conditions of communion, it is impossible for one to communicate with such a
Church without sin; both materially, as the things are unlawful which he joins
with them in; and formally, as he judges them so. This is the first
Proposition.

The second is, Where a Church retains the purity of doctrine. 6.
in its public profession, but has a mixture of some corruptions, as to
practice, which are only tolerated and not imposed, it is not lawful to
withdraw communion from such a Church, much less to run into total separation
from it: For here is no just and lawful cause given of withdrawing; here is no
owned corruption of doctrine or practice, nor any thing required as a condition
of communion, but what is in its self necessary; and therefore there can be no
plea, but only pollution from such a communion, which cannot be to any who do
not own any such supposed corruptions in the Church. Men may communicate with a
Church, and not communicate with the abuses of a Church; for the ground of his
communicating is, its being a Church, and not a corrupt or defective Church.
And that men are not themselves* guilty, by partaking with those who are guilty
of corruptions in a Church, might be easily and largely proved, both from the
Church of the Jews in the case of Elies sons, and the Christian Churches of
As^^, and Corinth, where we read of many corruptions reproved, yet nothing
spoken of the duty of the members of those Churches to separate from them,
which would have been, had it been a sin to communicate with those Churches
when such corruptions were in it. Besides, what reason is there that one man's
sins should defile another, more then another graces sanctify another? and
why corruption in another should defile him more then in himself, and so keep
him from communicating with himself? and what security any one can have in the
most refined Churches, but that there is some scandalous; or at least unworthy
person among them? and whether then it is not his duty to try and examine all
himself particularly, with whom he communicates? and why his presence at one
Ordinance should defile it more then at another? and why at any more then in
wordly converse, and so turn at last to make men Anchorets, as it has done
some? Many other reasons See Mr. Durham, Tract of Scandal, part. 2. chapter 12.
might be produced against this, which I forbear, it being fully spoke to by
others. And so I come to the Third Proposition, which is,

Where any Church, retaining the purity of doctrine, does require the owning
of, and conforming to, any unlawful or suspected practice, men may lawfully
deny conformity to, and communion with that Church in such things, without
incurring the guilt of Schism. I say not, men may proceed to positive Schism as
it is called, that is, erecting of new Churches, which from Cyprian is called
erigere Altar contra Altar; but only that withdrawing communion from a Church
in unlawful or suspected things, does not lay men under the guilt of Schism:
which because I know it may meet with some opposition from those men, who will
sooner call men Schismatics then prove them so, I shall offer this reason for
it to consideration. If our separation from the Church of Rome. was therefore
lawful, because she required unlawful things, as conditions of her communion;
then wherever such things are required by any Church; non-communion with that
Church in those things will be lawful too; and where non-communion is lawful,
there can be no Schism in it. Whatever difference will be thought of, as to the
things imposed by the Church of Rome and others, will be soon answered by the
proportionable difference between bare nonconformity, and total and positive
separation. What was in its self lawful and necessary then, how comes it to be
unlawful and unnecessary now? Did that justify our withdrawing from them,
because they required things unlawful, as conditions of communion; and will
not the same justify other men's nonconformity, in things supposed by them
unlawful? If it be said here, that the Popes power was an usurpation, which is
not in lawful Governors of Churches; it is soon replied, That the Popes
usurpation mainly lies in imposing things upon men's consciences as necessary,
which are doubtful, or unlawful; and wherever the same thing is done, there
is an usurpation of the same nature, though not in so high a degree; and it may
be as lawful to withdraw communion from one as well as the other. If it be
said, that men are bound to be ruled by their Governors, in determining what
things are lawful, and what not? To this it is answered: first, no true
Protestant can swear blind obedience to Church Governors in all things. It is
the highest usurpation to rob men of the liberty of their judgments: That
which we plead for against the Papists, is, that all men have eyes in their
heads as well as the Pope, that every one has a judicium privata discretionis,
which is the rule of practice, as to himself; and though we freely allow a
ministerial power, under Christ, in the Government of the Church, yet that
extends not to an obligation upon men, to go against the dictates of their own
reason and conscience. Their power is only directive and declarative, and in
matters of duty can bind no more then reason and evidence brought from
Scripture by them does. A man has not the power over his own understanding,
much l^sse can others have it. Nullus credit Picus Mi-? ra^d. Apol. p. 225. 226.
aliquid esse verum, quia vult credere id esse verum; non est enim in potestate
hominis facere aliquid apparere intellectui suo verum quando voluerit. Either
therefore men are bound to obey Church Governors in all things absolutely,
without any restriction or limitation; (which if it be not usurpation and
dominion over others faith in them, and the worst of implicit faith in others,
it is hard to define what either of them is,) or else if they be bound to obey
only in lawful things; I then enquire who must be judge what things are
lawful in this case, what not? if the Governors still, then the power will be
absolute again; for to be sure, whatever they command, they will say is
lawful, either in it self, or as they command it: if every private person must
judge what is lawful, and what not, which is commanded (as when all is said,
every man will be his owd judge in this case, in things concerning his own
welfare) then he is no further bound to obey then he judges the thing to be
lawful which is commanded. The plea of an erroneous conscience, takes not off
the obligation to follow the dictates of it; for as he is bound to lay it down,
supposing it erroneous, so he is bound not to go against it, while it is not
laid down. But then again, if men are bound to submit to Governors in the
determination of lawful things, what plea could our Reformers have to withdraw
themselves from the Popes yoke? it might have still held true, Boves arabant
and Job 1 14. Sum. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 6.
Asina Pascebantur simul, which is Aquinas his argument for the submission of
inferiors in the Church to their superiors: for did not the Pope plead to be
a lawful Governor, and if men are bound to submit to the determination of
Church Governors, as to the lawfulness of things; they were bound to believe
him in that as well as other things, and so separation from that Church was
unlawful then: So that let men turn and wind themselves which way they will,
by the very same arguments that any will prove separation from the Church of
Rome lawful, because she required unlawful things, as conditions of her
communion, it will be proved lawful, not to conform to any suspected or
unlawful practice, required by any Church Governors upon the same terms; if
the thing so required, be after serious and ^ober inquiry, judged unwarrantable
by a man's own conscience. And withal it would be further considered, whether
when our best Writers against the Papists, do lay the imputation o^ Schism, not
on those who withdraw communion, but on them for requiring such conditions of
communion (whereby they did rather eject men out of their communion, than the
others separate from them) they do not by the same arguments, lay the
imputation of Schism on all who require such conditions of communion, and take
it wholly off from those who refuse to conform for conscience sake. To this I
shall subjoyn the judgment of as learned and judicious a Divine, as most our
Nation has bred, in his excellent (though little). Tract concerning Schism. In
those Schisms, says he, which concern Mr. Hales of Schism, p. 8.
fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusing communion, but only to require
the execution of some unlawful or suspected act; for not only in reason, but
in Religion too, that Maxim admits of no release, Cantissimi cujusque
praeceptum; Quod dubitas, ne feceris. And after instanceth in the Schism about
Image Worship, determined by the second Council of Nice, in which he
pronounces the Schismatical party to be the Synod its self, and that on these
grounds: First, because it is acknowledged by all, that it is a thing
unnecessary. Secondly, it is by most suspected. Thirdly, it is by many held
utterly unlawful: Can then (says he) the enjoining of such a thing be ought
else but abuse? Or can the refusal of communion here, be thought any other
thing then duty? Here, or upon the like occasion, to separate, may peradventure
bring personal trouble or danger (against which it concerns any honest man to
have pectus praeparatum); further harm it cannot do, so that in these cases you
cannot be to seek what to think, or what you have to do. And afterward
propounds it as a remedy to prevent Schism, to have all Liturgies and public
forms of service so framed, as that they admit not of particular and private
fancies, but contain only such things, in which all Christians do agree. For,
says he, consider of all the Liturgies that are, and ever have been, and
remove from them whatever is scandalous to any party, and leave nothing but
what all agree on* and the evil shall be, that the public service and honor
of God shall no ways suffer: Whereas, to load our public forms, with the
private fancies upon which we differ, is the most sovereign way to perpetuate
Schism unto the Worlds end. Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of
Scriptures in the plainest and simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish
out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of private Opinion, or of
Church Pomp, of Garments or prescribed Gestures, of Imagenary, of Music, of
matter concerning the dead, of many Superfluities, which creep into the Church,
under the name of Order and Decency, did interpose it self. To charge Churches
and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first beginning of all
Superstition; and when scruple of conscience began to be made or pretended,
then Schism began to break in; if the special Guides and Fathers of the Church,
would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with Superfluities, or not
over-rigid, either in reviving obsolete customs, or imposing new, there would
be far less cause of Schism or Superstition; and all the inconvenience were
likely to ensue, would be but this, they should in so doing yield a little to
the imbecility of their inferiors, a thing which Saint Paul would never have
refused to do: mean while, wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a
piece of Church-Liturgy, he that separates is not the Schismatic; for it is
alike unlawful, to make profession of known or suspected falsehood, as to put in
practice unlawful or suspected actions.

Thus far that excellent person, whose words I have taken the pains to
transcribe, because of that great wisdom, judgment, and moderation, contained
in them; and the seasonableness of his Counsel and Advice, to the present
posture of affairs among us. Were we so happy but to take off things granted
unnecessary by all, and suspected by many, and judged unlawful by some; and to
make nothing the bonds of our Communion but what Christ has done, viz. one
Faith, one Baptism, etc. Allowing a liberty for matters of indifferency, and
bearing with the weakeness of those who cannot bear things which others account
lawful, we might indeed be restored to a true Primitive luster far sooner,
then by furbishing up some antiquated ceremonies, which can derive their
pedigree no higher, then from some ancient Custom and Tradition. God will one
day convince men, that the Unnion of the Church lies more in the Unity of Faith
and Affection, then in uniformity of doubtful Rites and Ceremonies. The bond of
Church Communion should be something common to strong and weak Christians, as S.
Austin says of the rule of faith, that it is pusillis magnisque communis; and
certainly the Primitive Church, Ep. 57.
that did not charge men's faith with such a load of Articles, as now in these
latter ages men are charged with, would much less burden men with imposing
doubtful practices upon them, as the ground of Church Communion. And for
public forms of Divine Service, such of all things certainly should be so
composed, as to be the least subject to any scruple from any persons
whatsoever; being on purpose composed for the declaring men's unity and consent
in their public worship: and those who are the most addicted to any one form,
can never plead it unlawful to amend it; whereas others may, that it is not
lawful or convenient at least, to use it without such alterations. And
therefore, were there that spirit of mutual condescension, which was most
certainly in Ecclesia primo-primitiva, as Gratian somwhere speaks, in the first
and truly primitive Church in the Apostles time; our breaches as to this thing
too, might soon be closed up, and the voice of Schism be heard among us no
more. It argued very much the prudence and temper of the French-Churches, in
composing their public forms of prayer, that they were so far from inserting
any thing controversiall into them, that Amyraldus tells us, the Papists
themselves De secess. ab Eccl. Romans and pace inter Evang. constable. p. 225.
would use them. Et quod vix credibile esset nisi public viseretur, eas
inseruerunt in eos libros in quos congesserunt varias precationum formulas, And
that which men would scarce believe unless they saw it, they inserted them into
their own Prayerbooks. The same temper was used by our Reformers in the
composing our Liturgy, in reference to the Papists, to whom they had then an
especial eye, as being the only party then appearing, whom they desired to draw
into their communion, by coming as near them as they well and safely could: And
certainly those Holy men, who did seek by any means to draw in others, at such
a distance from their principles as the Papists were, did never intend by what
they did for that end, to exclude any truly tender consciences from their
Communion. That which they laid as a bait for them, was never intended by them
as a hook for those of their own profession, But the same or greater reason
which made them seek so much at that time (before the rent between the Papists
and us was grown to that height it is now at; they being then in hopes by a
fair compliance to have brought the whole Kingdom to join with them) I say the
same reason which at that time made them yield so far to them then, would now
have persuaded them to alter and lay aside those things which yield matter of
offense, to any of the same profession with themselves now. For surely none
will be so uncharitable toward those of his own profession, as not to think
there is as much reason to yield in compliance with them, as with the Papists.
And it cannot but be looked upon as a Token of Gods severe displeasure against
us, if any, though unreasonable Proposals of Peace between us and the Papists
should meet with such entertainment among many; and yet any fair Offers of
Union and Accommodation among our selves, be so coldly embraced and entertained.

Having thus far showed how far the Obligation to keep in. 7.
a Church Society does reach to the several Members of it: I now proceed to
show what way the light of nature directs men to, for the quieting and
composing any differences which may arise in such a Society tending to break
the Peace of it. But before I come to the particular ways directed to by the
Law of Nature, for ending Controversies in the Church, I shall lay down some
things by way of caution, for the right understanding of what is already
spoken, lest I should be thought, instead of pleading for peace, to leave a
door open for an universal liberty, and so pave a new cawse-way toward Babel.
First, That though it be lawful not to conform to unlawful or suspected
practices in a Church: yet it is not therefore lawful to erect new Churches.
For all other essentials supposed in a Church, a mere requiring conformity in
some suspected rites, does not make it to be no true or sound Church, as to
other things, from which it is lawful to make a total divorce and separation. A
total separation is, when a new and distinct society for worship is entered
into, under distinct and peculiar officers governing by Laws and Church-rules
different from that form which they separate from. This I do not assert to be
therefore lawful, because some things are required, which men's consciences are
unsatisfied in: unless others proceed to eject and cast them wholly out of
communion on that account, in which case their separation is necessary, and
their Schism unavoidable. Secondly, therefore I assert, that as to things in
the judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches left undetermined by the
Law of God, and in matters of mere order and decency, and wholly as to the form
of Government, every one notwithstanding what his private judgment may be of
them, is bound for the Peace of the Church of God to submit to the
determination of the lawful Governors of the Church. And this is that power of
ending Controversies, which I suppose to be lodged in a Church-Society; not
such a one as whereto every man is bound to conform his private judgment; but
whereto every private person is bound to submit in Order to the Churches Peace.
That is, that in any Controversies arising in a Church, there is such a power
supposed, that may give such an authoritative Decision of the controversy in
which both parties are bound to acquiesce, so as to act nothing contrary to
that Decision. For as it is supposed that in all Contracts and Agreements for
mutual Society, men are content to part with their own Liberties for the good
of the whole: so likewise to part with the Authority of their own judgments,
and to submit to the Determination of things by the Rulers of the Society
constituted by them. For there must be a difference made between the Liberty
and freedom of a man's own judgment, and the Authority of it: for supposing men
out of all Society, every man has both; but Societies being entered, and
Contracts made, though men can never part with the freedom of their Judgments
(Men not having a Depotical power over their own understandings) yet they must
part with the Authority of their Judgments; i. e. in matters concerning the
Government of the Society, they must be ruled by Persons in Authority over
them. Else there can be nothing imagined but confusion, and disorder, in stead
of Peace and Unity in every civil State and Society. The case is the same in a
religious Society too, in which men must be supposed to part with the Authority
of their own judgments in matters concerning the Government of the Church, and
to submit to what is constituted and appointed by those who are entrusted with
the care and welfare of it. Else it is impossible there should be Unity and
Peace in a Church considered as a Society; which is as much as to say, there
neither is, nor can be such a Society. And that God has commanded that which
is Naturally impossible; I mean, freedom from divisions, and the Unity and
Peace of his Church: Which will appear from hence, because it can never be
expected that all men should be exactly of one mind: Either then men retaining
their private apprehensions, are bound to acquiesce in what is publicly
determined, or there is a necessity of perpetual confusions in the Church of
God. For the main inlet of all disturbances and divisions in the Church, is
from hence that Men consider themselves absolutely, and not as Members of a
governed Society, and so that they may follow their own own private judgments,
and are bound so to do in matters belonging to the Government of the Church,
and not to acquiesce for the Churches Peace in what is established in Order to
the ruling of this so constituted Society, by lawful Authority.

These things premised, the way is now fully cleared for the. 8.
discovering what ways are prescribed by the light of Nature for ending
controversies in the Church; which will appear to be these two.

1. In societies wherein persons act with an equality of Power, for the ending
differences arising, the less number must always acquiesce in the
determination of the greater. And therefore it i^ a generally received Axiom,
that in all Societies pars major ^ut habet universitatis, the greater part has
the power of the whole: And it is a standing Rule in the Civil Law, Refertur ad
universos quod public fit per majorem partem, which is determined by the
Lawyers to hold, not of the persons in power, C. de decurion. lib. 10. l.
nominationem Pet. Fabri. Comment. ad tit. de d^versis Reg. juris Lampridius in
Alex. Severo.
but of the persons present at the Determination; as when Alexander Severus
made fourteen of the Viri Consulares to be Curatores urbis, joined with the
Praefectis urbis, to Determine cases brought before them, what was determined
by the greater part of those present, was looked upon as binding, as if the
whole number had been there. And this Aristotle lays down as one of the
fundamental Laws of a Democratical Government. (...) (...). That must be
looked on as a just Politic l. 6. cap. 2.
and final decision of a Case debated, which the major part determines. And
therefore rationally infers, that in a Democracy the poorer sort (and so
likewise the worse) must always bear the greatest sway, because they are the
most. Which is an unavoydable inconvenience in that form of Government whether
in Church or State. The same he elsewhere applies to other forms of Government
which have a multitude of Rulers, as Aristocracy and Oligarchy: That which
seems good to the most obtains as a Law amongst all, Which Appian thus briefly
expresses, (...) and Dionys. Halicarnasseus, V. Grotium de jure bell. etc. lib.
^. cap. 5. sect. ^7.
(...), the one speaking of matter of Fact, that it does obtain, the other of
matter of Law that it should do so. It appears then from the Law and light of
nature, that where ever any multitude acts in an equality of Power, the greater
part have the power of the whole; not from any right which the major part has
as superior over the less; but from the Law of nature, which will have every
part ordered for the good of the whole; which good cannot often times be obtained
without a special determination on one side or other; nor that determination
have its effect, if the Act of the major part may be rescinded by the less. So
that in every thing requiring special determination, this is to be esteemed the
most just and final decision which is done by the major part: For it would be
manifestly unjust for the lesser part to determine the greater, and therefore
by the Law of nature, the greater part has the right of the whole.

2. In a society consisting of many particular Companies or Congregations,
there must be a subordination of Powers by the Law of nature, which grants a
right of Appeal to an injured person from the lower and subordinate Power to
the higher and superior. Appealing is defined by the Lawyers to be Provocatio
iniquae sententiae querelam contineus. An address to a V. Iac. Omphalium de
usurp. Leg l. 7. c. 2 Ulp. l. 1. D. de Appel. H^ttom. com. V. Juris.
higher Power with complaint of wrong: and so in geneall it is defined by
Ulpian to be ab Inferioris Iudicis sententia ad superiorem provocatio: but, as
Hottoman observes, appeals may sometimes be made to a coordinate power upon
complaint of injustice done. As one Praetor, Consul, Tribune might be appealed
to, from the sentence of another. The original of Appeals then is, that
injuries may be redressed, and in order to that, nature dictates that there
ought to be a subordination of Powers one to another, lest any injury done
through corruption or ignorance of the immediate Judges, prove irremediable. To
which purpose our learned Whitaker says, that Appeals are juris divini and
naturalis, and in omni societate Controv. 4. qu. 4. c. 2.
admodum necessariae; propter multorum judicum vel iniquitatem, vel
ignorantiam; alioqui actum esset de innocente, si non liceret ab iniqua
sententia appestare: So that appeals are founded upon natural right, lest men
should be injured in any determination of a case by those that have the
cognizance of it. And in order to a redress of wrongs, and ending
controversies, Nature tells us that Appeals must not be infinite, but there
must be some Power, from whence Appeals must not be made: What that should be,
must be determined in the same manner that it is in Civils; not that every
Controversy in the Church must be determined by an Ecumenical Council, but
that it is in the Power of the Supreme Magistrate, as Supreme head in causes
Ecclesiastical, to limit and fix this Subordination, and determine how far it
shall go, and no further. The Determination being in order to the Peace of the
Church, which Christian Magistrates are bound to look after, and see that
causes hang not perpetually without Decision: And so we find the Christian
Emperors constituting to whom Appeals should be made, and where they should be
fixed, as Justinian Just. auth. diss. epis. collat. 9. Theod. cod. de S. S.
Eccl. c. omni.
and Theodostus did. For when the Church is incorporated into the
Commonwealth, the chief Authority in a Commonwealth as Christian, belongs to
the same to which it does as a Commonwealth: But of that already. It is then
against the Law and Light of Nature, and the natural right of every man, for
any particular company of men, calling themselves a Church, to ingross all
Ecclesiastical Power so into their hands, that no liberty of Appeals for
redress can be made from it. Which (to speak within compass) is a very high
usurpation made upon the Civil and Religious rights of Christians; because it
leaves men under a causeless censure, without any authoritative vindication of
them from it. As for that way of elective Synods, substituted in the place of
authoritative Power to determine Controversies, it is a (...), which will never
be sovereign enough to cure the distemper it is brought for: For elective
Synods are but like that which the Lawyers call arbitrium boni viri, which they
distinguish from arbitrium G^ot. de ^ure belli a^ p^cis, l. 3. cap. 20. sect 46.
ex compromisso, and binds no further then the party concerned does judge the
Sentence equal and just. So that this helps us with no way to end
controversies in the Church, any further then the persons engaged are willing
to account that just which shall be judged in their Case. Taking then a
coercive Power, only for such a one as may authoritatively decide a
controv^rsie, we see what great Reason there is for what the Historian
observes: Arbitriis ii se debent interponere, qui Vellei. Paterc. hist. lib. 2.
non parente^ coercere possunt: That all Power of Arbitration should have some
juridicall power going along with it, to make a final end of quarrels. But
that which seems yet more strange to me, is this, that by those who assert the
Independency of particular Congregation^, it is so hotly pleaded, that Christ
has given every particular Congregation a Power over its own Members, to
determine controversies arising between them: but, that if one, or many of
these particular Congregations should err, or break the Rule, he has left no
power Authoritatively to decide what should be done in such cases. Can we
conceive that Christ should provide more for the Cases of particular Persons,
then of particular Churches? And that he should give Authority for Determining
one, and not the other? Is there any more coactive Power given by any to
Synods, or greater Officers, then there is by them to particular Churches?
which power is only declarative as to the Rule, though Authoritative as to
persons wherever it is lodged. Is there not more danger to Gods People, by
the scandals of Churches, then Persons? Or did Christ's Power of governing his
People reach to them only as particular Congregations? Does not this too
strongly savor of the Pars Donati? only the Meridies must be rendered a
particular Congregationall Church, where Christ causes his Flock to rest? But
supposing the Scripture not expressly to lay down a Rule for governing many
Churches, are men outlawed of their natural Rights? that supposing a wrong
Sentence passed in the Congregation, there is no hopes, way, or means to
redress his injury, and make his innocence known? Does this look like an
Institution of Christ? But that which I conceive is the (...); and the Original
of this mistake, is, that the Churches we read of first Planted in Scripture,
were only particular Congregations; and therefore there is no proper
Church Power beyond them, or above them. I meddle not with the Ant^cedent now,
which is largely discussed by others; but the extreme weakness of the
consequence, is that I am here obliged to discover. For what a strange
shortness of Discourse is it to Argue thus; If when there was but one
Congregation, that Congregation had all Power within its self; then when there
are more particular congregations, it must be so; and yet this is the very
Foundation of all those Kingdoms of Yvetos, as one calls them, those sole
self-governing congregations. When there was but one congregation in a Church,
it was necessary if it had any Church Power, that it must be lodged in that one
congregation: But when this congregation was multiplied into many more, is it
not as necessary for their mutual Government, there should be a common power
governing them together, as a joynt-society? Besides, the first congregational
Church in the New Testament, viz. that of Jerusalem, could be no particular
Organical Church; for it had many, if not all, Universal Officers in it; and
if they were the fixed Pastors of that Church, they could not, according to
the Principles of those who thus speak, Preach to any other congregation but
their own, by virtue of their Office: And so, either their Apostolical Office
and Commission must be destroyed, if they* were Pastors of particular Organical
Churches; or if their Apostolical Office be asserted, their Pastorship of
particular Organicall Churches is destroyed by their own Principles, who
^ssert, that the Pastor of a Church can do no Pastoral Office out. of his own
congregation. The case is the same, as to other Churches planted by the
Apostles, and governed by themselves; which two, as far as I can find in the
New Testament, were of an equal extent; viz. That all the Churches planted by
Apostles, were chiefly governed by themselves, though they had subordinate
officers under them. These first Churches then were not such particular
Organized Churches, but they were as the first matter of many congregations to
be propagated out of them; which after made one Society, consisting of those
several congregations imbodyed together, and ruled by one common Government. As
in a College, every Tutor has his own Pupils, which he rules; and if we
suppose but one Tutor at first in the College, with his Pupils, all the power,
both common to the Society, and peculiar to his Flock, is joined together; but
when there are many more Tutors, having Pupils under their charge, all these,
for their better ordering as a Society, must be governed by the common
Government of the College, to which the particular Government of every Tutor
is and must be subordinate: But this will be more fully made appear in the
Original of Civil Government. It is far more evident, that all Civil power lay
at first in Adam and his Family, and afterward in particular Families, than
that all Church Power lay in particular congregations at first. We may then
with as good Reason say, that there is no lawful civil: Government now, but
that of particular Families; and that no National Government has any right or
power over particular Families, because Families had once all civil Power
within themselves; as because it ^^ supposed, that all Church Power lay first
in particular congregations, therefore there must be no Church Power above
them; nor that particular congregations are subject to such Government as is
requisite for the Regulating of the Society in common, as comprehending in it
many particular congregations. Let them show then, how any Government in the
State is lawful, when Families had the first power, and by what right now
those Families are subordinate to the civil Magistrate, and what necessity
there is for it; and by the very same Reasons will we show the lawfulness* of
Government in the Church over many Congregations, and that those are by the
same right, and upon the same necessity, to subordinate themselves to the
Government of the Church, considere^^^ a Society taking in many particular
Congregations. The Parallel runs on further and clearer still: For as the heads
of the several Families after the Flood, had the command over all dwelling
under their Roofs, while they remained in one Family; and when that increased
into more, there power was extended over them too; which was the first Original
of Monarchy in the World: So the Planters of the first Churches, that while the
Church was but one Congregation, had power over it, when this Congregation was
multiplied into more, their Power equally extended over them all. And as
afterward, several heads of Families upon their increase, did constitute
distinct Civil Governments, wherein were subordinate Officers, but those
Governments themselves were coordinate one with another: So in the Church, so
many Congregations as make up one Provincial, or National Society (as
succession and prudence does order the bounds of them) do make up several
particular Churches, enjoying their Officers ruling them, but subordinare to
the Governors of the Church in common: Which Society, National or Provincial,
is subordinate to none beyond its self, but enjoyes a free Power within its
self of ordering things for its own Government, as it judges most convenient,
and agreeable to the Rules of Scripture. The sum then of what I say,
concerning subordination of Officers and Powers in the Society of the Church,
is this, That by the light and Law of Nature it appears, that no individual
company or Congregation, has an absolute, independent power within its self,
but that, for the redressing grievances happening in them, appeals are (...) to
the parties aggrieved, and a subordination of that particu(...) Congregation,
to the Government of the Society in common. (...)at, the right of Appealing,
and Original of Subordination, is from Nature; the particular manner and form
of subordinate and superior Courts, is to be fetched Grot. de Imp. sum.
Potest.. cap. 7. s. 14, 15, etc. c. 8. s. 13. Chamier: To. 2. l. 13. c. 12.
Whitaker Co ^tr. 3 q. 2. C^is. de Lib. Eccles. cap. 2. M^r ^. c. hist. Papa^us
passim.
from positive Laws; the limitation of Appeals, extent of jurisdiction, the
binding power of Sentence, so far as concerns external Unity in the Church, is
to be fetched from the power of the Magistrate, and civil Sanctions and
Constitutions. The Churches power, as to Divine Law, being only directive and
declarative; but being confirmed by a civil Sanction, is juridicall and
obligatory. Concerning the Magistrates power to call, confirm, alter, repeal
the Decrees of Synods; see Grotius, Chamier, Whitaker, Casaubon, Mornay, and
others, who fully and largely handle it; To whom having nothing to add, I will
take nothing at all from them: As for that time when the Church was without
Magistrates ruling in it, in those things left undetermined by the Rule of the
Word, they acted out of Principles of Christian Prudence agreeable to the Rules
of Scripture, and from the Principles of the Law of nature; One of which we
come in the next place to speak to. So much for the Churches Power, considered
as a Society for ending controversies, arising within its self, tending to
break the Peace and Unity of it.

CHAP. VII.
The fifth thing dictated by the Law of Nature, That all that are admitted into
this Society, must consent to be governed by the Laws and Rules of it. Civil
Societies founded upon mutual consent; express in the first entrance, implicit
in others born under societies actually formed. Consent as to a Church
necessary, the manner of Consent determined by Christ by Baptism and
Profession. Implicit Consent supposed in all baptized; explicit, declared by
challenging the privileges, and observing the duties of the Covenant.
Explicit by express owning the Gospel when adult, very useful for recovering
the credit of Christianity. The Discipline of the Primitive Church cleared from
Origin, Justin Martyr, Pliny, Tertullian. The necessary requisites of Church
Membership, whether positive signs of Grace: Explicit Covenant, how far
necessary; not the formal Constitution of a Church, * proved by several
Arguments.

THe Law of Nature dictates, That all who are admitted into. 1.
this Society, must consent to be governed by the Laws and Rules of that
Society, according to its Constitution. For none can be looked upon as a Member
of a Society, but such a one as submits to the Rules and Laws of the Society,
as constituted at the time of his entrance into it. That all civil Societies
are founded upon voluntary consent and agreement of parties, and do depend upon
Contracts and Covenants made between them, is evident to any that consider that
men are not bound by the Law of Nature to associate themselves with any but
whom they shall judge fit; that Dominion and Propriety was introduced by free
consent of men: and so there must be Laws and Bonds fit, agreement made, and
submission acknowledged to those Laws, else Men might plead their Natural
Right and Freedom still, which would be destructive to the very Nature of these
Societies. When men then did first part with their natural Liberties, two
things were necessary in the most express terms to be declared: First, a free
and voluntary consent to part with so much of their Natural Rights as was not
consistent with the well being of the Society: Secondly, a free submission to
all Laws, which should be agreed upon at their entrance into Society, or
afterward as they see cause. But when Societies were already entered, and
Children born under them, no such express consent was required in them, being
bound by virtue of the Protection they find from Authority to submit to it, and
an implicit consent is supposed in all such as are born under that Authority.
But for their more full understanding of this Obligation of theirs, and to lay
the greater tie of Obedience upon them, when they come to understanding, it
has been conceived very requisite by most States to have an explicit
Declaration of their consent, either by some formal Oath of Allegiance, or some
other way sufficiently expressing their fidelity, in standing to the Covenants
long since supposed to be made. To apply this now to the Church.

We have all along hitherto considered the Church in general, as a Society or
Corporation which was necessary in order to our discovering what is in it from
the light of nature without Positive Laws.

But here we must take notice of what was observed by Father. 2.
Laynez the Jesuit at the Council of Trent, That it is not with the Church as
with other Societies, which are first themselves, Hist. Council of Trent, l. 7.
p. 61^.
and then constitute the Governors. But the Governor of this Society was
first himself, and he appointed what Orders, Rules, and Laws should govern
this Society; and wherein he has determined any thing, we are bound to look
upon that, as necessary to the maintaining of that Society which is built upon
his Constitution of it. And in many of those Orders which Christ has settled
in his Church, the Foundation of them is in the Law of nature; but the
particular determination of the manner of them is from himself. Thus it is in
the case we now are upon; Nature requires that every one entering into a
Society, should consent to the Rules of it. Our Savior has determined how
this Consent should be expressed, viz. by receiving Baptism from those who have
the power to dispense it: which is the federal Rite whereby our consent is
expressed to own all the Laws and submit to them, whereby this Society is
governed: Which at the first entering of men into this Society of the Church was
requisite to be done by the express and explicit consent of the parties
themselves, being of sufficient capacity to declare it, but the Covenant being
once entered into by themselves, not only in their own name, but in the name of
their Posterity (a thing employed in all Covenants Deuteronomy. 29. 15. Acts 2. 38.
wherein benefits do redound to Posterity, that the Obligation should reach
them to; but more particular in this, it having been always the T^nour of Gods
Covenants with men, to enter the seed as well as the persons themselves, as to
outward Privileges) an implicit consent as to the children in Covenant, is
sufficient to enter them upon the privileges of it by Baptism, although withal
it be highly rational for their better understanding the Engagement they entered
into, that when they come to age, they should explicitly declare their own
voluntary consent to submit to the Laws of Christ, and to conform their lives
to the Profession of Christianity, which might be a more then probable way, and
certainly most agreeable both to Reason and Scripture to advance the credit of
Christianity once more in the World, which at this day so much suffers by so
many professing it without understanding the terms of it; who swallow down a
profession of Christianity, as boys do pills, without knowing what it is
compounded of, which is the great Reason it works so little alteration upon
their spirits.

The one great cause of the great flourishing of Religion in. 3.
the Primitive times, was certainly the strictness used by them in their
admission of members into Church-Societies, which is fully described by Origin
against Celsus, who tells us they did (...), enquire into their Dib. 3. p. 142,
143, and 147.
lives and carriages, to discern their seriousness in the profession of
Christianity during their being Catechumeni: Who after tells us they did
require (...), true Repentance and Reformation of Life, (...), then we admit
them to the participation of our Mysteries. I confess the Discipline of the
Primitive Church has been very much misrepresented to us, by men's looking upon
it through the glass of the modern practices and customs obtaining among us: as
though all this only concerned the Admission to the Lords Supper: though that
was always in chiefest veneration in the Church of God, as being the chief of
Gospel-Mysteries (as Tertul. Apol. c. 39, describes exclusion to be a
communicatione Orationis and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii:
they loved to speak) yet I cannot find that any were admitted to all other
Ordinances freely with them who were debarred from this: but their admission to
one, did include an admission to all* so on the contrary, I find none admitted
to Baptism, who were not to the Lords Supper; and if Catechumeni, presently
after, only confirmation intervening (which will hardly be ever found separate
from Baptism, till the distinction of the double Chrism in vertice and pectore
came up, which was about Ieroms time.)

The thing then which the Primitive Church required in admitting. 4.
persons adult to Baptism, and so to the Lords Supper, was a serious visible
profession of Christianity; which was looked upon by them as the greatest
Evidence of their real consent to the Rules of the Gospel. For that purpose it
will be worth our taking notice what is set down by Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2.
speaking of the celebration of the Lords Supper; P. 97* ed. Paris. 1636:
(...). Where we see what was required before Admission to the Lords Supper, A
Profession of Faith in the truths of the Gospel, and answerable Life to the
Gospel, without which it was not lawful to participate of the Lords Supper. And
further we see by Pliny, that the Christians of those times did make use of
some solemn Engagements among themselves which he calls Sacramenta; they did se
Sacramento obstringere ne funta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne
fidem fallerent, etc. and Tertullian reports it out of Pliny, that he found
nothing Lib. 10* e^* 97*
de Sacramentis eorum (as Iunius first reads it out of M. S. for de Sacris,
after him Heraldus, and as it is now read in Rigaltius Edition) besides
cautelam and ad confoederandam disciplinam, etc. scelera prohibentes, which
Eusebius calls (...), pacta, Covenants between them; and so Master Seldom
interprets the place of Origin in the beginning of his Book against Hist. Eccl.
lib. 3. cap. 33. Seldom. de Sy^ed. l. 1. cap. 9. V. Heraldum in Tertul.
Apologet. cap. 39.
Celsus, where Celsus begins his charge against the Christians, (...): where he
takes (...) not, as Gelenius renders it, conventus, but in its proper sense for
contracts or covenants that were made by the Christians as by other Societies,
only permitted, and tolerated by the Commonwealth. And we find by Pliny, that
when the hetaeriae were forbidden, he brought the Christians in under that Law;
the ground of those Societies was only a mutual compact and agreement among
the persons of it: Such as among the Essens of the Jews, and the Schools of
Philosophers among the Greeks. Josephus mentions the (...) of those who were
admitted into the Society of the Essens, And so in all other Societies Joseph.
Hales. p. 2. cap. 12.
which subsist only from mutual confederation in a Commonwealth. Thus I
acknowledge it to be in Christianity, that there must be such a supposed
contract or voluntary consent in the persons engaged in such Societies. But
with this observable difference, that although there must be a consent in both,
yet the one is wholly free, as to any pre-engagement or obligation to it, as
well as to the act its self; but in religious societies, though the Act of
consent be free, yet there is an antecedent Obligation upon men, binding them
to this voluntary consent. The want of the understanding this Difference, is
the very Foundation of that Opinion men call Erastianism; For the followers of
Erastus, when they find that Christians did act ex confoederata disciplina,
they presently conclude all Church Power lay only in mutual consent. It is
granted, Church Power does suppose consent; but then all Christians are under
an Obligation from the Nature of Christianity to express this consent, and to
submit to all censures Legally inflicted. About the hetaeriae and Societies
among the Romans, we may take notice of the Law of Twelve Tables. So in the
collection of Lud. Charondus, Sodalibus qui ejusdem Collegii sunt, and jus
cotundi habent, potestas esto pactionis quam volent inter se ineunda dum ne
quid ex publica lege corrumpant. Ex Caio c. 4. D. de Collec. and corp.

I confess, when persons are entered into a visible Church-So. 4.
ciety by Baptism, if they will own that profession they were baptized into,
and are not guilty either of plain ignorance of it, or manifest scandal, and
demand as their right the other Ordinances of the Gospel; I see not by what
power they may be excluded. If we fix not in a serious visible prosession as
the ground of giving right, but require positive evidences of grace in every
one to be admitted to Ordinances as the only thing giving right, for my part,
setting aside the many inconveniences besides which attend that in reference to
the persons to be admitted, I see not how with a safe and good conscience
Ordinances can be administered by any. My reason is this: Every one, especially
a Minister, in that case ought to proceed upon certain grounds that the person
admitted has right to the Ordinance to be administered; but if positive signs
of grace be required, a man's conscience cannot proceed upon any certainty,
without infallible knowledge of another spiritual state, which I suppose none
will pretend to. My meaning is, that which gives right, must be something
evident to the person admitting into it, if it be his duty to enquire after it;
but if only positive signs of grace be looked on, as giving right, the ground
of right can never be so evident to another person, as to proceed with a good
conscience, i. e. with a full persuasion of another right to the administration
of any Ordinance to him. If it be said, that these are required only as tokens
of a true visible profession, and it is that which gives the right; I reply,
Our knowledge of, and assent to the conclusion* can be no stronger, nor more
certain then to the premises from when^^ it is inferred; if therefore true
profession gives right, and our knowledge of that proceeds upon our knowledge
of the work of grace, we are left at the same uncertainty we were at before.
But if we say, that an outward profession of the Gospel (where there is nothing
rendering men incapable of owning it, which is ignorance, nor declaring they do
not own it, which is s^andall) is that which gives a visible right to the
Ordinances of the Church as visible, we have something to fix our selves upon,
and to bottom a persuasion of the right of persons to Ordinances.

Christ when he instituted Churches, did institute them as visible Societies,
that is, to have marks whereby to be known and distinguished, as other
Societies in the world are; now that which puts a difference between this and
other Societies, is an open profession of Christianity, which profession is
looked upon as the outward expression of the internal consent of the soul to
the Doctrine and Laws of the Gospel. Which outward evidence of consent, where
there is nothing evidently and directly oppugning it, is that which the Church
of God in admission of visible members is to proceed upon. I nowhere find that
ever Christ or his Apostles in making disciples, or admitting to
Church Membership, did exact any more then a professed willingness to adhere
to the Doctrine which they preached; nor that they refused any who did declare
their desire to join with them. An owning Christianity is all we read of
antecedent to admission of Church Members. And if any thing else be further
required as necessary, we must either say, the Word of God is defective in
institutions of necessity to the Church, which I suppose the assertors of it
will not be so inconsistent to their own principles, as to do; or else must
produce, where any thing further is required by the Word of God.

By this we may see what to answer those who require an. 7.
explicit Covenant from all members of the Church, as that which gives the
form and being to a Church. If they mean only in the first constitution of a
visible Church, an express owning of the Gospel Covenant; there is none will
deny that to be necessary to make one a member of the visible Church of Christ.
If they further mean, that there must be a real confederation between those who
join together in Gospel Ordinances in order to their being a Church, I know
none will question it that know what it is that makes a Society to be so; which
is such a real confederation with one another: If they mean further, that
though Christians be bound by virtue of their Gospel Covenant to join with some
Church*Society, yet not being determined by Scripture to what particular Church
they should join; therefore for Christians better understanding what their
mutual duty is to one another; and who that Pastor is to whom they owe the
relation of member, that there should be some significant declaration either by
words or actions of their willingness to join with such a particular Society
in Gospel Ordinances; I shall grant this to be necessary too. But if beyond
this their meaning be, that a formal explicit covenant be absolutely necessary
to make any one a member of a Church, I see no reason for it. For,

1. If there may be a real confederation without this; then this is not
necessary; but there may be a real confederation without this explicit
covenant: as appears in those Churches of Christ, both in the primitive times,
and since the Reformation, who have never used it, which none I suppose who
maintain this opinion will deny to have been true visible Churches of Christ.

2. If the Gospel Covenant entered into by any gives a right to
Gospel Ordinances by its self, then an explicit covenant is not that which
makes one a member of a Church; but the Gospel Covenant gives that right to all
Gospel Ordinances. If by Baptism, the person baptized have a legal title to all
Gospel Ordinances, then, etc. The Minor appears, in that they are admitted
Church Members by Baptism; and how can any be a Member of a Church, and not
have right to all Ordinances in it, supposing capacity to receive them? A right
once received, continues till it be forfeited, especially when it is such a
right as is not limited to any particular privileges, but to all the
privileges of that Society into which they are entered.

3. The reality of consent may be sufficiently manifested without an explicit
covenant; as in the joining with those who are under the same profession in the
common acts of the Society and acceptance of, and submission to the Rulers of
that Society, which implicitly is that Covenant which they would have
expressed; and actions in this case, are as declarative and significative as
words.

4. If a Church may cease to be a true Church, without explicit disowning such
a Covenant, then it is not explicit covenanting which makes a Church; but a
Church may cease to be a true Church without explicit disowning it; as in case
of universal corruption, as to Word and Sacraments; as in the Church of Rome,
that still owns her self for a Church. The ground of the consequence, is from
the parity of reason as to contraries.

But though I see no reason at all, why an explicit Covenant. 8.
should be so necessary to a Church, that we cannot suppose a true Church
without it; yet I no ways deny the lawfulness or expediency, in many cases,
of having a personal profession from all baptized in Infancy, when they come to
age (which we may, if we please, call Confirmation) and the necessity of of
desiring admission, in order to participation of all Ordinances: which desire
of admission, does necessarily imply men's consenting to the Laws of that
Society, and walking according to the duties of it; and so they are
consequentially and virtually, though not expressly and formally, bound to all
the duties required from them in that relation. When Churches are overrun with
loosnesse, ignorance, and profaneness, or when Christians are under
persecution, an external profession of the Gospelcovenant, and declaring their
owning the Society they are entered into, and submitting to the Laws of it, may
be, if not wholly necessary, yet very useful and expedient: And indeed, at all
times we see people understand so little of their duty or engagements, and are
so hardly brought under the exercise of Gospel-discipline, that an open
profession of their submission to the Rules of the Gospel, seems the most
likely way to advance the practice, Power, and purity of Religion: But of this
much is spoken by others lately, and therefore I supersede. From all this we
see, that every Society implying a joining together in some common duties,
Nature tells us there must be a real consenting together, explicit, or
implicit in all persons, who enter into such a Society.

CHAP. VIII.
The last thing dictated by the Law of Nature, is, that every Offender against
the Laws of the Society, must give an account of his actions to the Governors
of it, and submit to the censures inflicted upon him by them. The original of
penalties in Societies. The nature of them, according to the nature and ends of
Societies. The penalty of the Church no civil mulct; because its Laws and ends
are different from civil Societies. The practice of the Druids in
excommunication. Among the Jews, whether a mere civil or sacred penalty. The
latter proved by six arguments. Cherem Col Bo objections answered. The
original of the mistake showed. The first part concluded.

NAture dictates further, that in a well-ordered Society, every 1.
offender against the Rules of that Society, must give an account of his
actions to the Governors of that Society, and submit to the censures of it,
according to the judgment of the Rulers of it. In all Societies subsisting by
Laws, men being more ruled by hopes and fears, then by a sense of duty, or love
of goodness, it is necessary for maintaining a Society, that there must be not
only a declaration of what men ought to do, but a setting forth the penalties
which they must undergo upon violation of the Laws whereon the Society does
subsist: And as there must be penalties annexed, as the sanction of the Law, so
it must of necessity be employed in a well-ordered Society, that every person,
as he does promise obedience to the Law, so by the same obligation he is bound
to submit to the penalties upon disobedience: For whatever Laws binds to duty
where there is a penalty threatened, does bind likewise to punishment upon
neglect of duty: for no sooner is the Law broken, but the offender lies under
the penal sanction of that Law, and is thereby bound to give an account of
himself and actions, to those Governors who are bound to see the Laws obeyed,
or offenders punished. Guilt follows immediately upon the breach of the Law,
which is nothing else but the offenders obligation to punishment. From this
obligation on the offenders part, arises a new relation between the Governor
of the Society and the offender. On the Governors part a right to punish,
vindictive justice supposing offenses committed, and on the offender^ part, an
obligation to undergo what shall be inflicted upon him for his offense:
Punishment being nothing else, but malum passionis ob malum actionis. There
must be then these things supposed in any well ordered Society; Laws to be
governed by, Rulers to see the Laws kept, or offenders punished, penalties made
known for offenders, submission of the persons in the Societies to the
penalties, if they deserve them. But now of what kind, nature, and degree the
penalties must be, must be resolved according to the nature, end, and design of
the constitution of the Society If it be a Society for preservation of the
rights of Bodies, or Estates, the penalties must be either pecuniary or
corporal: And the ground is, because the end of legal punishment is not
properly revenge, but the preservation of the Society, which without
punishments could not be: A threefold end is therefore assigned to punishments;
the reformation of the offending person, the prevention of further Gellius
Noct. Attic. l. 6. c. 16. V. Grotium de jure belli, l. 2. c. 20. s. 6, 7, 8.
Matthew. 1. 19.
offenses in the Society of the same kind, and the being a terror and example
to others; the first is called (...) or (...). The second (...), being for the
preservation of the honor of the Magistrate: the third (...), when the
punishment is inflicted upon one, that others should take notice of it; which
must be always done in a public manner: So (...)* in Matthew, is opposed to
(...).

These things being thus in general considered, come we 2.
now to apply it to the Church considered as a Society. That it has peculiar
Laws to be governed by, appears by the distinct nature, end, and design of the
constitution of it; which is not to preserve any outward Rights, but to
maintain and keep up a religious Society for the service of God; and therefore
the penal sanctions of these Laws cannot properly be any corporal or
pecuniary mulct, but somewhat answerable to the nature of the Society. It must
be then somewhat which implies the deprivation of that which is the chiefest
benefit of that Society. The benefits of it are the privileges and honor
which men enjoy by thus associating themselves for so high an employment: That
punishment then must be the loss of those privileges which the Corporation
enjoyes, which must be by exclusion of the offending person from communion with
the Society. Hence we see it is evident, that which we call Excommunication is
the greatest penalty which the Church, as a Society, can inflict upon the
members of it, considered as such. And hence it is likewise clear, that as the
Society of the Church is distinct from others, the Laws, ends, Governors of a
different nature; so the punishment must be a punishment distinct from civil,
and ordained wholly in order to the peculiar ends of this Society; which they
do not well consider, who deny any such power as that of Excommunication
peculiar to the Church, which is as much as to deny that the Laws whereby the
Church is ruled, are different from the civil Laws, or the end of this Society
from the ends of civil Societies: for the punishment must be proportioned to
the Laws, and referred immediately to its proper ends. It were no ways
difficult to answer the pretenses brought against this: For although I
acknowledge a subordination of this religious Society to the Supreme Authority
in the Commonwealth, and that the Rules concerning the Government of the
Society in common must have their sanction from thence; yet this no ways
implies but it may have its peculiar penalties and power to inflict them, any
more then any Company of Tradesmen have not power to exclude any from their
Company for breaking the Rules of the Company, because they are subordinate to
the Supreme Authority: or any College to expel any from thence, for breaking
the local Statutes of it, which are distinct from the Common-Laws. Nor is it
any argument, that because Christians had mutual confederations in times of
persecution for the exercise of censures, therefore these censures were only
arbitrary and humane; unless it be proved, that it was not a duty in them so to
confederate and join together, nor was there any antecedent obligation to
inflict those censures upon offenders. Much less, thirdly, because their
jurisdiction is not civil and coactive, therefore they have none at all; which
is as much as to say, the Laws of Scripture are not our common-Laws, therefore
they are none at all.

I shall not here insist upon the divine Right of power to. 3.
excommunicate offenders, founded upon the positive Laws of Chist, it being my
only business now to show what foundation such a power has in the Law of
Nature, which we have seen does follow upon the Churches being a distinct
Society ruled by other Laws, acting on other ends, subsisting upon different
grounds from any other Society. A further evidence we have of this, how
consonant it is to the light of Nature, from the practice of all Societies
pretending to be for the Worship of God, who have looked upon this as the
proper penalty of offenders among them, to be excluded out of those Societies.
Thus we find among the Druids, whose great office was to take care of the
worship of their gods, and to instruct Caesar de bello Gallico. l. 6. V.
Nicolaum Damascenum de moribus gentium de cercetis, (...).
the people in Religion, as Caesar relates, Illi rebus divinis intersunt,
sacrificia publica ac privata procurant, religiones interpretantur; and
accordingly the punishment of disobedience among them was excommunication from
their sacrifices, which they looked upon as the greatest punishment could be
inflicted upon them, as Caesar at large describes it; Si quis aut privatus aut
pubicus eorum decreto non stetit, sacrificiis interdicunt: haec poena apud eos
est gravissima: quibus ita est interdictum, ii numero impioru^ and sceleratorum
habentur; iis omnes decedunt, aditu^ eoru^ sermonemque defugiunt, ne quid ex
contagione incommodi accipiant, neque iis petentibus jus redditur, neque honos
ullus communicatur.

The practice of Excommunication among the Jews is not questioned by any, but
the right ground and orignall of that practice, with the effect and extent of
it. Some conceive it to have been only taken up among the Jews, after the power
of capital punishments was taken from them; and that it was used by them,
wholly upon a civil account, not extending to the exclusion of men from their
worship in the Temple or Synagogues, but only to be a note of insamy upon
offending persons. This opinion though entertained by persons of much skill and
learning in the Jewish antiquities, yet carries not that evidence with it to
gain my assent to it. For first, the causes of excommunication were not such as
were expressed by their Law to deserve such civil punishments as might have
been inflicted by them upon offenders, nor were they generally matters of a
civil nature, but matters of offense and scandal, as will appear to any that
shall peruse the twenty four causes of Excommunication, related out of the
Jewish Writers by Seldom and Ioh. Coch. Such were the neglecting the Precepts
of the Scribes, the vain pronouncing the Name of God, bearing witness against a
Jew before Heathen tribunals, doing Seldom de jure nature etc. l. 4. cap. 8.
Excerpt. Gem. Sanh. page 147.
any common work in the afternoon of the day before the Passover, with others
of a like Nature. If Excommunication had been then taken up among them only ex
confoederata disciplina, to supply the defect of civil Judicatories, at least
all Capital offenders must have lain under the Sentence of Excommunication.
But here we read not of any being Excommunicated for those, but for other
lesser matters, which were looked upon as matters of scandal among them: and
though some of them were matters of civil injuries, yet it follows not that men
were Excommunicated for them as such, but for the scandal which attended them.
As, in the Christian Church, men are Excommunicated for matters which are
punishable by the civil Magistrate, but not under that notion, but as they are
offenses to that Christian Society which they live among. Secondly, It appears
that Excommunication was not a mere civil Penalty, because the increasing or
abatement of that Penalty did depend upon the person's Repentance, and desire
of Absolution. Now civil Penalties do not regard the intention and mind of the
Person, but the quality and desert of the Action; the Reason is, because Humane
Laws do respect immediately actionem ipsam, and not animum agentis, unless it
be only so far as the mind has influence upon the Action. But now it is
otherwise in such Laws which take immediate Notice of the intention of the
mind, and only of outward Actions as they are significative and expressive of
the inward intention: for in these, though the ground of proceeding to
Penalties be from the notice taken of the outward Action, yet that outward
Action being subject to Penalty, as expressive of the minds intention; where
there may be sufficient evidence given of the Integrity and Uprightness of the
Intention afterward, there may be proportionably a Relaxation of the penalty;
because the end of the Penalty inflicted was not to be an Act of Justice
excluded from Mercy in the end of Administration as in Civil Judicatories, but
an Act of Justice whose end was mercy, that is, the regaining and recovering
the offenders soul from sin, by inflicting such a penalty upon him, as might
humble him under the sense of it. Hence appears the great reasonableness of
their proceedings in the managery of Discipline in the primitive times, who did
not fix a certain time as a standing Law for all offenders, but did increase,
or lessen both the time and weight of their penance, according to the evidences
given of their submission and true repentance for their miscarriages. That it
was thus now in reference to Epist. Hebr. I^stitut. p. 55.
excommunication among the Jews, appears from what is asserted by the learned
Buxtorf concerning the time of the lesser excommunication, called (...) Niddui,
which remained thirty days usually, but were shortened by confession and desire
of absolution; durat 30. dies qui tamen poenitentia and deprecatione
decurtantur. But if after thirty days past, he continue impenitent, the Judge
as he sees sit, increases the punishment, so as to double or treble the time,
or extend it to his whole life: if he dyed without repentance, a stone is laid
upon his Bier, to show he deserved lapidation; they wept not for him, nor
buried him in the common place of burial. Further, V. Seldom de jure not. etc.
lib. 4. cap. 8. p. 516. Shulchan. A ru^h chosen. hammischpat. s. 100. Excerpt.
Genesis Sam. bed. p. 141. n. 11. 12.
Buxtorf there alleges this constitution of their Law: that if he that was
under Niddui, and desired not absolution, was the second time under it, if that
did no good on him, then he was excommunicated with the higher sort of
excommunication, called (...) which is likewise observed by Ioh. Coch. Mr.
Seldom, and others. From whence it is evident that this was an Ecclesiastical
censure, and not merely Civil, because the main end of it was not satisfaction
to the Law, but the repentance of the person who lay under the fault; and
according to the evidence given of it, the penalty was relaxed or increased,
which argument not yet taken notice of nor improved by Writers on this subject,
seems to make the case clear, that excommunication among the Jews was not a
mere out-lawry, as some conceive it to have been.

Thirdly, I argue, If it was not the breach of the Law, but the, 5.
publikeness of the offense, or the scandal of it which was the ground of
excommunication; then it was not a mere civil penalty, but an Ecclesiastical
censure: for civil penalties do proceed upon the breach of the Law, and alter
not as to the publikeness or privateness of the offense; but here it is evident
that the same offense deserving excommunication if done in public, did not if
done in private, or was left at the persons liberty to have the offender
excommunicated or not. That which is reckoned as the first cause of
excommunication, is affront or contempt put upon a wise man, or Rabbi, or one
that was (...) a Student in the Law; now it is determined by them in this case,
that if it were done in private, the Rabbi might pardon him: but if in public,
he could not. For as Ioh. Coch. gives the reason, publicum p. 146.
Doctoris ludibrium in legis contemptum redundas: the contempt of public
Teachers of the Law, redounds to the dishonor of the Law its self. Thus it was
the scandal of the fault. and not the bare offense which made excommunication
necessary among them; and not as that scandal was a mere defamation of the
person, but as it redounded to the contempt of the Law. Fourthly, I argue from
the form used in excommunication by them. There are two* forms produced of
their excommunications, the one by Buxtorf out of an old Lex Rabbinic. p. 828.
Hebrew Manuscript, the beginning of which is, Ex sententia Domini Dominorum,
sit in Anathemate Plo^i filius Ploni, in utraque domo judicii, superiorum, sc.
and inferiorum, etc. where two things evidence, it was accounted a sacred and
no civil action, doing it immediately in the name and authority of the Lord of
lords; and pronouncing him excommunicate both in Heaven and Earth. So R.
Elieser, speaking of the Excommunication Pirk. R. Elieser c. 38. p. 101.
of the Cuthites or Samaritans, Atque anathemate devovebant Cuthaos mysterio
nominis Amphorasch, and Scriptura exarata in tabulis, and anathemate domus
judicii superioris, atque anathemate curia inferioris, as it is translated by
Guli. Vorstius, who in his Notes upon that Book produces a most dreadful
sentence of Excommunication used to this day in many* Synagogues, which they
call Cherem Col Bo. from the book whence it is taken, which runs most solemnly
in p. 226. ad 230.
the several names of God, whereby they do Chamatize, curse and devote the
persons against whom it is pronounced. Fifthly, It appears not to be a merely
civil thing instead of civil power, because they use it against those over
whom they have no civil Jurisdiction, as appears by their Schamatizing the
Christians in their Liturgies, as Buxtorf observes. Sixthly, I argue from the
Effects of it, because they who lay under it were excluded from public
Worship, which is averred by Buxtorf, Goc^. and others in the places forecited.
It is acknowledged that he that was only under Niddui, might be present at
public Worship; but even there he was under his Separation too, of four Cubits
from any other Israelite.

And hence in probability might the mistake arise, because. 6.
those under Niddui might appear at the Temple or Synagogue, therefore
Excommunication was no prohibition a Sacris. But he that was under Cherem, Non
docet, non docetur, Neither teaches others, nor is taught himself, says Ioh.
Cocceius; and Buxtorf of one under Cherem, omnino a coetu sacro excluditur: Ep.
institut. page 56.
and in this sense Buxtorf expressly takes the turning out of the Synagogue,
Ioh. 9. 22 -- 12. 42. which, says he, is done by Cherem. But against this it
is strongly pleaded by our Learned Mr. Seldom, that putting out of the
Synagogue is De Syned^iis lib. 1. cap. 7.
nothing else but Excommunicating (...) to separate from the Congregation,
taking (...) and so (...) in the civil and not sacred sense, as it denotes an
excluding them from common Society; but though it be freely granted that that
is sometimes the signification of (...) and (...) as Mat. 10. 17. yet those
particulars being considered, which are already laid down, I shall leave it to
consideration whether it be more probable to take the word Synagogue here in a
Civil or Sacred Sense; when the occasion expressed is merely a matter of
Doctrine and Opinion, and not any thing condemned by their Law. Another thing
which has been, I believe a great ground of mistaking in this matter, is, that
excluding from the civil Society among them was always consequent upon
Excommunication; the Reason whereof was, because the Church and Commonwealth
were not distinct among the Jews; and the same persons who took care of Sacred,
did likewise of Civil things (there being no distinct Sanhedrins among them as
some imagine:) but from hence it no ways follows, but their Excommunication
might be an exclusion from Sacred Worship as well as Civil Society. However,
were it as they pretend, that it was from civil commerce, yet the whole people
of the Jews being (...) Gods peculiar people, and his only Church in being
before the times of the Gospel, an exclusion in that respect from the common
Society of them, might deservedly be looked upon as a sacred action, and not
merely civil, it being a separation from a people whose main ligature was
their being a Church of God, or a Community gathered together for Gods worship
and service. Thus we see the Church of the Jews had this power among them; and
for the Christian Church, the practice of Discipline upon offenders was never
questioned, though the right has been; so that from hence we gather, in that
it has been the practice of Societies constituted for the Worship of God, to
call offenders to an account for their offenses, and if upon examination they
be found guilty, to exclude them their Society; that it is a dictate of the Law
of Nature, That every offender against the Laws of a Society must give an
account of his actions to the Rulers of it, and submit to the Censures
inflicted on him by them. Thus I am now come to the end of my first stage, to
show how far Church Government is founded upon the Law and Light of Nature,

And so to the end of the first Part.
PART. II.
CHAP. I.
The other ground of Divine Right considered, viz. Gods positive Laws; which
imply a certain knowledge of Gods intention to bind men perpetually. As to
which, the Arguments drawn from Tradition, and the practice of the Church in
after-ages, proved invalid by several arguments. In order to a right stating
the Question, some Concessions laid down. First, That there must be some form
of Government in the Church. The notion of a Church explained: whether it
belongs only to particular Congregations, which are manifested not to be of
Gods primary intention, but for our necessity. Evidence for National Churches
under the Gospel. A National Church Government necessary.

I Now come to the second way, whereby any. 1.
thing comes to be of unalterable Divine Right, which is, by the positive Laws
of God, which do bind universally to obedience. In the entrance into this
Discourse, it is necessary to lay down the ways, whereby we find out a Divine
positive Law determining an unalterable Obligation: which must be either by
express words of Scripture, or by some other certain way, whereby to gather
from thence, that it was Gods intention to bind men. For the main thing
requisite to make a standing universal positive Law, is Gods declaring his
mind, that the thing enquired into, should unalterably bind men to the practice
of it. Now whatever does sufficiently manifest Gods intention, is a medium to
find out such a Law by, and nothing else: But it must be such a manifestation
as gives a man's mind sufficient evidence and testimony whereon to build a true,
certain, and divine assent to the thing, as revealed: So that whatsoever binds
the conscience as a Law, must first be entertained by the understanding as a
matter of faith; not as it imports something merely doctrinall and dogmaticall,
but as it implies the matter of a Divine Revelation, and the object of an
assent upon the credibility of a Testimony. For God having the only immediate
authority over the consciences of men, nothing can bind immediately the
conscience but a Divine Law, neither can any thing bind as such, but what the
understanding assents unto, as revealed by God himself. Now the Word of God
being the only Codex and Digests of Divine Laws, whatever Law we look for, must
either be found there in express terms, or at least so couched therein, that
every one by the exercise of his understanding, may by a certain and easy
collection, gather the universal obligation of the thing enquired after. In
this case then, whatsoever is not immediately founded upon a Divine Testimony,
cannot be made use of as a Medium to infer an universally binding Law by: So
that all Traditions and Historical evidence will be unserviceable to us, when
we enquire into Gods intentions in binding men's consciences. Matters of fact,
and mere Apostolical practice, may I freely grant, receive much light from the
Records of succeeding ages; but they can never give a man's understanding
sufficient ground to infer any Divine Law, arising from those facts attested
to be the practice or Records of succeeding ages.

For first, The foundation and ground of our assent in this 2.
case, is not the bare testimony of Antiquity; but the assurance which we have,
either that their practice did not vary from what was Apostolical; or in their
Writings, that they could not mistake concerning what they deliver unto us: And
therefore those who would infer the necessary obligation of men to any form of
Government, because that was practiced by the Apostles, and then prove the
Apostolical practice from that of the ages succeeding, or from their Writings,
must first of all prove, that what was done then, was certainly the Apostles
practice, and so prove the same thing by its self, or that it was impossible
they should vary from it, or that they should mistake in judging of it: For
here something more is required then a mere matter of fact, in which I confess
their nearness to the Apostles times does give them an advantage above the
ages following, to discern what it was; but such a practice is required, as
inferrs an universal obligation upon all places, times, and persons. Therefore
these things must be manifested, that such things were unquestionably the
practice of those ages and persons; that their practice was the same with the
Apostles; that what they did, was not from any prudential motives, but by
virtue of a Law which did bind them to that practice. Which things are easily
passed over by the most eager Disputers of the controversy about
Church Government, but how necessary they are to be proved before any form of
Government be asserted, so necessary, that without it there can be no true
Church, any weak understanding may discern.

Secondly, Supposing that Apostolical practice be sufficiently attested by the
following ages, yet unless it be cleared from Scripture, that it was Gods
intention that the Apostles actions should continually bind the Church, there
can be nothing inferred that does concern us in point of Conscience. I say,
that though the matter of fact be evidenced by Posterity, yet the obligatory
nature of that fact must depend on Scripture: and the Apostles intentions must
not be built upon men's bare ^urmises, nor upon after-practices, especially if
different from the constitution of things during the Apostles times. And here
those have somewhat whereon to exercise their understandings, who assert an
obligation upon men to any form of Government, by virtue of an Apostolical
practice, which must of necessity suppose a different state of things from what
they were when the Apostles first established Governors over Churches. As how
those who were appointed Governors over particular Congregations by the
Apostles, come to be by virtue of that Ordination, Governors over many
Congregations of like nature and extent with that over which they were set: And
whether, if it were the Apostles intention that such Governors should be
always in the Church, is it not necessary that that intention of theirs be
declared by a standing Law, that such there must be; for here matter of fact
and practice can be no evidence, when it is supposed to be different from the
constitution of Churches afterward: But of this more hereafter.

Thirdly, Supposing any form of Government in its self necessary, and that
necessity not determined by a Law in the Word of God, the Scripture is thereby
apparently argued to be insufficient for its end; for then deficit in
necessariis; some things are necessary for the Church of God which the
Scripture is wholly silent in. I say not, that every thing about
Church Government must be written in Scripture; but supposing any one form
necessary, it must be there commanded, or the Scripture is an imperfect Rule,
which contains not all things necessary by way of Precept: For there can be no
other necessity universal, but either by way of means to an end, or by way of
Divine Command: I know none will say, that any particular form of Government is
necessary absolutely, by way of means to an end; for certainly, supposing no
obligation from Scripture, Government by an equality of power in the Officers
of the Church, or by superiority of one order above another, are indifferent in
order to the general ends of Government, and one not more necessary then the
other. If any one form then be necessary, it must be by that of command; and if
there be a command universally binding, whose footsteps cannot be traced in the
Word of God, how can the Scriptures be a perfect Rule, if it fails in
determining binding Laws? So that we must, if we own the Scriptures sufficiency
as a binding Rule, appeal to that about any thing pleaded as necessary, by
virtue of any Divine command: and if such a Law cannot be met with in
Scripture, which determines the case in hand one way or other by way of
necessary obligation, I have ground to look upon that which is thus left
undetermined by Gods positive Laws, to be a matter of Christian-liberty; and
that neither part is to be looked upon as necessary for the Church of God, as
exclusive of the other.

This I suppose is the case, as to particular forms of Government. 3.
in the Church of God: but that I may not only suppose but prove it, I now come
to the stating of the Question, which if ever necessary to be done any where,
it is in the Controversy of Church Government, the most of men's heats in this
matter arising from want of right understanding the thing in question between
them. In the stating the Question, I shall proceed by degrees, and show how far
we acknowledge any thing belonging to Government in the Church to be of an
unalterable Divine Right. First, That there must be a form of Government in the
Church of God, is necessary by virtue, not only of that Law of Nature which
provides for the preservation of Societies, but likewise by virtue of that
Divine Law, which takes care for the Churches preservation in peace and unity.
I engage not here in the Controversy, Whether a particular Congregation be the
first Political Church or no; it suffices for my purpose, that there are other
Churches besides particular Congregations: I mean, not only the Catholic
visible Church, which is the first, not only in order of consideration, but
nature too, as a totum Integrale before the similar parts of it, but in respect
of all other accidental modifications of Churches, from the several ways of
their combination together. They who define a Church by stated worshipping
Congregations, do handsomely beg the thing they desire, by placing that in
their definition of a Church, which is the thing in question: which is, Whether
there be no other Church but such particular Congregations? Which is as if one
should go about to prove, that there were no civil Societies but in particular
Corporations, and to prove it, should give such a definition of civil Society,
that it is, A company of men joined together in a Corporation, for the
preservation of their Rights and Privileges, under the Governors of such a
place. It must be first proved, that no other company of men can be called a
civil Society besides a Corporation: and so that no other society of men
joining together in the profession of the true Religion, can be called a
Church, but such as join in particular Congregations.

To which purpose it is very observable, That particular ^* 4.
Congregations are not de primaria intention divina; for if the whole world
could join together in the public Worship of God, no doubt that would be most
properly a Church, but particular Congregations are only accidental, in
reference to Gods intention of having a Church, because of the impossibility of
all men's joining together for the convenient distribution of
Church Priviledges, and administration of Gospel Ordinances. For it is evident,
that the Privileges and Ordinances, do immediately and primarily belong to the
Catholic visible Church, in which Christ to that end has set Officers, as the
Apostle clearly expresses, 1 Corinthians. 12. 28. (for how Apostles should be set
as Officers over particular Congregations, whose Commission extended to the
whole World, is, I think, somewhat hard to understand) but for the more
convenient participation of Privileges and Ordinances, particular
Congregations are necessary: This will be best illustrated by Examples. We read
that ( Esther 1. 3.) King Ahashuerus made a feast for all his Princes and
Servants: Doubtless the King did equally respect them all as a Body in the
feasting of them, and did bestow his entertainment upon them all as considered
together; but by reason of the great multitude of them, it was impossible that
they should all be feasted together in the same Room; and therefore for more
convenient participation of the Kings bounty, it was necessary to divide
themselves into particular companies, and to associate as many as conveniently
could in order to that end. So it is in the Church, Christ in donation of
privileges equally respects the whole Church; but because men cannot all meet
together to participate of these privileges, a more particular distribution
was necessary for that end. But a clearer example of this kind we have yet in
Scripture, which is Mark 6. 39. in our Saviors feeding the multitude with five
loaves and two fishes; where we see our Saviors primary intention, was to feed
the whole multitude; but for their more convenient partaking of this food, our
Savior commands them to sit down (...), according to the Hebraism of
ingeminating the words, to note the distribution of them, and therefore the
Vulg. Lat. renders it secundum contubernia, that is (...), as Camerarius
expounds it, according to so many companies and divisions as might conveniently
sit together, as at a Table: Where we plainly see this distribution was only
accidental, as to Christ's primary intention of feeding the multitude, but was
only necessary for their own convenience. Thus the case is evident, as to the
Church of God, it is our necessity and convenience which makes several
Congregations of the Catholic visible Church, and not Gods primary intention,
when he bestowed such privileges upon the Church, that it should be understood
of particular Congregations.

If then particular Congregations be only accidental for our. 5.
convenience, it evidently follows that the primary notion of a Church, does
not belong to these; nor that these are the first subject of Government which
belongs to a Church as such, and not as crumbled into particular Congregations;
although the actual exercise of Government be most visible and discernable
there; Because the joining together for participation of Gospel Ordinances must
be in some particular company or other associated together for that end. Where
ever then we find the notion of a Church particular, there must be government
in that Church; and why a National Society incorporated into one civil
Government, joining in the profession of Christianity, and having a right
thereby to participate of Gospel Ordinances in the convenient distributions of
them in particular congregations, should not be called a Church; I confess I
can see no reason. The main thing objected against it, is, that a Church
implies an actual joining together for participation of all Gospel Ordinances;
but as this, as I said before, is only a begging the Question, so I say now,
that actual communion with any particular Congregation, is not absolutely
necessary to a member of a Church; for supposing one baptized at Sea, where no
settled Congregation is (nor any more Society then that which Aristotle calls
(...)) yet such a one is thereby a member of the Church of God, though not of
any Congregation; so likewise a Church then may consist of such as have a right
to Ordinances, without the inserting their actual participation of them in
fixed Congregations. A particular Church then I would describe thus, That it
is, A society of men joining together in the visible profession of the true
Faith; having a right to, and enjoying among them the Ordinances of the Gospel.
That a whole Nation professing Christianity, in which the Ordinances of the
Gospel are duly administered in particular Congregations, is such a Society, is
plain and evident. A clear instance of such a National constitution of a Church
under the Gospel, we have in the Prophecy of the Conversion of Egypt and
Assyria in Gospel Times. Isaiah 19. 19, 21, 24, 25. We have Egypts professing
the true Faith, and enjoying Gospel Ordinances, verse. 19. 21. which, according
to the Prophetical style are set down under the representation of such things
as were then in use among the Jews: by an Altar in the midst of the Land, ver.
19. The Altar noting the true worship of God; and being in the midst of the
Land, the universal owning of this worship by all the people of the land. God
owns them for a Church, v. 25. Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying,
Blessed be Egypt my people. The very name whereby Israel was called while it
was a Church. (...) Hosea, 2. 1. And when God unchurched them, it was under
this name, (...) Ye are not my people. As much then as Israel was a Church when
God owned it for his People: so should Egypt be upon their conversion to the
Faith of Christ, which was done upon Marks preaching at Alexandria not long
after the death of Christ.

This then we have now briefly cleared, that a Nation joining. 6.
in profession of Christianity, is a true Church of God: whence it evidently
follows, that there must be a Form of Ecclesiastical Government over a Nation
as a Church, as well as of Civil Government, over it, as a Society governed by
the same Laws. Therefore some make this necessary to a National Hudson of the
Church cap. 1. sect. 3.
Church, National Union in one Ecclesiastical body in the same Community of
Ecclesiastical Government. For every Society must have its Government
belonging to it as such a Society; and the same Reason that makes Government
necessary in any particular Congregation, will make it necessary for all the
particular Congregations joining together in one visible society as a
particular National Church. For the unity and peace of that Church, ought much
more to be looked after then of any one particular Congregation, in as much as
the Peace of all the particular combinations of men for participation of
Ordinances does depend upon, and is comprehended in the Peace of the whole. But
though I say from hence that some form of public Government by the
subordination of particular Assemblies to the Government of the whole body of
them is necessary, yet I am far from asserting the necessity of any one form of
that Government, much more, from saying that no National Church can subsist
without one National Officer, as the High Priest under the Law, or one
National place of Worship, as the Temple was. The want of considering of
which, viz that National Churches may subsist without that Form of them under
the Jews, is doubtless the great Ground of Men's quarrelling against them; but
with what Reason, let Men impartially judge. This then we agree, that some from
of Government is necessary in every particular Church, and so that Government
in the Church of Divine and unalterable Right; and that not only of particular
Congregations, but of all Societies which may be called Churches, whether
Provincial, or National.

CHAP. II.
The second Concession is, That Church Government formally considered, must be
administered by Officers of Divine appointment. To that end, the continuance of
a Gospel. Ministry fully cleared from all those Arguments, by which positive
Laws are proved immutable. The reason of the appointment of it continues; the
dream of a seculum Spiritus Sancti discussed, first broached by the M^ndicant
Friars. Its occasion and unreasonableness showed. Gods declaring the perpetuity
of a Gospel Ministry, Matthew. 28. 19. explained. A novell Interpretation largely
refuted. The world to come, what. A Ministry necessary for the Churches
continuance, Ephesians. 4. 12. explained, and vindicated.

SEcondly, That the Government of the Church ought to be. 1.
Administered by Officers of Divine appointment, is another thing I will yield
to be of Divine Right* but the Church here, I take not in that latitude which I
did in the former Concession, but I take it chiefly here for the Members of the
Church, as distinct from Officers, as it is taken in Acts 15. 22. So that my
meaning is, that there must be a standing perpetual Ministry in the Church of
God, whose care and employment must be, to oversee and Govern the People of
God, and to administer Gospel Ordinances among them, and this is of Divine and
perpetual Right. That Officers were appointed by Christ in the Church for
these ends at first, is evident from the direct affirmation of Scripture, God
has set in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
etc. 1 Corinthians. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. and other places to the same purpose.
This being then a thing acknowledged, that they were at first of Divine
Institution, and so were appointed by a Divine positive Law, which herein
determines and restrains the Law of Nature (which does not prescribe the
certain qualifications of the persons to govern this Society, nor the
instalment or admission of them into this employment, viz by Ordination.) The
only enquiry then left, is, Whether a standing Gospel Ministry be such a
positive Law, as is to remain perpetually in the Church, or no? which I shall
make appear by those things which I laid down in the entrance of this Treatise,
as the Notes whereby to know when positive Laws are unalterable.

The first was, when the same reason of the command continues 2.
still; and what reason is there why Christ should appoint Officers to rule his
Church then, which will not hold now? Did the people of God need Ministers then
to be as Stars (as they are called in Scripture) to lead them unto Rev. 1. 16.
Christ, and do they not as well need them now? Had people Heb. 13. 7. Heb. 2.
3.
need of guides then, when the doctrine of the Gospel was confirmed to them by
miracles, and have they not much more now? Must there be some then to oppose
gainsayers, and must Titus 1. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 1.
they have an absolute liberty of prophesying now, when it is foretold what
times of seduction the last shall be? Must there be some then to rule over
their charge, as they that must give an Heb. 13. 17.
account, and is not the same required still? Were there some then* to reprove,
rebuke, exhort, to preach in season, out 2 Timothy 4. 2.
of season, and is there not the same necessity of these things still? Was it
not enough then, that there were so many in all Churches that had extraordinary
gifts of tongues, prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.
praying, interpretation of tongues, but besides those there were some Pastors
by office, whose duty it was to give attendance 1 Timothy 4. 13.
to reading, to be wholly in these things; and now when these extraordinary
gifts are ceased, is not there a much greater necessity then there was then,
for some to be set apart and wholly designed for this work? Were Ordinances
Matthew 28. 18.
only then administered by those whom Christ commissioned, and such as derived
their authority from them; and what reason is there that men should arrogate
and take this employment upon themselves now? If Christ had so pleased, could
he not have left it wholly at liberty for all believers to have gone about
preaching the Gospel? or why did he make choice of 12. Apostles chiefly for
that work, were it not his Will to have some particularly to dispense the
Gospel? and if Christ did then separate some for that work, what Reason is
there why that Office should be thrown common now, which Christ himself
enclosed by his own appointment?

There can be no possible Reason imagined, why a Gospel Ministry. 3.
should not continue still, unless it be that Fanatic pretense of a Seculum
Spiritus Sancti, a Dispensation of the Spirit, which shall evacuate the use of
all means of Instruction, and the use of all Gospel Ordinances; which pretense
is not so Novell as most imagine it to be; for setting aside the Montanistical
spirit in the Primitive Times, which acted upon Principles much of the same
Nature with these we now speak of: The first rise of this Ignis fatuus was from
the bogs of Popery, viz. from the Orders of the Dominicans and Franciscans,
about the middle of the twelfth Century. For no sooner did the Pauperes de
Lugduno, or the Waldenses appear, making use of the Word of God to confute the
whole Army of Popish Traditions, but they finding themselves worsted at every
turn while they disputed that ground, found out a Stratagem whereby to recover
their own Credit, and to beat their adversaries quite out of the field. Which
was, that the Gospel which they adhered to so much, was now out of date, and
instead Matthaeus Paris. hist. Angl. in Hen. 3. A. 1257. p. 939. Ed. Vatsi^i
Cap. 8. apud Balaeum. App de vit. Pontif. p. 480.
of that they broached another Gospel out of the Writings of the Abbot Ioachim,
and Cyrils visions, which they blasphemously named Evangelium Spiritus Sancti,
Evangelium Novum, and Evangelium Aeternum, as Gulielmus de Sancto Amore, their
great Antagonist, relates in his Book de periculis noviss. temporum, purposely
designed against the Impostures of the Mendicant Friars, who then like Locusts,
rose in multitudes with their shaven crowns out of the bottomless pit. This
Gospel of the Spirit they so much magnified above the Gospel of Christ, that
the same Author relates these words of theirs concerning it; Quod comparatum ad
Evangelium Christi, tanto plus perfectionis ac dignitatis habet, quantum Sol ad
Lunam comparatus, aut ad nucleum testa; that it exceeded it as much as the
kernel does the shell, or the Light of the Sun does that of the Moon. We see
then from what quarter of the World this new Light began to rise: but so much
for this digression. To the thing it self.

If there be such a dispensation of the Spirit which takes. 4.
away the use of Ministry and Ordinances, it did either commence from the time
of the effusion of the Spirit upon the Apostles, or some time since. Not then;
for even of those who had the most large portion of the Spirit poured upon
them, we read that they continued in all Gospel ordinances, Acts 2. 42, and
among the chief, (...), under the Apostles Ministry, it may be better rendered
than in the Apostles Doctrine: And which is most observable, the Prophecy of
Joel about the Spirit, is then said to be fulfilled, Acts 2. 17. Besides, if
either that place of Joel, or that of Jeremy, cited Heb. 8. 11. or the Unction
of the Spirit, 1 John 2. 20, 27. did take away the use of preaching, how did
the Apostles themselves understand their meaning, when they were so diligent in
preaching and instructing others: John writes to those, to try the Spirits, of
whom he says, They have an 1 John 4. 1. 1 John 2. 20.
Unction to know all things: and those to whom the Apostle writes, that they
need not teach every one his Neighbor; of them he says, that they had need to
be taught the first principles of the Heb. 5. 12.
Oracles of God. And even in that very Chapter where he seems to say, they that
are under the New Covenant, need not be taught, he brings that very Speech in
as an argument, that the old dispensation of the Law was done away: And so goes
about to teach, when he seems to take away the use of it. These Speeches then
must not be understood in their absolute and literal sense, but with a
reflection upon, and comparison with, the state of things in the times wherein
those Prophecies were uttered: For God to heighten the Jews apprehensions of
the great blessings of the Gospel, does set Calvin. in Joel. 2. 28.
them forth under a kind of Hyperbolical expressions, that the dull capacity of
the Jews might at least apprehend the just weight and magnitude of them, which
they would not otherwise have done. So in that place of Jeremy, God to make
Jer. 31. 31.
them understand how much the knowledge of the Gospel exceeded that under the
Law, does as it were set it down in this Hyperbolicall way, that it will exceed
it as much, as one that needs no teaching at all, does one that is yet but in
his rudiments of learning. So that the place does not deny the use of teaching
under the Gospel, but because Teaching does commonly suppose ignorance, to show
the great measure of knowledge, he does it in that way, as though the knowledge
should be so great, that men should not need be taught in such a way of
Rudiments as the Jews were, viz by Types and Ceremonies, and such things. We
see then no such dispensation was in the Apostles times; for the same Apostle
after this in Chapt. 10. 25. bids them not to forsake the Assembling themselves
together as some did; Wherefore were these Assemblies, but for Instruction? and
in the last Heb. 10. 25.
Chapter, bids them obey their Rulers. What need Rulers, if no need of
Teaching? But so senseless a dream will be too much Heb. 13. 7.
honored with any longer confutation. In the Apostles times then, there was no
such dispensation of the Spirit, which did take away the use of Ministry and
Ordinances. If it be expected since their times, I would know whence it
appears, that any have a greater measure of the Spirit then was poured out in
the Apostles times; for then the Ministry was joined with the Spirit: and what
Prophecies are fulfilled now, which were not then? Or if they pretend to a
Doctrine distinct from, and above what the Apostles taught, let them produce
their evidences, and work those miracles which may induce men to believe them:
Or let them show what obligation any have to believe pretended new Revelations,
without a power of miracles, attesting that those Revelations come from God? Or
whereon men must build their faith, if it be left to the dictates of a
pretended Spirit of Revelation? Or what way is left to discern the good Spirit
from the bad, in its actings upon men's minds, if the Word of God be not our
Rule still? Or how God is said to have spoken in the last days by his Son, if
a Heb. 1. 1.
further speaking be yet expected? For the Gospel Dispensation is therefore
called the Last days, because no other is to be expected: Times being
differenced in Scripture according to Gods ways of revealing himself to men.
But so much for this.

The second way whereby to know when Positive Laws are. 5.
unalterable, is when God has declared that such Laws shall bind still. Two
ways whereby God does express his own Will concerning the perpetuity of an
Office founded on his own Institution. First, if such things be the work
belonging to it, which are of necessary and perpetual use. Secondly, if God
has promised to assist them in it perpetually, in the doing of their work.
First, the Object of the Ministerial Office are such things which are of
necessary and perpetual use; I mean the Administration of Gospel Ordinances.
viz. the Word and Sacraments, which were appointed by Christ for a perpetual
Use. The Word as a means of Conversion and Edification; the Sacraments not
only as notes of distinction of Professors of the true faith from others, but
as Seals to confirm the Truth of the Covenant on Gods part toward us, and as
Instruments to convey the blessings sealed in the Covenant to the hearts of
Believers. Now the very Nature of these things does imply their perpetuity and
continuance in the world, as long as there shall be any Church of God in it.
For these things are not typi rerum futurarum, only Ceremonies to represent
something to come, but they are symbola rerum invisibilium, signs to represent
to our Senses things invisible in their own Nature: and between these two there
is a great difference, as to the perpetuity of them: For Types of things as to
come, must of necessity expire when the thing typified appears; but
representation of invisible things cannot expire on that account, because the
thing represented as invisible, cannot be supposed to be made visible, and so
to evacuate the use of the Signs which represents them to us. Types represent
a thing which is at present invisible; but under the Notion of it as future.
Symbols represent a thing at present invisible, but as present; and therefore
Symbols are designed by Gods Institution for a perpetual help to the weakness
of our Faith. And therefore the Lords Supper is appointed to set forth the
Lords 1 Cor. 11: 26.
Death, till he come: whereby the continuance of it in the Church of God is
necessarily implied. Now then, if these things which are the proper object of
the Ministerial Function be of a perpetual Nature; when these things are
declared to be of an abiding Nature, it necessarily follows, that that Function
to which it belongs to administer these things, must be of a perpetual Nature.

Especially if we consider in the second place, that Christ. 6.
has promised to be with them continually in the administration of these
things: For that, notwithstanding the dust lately thrown upon it, we have a
clear place, Matthew. 28. 19. Go teach and baptize, etc. Lo I am with you
always to the end of the World. If (...), did not signify perpetuity, yet
certainly the latter words do; for how could Christ be with the Apostles
themselves personally to the end of the World? It must be therefore with them,
and all that succeed them in the Office of Teaching and Baptizing, to the
Worlds end: For that I assert to be the meaning of (...). I insist not barely
on the signification of the word (...), either as to its supposed Etymology, or
as it Answers the Hebrew (...) knowing how fallible the Arguments drawn from
thence are, when in the Dispute of the Eternity of the Law of Moses with the
Jews, it is confessed that (...) relates only to a long continuance of Time.
But however, I suppose that it will hardly be found in Scripture, that either
(...) or (...) does barely relate to the time of Life of any individual
persons, especially, if absolutely put as it is here. One great signification
of (...) in the New Testament (which we are to inquire into, and not how it is
used among Greek Authors) is that wherein (...) is taken for the world its
self Philolog. Sacr. de Hebr. N. T. cap. 2.
which Vorstius reckons among the Hebraisms of the New Test. in which sense the
Jews call God (...) and great persons (...) Magnates mundi in which Sense, in
the New Testament, the Devil is called (...). Ioh. 12. 31. -- 14. 31. and
(...), 2 Cor. 4. 4. And so God is said to create (...), the worlds, Heb. 1. 2.
-- 11. 3. If we take it in this Sense, Christ's promise must of necessity relate
to the dissolution of the Fabric of the World, and that he would be with his
Servants in the Gospel, till all things be dissolved. Against this it is
pleaded, that the (...) here relates to the destruction of Jerusalem, and that
(...) implies the state of things under the Law, which would continue till
Jerusalem were destroyed, from which time a new (...) would commence. But to
this I answer, first; I absolutely deny, that (...), does ever in Scripture
relate to the destruction of the Jewish State. This will be best made out by a
particular view of the places wherein this Phrase occurres. The first time we
meet with this phrase is in Matthew. 13. where we have it thrice, ver. 39. (...):
Now can any be so senseless, as to imagine that the Harvest wherein the Tares
shall be gathered, and cast into unquenchable fire, when the Angels are said to
be the Reapers, and to gather out of Christ's Kingdom every thing that offends,
should be attributed to the destruction of Jerusalem? and so ver. 40. and ver.
49. where the same phrase expresses the same time, (...), where the
Antecedents and Consequents fully Declare, what the time there is meant, which
is the general Judgment of the world. The only place pleaded for this sense,
is Matthew 24. 3. where the Disciples inquire of Christ what should be the
sign, (...), where granting, that the former Christ's coming may respect his
coming to alter the present state of things, according to the Jews
apprehension of the Messiah; yet I deny that the latter does, but it respects
the general Destruction of the World, consequent upon that alteration: For the
Jews not only expected an alteration of the present state of things among
them, but a consequent Destruction of the World, after the coming of the
Messiah, according to that speech of theirs cited by Doctor Lightfoot. (...)
This World shall be Horae hebr. in Matthew. 24. 3. p. 262.
destroyed for a 1000. years, and after that (...) there should be the State of
Eternity. So that the Disciples, speaking in the Sense of the Jews, do not
only inquire of the signs of his altering the present state of things among
them, but likewise of the Destruction of the whole World too. Accordingly it is
observable, that throughout that Chapter, our Savior intermixeth his answers
to these 2 Questions. Sometimes speaking in reference to the Jewish State, as
it is plain he does, verse 15, 16. and so on; and when he says, that this
Generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled, ver. 34. But
then it is as evident, that some places must relate to the destruction of the
World, as when he says, Of that day and hour knows no Man, no not the Angels
of Heaven, but the Father only, ver. 36. which will appear more plainly, by
comparing it with Mark 13. 32. Where the Son is excluded from knowing that hour
too; But how can any say, that the Son did not know the time of the Destruction
of Jerusalem, which he himself foretold when it should be? And those words
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, ver. 35. seem to be our Saviors Transition
to the Answer of the other Question, about the final destruction of all things.
However that be, as we see no reason at all why (...), should only respect the
subversion of the Jewish State: But supposing it should, yet there is far less
reason why it should be so meant, in the place whose sense we are inquiring
into. For if by Christ's coming to destroy Jerusalem, the old Sat and
Dispensation should be taken away, we must suppose a new state under the
messiah to begin from thence. And how Rational does this sound, that Christ
should promise his peculiar Presence with his own Apostles, whom he employed in
erecting the Gospel State, only till the Old Jewish State be subverted; but
his Promise not at all to extend to that Time, wherein the State of the
Kingdom of the Messiah should be set up in stead of it: And how could any of
the Apostles, for example, Saint John, who survived the Destruction of
Jerusalem, expect Christ's Presence with him, by virtue of this Promise, if it
extended no further then to the Destruction of the Jewish State? Besides, it is
a mere groundless fancy, and favors of the Jewish apprehensions of the State
of the Messiah Kingdom, to imagine that the Temporal State of Jerusalem must
be first subverted before that (...) or Dispensation of things was at an end.
For the Jewish State and Dispensation did not lie in the Jewish Polity, but in
Obligation to the Law of Moses, which expired together with Christ. And so the
Gospel-tate, which is called the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Regeneration,
began Matthew. 19. 28.
upon Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, when he was solemnly (as it were)
inaugurated in his Mediatory Kingdom. And presently after sends down his
Viceroy upon the day of Pentecost, in the effusion of the Spirit upon the
Apostles, making Acts 2. 11
good his Promise of the Paracle^e to supply his absence: Whereby the Apostles
were more signally empowered for the advancing of the Gospel state.

The (...) then of the Gospel commenceth from Christ's. 7.
Resurrection, and to this (...) I am very inclinable to think that our Savior
has reference in these words, when he says, he will be with his Disciples to
the end of that (...), if we take it for a state of things, or the
Gospel Dispensation; that is, as long as the Evangelical Church shall continue:
For that in Scripture is sometime called The World to come, and that Heb. 2. ^.
Lightfoot Horae. Hebr. in Matthew. 12. 32. p. 173. Heb. 6. 5.
Phrase among the Jews of (...) the world to come, is set to express the times
of the Messiah; and it may be the Apostle may referr to this, when he speaks of
Apostales tasting (...), that is, the force and energy of the Gospel preached;
whence the Kingdom of God is said to be not (...), but (...), not in word, but
in power, which is the (...), spoken of by the Apostle elsewhere, 1. Cor. 4. 20.
the powerful demonstration of the Spirit accompanying the preaching of the
Gospel. When Christ is called by the Prophet (...) the everlasting Father, the
Septuagint renders it by (...), and so the Vulgar, Latin. 1 Cor. 24.
Pater futuri saeculi, the Father of the World to Come: that is, the Gospel
State, and to this sense Christ is said to be Isai. 9. 5. Heb. 9. 11.
made an High Priest, (...), and the Law to be a shadow (...), of good things
which should be under the new state of the Gospel. And which is more plain to
the Heb. 10. 1.
purpose, the Apostle expresses what was come to pass in Ephesians. 2. 7.
the days of the Gospel, (...), in the Ages to come, where the very word (...)
is used to this sense. And Matthew 12. 32.
according to this importance of the word (...), some very probably interpret
that place of our Savior concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost, that it
should not be forgiven (...), neither in the present D Reynolds on Hosea 14. 3.
state of the Jewish Church, wherein there is no sacrifice of expiation for
contumacious sinners, but they that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy; so
neither shall there be, any under the World to come, that is the dispensation
of Gospel Grace, any pardon Heb 10. 26, 27, 28.
proclaimed to any such sinners who ^^ample under foot the blood of the
Covenant, and offer despite to the Spirit of grace. Thus we see how properly
the word (...) may agree here to the Gospel-State, and so Christ's promise of
his Presence does imply the perpetuity of that Office as long as the
Evangelical state shall remain, which will be to the Worlds end.

The third thing, whereby to know when positive institutions. 8.
are unalterable, is, when they are necessary to the being, succession, and
continuance of the Church of God. Now this yields a further evidence of the
perpetuity of Officers in the Church of God, seeing the Church its self cannot
be preserved without the Government; and there can be no Government without
some to Rule the members of the Church of God, and to take care for a due
administration of Churchpriviledges, and to inflict censures upon offenders,
which is the power they are invested in by the same authority which was the
ground of their institution at first. It is not conceivable how any Society, as
the Church is, can be preserved without the continuance of Church Officers
among them. As long as the Body of Christ must be edified, there must be some
(...), fitted for the work of the Ministry, which is appointed in order to that
end; For that I suppose is the Apostles meaning in Ephesians. 4. 12. (...).
following the Complutensian copy, leaving out the comma between (...) and
(...), which makes as though it were a distinct thing from the former; whereas
the Original carries the sense on; for otherwise it should have been (...),
etc. and those who follow the ordinary reading, are much at a loss how to
explain that (...) coming in so in the midst without dependence upon the
former. Therefore the vulg. Latin best renders it, ad consummationem sanctorum
ad opus ministerii; for the completing of the Saints for the work of the
ministry, in order to the building up of the body of Christ; and to this
purpose Musculus informs us, the German version renders it. And so we
understand the enumeration in the verse before of Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11
Pastors and Teachers, not for the persons themselves, but for the gifts of
those persons, the office of Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, etc. which is most
suitable to the (...) in the eighth verse. He gave gifts to men; now these
gifts, says he, Christ gave to men (...), for the fitting the Saints for the
work of the Ministry. Not as a late Democratical Writer would persuade us, as
though all the Saints were thereby fitted for this Work of the Ministry; (for
that the Apostle excludes by the former enumeration); for, are all the Saints
fitted for Apostles? are all Prophets, are all Evangelists, are all Pastors and
Teachers? as the Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 29, 8, 9, 10, 11.
himself elsewhere argues. And in the 8 v. of that chapter, he particularly
mentions the several gifts qualifying men for several useful employments in
the Church of God, the Spirit dividing to every man severally as he will.
Therefore it cannot be that all the Saints are hereby fitted for this Work; but
God has scattered these gifts among the Saints, that those who have them might
be fitted, (...), because God would not leave his Church without persons
qualified for the service of himself in the work of the Ministry, in order to
the building up of the Body of Christ. And by the (...), here may be meant no
other then those he speaks of in the chapter before, when he speaks of the
Revelation made (...), Ephesians. 3. 5.
to his holy Apostles and Prophets, and so God gave these gifts for the
fiitting the holy Apostles, etc. for the work of the Ministry. It cannot be
meant of all, so as to destroy a peculiar function of the Ministry; for Gods
very giving these gifts to some and not to others, is an evidence that the
function is peculiar. For else had the gifts been common to all, every Saint
had been an Apostle, every believer a Pastor, and Teacher, and then where had
the People been that must have been ruled and governed? So that this very place
does strongly assert both the peculiarity of the Function, from the peculiarity
of gifts in order to fitting men for it; and the perpetuity of the Function
from the end of it, the building up of the Body of Christ. Thus I have now
asserted the perpetual divine Right of a Gospel Ministry, not only for teaching
the Word, but administration of Ordinances, and governing the Church as a
Society: which work belongs to none but such as are appointed for it, who are
the same with the dispencers of the Word, as appears from the titles of (...),
Governors, Rulers, Pastors, all which necessarily imply a Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Governing power, which having been largely proved by others, and yielded by
me, I pass over.

CHAP. III.
The Question fully stated. Not what form of Government comes the nearest to
the Primitive practice, but whether any be absolutely determined. Several
things propounded for resolving the Question. What the form of
Church Government was under the Law. How far Christians are bound to observe
that. Neither the necessity of superiority, nor the unlawfulness can be proved
thence.

ANd now I come to the main Subject of the present Controversy, 1.
which is acknowledging a form of Government necessary, and the Governors of
the Church perpetual; Whether the particular form whereby the Church must be
governed, be determined by any positive Law of God, which unalterably binds all
Christians to the observation of it. By Church here, I mean not a particular
Congregation, but such a Society which comprehends in it many of these lesser
Congregations united together in one body under a form of Government. The forms
of Government in controversy, the Question being thus stated, are only these
two* the particular officers of several Churches, acting in an equality of
Power, which are commonly called a College of Presbyters; or a Superior Order
above the standing Ministry, having the Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination
belonging to it by virtue of a Divine Institution. Which order is by an
Antonomasia called Episcopacy. The Question now, is not, which of these two
does come the nearest to Apostolical practice, and the first Institution, which
has hitherto been the controversy so hotly debated among us; but whether
either of these two forms be so settled by a jus divinum, that is, be so
determined by a positive Law of God, that all the Churches of Christ are bound
to observe that one form so determined, without variation from it: or whether
Christ has not in settling of his Church (provided there be some form of
Government, and a settled Ministry for the exercise of it,) left it to the
prudence of every particular Church, consisting of many Congregations, to agree
upon its own form which it judgdeth most conducing to the end of Government in
that particular Church. (...). Here now we fix our selves, and the first thing
we do, is to agree upon our ways of resolution of this Question, whereby to
come to an end of this debate. And the most probable way to come to an issue in
it, is, to go through all the ways whereon men do fix an unalterable divine
Right, and to see whether any of these do evince a divine Right settled upon a
positive Law or no, for one of these forms. The pleas then for such a divine
Right are these: Either some formal Law standing in force under the Gospel, or
some plain Institution of a New Law by Christ in forming his Church, or the
obligatory nature of Apostolical practice, or the general sense of the
Primitive Church, to which we shall add by way of Appendix, the Judgment of
the chief Divines and Churches since the Reformation; if we go happily through
these, we may content our selves with having obtained the thing we aim at.

The first inquiry then is, Whether any formal Law of God 2.
concerning a form of government for his Church, either by persons acting in an
equality of Power, or subordination of one Order to another, under the Gospel,
does remain in force or no, binding Christians to the observing of it. The
Reason why I begin with this, is, because I observe the Disputants on both
sides make use of the Pattern under the Law to establish their form by. B.
Bilson Perpet. Govern. cap. 2. B. Andrews Form of Government in the old T. B.
Usher. Original of Episc.
Those who are for Superiority of one Order above another in the government of
the Church, derive commonly their first argument from the Pattern under the
Law. Herl of Indep. p. 4. Apol. Spanbem. omnes.
Those who are for an equality of Power in the persons acting in government,
yet being for a subordination of Courts, they bring their first argument for
that, from the Jewish Pattern. So that these latter are bound by their own
argument, though used in another case, to be ruled in this Controversy by the
Jewish Pattern. For why should it be more obligatory as to subordination of
Courts, then as to the superiority of Orders? If it holds in one case: it must
in the other. And if there be such a Law for Superiority standing unrepealed,
there needs no New Law to enforce it under the Gospel. We shall therefore first
enquire what foundation there is for either form in that Pattern, and how far
the argument drawn from thence is obligatory to us now. For the practice then
in the Jewish Church, That there was no universal equality in the Tribe of Levi
which God singled out from the rest for his own service, is obvious in
Scripture. For there we find Priests above the Levites; the family of Aaron
being chosen out from the other families of Cohath (one of the three sons of
Levi) to be employed in a nearer attendance upon Gods Service then any of the
other families. And it must be acknowledged, that among both Priests and
Levites there was a Superiority; For God placed Eleazar over the Priests, Numb.
3. v. 30, 34, 35.
Elizaphan over the Cohathites, Eliasaph over the Gershonites; Zuriel over the
Merarites, and these are called (...) the Rulers over their several families;
for it is said of every one of them (...) he was Ruler over the house of his
Father. Neither were these equal; for over Numb. 4. 28. 32. Numb. 4. 19.
Eliasaph and Zuriel God placed Ithamar, over Elisaphan and his own family God
set Eleazar, who by reason of his authority over all the rest, is called (...)
the Ruler of the Rulers of Levi, and besides these there were under these
Rulers (...) the chief Fathers of the several distinct families, as they are
called Exodus 6. 25. Thus we briefly see the subordination that there was in
the Tribe of Levi; the Levites first, over them the heads of the Families, over
them the Rulers, or the chief of the heads, over them Ithamar, over both
Priests and Levites, Eleazar; Over all, Aaron the High Priest.

There being then so manifest an inequality among them,. 3.
proceed we to show how obligatory this is under the Gospel. For that end it
will be necessary to consider, whether this imparity and Superiority were
peculiarly appointed by God for the Ecclesiastical government of the Tribe of
Levi, as it consisted of persons to be employed in the service of God, or it
was only such an inequality and Superiority as was in any other Tribe. If only
common with other Tribes, nothing can be inferred from thence peculiar to
Ecclesiastical government under the Gospel, any more then from the government
of other Tribes to the same kind of government in all civil States. We must
then take notice that Levi was a particular distinct Tribe of it self, and so
not in subordination to any other Tribe; for they had the heads of their
Fathers as well as others, Exodus 6. 25. and although when they were settled in
Canaan, their habitations were intermixed with other Tribes in their forty eight
Cities, yet they were not under the government of those Tribes among whom they
lived, but preserved their authority and government entire among themselves.
And therefore it was necessary there should be the same form of government
among them, which there was among the rest. The whole body of the Nation then
was divided into thirteen Tribes; these Tribes into their several families;
some say seventy, which they called (...), these Families were divided into so
many Households (...), their Households into persons (...); over the several
persons were the several Masters of Families; over the several Households were
the Captains of 1000 and 100, 50 -- 10. Over the Families, I suppose, were the
heads of the Fathers. And over the thirteen Tribes were the (...) the chief
Fathers of the Tribes of the Children of Israel, Numb. 32. 28. and we have the
names of them set down, Numb. 34. 17, etc. So that hitherto, we find nothing
peculiar to this Tribe, nor proper to it as employed in the service of God. For
their several Families had their several Heads, and Eleazar over them as chief
of the Tribe. And so we find throughout Numbers 2. all the Heads of the several
Tribes are named and appointed by God as Eleazar was.

The only things then which seem proper to this Tribe, were 5.
the superiority of the Priests over the Levites in the service of God, and the
supereminent power of the High Priest, as the type of Christ. So that nothing
can be inferred from the order under the Law to that under the Gospel, but from
one of these two. And from the first there can be nothing deduced but this,
that as there was a superiority of Officers under the Law, so likewise should
there be under the Gospel; which is granted by all in the superiority of
Priests over Deacons, to whom these two answer in the Church of God, in the
judgment of those who contend for a higher order by divine Institution above
Presbyters. And withal we must consider, that there was under that order no
power of jurisdiction invested in the Priests over the Levites, but that was in
the heads of the Families; and ordination there could not be, because their
office descended by succession in their several Families. Those who would argue
from Aarons power, must either bring too little, or too much from thence; Too
little, if we consider his office was typical and ceremonial, and as High
Priest had more immediate respect to God then men, Heb. 5. 1. and therefore
Eleazar was appointed over the several Families during Aarons lifetime; and
under Eleazar, his son Phinehas. Too much, If a necessity be urged for the
continuance of the same authority in the Church of God; which is the argument
of the Papists, deriving the Popes Supremacy from thence. Which was acutely
done by Pope Innocentius the third, the Father of the Lateran Council, who
proved, that the Pope may exercise temporal jurisdiction from that place in
Deuteronomy 17. 8. and that by this reason, because Deuteronomy did imply the
second Law, and therefore what was there written, in Novo Testamento debet
observari, must be observed under the Gospel, which according to them is a new
Law.

All that can be inferred then from the Jewish pattern, 5.
cannot amount to any obligation upon Christians, it being at the best but a
judicial Law, and therefore binds us not up as a positive Law; but only
declares the equity of the thing in use then. I conclude then, That the Jewish
pattern is no standing Law for Church Government now, either in its common or
peculiar form of Government; but because there was some superiority of order
then, and subordination of some persons to others under that government, that
such a superiority and subordination is no ways unlawful under the Gospel;
for that would destroy the equity of the Law. And though the form of Government
was the same with that of other Tribes, yet we see God did not bind them to an
equality, because they were for his immediate service, but continued the same
way as in other Tribes; thence I infer, that as there is no necessary
obligation upon Christians to continue that form under the Jews, because their
Laws do not bind us now; so neither is there any repugnancy to this Law in such
a subordination, but it is very agreeable with the equity of it, it being
instituted for peace and order, and therefore ought not to be condemned for
Antichristian. The Jewish pattern then of Government, neither makes equality
unlawful, because their Laws do not oblige now; nor does it make superiority
unlawful, because it was practiced then. So that notwithstanding the Jewish
pattern, the Church of Christ is left to its own liberty for the choice of its
form of Government, whether by an equality of power in some persons, or
superiority and subordination of one order to another.

CHAP. IV.
Whether Christ has determined the form of Government by any positive Laws.
Arguments of the necessity why Christ must determine it, largely answered; as
First, Christ's faithfulness compared with Moses, answered, and retorted; and
proved, that Christ did not institute any form of Church Government, because no
such Law for it as Moses gave; and we have nothing but general Rules, which are
applyable to several forms of Government. The office of Timothy and Titus, what
it proves in order to this question: the lawfulness of Episcopacy shown
thence, but not the necessity. A particular form, how far necessary, as Christ
was the Governor of his Church; the similitudes the Church is set out by,
prove not the thing in question. Nor the difference of Civil and Church
Government; nor Christ setting Officers in his Church; nor the inconvenience of
the Churches power in appointing new Officers. Every Minister has a power
respecting the Church in common, which the Church may restrain. Episco^acy
thence proved lawful, the argument from the Scriptures perfection answered.

WE come then from the Type to the Antitype, from. 1.
the Rod of Aaron to the Root of Iess^* from the Pattern of the Jewish Church,
to the Founder of the Christian: To see whether our Lord and Savior has
determined this controversy, or any one form of government for his Church, by
any universally binding act or Law of his. And here it is pleaded more hotly by
many that Christ must do it, than that he has done it. And therefore I shall
first examine the pretenses of the necessity of Christ's determining the
particular form; and then the arguments that are brought that he has done it.
The main pleas that there must be a perfect form of Churchgovernment laid down
by Christ for the Church of God, are from the comparison of Christ with Moses,
from the equal necessity of forms of Government now which there is for other
Heb. 1. 2, 5, 6.
Societies, from the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures; all other
arguments are reducible to these three Heads. Of these in their order.

First, From the comparison of Christ with Moses, they argue Arg. 1.
thus: If Moses was faithful in his house as a servant, much more Christ as a
Son; now Moses appointed a particular form of Government for the Church under
the old Testament; therefore Christ did certainly lay down a form of Church
Government for the New Testament.

To this I answer: first, Faithfulness implies the discharge Answ. 1.
of a trust reposed in one by another: so that it is said verse. 2. he was
faithful to him that appointed him: Christ's faithfulness then lay in
discharging the Work which his Father laid upon him, which was the Work of
mediation between God and us; and therefore the comparison is here Instituted
between Moses as typical Mediator, and Christ as the true Mediator; that as
Moses was faithful in his Work, so was Christ in his. Now Moses his
faithfulness lay in keeping close to the Pattern received in the Mount, that
is, observing the commands of God; Now therefore if Christ's being faithful in
his office, does imply the settling any one form of Government in the Church, it
must be made appear that the serling of this form was part of Christ's Mediatory
Work, and that which the Father commanded him to do as Mediator* and that
Christ received such a form from the Father for the Christian Church, as Moses
did for the Jewish. To this it is said, That the Government is laid upon
Christ's shoulders, and all power in his hands; and therefore it belongs to him
as Mediator. Isa. 9. 6. Matthew 28. 18.
Christ I grant is the King of the Church, and does govern it outwardly by his
Laws, and inwardly by the conduct of his Spirit: but shall we say, that
therefore any one form of Government is necessary, which is neither contained
in his Laws, nor dictated by his Spirit? the main original of mistakes here,
is, the confounding the external and internal Government of the Church of
Christ, and thence whenever men read of Christ's power, authority and
government, they fancy it refers to the outward Government of the Church of
God, which is intended of his internal Mediatory power over the hearts and
consciences of men. But withal I acknowledge, that Christ for the better
government of his Church and people, has appointed Officers in his Church,
invested them by virtue of his own power with an authority to preach and
baptize, and administer all Gospel Ordinances in his own Name, Matthew. 28. 18.
19.
that is, by his authority, for it is clearly made known to us in the Word of
God, that Christ has appointed these things. But then, whether any shall
succeed the Apostles in superiority of power over Presbyters, or all remain
governing the Church in an equality of power, is nowhere determined by the Will
of Christ in Scripture, which contains his Royal Law: and therefore we have no
reason to look upon it as any thing flowing from the power and authority of
Christ as Mediator; and so not necessarily binding Christians.

Secondly, I answer; If the correspondency between Christ 2.
and Moses in their work, does imply an equal exactness in Christ's disposing
of every thing in his Church, as Moses did among the Jews; then the Church of
Christ must be equally bound to all circumstances of Worship as the Jews were.
For there was nothing appertaining in the least to the Worship of God, but was
fully set down even to the pins of the Tabernacle in the Law of Moses; but we
find no such thing in the Gospel. The main Duties and Ordinances are prescribed
indeed, but their circumstances and manner of performance are left as matters
of Christian-liberty, and only couched under some general Rules: which is a
great difference between the legal and Gospel-state. Under the Law all
Ceremonies and Circumstances are exactly prescribed: but in the Gospel we read
of some general Rules of direction for Christians carriage in all
circumstantial things. These four especially contain all the directions of
Scripture concerning Circumstantials. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
All things to be done decently and in order. All to be done for edification.
Give no offense. Do all to the glory 1 Cor. 14. 26.
of God. So that the particular circumstances are left to Christian-liberty
with the observation of general Rules. It is evident 1 Cor. 10. 32.
as to Baptism and the Lords Supper, which are unquestionably 1 Cor. 10. 31.
of divine Institution, yet as to the circumstances of the administration of
them, how much less circumstantial is Christ Romans 14. 6, 7.
then Moses was! As to circumcision and the passover under the Law, the age,
time, persons, manner, place, form, all fully set down; but nothing so under
the Gospel: Whether Baptism shall be administered to Infants or no, is not set
down in express words, but left to be gathered by Analogy and consequences;
what manner it shall be administered in, whether by dipping or sprinkling, is
not absolutely determined; what form of words to be used, whether in the name
of all three persons, or sometimes in the Name of Christ only, as in the Acts
Acts 2. 38. 8. 12, 19, 5.
we read (if that be the sense, and not rather in Christ's Name, i. e. by
Christ's authority). Whether*sprinkling or dipping shall be thrice as some
Churches use it, or only once as others. These things we see relating to an
Ordinance of Divine Institution, are yet past over without any express command
determining either way in Scripture. So as to the Lords Supper; What persons to
be admitted to it, whether all visible professors, or only sincere Christians:
upon what terms, whether by previous examination of Church Officers, or by an
open profession of their faith, or else only by their own trial of themselves,
required of them as their duty by their Ministers; whether it should be always
after Supper as Christ himself did it; whether taking fasting, or after meat;
whether kneeling, or sitting, or leaning? Whether to be consecrated in one form
of words, or several? These things are not thought fit to be*determined by any
positive command of Christ, but left to the exercise of Christian-liberty; the
like is as to preaching the Word, public Prayer, singing of Psalms; the
duties are required, but the particular Modes are left undetermined. The case
is the same as to Church-governwent. That the Church be governed, and that it
be governed by its proper Officers, are things of Divine appointment: but
whether the Church should be governed by many joining together in an equality,
or by Subordination of some persons to others, is left to the same liberty
which all other Circumstances are; this being not the Substance of the thing it
self, but only the manner of performance of it.

3. I answer, That there is a manifest disparity between the. 3.
Gospel and Jewish state: and therefore Reasons may be given why all
Punctilioes were determined then which are not now: as

1. The perfection and liberty of the Gospel-state above the Jewish. The Law
was only as a Paedagogy, the Church then in her Infancy and Nonage, and
therefore wanted the Fescues of Ceremonies to direct her, and every part of her
lesson set her, to bring her by degrees to skill and exactness in her
Understanding the mystery of the things represented to her. But must the Church
now grown up under Christ be still sub ferula, and not dare to vary in any
Circumstance, which does not concern the thing it self! A Boy at School has
his Lesson set him, and the manner of learning it prescribed him in every mode
and circumstance. But at the University has his Lectures read him, and his
work set, and general Directions given, but he is left to his own liberty how
to perform his work, and what manner to use in the doing of it. So it was with
the Church under age: Every mode and circumstance was Determined; but when the
fullness of Time was come, the Church then being grown up, the main Offices
themselves were appointed, and general Directions given; but a liberty left
how to apply and make use of them, as to every particular case and occasion.
Things Moral remain still in their full force, but circumstantials are left
more at liberty by the Gospel-liberty; as a Son that is taught by his Father,
while he is under his instruction, must observe every particular direction for
him in his Learning: but when he comes to age, though he observes not those
things as formerly, yet his Son*ship continues, and he must obey his Father as
a Child still, though not in the same manner. The similitude is the Apostles,
Galat. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 10. which he there largely amplifies to this very
purpose of freeing Christians from Judaical ceremonies.

2. The Form of Government among the Jews in the tribe of Levi, was agreeable
to the Form of Government among the other Tribes; and so Moses was not more
exact in Reference to that, then to any other; and those persons in that Tribe
who were the chief before the Institution of the A^ronicall Priesthood, were
so after; but now under the Gospel, people are not under the same Restrictions
for civil Government by a Judicial Law, as they were then. For the Form of
Ecclesiastical Government then took place among them as one of their Judicial
Laws; And therefore if the Argument hold, Christ must as well Prescribe a Form
for civil Government as Ecclesiastical; if Christ in the Gospel must by his
Faithfulness follow the Pattern of Moses. But if Christ be not bound to follow
Moses Pattern as to Judicial Law, for his Church and People; neither is he as
to a Form of Ecclesiastical Government, because that was a part of their Civil
and Judicial Law.

3. The people of the Jews was a whole and entire people, subsisting by
themselves when one set Form of Government was prescribed them; but it is
otherwise now under the Gospel. The Church of Christ was but Forming in Christ's
own time, nor the Apostles, in whose time we read of but some Cities and no
whole Nations converted to the Faith; and therefore the same Form of Government
would not serve a Church in its first constitution, which is necessary for it
when it is actually formed. A Pastor and Deacons might serve the Church of a
City while believers were few, but cannot when they are increased into many
Congregations. And so proportionably when the Church is enlarged to a whole
Nation, there must be another Form of Government then. Therefore they who call
for a National Church under the Gospel, let them first show a Nation Converted
to the Faith, and we will undertake to show the other. And this is the chief
Reason why the Churches Polity is so little described in the New Testament,
because it was only growing then: and it does not stand to Reason, that the
coat which was cut out for one in his Infancy, must of necessity serve him when
grown a man; which is the argument of those who will have nothing observed in
the Church, but what is expressed in Scripture. The Apostles looked at the
present state of a Church in appointing Officers, and ordered things according
to the circumstances of them, which was necessary to be done in the founding of
a Church; and the reason of Apostolical practice binds still, though not the
individual action, that as they Regulated Churches for the best convenience of
Governing them, so should the Pastors of Churches now. But of this largely
afterward.

4. Another difference is, that the People of the Jews lived all under one
civil Government; but it is otherwise with Christians who live under different
Forms of civil Government. And then by the same reason that in the first
institution of their Ecclesiastical Government it was formed according to the
civil, by the same reason, must Christians do under the Gospel, if the
argument holds that Christ must be faithful as Moses was. And then because
Christians do live under several and distinct Forms of civil Government, they
must be bound by the Law of Christ, to contemperate the Government of the
Church to that of the State. And what they have gained by this for their cause,
who assert the necessity of any one Form from this Argument, I see not; but on
the contrary this is evident, that they have evidently destroyed their own
principle by it. For if Moses did prescribe a Form of Government for Levi
agreeable to the Form of the Commonwealth, and Christ be as faithful as Moses
was, then Christ must likewise order the Government of Christian Churches,
according to that of the State, and so must have different Forms as the other
has. Thus much will serve abundantly to show the weakness of the argument
drawn from the agreement of Christ and Moses, for the proving any one form of
Government necessary; but this shall not suffice. I now shall ex abundanti from
the answers to this argument, lay down several arguments that Christ did never
intend to institute any one Form of Government in his Church.

1. Whatever binds the Church of God as an institution of 4.
Christ, must bind as an universal standing Law; but one form of Government in
the Church cannot bind it as a standing Law. For whatever binds as a standing
^aw, must either be expressed in direct terms as such a Law; or deduced by a
necessary Consequence from his Laws, as of an universally binding Nature; but
any one particular form of Government in the Church, is neither expressed in
any direct terms by Christ, nor can be deduced by just Consequence; therefore
no such form of Government is instituted by Christ. If there be any such Law,
it must be produced, whereby it is determined in Scripture, either that there
must be Superiority or Equality among Church Officers, as such, after the
Apostles decease. And though the Negative of a Fact holds not, yet the Negative
of a Law does, else no superstition. I have not yet met with any such produced,
and therefore shall see what consequences can be made of a binding Nature. To
this I say, that no consequences can be deduced to make an institution, but
only to apply one to particular Cases: because Positives are in themselves
indifferent without Institution and Divine appointment; and therefore that must
be directly brought for the making a Positive universally binding, which it
does not in its own Nature do. Now here must be an Institution of something
merely Positive supposed, which in its self is of an indifferent Nature; and
therefore no consequence drawn can suffice to make it unalterably binding,
without express Declaration that such a thing shall so bind; for what is not in
its own Nature moral, binds only by virtue of a command, which command must be
made known by the Will of Christ, so that we may understand its Obligatory
nature. So that both a consequence must be necessarily drawn, and the
Obligation of what shall be so drawn must be expressed in Scripture: which I
despair of ever finding in reference to any one Form of Government in the
Church.

2. If the standing Laws for Church Government be equally applyable to several
distinct Forms, then no one Form is prescribed in Scripture; but all the
standing Laws respecting Church Government, are equally applyable to several
Forms: All the Laws occurring in Scripture respecting Church Government, may
be referred to these three heads. Such as set down the Qualifications of the
Persons for the Office of Government, such as require a right management of
their Office, and such as lay down Rules for the management of their Office.
Now all these are equally applyable to either of these two forms we now
discourse of. We begin then with those which set down the qualifications of
persons employed in Government, those we have largely and fully set down by St.
Paul in his Order to 1 Timothy 3. 1. to the 8.
Timothy and Titus, prescribing what manner of persons those Titus 1. 5. to the
10.
should be who are to be employed in the Government of the Church. A Bishop
must be blameless as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not soon angry, not
given to wine, no striker, etc. All these, and the rest of the Qualifications
mentioned, are equally required as necessary in a Bishop, whether taken for one
of a Superior Order above Presbyters, or else only for a single Presbyter;
however that be, if he has a hand in Churchgovernment, he must be such a one
as the Apostle prescribes; And so these commands to Timothy and Titus given by
Paul, do equally respect and concern them, whether we consider them as
Evangelists acting by an extraordinary Commission, or as fixed Pastors over all
the Churches in their several precincts; so that from the Commands themselves
nothing can be inferred either way to determine the Question; only one place is
pleaded for the perpetuity of the Office Timothy was employed in, which must
now be examined: The place is 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight
of God, etc. that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. From hence it is argued thus: The
Commandment here was the Charge which Timothy had of governing the Church; this
Timothy could not keep personally till Christ's second coming; therefore there
must be a Succession of Officers in the same kind till the second coming of
Christ. But this is easily answered. For first, it is no ways certain what
this Command was which St. Paul speaks of; Some understand it of fighting the
good fight of Faith, others of the precept of Love, others most probably the
sum of all contained in this Epistle, which I confess implies in it (as being
one great part of the Epistle) Paul's direction of Timothy for the right
discharging of his Office; but, granting that the command respects Timothy's
Office, yet I answer, Secondly, It manifestly appears to be something personal,
and not successive; or at least nothing can be inferred for the necessity of
such a Succession from this place which it was brought for: Nothing being more
evident then that this command related to Timothy's personal observance of it.
And therefore thirdly, Christ's appearing here, is not meant of his second
coming to judgment, but it only imports the Hom. 18. in 1 Timothy To. 4.
time of Timothy's decease; So Chrysostom, (...). So Estius understands it,
usque ad exitum vitae; Epistol. 80. ^ad Hesych.
and for that end brings that Speech of Augustine, Tun^ unicuique veniet dies
adventus Domini, cum venerit ei dies, ut talis hinc exeat, qualis*judicandus
est illo die. And the reason why the time of his death is set out by the coming
of Christ, is, (...), as Chrysostom, and from him Theophylact observes, to
incite him the more, both to diligence in his work and patience under
sufferings, from the consideration of Christ's appearance. The plain meaning of
the words then is the same with that, Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Nothing then can be hence inferred
as to the necessary succession of some in Timothy's Office, whatever it is
supposed to be.

Secondly, The precepts of the Gospel requiring a right. 5.
management of the work, are equally applyable to either form. Taking heed to
the flock over which God has made them overseers, is equally a duty; whether
by flock we understand either the particular Church of Ephesus, or the adjacent
Churches of Asia; Whether by Overseers we understand some acting over others,
or all joining together in an equality. So exhorting, reproving, preaching in
season and out of season, doing Acts 20. 28.
all things (...), without rash censures and partiality; 2 Timothy 4. 2.
watching over the flock as they that must give an account: 1 Timothy 5. 21.
Laying hands suddenly on no man: rebuking not an Elder, but under two or three
witnesses. And whatever precepts Heb. 13. 17.
of this nature we read in the Epistles of Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
may be equally applyable to men acting in either of these two forms of
Government: There being no precept occurring 1 Timothy 5. 19.
in all those Epistles prescribing to Timothy, whether he must act only as a
Consul in Senatu with the consent of the Presbytery, or whether by his sole
power he should determine what was the common interest, and concern of those
Churches he was the Superintendent over. Neither does the Apostle determine at
all in those Epistles chiefly concerning Church Government, whether upon the
removal of Timothy or Titus thence as Evangelists, as some pretend, or upon
their death as fixed Pastors and Bishops, as others, any should succeed them in
the power they enjoyed, or no: nor in what manner the Pastors of the several
Churches should order things of common concernment, Which would seem to be a
strange omission, were either of these two forms so necessary, taken
exclusively of the other, as both parties seem to affirm. For we cannot
conceive but if the being and right constitution of a Church did depend upon
the manner of the Governors acting in it, but that care which Paul had over
all the Churches would have prompted him (especially being assisted and guided
by an infallible Spirit in the penning those Epistles) to have laid down some
certain Rules for the acting of the Pastors of the Churches after the departure
of Timothy and Titus. Considering especially that the Epistles then written by
him, were to be of standing perpetual use in the Church of God; and by which
the Churches in after-ages were to be guided as well as those that were then in
being. The Apostle in both Epistles takes care for a succession of Pastors in
those Churches: Timothy is charged to commit the things he had 2 Timothy 2. 2.
heard of Paul to faithful men; who shall be fit to teach others. Had it not
been as requisite to have charged him to have committed his power of Government
to men fit for that, had the Apostles looked on the form of Government to be as
necessary as the office of preaching? Paul says, he left Titus in Creete on
purpose to settle the Churches and ordain Presbyters Titus 1. 5.
in every City: had it not been as necessary to have showed in what order the
Churches must be settled, and what power did belong to those Presbyters, and how
they should act in the governing their Churches, had he thought the
constitution of the Churches did depend upon the form of their acting? We see
here then, that St. Paul does not express any thing necessarily inferring any
one constant form to be used in the Church of God, And whence can we infer any
necessity of it, but from the Scriptures laying it down as a duty that such a
form and no other there must be used in the Church of God? For all that we can
see then by Paul's direction for Church Government, (when if ever, this should
have been expressed) it was left to the Christian wisdom and prudence of the
Churches of Ephesus and Creet to consult and determine in what manner the
government of their Churches should be provided for, upon the departure of
Timothy and Titus from them.

But here it will be soon replied, That though nothing be. 6.
expressed in Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, yet Paul's appointing Timothy
and Titus over those Churches, did determine the form of Government, and they
were entrusted with a power to provide for future Governors after them.

To this ^answer: First, The superiority which Timothy and Titus had over those
Churches, does not prove that form of Government necessary in all Churches; I
dispute not whether they were Evangelists or no, or acted as such in that
Superiority (of that afterward) it is evident they might be so; there being no
convincing argument to the contrary. And the bare possibility of the truth of
the Negative, destroys the necessity of the Affirmative of a Proposition. As,
Si posibile est, hominem non esse animal, then that Proposition is false,
Necesse est hominem esse animal. For, Necesse est esse, and Non possibile est
non esse, being ^quipollents on the one side; and Possibile est non esse, Et
non necesse est esse, being ^quipollents on the other; Possibile est non esse,
must be contradictory to Necesse est esse, as Non possibile est non esse, is to
Non necesse est esse. So that if only the possibility of their acting as
Evangelists, that is, by an extraordinary Commission, be evicted, which I know
none will deny; the necessity of their acting as fixed Bishops is destroyed,
and consequently the necessity of the continuance of their office too, which
depends upon the former. For if they acted not as Bishops, nothing can be drawn
from their example necessarily enforcing the continuance of the Superiority
which they enjoyed. But though nothing can be inferred from hence as to the
necessity of that office to continue in the Church, which Timothy and Titus
were invested in; yet from the Superiority of that power which they enjoyed
over those Churches, whether as Evangelists, or as fixed Bishops, These two
things may be inferred. First, That the superiority of some Church Officers
over others, is not contrary to the Rule of the Gospel: for all parties
acknowledge the superiority of their power above the Presbyters of the several
Cities; only the continuance of this power ^^ disputed by many. But if they had
any such power at all, it is enough for my present design, viz. that such a
superiority is not contrary to the Gospel-Rule: or that the nature of the
Government of the Church does not imply a necessary equality among the
Governors of it. Secondly, Hence I infer, that it is not repugnant to the
constitution of Churches in Apostolical times, for men to have power over more
than one particular Congregation. For such a power Timothy and Titus had, which
had it been contrary to the nature of the regiment of Churches, we should never
have read of in the first planted Churches. So that if those popular arguments
of a necessary relation between a Pastor and particular people, of personal
knowledge, care and inspection, did destroy the lawfulness of extending that
care and charge to many particular Congregations, they would likewise overthrow
the nature, end and design of the office which Timothy and Titus acted in:
which had a relation to a multitude of particular and Congregational Churches.
Whether their power was extraordinary or no, I now dispute not; but whether
such a power be repugnant to the Gospel or no; which from their practice is
evident that it is not. But then others who would make this office necessary,
urge further, that Timothy or Titus might ordain and appoint others to succeed
them in their places and care over all those Churches under their charge. To
which I answer, First, What they might do is not the question, but what they
did, as they might do it; so they might not do it, if no other evidence be
brought to prove it: for, Quod possibile est esse, possibile ^st non esse.
Secondly, Neither what they did, is the whole question, but what they did with
an opinion of the necessity of doing it, whether they were bound to do it or
no? and if so, whether by any Law extant in Scripture, and given them by Paul
in his Epistles, or some private command and particular instructions when he
deputed them to their several charges: If the former, that Law and command must
be produced, which will hardly be, if we embrace only the received Canon of the
Scripture. If the latter* we must then fetch some standing Rule and Law from
unwritten Traditions: for no other evidence can be given of the Instructions by
word of mouth, given by Paul to Timothy and Titus at the taking their charges
upon them. But yet Thirdly, Were it only the matter of fact that was disputed,
that would hold a Controversy still, viz. Whether any did succeed Timothy and
Titus in their Offices: but this I shall leave to its proper place to be
discussed, when I come to examine the argument from Apostolical Succession.
Thus we see then that neither the qualification of the persons, nor the
commands for a right exercise of the office committed to them, nor the whole
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, do determine any one form of Government to be
necessary in the Church of God.

Thirdly, Let us see whether the general Rules do require. 7.
any one form; which rules in that they are general, can determine nothing of
the authority it self as to its particular mode, being intended only for the
regulation of the exercise of the authority in which men are placed. And it is
an evidence that nothing is particularly determined in this case, when the
Spirit of God only lays down such Rules for government which are applyable to
distinct forms. Otherwise, certainly some Rule would have been laid down, which
could Heb. 5. 2. Romans 10. 14.
have been applied to nothing but to that one form. That none take the office
of preaching without a Call, nor go without sending, will equally hold whether
the power of Ordination lie in a Bishop with Presbyters, or in Presbyters
acting with equality of power, That offenders be censured, and complaints made
to the Church in case of scandal, determines nothing to whom the power of
Jurisdiction does solely belong, nor what that Church is which must receive
these complaints. That all things be done with decency and order, does
prescribe nothing wherein that Decency lies, nor how far that Order may extend;
nor yet who must be the Judges of that Decency and Order. That all be done for
edification, and the common benefit of the Church, does no ways restrain his
Churches freedom in disposing of its self as to the form of its government, so
the aim of the Church be for the better edification of the body of the Church,
and to promote the benefit of it. But methinks, these general Orders and Rules
for Discipline do imply the particular manner of government to be left at
liberty to the Church of God, so that in all the several forms these general
Rules be observed. Whereas had Christ appointed a superior Order to govern
other subordinate Officers and the Church together; Christ's command for
governing the Church would have been particularly addressed to them: and again,
had it been the will of Christ there should be no superior Order above the
Pastors of particular Churches, there would have been some express and direct
prohibition of it; which because we no where read; it seems evident that Christ
has left both the one and the other to the freedom and liberty of his Church.
So much shall serve in this place, to show how improbable it is that Christ did
ever prescribe any one form of Government in his Church, since he has only
laid down general Rules for the management of Church government.

But this will not yet suffice those, who plead that Christ. 8.
must determine one immutable form of Government in his Church: but although it
be a high presumption to determine first what Christ must do, before we examine
what he has done, yet we shall still proceed and examine all the pretenses
that are brought for this opinion. The next thing then which is generally urged
for it, is, the equal necessity of Christ's instituting a certain form as for
any other Legislator who models a Commonwealth. Now for answer to this, I say
first, That Christ has instituted such an immutable government in his Church,
as is sufficient for the succession and continuance of it, which is all which
Founders of Commonwealths do look after, viz. that there be such an Order and
distinction of persons, and subordination of one to the other, that a Society
may still be preserved among them; now this is sufficiently provided for by
Christ's appointing Officers continually to rule his Church, and establishing
Laws for the perpetuating of such Officers; so whatsoever is necessary in order
to the general ends of Government is acknowledged to be appointed by Jesus
Christ. Until then that it be proved that one form of government is in it self
absolutely necessary for the being of a Church, this argument can prove
nothing* for what is drawn from necessity, will prove nothing but in a case of
necessity. Secondly, I answer, That those things which are not absolutely
necessary to the being of a Church, are left to Christ's liberty, whether he
will determine them or no; and are no further to be looked on as necessary then
as he has determined by his Laws whether they shall be or no, in his Church.
The thing will be thus cleared. When I read that Zaleucus, Lycurgus, or Numa,
did form a Commonwealth and make Laws for it; I presently conclude that there
must be some order or distinction of persons in this Common wealth; and some
rules whereby persons must be governed, and whereby others must Rule: But I
cannot hence infer that Zaleucus, or Lycurgus did institute Monarchical,
Aristocratical, or Democratical Government, because any of these forms might be
agreeable to their design; and therefore what kind of government they did
appoint, can no otherwise be known then by taking a view of the Laws which they
made in order thereto. So it is in reference to Christ, when we read that
Christ has instituted a Church always to continue in the World, we presently
apprehend that there must be some power and order in the members of that
Society, and Laws for the governing it: but we cannot hence gather that he has
bound up his Officers to act in any one form, because several forms might in
themselves equally tend to the promoting the end of Government in his Church.
And therefore what Christ has expressly determined in his positive Laws, must
be our Rule of judging in this case, and not any presumption of our own, that
such a form was necessary, and therefore Christ must institute and Ecclesiast.
Polity lib. 3. sect. 11.
appoint it, Which is fully expressed by judicious Mr. Hooker, whose words will
serve as a sufficient answer to this Objection. As for those mavelous
Discourses, whereby they adventure to argue, that God must needs have done the
thing which they imagine was to be done; I must confess, I have often wondered
at their exceeding boldness herein. When the question is, Whether God have
delivered in Scripture (as they affirm he has) a complete particular immutable
form of Church-Polity: why take they that other, both presumptuous and
superfluous labor, to prove he should have done it: there being no way in this
case to prove the deed of God, saving only by producing that evidence wherein
he has done it? But if there be no such thing apparent upon record, they do as
if one should demand a Legacy, by force and virtue of some written Testament,
wherein there being no such thing specified, he pleads that there it must
needs be, and brings arguments from the Love and good will which always the
Testator bore, imagining that these or the like proofs will convict a Testament
to have that in it, which other men can no where by reading find. In matters
which concern the actions of God, the most dutiful way on our part, is, to
search what God has done, and with meekness to admire that, rather then to
dispute what he in congru^ty of reason ought to do. Thus he, with more to the
same purpose. The sum then of the answer to this Argument, is this, That
nothing can be inferred of what Christ must do, from his relation to his
Church, but what is absolutely necessary to the being of it; as for all other
things, they being arbitrary constitutions, we can judge no more of the
necessity of them, then as we find them clearly revealed in the Word of God.
And therefore the Plea must be removed from what Christ must do, to what he
has done, in order to the determining the particular form of Government in his
Church.

But still it is argued for the necessity of a particular form. 9.
of Government in the Church from the similitudes the Church is set out by in
Scripture; It is called a Vine, and therefore Parker de Polit. Eccles. lib. 2.
c. 40.
must have Keepers: an House, and therefore must have Government; a City, and
therefore must have a Polity; a Body, and therefore must have Parts. I answer,
First, All these Similitudes prove only that which none deny, that there must
be Order, Power, and Government in the Church of God; we take not away the
Keepers from the Vine, nor the Government from* the House, nor Polity from the
City, nor distinction of parts from the Body; we assert all these things as
necessary in the Church of God. The keepers of the Vine to defend and prune it;
the Governors of the House to rule and order it; the Polity of the City to
guide and direct it; the parts of the Body to complete and adorn it. But
Secondly; None of these Similitudes prove what they are brought for; viz. that
any one immutable form of Government is determined. For may not the Keepers of
the Vine use their own discretion in looking to it, so the flourishing of the
Vine be that they aim at? and if there be many of them, may there not be
different orders among them, and some as Supervisors of the others work? The
House must have Governors; but those that are so, are entrusted with the power
of ordering things in the House according to their own discretion; and where
there is a multitude, is there not diversity of Offices among them? and is it
necessary that every House must have Offices of the same kind? In great and
large Families there must be more particular distinct Orders and Offices, than
in a small and little one. The City must have its Polity; but all Cities have
not the like; some have one form, and some another, and yet there is a City
still and a Polity too. A body must have all its parts; but are all the parts
of the body equal one to another? it suffices that there be a proportion,
though not equality in them: the several parts of the body have their several
offices, and yet we see the head is superintendent over them all: and thus if
we make every particular Church a Body, yet it follows not that the form of
clothing that Body must always be the same* for the manner of Government is
rather the clothing to the Body than the parts of it, the Governors indeed
are parts of the Body; but their manner of governing is not, that may alter
according to the proportion and growth of the Body, and its fashion change for
better convenience.

But if these Similitudes prove nothing; yet certainly, say. 10.
they, the difference as to Civil and Ecclesiastical Government will; for
though there may be different forms in civil Government, which are therefore
called an Ordinance of man; yet there must be but one in Church Government,
which is an Ordinance of God, ^ Pet. 2. 13.
and Christ has appointed Officers to rule it. I answer, first, We grant and
acknowledge a difference between the Church and the Commonwealth, they are
constituted for other ends; the one Political, the other Spiritual; one
temporal, the other eternal; they subsist by different Charters; the one given
to men as men, the other to men as Christians: They act upon different
principles; the one to preserve civil Rights, the other to promote an eternal
Interest; nay, their formal constitution is different; for a man by being a
member of a Commonwealth does not become a Member of the Church, and by being
excommunicated out of the Church* does not cease to be a Member of the
Commonwealth: The Officers of the one are clearly distinct from the other, the
one deriving their power from the Law of Christ, the other from Gods general
Providence: the Magistrate has no power to Excommunicate formally out of the
Church any more then to admit into it, nor have the Church Officers any power
to cast men out of the commonwealth. We see then there is a difference between
Civil and Ecclesiastical Government: But then I answer, Secondly, The power of
the Magistrate is not therefore called an Ordinance of man, because of the
mutability of its Form, and as distinguished from the Form of
Church Government. For First, The Apostle speaks not of the Form of Government,
but of the Power; Submit to every Ordinance of man, etc. the ground of
Submission is not the form, but the power of civil government; and therefore
there can be no opposition expressed here between the Forms of Civil and
Ecclesiastical government: but if any such opposition be, it must be between
the powers; and if this be said as to civils, that the power is an Ordinance of
Man in that sense, (whereas Paul says it is of God) yet as to the Church it is
freely acknowledged Romans 13. 1*
that the Power is derived from God. Secondly, The civil power is not called
(...), because it is a creature of man's making, and so subject to men's power;
but the ground of that Speech is, because all civil power respects men as men,
without any further connotation. Humana dicitur, non quod ab hominibus sit
excogitata, sed quod hominum sit propria, says Beza. And to the same purpose
Calvin, Humana dicitur Ordinatio, non quod humanitus inventa fuerit; sed quod
propria hominum est digesta and ordinata vivendi ratio. Piscator, Humanam
appellat, non quod magistratus homines authors habeat, sed quod Homines eam
gerant. So then the civil power is not called an Ordinance of man, as it is of
man's setting up, but as it is proper to man; and so if there be any opposition
between the civil and Church power, it is only this, that the one belongs to
men as men, the other to men as Christians. Thirdly, Although it be granted
that Christ has appointed and set up his own Officers in his Church; yet it
does not thence follow that he has determined in what manner they shall Rule
his Church. It is true, Christ has set up in his Church, some Apostles, some
Evangelists, and Ephesians. 4. 12.
some Pastors and Teachers: but it does not thence follow, that Christ has
determined, whether the Power of Apostles and Evangelists should continue in
his Church or no, as it implied Superiority over the ordinary Pastors of the
Churches; nor whether the Pastors of the Church should act in an equality in
their Governing Churches. I grant, that all Church Government must be performed
by Officers of Christ's appointing; but that which I say is not determined in
Scripture, is, the way and manner whereby they shall Govern Churches in common.

It is yet further argued, That if the Form of Church Government. 11.
be not immutably determined in Scripture, then it is in the Parker* Polit.
Eccles. l. 2. cap. 45. s. c.
Churches Power, to make new Officers which Christ never made, which must be a
plain addition to the Laws of Christ, and must argue the Scripture of
Imperfection. This being one of the main Arguments, I have reserved it to the
place of the Triarii, and shall now examine what strength there lies in it. To
this therefore I answer, First, Those Officers are only said to be new, which
were never appointed by Christ, and are contrary to the first appointments of
Christ for the Regulating of his Church; such it is granted the Church has no
power to institute: but if by new Officers be meant only such as have a charge
over more then one particular congregation by the consent of the Pastors
themselves; then it is evident, such an Office cannot be said to be new. For,
besides the general practice of the Church of God, from the first Primitive
times which have all consented in the use of such Officers; we find the
Foundation of this Power laid by Christ himself in the Power which the Apostles
were invested in, which was extended over many, both Churches and Pastors. But
if it be said, The Apostolical Power being extraordinary, must cease with the
persons which enjoyed it: I answer: First, What was extraordinary did cease;
but all the Dispute is, what was extraordinary, and what not; some things were
ordinary in them, as Preaching, Baptizing, Ordaining, Ruling Churches; some
things were again extraordinary, as immediate mission from Christ (the main
distinguishing Note of an Apostle) a Power of working Miracles to confirm the
Truth of what they Preached. Now the Question is, whether the power which they
enjoyed over Presbyters and Churches, be to be reckoned in the first or the
second number. It must therefore be proved to be extraordinary, before it can
be said to cease with them, and that must be done by some Arguments proper to
their persons; for if the Arguments brought be of a common and moral Nature, it
will prove the Office to be so too. Secondly, By ceasing may be meant either
ceasing as to its necessity, or ceasing as to its lawfulness: I say not, but
that the necessity of the Office, as in their persons, for the first Preaching
and propagating the Gospel, did cease with them; but, that after their death it
became unlawful for any particular persons to take the care and charge of
Diocesan Churches, I deny. For to make a thing unlawful which was before
lawful, there must be some express prohibition forbidding any further use of
such a power, which I suppose men will not easily produce in the Word of God.

I answer therefore Secondly, That the extending of any. 12.
Ministerial power, is not the appointing of any New Office; because every
Minister of the Gospel has a Relation in actu primo to the whole Church of
God: the restraint and enlargement of which power is subject to Positive
Determinations of prudence and convenience in actu secundo; and therefore if
the Church see it fit for some men to have this power enlarged for better
government in some, and restrained in others, that enlargement is the
appointing no new Office, but the making use of a power already enjoyed for the
benefit of the Church of God. This being a Foundation tending so fully to clear
the lawfulness of that Government in the Church which implies a superiority
and subordination of the Officers of the Church to one another: and the
Churches using her prudence in ordering the bounds of her Officers, I shall do
these two things. First, Show that the power of every Minister of the Gospel
does primarily and habitually respect the Church in common. Secondly, that the
Church may in a peculiar manner single out some of its Officers for the due
Administration of Ecclesiastical power. First, that every Minister of the
Gospel has a power respecting the Church in common: This I find fully and
largely proved by those who assert the equality of the power of Ministers;
First, from Christ's bestowing the several Offices of the Church, for the use of
the whole Church, Ephesians, 4. 12, 13. Christ has set Apostles, etc. Pastors
and Teachers in his Church; now this Church must needs be 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29.
the catholic visible Church, because indisputably the Apostles Office did
relate thereto, and consequently so must that of Pastors and Teachers too:
Again, the end of these Offices is the building up the Body of Christ, which
cannot otherwise be understood then of his whole Church: else Christ must have
as many Bodies as the Church has partiticular congregations. Which is a new
way of Consubstantiation. Secondly, The Ministerial Office was in being before
any particular congregations were gathered: For Christ upon his Ascension to
Glory gave these Gifts to men; and the Apostles Ephesians. 4. 8.
were empowered by Christ before his Ascension, Either then Matthew. 28. 19.
they were no Church Officers, or if they were so, they could have no other
Correlate, but the whole body of the Church of God then lying under the power
of Darkness, a few persons excepted. Thirdly, Because the main Design of
appointing a Gospel Ministry was the conversion of Heathens and Infidels: and
if these be the proper Object of the Ministerial Function, then the Office must
have reference to the whole Church of Christ; else there could be no part of
that Office performed toward those who are not yet converted. Fourthly, Else a
Minister can perform no office belonging to him as such beyond the bounds of
his particular congregation, and so can neither Preach nor Administer the
Sacraments to any other but within the Bounds of his own particular place and
people. Fifthly, Because Ministers by Baptizing do admit men into the catholic
visible Church, (else a man must be baptized again every time he removes from
one Church to another) and none can admit beyond what their office does extend
to; therefore it is evident that every particular Pastor of a Church has a
Relation to the whole Church; To which purpose our former observation is of
great use; viz. That particular congregations are not of Gods primary
intention, but for men's convenience, and so consequently is the fixedness of
particular Pastors to their several places for the greater convenience of the
Church; every Pastor of a Church then has a Relation to the whole Church; and
that which hinders him from the exercise of this power, is not any
unlawfulness in the thing, but the preserving of order and convenience in the
Church of God. This being premised, I say, Secondly, That the officers of the
Church may in a peculiar manner attribute a larger and more extensive power to
some particular persons for the more convenient exercise of their common power.
We have seen already that their power extends to the care of the Churches in
common, that the restraint of this power is a matter of order and decency in
the Church of God; Now in matters of common concernment, without all question
it is not unlawful when the Church judges it most for Edification, to grant to
some the executive part of that power, which is Originally and Fundamentally
common to them all. For our better understanding of this, we must consider a
twofold power belonging to Church Officers, a power of Order, and a power of
jurisdiction; for in every Presbyter, there are some things inseparably joined
to his Function, and belonging to every one in his personal capacity, both in
actu primo, and in actu secundo, both as to the right and power to do it, and
the exercise and execution of that power; such are preaching the Word, visiting
the sick, administering Sacraments. etc. But there are other things which every
Presbyter has an aptitude, and a jus to, in actu primo, but the limitation and
exercise of that power does belong to the Church in common, and belong not to
any one personally, but by a further power of choice or delegation to it, such
is the power of visiting Churches, taking care that particular Pastors
discharge their duty; such is the power of ordination and Church censures, and
making Rules for decency in the Church; this is that we call the power of
jurisdiction. Now this latter power, though it belongs habitually and in actu
primo to every Presbyter; yet being about matters of public and common
concernment, some further Authority in a Church constituted is necessary,
besides the power of order; and when this power, either by consent of the
Pastors of the Church, or by the appointment of a Christian Magistrate, or
both, is devolved to some particular persons, though quoad aptitudinem the
power remain in every Presbyter, yet quoad executionem it belongs to those who
are so appointed. And therefore Camero determins that, Ordinatio non fit a
pastore De Ecclesia in Mat. 18. 15. Tom. 1. op. in 40. p. 27.
quatenus pastor est, sed quatenus ad tempus singularem authoritatem obtinet,
i. e. That Ordination does not belong to the Power of Order but to the Power of
Jurisdiction, and therefore is subject to Positive restraints, by Prudential
Determinations. By this we may understand how lawful the Exercise of an
Episcopal Power may be in the Church of God, supposing an equality in all
Church Officers as to the Power of Order. And how incongruously they speak, who
supposing an equality in the Presbyters of Churches at first, do cry out, that
the Church takes upon her the Office of Christ, if she delegates any to a more
peculiar Exercise of the power of Jurisdiction.

The last thing pleaded why an immutable Form of Church Government. 13.
must be laid down in Scripture, is, from the perfection and sufficiency of the
Scriptures; because otherwise the Scriptures would be condemned of
imperfection. But this will receive an easy dispatch: For, First, The
Controversy about the perfection of the Scriptures, is not concerning an
essential or integral Perfection, but a perfection ratione finis and effectuum
in order to its end; now the end of it, is to be an Rivet. Isagog. ad Script.
sacr. cap. 24. s. 3.
adaequate Rule of Faith and Manners, and sufficient to bring men to salvation;
which it is sufficiently acknowledged to be, if all things necessary to be
believed or practiced be contained in the Word of God: now that which we assert
not to be fully laid down in Scripture, is not pleaded to be any ways
necessary, nor to be a matter of Faith, but something left to the Churches
Liberty; but here it is said by some, that this is adding to the Law of God,
which destroys the Scriptures perfection; therefore I answer: Secondly,
Whatever is done with an Opinion of the necessity of doing it, destroys the
Scriptures perfection if it be not contained in it: for that were to make it an
imperfect Rule; and in this sense every additio perficiens is additio
corrumpens, because it takes away from the perfection of the Rule which it is
added to: and thus Popish Traditions are destructive of the Scriptures
sufficiency. But the doing of any thing not positively determined in Scripture,
not looking upon it as a thing we are bound to do from the necessity of the
thing, and observing the general Rules of Scripture in the doing it, is far
from destroying the perfection or sufficiency of the Word of God. Thirdly, All
essentials of Church Government are contained clearly in Scripture: The
essentials of Church Government, are such as are necessary to the preservation
of such a Society as the Church is: Now all these things have been not only
granted, but proved to be contained in Scripture; but whatever is not so
necessary in its self, can only become necessary by virtue of Gods express
command; and what is not so commanded, is accidental, and circumstantial, and a
matter of Christian liberty, and such we assert the Form of Church Government
to be. It is not our work to enquire, why God has determined some things that
might seem more circumstantial than this, and left other things at liberty; but
whether God has determined these things or no. Which determination being once
cleared, makes the thing so commanded necessary as to our observance of it; but
if no such thing be made appear, the thing remains a matter of liberty, and so
the Scriptures perfection as to necessaries in order to Salvation, is no ways
impeached by it. So much now for the necessity of Christ's determining the
particular form of Government: We now proceed to the consideration of Christ's
Actions, whether by them the form of Church Government is determined or no?

CHAP. V.
Whether any of Christ's Actions have determined the Form of Government. All
Power in Christ's hands for Governing his Church: What order Christ took in
order thereto when he was in the World. Calling Apostles the first action
respecting outward Government: The Name and Office of Apostles cleared; An
equality among them proved during our Saviors life. Peter not made Monarch of
the Church by Christ. The Apostles Power over the seventy Disciples considered,
with the nature and quality of their Office, Matthew. 20. 25, 26, 27. largely
discussed and explained. It makes not all inequality in Church Officers
unlawful; by the difference of Apostles and Pastors of Churches, Matthew. 18. 15.
How far that determins the Form of Church Government. No evidence of any exact
Order for Church Government from thence, Matthew. 16. 15, 16 17, 18. considered
how far that concerns the Government of the Church.

HAving considered and answered the Arguments which. 1.
are brought, why Christ must determine the particular Form of Government: Our
next task will be to enquire into those Actions of our Savior which are
conceived to have any plausible aspect toward the settling the Form of
Government in his Church. And were it not that men are generally so wedded to
an hypothesis they have once drunk in by the prevalency of interest or
education, we might have been superseded from our former labor, but that men
are so ready to think that Opinion to be most necessary, which they are most in
love with, and have appeared most zealous for. Men are loath to be persuaded
that they have spent so much breath to so little purpose, and have been so hot
and eager for somewhat, which at last appears to be a matter of Christian
liberty. Therefore we find very few that have been ever very earnest in the
maintaining or promoting any matter of opinion, but have laid more weight upon
it, than it would really bear; lest men should think, that with all their sweat
and toil, they only beat the air, and break their Teeth in cracking a Nut,
with a hole in it; which if they had been so wise as to discern before, they
might have saved their pains for somewhat which would have better recompensed
them. But thus it generally fares with men; they suck in principles according
as interest and education disposes them, which being once in, have the
advantage of insinuating themselves into the understanding, and thereby raise a
prejudice against whatever comes to disturb them; which prejudice being the
Yellow-jaundise of the Soul, leaves such a tincture upon the eyes of the
Understanding, that till it be cured of that Icterism, it cannot discern things
in their proper colors. Now this prejudice is raised by nothing more strongly,
than when the opinion received is entertained, upon a presumption that there is
a Divine stamp and Impress upon it, though no such Effigies be discernable
there. Hence come all the several contending parties about Church Government,
equally to plead an interest in this Ius Divinum, and whatever opinion they
have espoused, they presently conceive it to be of no less than Divine extract
and Original, And as it sometimes was with great personages among the Heathens,
when their miscarriages were discernable to the eye of the World, the better to
palliate them among the vulgar, they gave themselves out to be impreguated by
some of their adored Deities; so I fear it has been among some whose Religion
should have taught them better things, when either faction, design, or
interest, has formed some conceptions within them suitable thereunto, to make
them the more passable to the World, they are brought forth under the pretense
of Divine Truths. Far be it from me to charge any sincere, humble, sober
Christians with an offense of so high a nature, who yet may be possessed with
some mistakes and apprehensions of this nature; but these are only wrought on
by the Masters of parties, who know, unless they fly so high, they shall never
hit the game they aim at. This is most discernable in the Factors for the Roman
Omnipotency (as Paulus the fifth was called Omnipotentiae Pontifici^
Conservaton); they who see not that Interest and Faction upholds that Court
rather then Church, may well be presumed to be hoodwinked with more then an
implicit Faith; and yet if we believe the great supporters of that Interest,
the power they plead for is plainly given them from Christ himself; and not
only offer to prove that it was so, but that it was not consistent with the
Wisdom of Christ that it should be otherwise. Lest I should seem to wrong those
of any Religion, hear what the Author of the Gloss upon the Extravagants
Extravag. unum sanctum.
(so they may be well called) says to this purpose, applying that place of our
Savior, all power is given to me in heaven and earth, Matthew 28. 18. to the
Pope, adds these words, Non videretur Dominus discretas fuisse, ut cum
reverentia ejus loquar; nisi unicum post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui hac
omnia posset. We see by this, what blasphemies men may run into, when they
argue from their private fancies and opinions, to what must be done by the Law
of Christ. It therefore becomes all sober Christians impartially to enquire
what Christ has done, and to ground their opinions only upon that, without any
such presumptuous intrusions into the Counsels of Heaven. We here therefore
take our leave of the Dispute, Why it was necessary a form of Government should
be established, and now enter upon a survey of those grounds which are taken
from any passages of our Savior, commonly produced as a Foundation for any
particular Forms.

I shall not stand to prove, that Christ as Mediator has all. 2.
the power over the Church in his own hands, it being a thing so evident from
Scripture, and so beyond all dispute with Matthew. 28. 18.
those whom I have to deal with. In which respect he is the only Head of the
Church, and from whom all divine Right Isa. 9. 6.
for authority in the church must be derived. Which Right can arise only from
some actions or Laws of Christ, which we therefore now search into. The first
public action of Christ after his solemn entrance upon his Office, which can
be conceived to have any reference to the Government of his Church, was, the
calling the Apostles. In whom for our better methodizing this Discourse, we
shall observe these three ^everal steps. First, When they were called to be
Christ's Disciples. Secondly, When Christ sent them out with a power of
Miracles. Thirdly, When he gave them their full commission of acting with
Apostolical power all the world over. These three seasons are accurately to be
distinguished; for ^he Apostles did not enjoy so great power when they were
^isciples, as when they were sent abroad by Christ; neither had ^hey any proper
power of Church Government after that ^^nding forth, till after Christ's
Resurrection, when Christ told them, All power was put into his hands, and
therefore gave them Matthew. 2^. 18, 19.
^^ll commission to go and preach the Gospel to all Nations. The first step
then we observe in the Apostles toward their power of Church Government, was
in their first calling to be Disciples. Two several calls are observed in
Scripture concerning the Apostles: The first was more general, when they were
called only to follow Christ; The second more special, when Christ told them
what he called them to, and specified and described their Office to them, by
telling them he would make them Fishers of Men. We shall endeavor to digest
the Order of their calling as clearly and as briefly as we ^an. Our blessed
Savior about the thirtieth year of his age, solemnly entering upon the
discharge of his prophetical Office, Luke 5. 32.
in making known himself to be the true Messiah to the World, to make his
appearance more public, goes to Jordan, and is Mat. 3. 23. Mat. 4. 1.
there baptized of John; presently after he is led up by the Spirit into the
Wilderness, where he continued forty days. In this space of time John removes
from Jordan, and comes on the other side to Bethabara; thither Christ comes to
John; John 1. 29.
John not only owns Christ himself, but tells his disciples, This was he into
whose Name he had baptized them. Upon this, two John 1. 37.
of John's disciples leave their Master and follow Christ. These two are the
first Disciples we ever read our Savior had; whereof the one was Andrew,
Peter's brother, and the other probably conceived to be John (it being his
custom to conceal his name when he speaks of himself) Andrew calls his brother
Peter; Christ next day calls Philip, Philip he finds Nathaniel; and this, as
far as we read, was the first number of Christ's Disciples. Here we find two or
three gathered together in the Name of Christ, and Christ (truly) in the John
2. 2. John 2. 17, 23.
midst of them. These disciples it appears staid with Christ sometime, for they
went with him to the marriage in Cana: and after went up with him to Jerusalem,
when many professed to be his Disciples; from thence he goes into Judea, where
he gathers many Disciples, and baptizeth them. After John 3* 22. John 4. 1.
this he returns with his Disciples by the way of Samaria into Galilee: and
these Disciples being now again at home, in probability did return for their
livelihood to their old employments for some small time, Christ having not yet
commanded them to forsake all and follow him. Not long after (about a years
space from the first calling them) Jesus being in Galilee, goes to the lake of
Genezareth, there he finds Andrew and Peter Luke 5. 1. Matthew. 4. 18, 19. Mark
1. 16, 17.
fishing: after the miracle there wrought, he then in a more solemn manner
calls them to leave their employment, for he had* designed them for a greater,
which was to be Fishers of Men. Whereby our Savior expresses the care, pains,
diligence, design and end of the Ministerial Function he had appointed them
for. Andrew and Peter presently leave all and follow Christ; the like do James
and John whom they met with, a little further upon the shore. And now those who
were before but as common Disciples, are admitted into a higher Order, and bred
up by Christ as persons designed for an employment of so high a Nature. We see
here a necessity of making a double call of the Apostles; else it were
impossible to reconcile the Narration of John with the other Evangelists.
Therefore Augustine thinks their first being with Christ in John, De Consensu
Evang. l. 2. cap. 17.
was only for present satisfaction who he was, which as soon as they understood
and admired, they returned to their own Habitations. Thomas, he makes three
several callings of them; the first ad agnitionem and familiaritatem, which is
that in John; the second ad Discipulatum, that spoken of in Luke 5. 1. the V.
Casaub. exer. in Bar. 13. s. 11. Montacut. Grig. Eccles. To. 1. p. 2. p. 41.
Chemnitium Harm. Evan^c. 36.
third ad adh^sionem, Matthew. 4. 18. Mark 1. 16. But I see no reason to make the
story in Luke to be different from that of Matthew and Mark; the former some
say, was vocatio ad fidem, a general preparatory call to the latter; the latter
was vocatio ad munus Apostolicum, although they were not chosen to be Apostles
till afterward, yet now Christ made them Candidores of the Apostleship, and
amicos interioris admissionis, in order to that great employment he had
designed them for. Further, we must take notice that from the time of the
Baptism of John, the Apostles did generally continue with Christ, which appears
from the qualification of an Apostle given by Peter at the choice of Matthias;
Of those men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went
in and out Acts 1. 21* 22.
among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day he was taken
up from us. The strength of which Tehimony is impregnable, for proving that the
Apostles did generally continue with Christ after their being called to follow
him; but that time from the baptism of John must not be taken strictly; for
many of the Apostles, as Matthew, etc. were not called till some time after.
About four months after Christ's more Harmon. cap. 50.
solemn calling of the Apostles, at the time* of Pentecost, as Chemnitius
conjectures, our Savior proceeds to a solemn choice of them into their Office,
which is described by Luke 6. Mark 3. 14, 15.
13. after he had prayed the whole night before v. 12. Mark* he acquaints us
with the ends of Christ's choosing them. First, That they might continually
attend upon him, the better to be fitted for their employment afterward; which
he expresses, when he adds, That he might send them out to preach, and to give
them power over Devils and Diseases, to cast out the one, and to cure the
other. Their actual sending out was not (say some) till half a year after,
which is the story related by Mat. 10. 1. near a twelve-moneth (say others) but
presently upon their choice Christ makes the Sermon in the Mount, as appears by
comparing Luke 6. 17, 20. with Mat. 5. 1. wherein among other things, our
Savior takes occasion* to declare their duty to them, telling them, They were
the Light of the World, etc. Which he does, the more to fit them for the
discharge of their employment.

Having thus laid these things together about the Apostles,. 3.
from their first calling to the time of their mission, we shall take notice of
those things from them which may relate to the Office which the Apostles were
called to, and to the Government of the Church by them. First, We here observe,
that our Savior no sooner began to preach the Gospel himself, but he made
choice of some persons as a peculiar Order of men for the propagation of the
Gospel in the World. The peculiarity of the Function of a Gospel Ministry under
Christ was, we see, designed from Christ's first public appearance in his
Office: he might have left the Apostles in the common order of Disciples, had
he not intended an office in his Church distinct and peculiar from all other
employments; and therefore it is observable, that Christ did not call the*
Apostles off from their other employments, till he designed to make them
Apostles; before, when they were only private Disciples, they did follow their
employments at some times still; but when he calls them to be Fishers of men,
be bids them leave all and follow him. Secondly, We take notice of the
admirable wisdom of our Savior in the choice he made of the Persons for first
founding his Church* and the means he used to fit them for it. The persons were
such as were most suitable to his design; the means such as were most suitable
to the persons. The persons were such, who by reason of the known meanness of
their condition, and supposed weakness of abilities, were the fittest to
convince the World, that the Doctrine which they preached was not the product
of humane wisdom, but the express Image and Character of Divine truth; whose
nakedness and simplicity would gain more upon men's belief by the power which
accompanied the Preaching of it, then the most refined and sublimated Notions
of their wise men should do, managed with the greatest subtilty and prudence by
the maintainers of them. Christ would make men see that his Doctrine stood not
in need either of the wisdom or power of men, to defend or propagate it* and
therefore made choice of the most unlikely Instruments for that end, that men's
faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of 1 Cor. 2. 5.
God. But withal, we are to take notice of Christ's admirable wisdom in the
means he used to fit and qualify them for the first builders of his Church;
for although the power and efficacy of their preaching was wholly from God, and
not from themselves, yet our Savior does not *presenly upon his calling them,
place them in the highest Office he intended them for, but proceeds gradually
with them, and keeps them a long time under his own eye and instruction, before
he sends them abroad: and that for two ends chiefly: First, To be witnesses of
his actions. Secondly, To be Auditors of his Doctrine. First, To be witnesses
of his actions, which was looked on by the Apostles, as the most necessary
qualification for an Apostle in the place forecited, Acts 1. 21, 22. Peter
calls himself a witness of the sufferings of Christ, 1 Pet. 5. 1. John says,
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our h^^ds have handled of the Word of
Life; that which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, 1 John 1. 1, 3.
whereby the credibility of the Gospel was sufficiently evidenced to the World,
when the chief Preachers of it spoke nothing but what their own senses were
witnesses of, both as to the Doctrine and actions of Christ; and therefore it
is no ways credible, they should be deceived themselves in what they spoke;
and more improbable they would deceive others, whose interest lay wholly upon
the truth of the Doctrine which they Preoched* for by the very Preaching of
that Doctrine they robbed themselves of all the comforts of Life, and exposed
themselves to a thousand miseries in this Life; so that unless their Doctrine
was true in order to another Life, they were guilty of the greatest folly this
World ever heard of. We see what care our Savior took to satisfy the reasons
of men concerning the credibility of his Doctrine, when the persons he employed
in the founding a Church upon it, were only such as were intimately conversant
with the whole Life, Doctrine, and Works of him from whom they received it; and
thereby we cannot suppose any ignorance in them concerning the things they
spoke* and lest men should mistrust they might have a design to impose on
others, he made their faithfulness appear, by their exposing themselves to any
hazards to make good the truth of what they preached. Especially, having such a
Divine Power accompanying them in the Miracles wrought by them, which were
enough to persuade any rational men that they came upon a true Embassy, who
carried such Credentials along with them. Another end of our Saviors training
up his Apostles so long in his School before he sent them abroad, was, that
they might be Auditors of his Doctrine, and so might learn themselves before
they taught others. Christ was no friend to those hasty births which run abroad
with the shell on their heads; no, although it was in his power to conferr the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, as well at their first entrance into Discipleship as
afterward, yet we see he nu^tures and trains them up gradually, teaching them
as Quintilian would have Masters do, guttatim, acquainting them now with one,
then with another of the Mysteries of the Gospel. Christ does not overwhelm
them with floods and torrents of Discourses, but gently drops now one thing
into them, then another, by which way such narrow-mouthed Vessels would be the
soonest filled. Yea our Savior uses such ^n (...) as the Greek Fathers call
it, such a prudent temper in instructing them, that it is matter of just
admiration to consider under how great and stupendous ignorance of the main
points of Redemption (Christ's Death and Resurrection, and the nature of Christ's
Kingdom) they discovered, after they had been some years under Christ's
Tutorage. And we see what industry and diligence was used in the training up of
those for the Apostleship, who were in an immediate way sent out by Christ. And
it is very probable that upon their first sending abroad they taught not by
immediate Revelation, but only what they had learned from Christ during their
being with him. Whence we see what a subordination there is in acquired parts,
labor, and industry to the Teachings and Inspirations of the Divine Spirit;
our Savior looked not on his labor as lost, although afterward the Unction
from the Holy One should teach them all things. It was Christ's design to have
them go (...) from strength to strength, a domo sanctuarii in domum doctrinae,
as the Chaldee Paraphrast Psalm. 84. 7.
renders that place, from one School of learning to another. As under the Law
even those that waited for the R^ach hakkodesh, the inspiration of the Divine
Spirit, were brought up in the Schools of the Prophets under instruction there;
which was the place where they lay expecting the gentle gale of the Holy Spirit
to carry them forth; which was the ground of Amos his complaint. that he was
neither a Prophet, nor the son Amos 7. 14.
of a Prophet; by which it seems evident, that Gods ordinary course was to take
some of the Sons of the Prophets out of the Colleges where they lived, and
employ them in the Prophetical Office. But of this largely elsewhere. Such a
School of the Prophets did our Savior now erect, wherein he entered his
Disciples as Scholars, and educated them in order to the Office he intended
them for.

The next thing we take notice of, is, the name and nature. 4.
of that Office which Christ called them to. They who derive the use of the
name of Apostles as applied by Christ to his Disciples, either from the (...)
at Athens, by which name the Masters of some ships were called as the ships
(...), or Suidas in v. Digest. l. 50. tir. 16. leg. 106. Cont. Ebionitas.
from Hesychius his (...), which he interprets (...), or from the (...) in the
Sense of the Civil Law, which signify the dim^ssory Letters granted for
appeals; or from the Jewish (...) as thereby were understood those (...) as
Epiphanius calls them, who were as Assessours and Counselors to the Patriarch
of the Jews at Tiberias; or those Officers who were sent up and down by the
Patriarch to gather up tenths, first fruits, and such other things; who are
called thence Apostoli in the Codex. Theod. tit. de Iudaeis; all Lib. 16. tit.
8.
these I say do equally lose their labor* and run far to fetch that which
might be found much nearer home: Our Savior taking the word from common use,
but applying it in a special manner to a peculiar Sense, which is the custom
of the Scriptures: The Original of the Word properly imports such as are
employed by Commission from another for the dispatch of some business in his
Name. So Casaubon (who was sufficiently Exercit. 14 Sect. 4.
able to judge of the use of a Greek word) In communi Graecorum usu (...)
dicebantur certi homines, qui negotii gerendi gratia, magis quam deferendi
nuntii aliquo mittebantur. And so it is taken, John 13. 16. (...), He that is
sent is not greater then he that sent him. Thence Epaphroditus when employed
upon a special message to Paul in the Name of the Churches, is called (...),
Philippians, 2. 25. which we Translate your Messenger. And so Titus and the two
other sent to the Church of Corinth to gather their Charity* are called (...),
the 2 Cor. 8. 23.
Messengers of the Churches. Thence Paul fully renders the Import and Sense of
the word Apostle by (...), 2 Corinthians. 5. 20. We act as Ambassaduors for Christ.
To which purpose it is observable that the Septuagint (whose Greek is most
followed by the New Testament) do render the word (...) when it signifies to
employ a Messenger upon special Service, by (...), as 1 King. 21. 11. -- 1
King. 12. 18. Exodus 4. 30. and the very word (...) is used in this Sense, 1
King. 14. 6. where Ahijah says, I am (...), A sad Messenger to thee; for, thus
says the Lord, etc. Whereby the full Sense and Importance of the word Apostle
appears to be, one that is employed by a peculiar Commission from him that has
authority over him for the doing some special service. Thus were Christ's
disciples called Apostles from the immediate commission which they had from
Christ for the discharge of that work which he employed them in. Thence our
Savior makes use of the word sending in the proper and peculiar sense when he
gives the Apostles their commission, in those remarkable words of Christ to
them; As the Father has sent me, even so send I you. John 20. 21. Whereby our
Savior delegates his power and authority which he had as Doctor of the
Church, to his Apostles upon his leaving the World, not in a privative way, so
as to destroy his own authority over the Church, but in a cumulative way,
investing them with that authority which they had not before, for both Teaching
and Governing the Church. No Argument then can be drawn for the Right or Form
of Church Government from Christ's actions toward his Disciples before the last
and full Commission was given unto them; because they had no power of
Church Government before that time.

Which will be further cleared if we consider their first. 5.
sending out, spoken of Matthew. 10. 1. Mark 6. 7. Luke 9. 1. Several things lie
in our way to be observed in reference to this Mission of the Apostles. First,
that though the Apostles had been now for some competent time, not only called
to their Office, but solemnly chosen to it; yet we no where read that they did
ever exercise that Office till now they were sent forh by Christ. They remained
still at Christ's feet, learning for their own instruction, and fitting
themselves for their future employment, and thought it no inconvenience while
they lay for a wind, to lay in sufficient lading and provision for their
voyage. Baptize indeed they did before, Ioh. 4. 2. but that I suppose was done
by them by an immediate present Order from Christ himself, being by as the
chief in the action, thence Christ in one place is said to baptize, Ioh. 3. 22.
and yet he is said not to baptize, but his Disciples, Ioh. 4. 2. Christ did it
authoritatively, the Disciples ministerially. Yet if we should grant the
Disciples did then baptize as private men after the received custom of the
Jews, (among whom only a Confessus trium was requisite to Baptize a proselyte)
this does not at all take off from the peculiarity of a Function both to Preach
and Baptize, because as yet the Gospel Ministry was not instituted; and
therefore what might be lawful before restraint, does not follow it should be
so after* when all those scattered rays and beam, which were dispersed abroad
before, were gathered into the Ministerial Office upon Christ's appointing it,
as that great Hemisphere of Light in the creation, was after swallowed up in
the body of the Sun. But now were the Apostles first sent out to Preach, and
now God first begins to null the Jewish Ministry, and set up another instead of
it, and makes good that threatening: That he was against the Shepherds, and
would require the flock at their hand, and cause them to cease to feed the
Flock, etc. Here Ezekiel. 34. 10.
then we have the first Exercise of the Apostles Ministry, for which we see,
besides their former call and choice, particular mission was after necessary.
Secondly, we observe that the employment Christ sent them upon now, was only a
Temporary employment, confined as to work and place, and not the full
Apostolical work. The want of considering and understanding this, has been
the ground of very many mistakes among Men, when they argue from the Occasional
Precepts here given the Apostles, as from a standing perpetual Rule for a
Gospel Ministry: Whereas our Savior only suited these instructions to the
present case, and the nature and condition of the Apostles present employment,
which was, not to preach the Gospel up and down themselves, but to be as so
many John Baptists to call people to the hearing of Christ himself; and
therefore the Doctrine they were to Preach was the same with his, The Kingdom
of Heaven is at Matthew. 10. 7*
hand, whereby it appears their Doctrine was only preparatory to Christ; it
being only to raise up higher expectations of the Gospel-state under the
Messiah; and these were they whom the King now sent into the highways to
invite men to the marriage Matthew. 22. ^.
Feast, and to bid them to come in to him. This was the only present employment
of the Apostles in their first mission: in which they were confined to the
Cities of Judea, that they might have the first refusal of the Gospel-Offers.
This mission then being occasional, limited, and temporary, can yield no
Foundation for any thing perpetual to be built upon it. Thirdly, we observe
that those whom Christ employed in the first dispersing of the Gospel abroad,
were furnished with arguments sufficient to evince not only the credibility,
but the certain truth of what they preached. Therefore Christ when he now sent
them out, gave them (...), not only a mere power to work miracles, but a right
conferred on them to Mat. 10. 2.
do it as the Apostles of Christ. These were the Credentials which the Apostles
carried along with them to show from whom they derived their power, and by
whose authority they acted. And these were the most suitable to them, as making
it appear that a Divine presence went along with them, and therefore they could
not salsifie to the world in what they Declared unto them; which was the best
way for them to evidence the Truth of their Doctrine, because it was not to be
discovered by the Evidence of the things themselves, but it depended upon the
Testimony of the Author; and therefore the only way to confirm the truth of
the Doctrine, was to confirm the credibility of the Author, which was best
done by doing something above what the power of nature could reach unto. And
this was the prerogative of the Apostles in their first mission above John the
Baptist: For of him it is said that he did no miracle. Fourthly, we observe
that the Apostles in this mission were invested in no power over the Church,
nor in any Superiority of Order one over another. The first is evident, because
Christ did not now send them abroad to gather Churches, but only to call
persons to the Doctrine of the Messiah; and while Christ was in the World among
them, he retained all Church power and authority in his own hand. When this
temporary mission expired, the Apostles lived as private persons still under
Christ's Tutorage, and we never read them acting in the least as Church Officers
all that while. Which may appear from this one argument, because all the time
of our Saviors being in the World, he never made a total separation from the
Jewish Church, but frequented with his Disciples the Temple worship and Service
to the last; although he super-added many Gospel Observations to those of the
Law. And therefore when no Churches were gathered, the Apostles could have no
Church power over them. All that can be pleaded then in order to
Church Government from the consideration of the Form of Government as settled by
our Savior, must be either from a supposed inequality among the Apostles
themselves, or their superiority over the LXX. Disciples; or from some Rules
laid down by Christ in order to the Government of his Church: of which two are
the most insisted on, Matthew 20. 25. Matthew. 18. 17. Of these in their Order.

The first argument drawn for an established form of Government. 6.
in the Church, from the state of the Apostles under Christ, is, from a
supposed inequality among the Apostles, and the superiority of one as Monarch
of the Church; which is the Papists Plea from Saint Peter, as the chief and
head of the Apostles. Whose loud Exclamations for Saint Peter's authority a^^
much of the same nature with those of Demetrius the Silver-Smith at Ephesus,
with his fellow craftsmen, who cried up, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, not
from the honor they bore to her as Diana, but from the gain which came to them
from her worship at Ephesus. But I dispute not now the entail of Saint Peter's
power, what ever it was to the Roman Bishop: but I only inquire into the Pleas
drawn for his authority from the Scriptures, which are written in so small a
character, that without the spectacles of an implicit Faith, they will scarce
appear legible to the Eyes of men. For what though Christ changed Saint Peter's
name? must it therefore follow that Christ baptized him Monarch of his Church?
Were not John and James called by Christ Boanerges? and yet who thinks that
those sons of Thunder must therefore overturn all other power but their own?
Christ gave them new names, to show his own authority over them, and not their
authority over others; to be as Monitors of their Duty, and not as Instruments
to convey power. So Chrysostom speaks of the very name Peter, given to Simon;
it was to show him his duty of being fixed and stable in the Faith of Christ,
(...), Tom. 8. ed. Savil. p. 105.
this name might be (as a string upon his finger) a continual remembrancer of
his duty. And likewise, I conceive, as an encouragement to him after his fall,
that he should recover his former stability again; else it should seem strange
that he alone of the Apostles should have his name from firmness and stability,
who fell the soonest, and the foulest of any of the Apostles; unless it were
(...), which would be worse Divinity, then Rhetoric. The change then of St
Peter's name imports no such Universal Power, neither from the change, nor from
the name. But why then has Saint Peter the honor to be named first of all the
Apostles? First, it seems to be employed as an honor given to Peter above the
rest. But does all honor carry an Universal power along with it? there may be
order certainly among equals; and there may be first, second, and third, etc.
where there is no imparity and jurisdiction in the first over all the rest.
Primacy of Order as among equals, I know none will deny Saint Peter: A Primacy
of Power as over Inferiors, I know none will grant, but such as have subdued
their Reason to their Passion and Interest. Nay, a further Order then of m^er
place may without danger be attributed to him: A Primacy in Order of Time, as
being of the first called, and it may be the first who adhered to Christ, in
Order of Age; of which Jerome, aetati delatum quia Petrus senior erat, speaking
of Peter and John; nay yet higher, some Order of Dignity too; in regard of his
Lib. 1. c. Iovin.
(...) which the Greek Fathers speak so much of; the servency and heat of his
spirit, whence by Eusebius he is called Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. c. 14.
(...) The Prolocutor among the Apostles, who was therefore most forward to
inquire, most ready to answer, which Chrysostom elegantly calls (...) alluding
to the name (...) and (...), which are frequently given to Peter by Chrysostom.
in Matthew. 6. 16.
the Fathers, which import no more then praesultor in chorea, he that that led
the dance among the Disciples: but his being (...) implies no Superiority of
Power. For Dyonys. Hist. Romans lib. 11.
Haliarnass. calls Appius Cla^dius (...), whereas all know that the Decemviri
had an equality of power among themselves. Neither does his being as the mouth
of the Disciples imply his power; For Aaron was a mouth to Moses, but Moses was
Aarons Master. Neither yet does this Primacy of Order always hold in reference
to Peter: For although generally he is named first of the Aposties, as Matthew,
10. 2. Mark 3. 16. Acts 1. 13. Mark 1. 36. Luk 8. 45. Acts 2. 14. -- 37. Yet in
other places of Scripture we find other Apostles set in Order before him as
James, Galat. 2. 9. Paul and Apollos, and others, 1 Cor. 3. 22. 1 Cor. 1. 12.
-- 9. 5. No Argument then can be drawn hence, if it would hold but only a
Primacy of Order; and yet even that fails too in the Scriptures changing of the
Order so often. But, say they, whatever becomes of this Order, we have a strong
Foundation for Saint Peter's Power, because Christ said, he would build his
Church upon him, Matthew. 16. 17. This were something indeed, if it were proved;
but I fear this Rock will not hold water, as it is brought by them; nor Saint
Peter prove to be that Rock. For indeed, Was the Church built upon Saint Peter?
then he must be the chief Foundation stone, and Peter must build upon himself,
and not upon Christ, and all the Apostles upon him; and thus in exalting the
Servant, we depress the Master; and in setting a new Foundation, we take 1 Cor.
3. 12.
away the only Foundation, Jesus Christ. If by being built upon Peter, they
mean no more then being built by him as the chief Instrument; it is both a very
incongruous Speech, and implies nothing more then what was common to him, and
the rest of the Apostles, who were all Master Builders in the Church of Christ,
as Paul calls himself; and in that respect are Rev, 21. 19.
set forth as the twelve Foundation stones, in the walls of the New Jerusalem.

The Rock then spoken of by Christ, in his Speech to Peter, if taken
Doctrinally, was Saint Peter's Confession, as many of the Fathers interpret it;
if taken personally, it was none other but Christ himself, who used a like
Speech to this, when he John 2. 19.
said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. Which words,
though spoken by occasion of the material Temple (as those were of Peter's name)
yet Christ understood them of the Temple of his Body, (as here likewise he does
of his person.) But still they urge, Christ put the Keys into Saint Peter's
hands, Matthew, 16. 19. Now the power of the Keys does denote Regal Authority.
I answer, First, The Keys may be given two ways, either from a Prince to a
Subject, or from a City to a Prince. In this latter acception, they denote
principality in the Receiver, but withal inferiority and subjection in the
Given: and in this sense, I am so charitable, as to think they will not say
that Christ gave the Keys to Peter; it must be then as a Prince to a Subject;
and when they are so given, it does not imply an universal power in the persons
to whom they are given, but an investing them in that particular place he has
appointed them to; the Office which the power of the Keys implies, is
Ministerial, and not Authoritative; Delarative, and not Iuridical; over persons
committed to their charge, and not over Officers joined in^equality of power
with them. For so were the rest of the Apostles with Peter in the same power of
the Keys, Matthew. 18. 18. John 20. 23. This-power of the Keys then was given
to Peter in a peculiar manner, but nothing peculiar to him given thereby. But
still there remains another Ward in Saint Peter's Keys, and the last foot to
the Popes Chair which is Pasce oves, Feed my sheep; a charge given particularly
to Peter, John 21. 15. Thence they infer his Power over the whole Church. But
this foot has neither joints nor sinews in it, and is as infirm as any of the
rest: sor neither did this Command rather then Commission belong only to
Peter; for Christ had before given them all their general Commission: As the
Father has sent me, even so send I you, John 20 21. whereby is implied an
investing all the Apostles equally, with the power and authority of Governing
the Church of God; although this charge be peculiarly renewed to Peter, because
as he had particularly fallen, so he should be particularly restored; neither yet
did we grant this: does the word, (...) imply such a Power and authority as
they plead for, viz. A Supreme power over the Church of God: for this even by
Peter himself is attributed to the fixed Presbyters of the Churches, who by
this argument have as much authority conveyed them, as Saint Peter had, 1 Pet.
5. 2. and yet should we grant this, it would not infer what they desire; for
these sheep were not the whole Church of Christ, taken absolutely, but
Indefinitely. For all the Apostles had a command to preach to every Creature,
Matthew. 28. 18. which was as to the words larger, as to the Sense the same with
that to Saint Peter here. And afterward we find Peter called the Apostle of
Circumcision, and the Apostles sending him Gal. 2. 7. Acts 8. 14, Gal. 2. 9.
to Samaria, and Paul in the right hand of fellowship with Peter; which had
been certainly dishonorable to Peter, had he been invested with such an
Universal Supreme Power over the Apostles and the whole Church. Such pretenses
then as these are for such an Extravagant power in the Church of God, from such
miserably weak Foundations, for the upholding a corrupt Interest, have given
the occasion to that tart Sarcasm, In Papatu sub Petri nudo nomine Satan non
amplius Larva. But that which would seem sufficient to awaken any out of this
dream of Saint Peter's power over the rest of the Apostles, Mat. 18. 1. Mat. 9.
34. Luke 9. 46.
is, the frequent contendings of the twelve Apostles, one among another, Who
should be the greatest; and that even after that Christ had said, Upon this
Rock will I build my Church, as we may see Matthew 20 24. If Christ had
conferred such a power on Saint Peter, what little ground had there been for
the request of James and John? and would not our Savior rather have told them,
the chiefest place was conserred on Peter already, then have curbed their
ambition in seeking who should be greatest; and would have bid them be subject
to Peter as their Head and Ruler. We see not then the least foundation for an
universal Monarchy in the Church of God; and so this form of Government is not
determined by any actions or commands of Christ.

We come now to consider the pleas of others, who join in. 7.
renouncing any Supreme power under Christ, over the Church of God; but differ
as to the particular forms of Government in the Church; those who are for an
inequality, usually fix on the imparity between the Apostles and the LXX. Those
that are for a parity upon Matthew. 20. 25. and Matthew. 18. 17. I shall here
proceed in the former method, to show that none of those can prove the Form
they contend for as only necessary, nor their adversaries prove it unlawful.
First then for the inequality between the Apostles and the LXX. Disciples; by
that inequality is meant, either only an inequality of order; or else, an
inequality carrying superiority and subordination. It is evident that the LXX.
disciples were not of the same Order with the twelve Apostles, whom Christ had
designed for the chief Government of his Church, after his Ascension; and in
this respect the comparison of the twelve heads of the Tribes, and the seventy
Elders, seems parallel with the twelve Apostles; and the LXX. disciples; but if
by imparity, be meant, that the twelve Apostles had a superiority of power and
jurisdiction over the LXX. disciples; there is not the least evidence or
foundation, in Reason or Scripture for it. For the LXX. did not derive their
power from the Apostles, but immediately from Christ; they enjoyed the same
privileges, were sent upon the same message, (making way for Luke 10. 1.
Christ's entertainment in the several Cities they went to) yea, all things were
parallel between them and the Apostles in their mission (unless any difference
be made in the Cities they went to, and their number). So that there is no
superiority of office in the Apostles, above the LXX. nor of power and
jurisdiction over them; their Commissions being the same: And it seems most
probable that both their missions were only temporary, and after this the LXX.
remained in the nature of private Disciples, till they were sent abroad by a
new Commission after the Resurrection, for preaching the Gospel, and planting
Churches. For we see that the Apostles themselves were only Probationers, till
Christ solemnly authorized them for their Apostolical employment, Matthew. 28.
18. John 20. 21. when their full Commissions were granted to them, and then
indeed they acted with a plenitude of power, as Governors of the Church, but
not before. Nothing can be inferred then for any necessary standing Rule for
Church Government, from any comparison between the Apostles and the LXX. during
the life of Christ, because both their missiors were temporary and occasional.
Only we see, that because Christ did keep up the number of the twelve so
strictly, that as the LXX. were a distinct number from them, so when one was
dead, another was to be chosen in his stead (which had been needless, if they
had not been a distinct Order and College by themselves), it is thence evident
that the Apostolical power, was a superior power to any in the Church; and
that such an inequality in Church Officers as was between them and particular
Pastors of Churches, is not contrary to what our Savior says, when he forbids
that dominion and authority in his Disciples, which was exercised by the Kings
of the earth, Matthew 20. 25. Luke 22. 25. which places, because they are
brought by some, to take away all inequality among Church Officers, I shall so
far examine the meaning of them, as they are conceived to have any influence
thereupon. First then, I say, that it is not only the abuse of civil power,
which our Savior forbids his Disciples, but the exercise of any such power as
that is. And therefore the Papists are mistaken, when from the words of Luke,
Vos autem non sic, they conclude, All power is not forbidden, but only such a
tyrannical power, as is there spoken of. For those words are not a limitation
and modification of the power spoken of, but a total prohibition of it; for
first, the comparison is not between the Apostles and Tyrants, but between them
and Princes, yea such as Luke c^lls (...). Indeed, had Christ Luke* 12, 25.
said, The Kings of the earth abuse their authority; vos autem non sic; then it
would have been only a limitation of the exercise of power; but the mere
exercise of civil authority being spoken of before, and then it being
subjoyned, but you not so; it plainly implies a forbidding of the power spoken
of, in the persons spoken to. But, say they, the words used in Matthew, are
(...) and (...), which import the abuse of their power, which is forbidden. But
I answer, first, in Luke it is otherwise; for there it is the simple (...) and
(...), when it follows, (...). So that if the abuse be forbidden in one, the
use is in the other: but secondly, (...), by the LXX. is used frequently for
(...), and (...) is often rendered by that word; as Psalm 72. 7. He shall have
dominion, (...), Psalm 110. 2. (...), Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies;
v. Psalm. 109. Jer. 3. Numb. 23. -- 32.
in both which places, it is spoken of christ's Kingdom. So in Genesis 1. 28.
(...). Replenish the earth, and have dominion over it. In all which places, it
is used simply for Dominion, and not for Tyrannical Power.

It is not then the abuse of civil Power, but the use of it, which is here
forbidden: which will be more evident secondly, from the importance of the
phrase (...); which answers to the Hebrew (...) and simply denies what went
before; as when Cain expresses his fear of being killed, Genesis 4. 14. The
Septuagint render Gods answer by (...), whereby is not denied, only the manner
of his death to be as Abels was, but it is simply denied; and so Psalm 1. 4.
the LXX. render (...) by (...), the wicked are not so. So, when Christ says,
Matthew 19. 8. (...), from the beginning it was not so; it imports an absolute
denial of giving bills of divorce from the beginning. Thirdly; This no ways
answers to the scope of the Apostles contention, which was merely about Primacy
and Power, and not at all about the abuse of this Power. So that by this place,
all affectation and use of a civil, co*active, external power is forbidden to
the Officers of the Church; the power of the Church being only a directive,
voluntary power; and is rather a Ministry then a Power, as our Savior
expresses there, Matthew 20. 26. Luke 22. 26. But having thus excluded all
Civil Power from the Governors of the Church, as such: I say, secondly, That
this place does no ways imply a prohibition of all inequality among the
Governors of the Church; which is abundantly cleared by this reason, because
by the acknowledgement of all parties, the Apostles had a Superior power over
the ordinary Pastors of Churches; Now if the exercise of all Superiority had
been forbidden, this must have been forbidden too; as implying plainly an
exercise of authority in some over others in the Church. And therefore Musculus
thus explains the place: Non exigit hoc Christus ut omnes in regno suo sint
aequales, sed ne quispiam cupiat magnus and primus haberi and videri. It is not
an inequality of Order, but ambition which Christ forbids; and therefore he
observes that Christ says not. Let none be great among you, and none first;
which should have been, if all Primacy and Superiority had been forbidden, and
a necessity of an equality among Church Officers: but he that will be great
among you, let him be your Minister. Let those that are above others, look upon
themselves as the servants of others, and not as their masters. For God never
bestows any power on any, for the sake of those that have it, but for the sake
of those for whom they are employed: When men seek then their own greatness,
and not the service of the Church, they flatly contradict this Precept of
Christ, But with you it shall not be so. But however an inequality of Power and
Order for the Churches good is not thereby prohibited: Which is sufficient for
my purpose.

The next place to be considered, is, that in Matthew 18. 15,. 8.
16, 17. If thy brother shall trespass against thee* go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church; but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican. It
seems a very strange thing to consider, that this one place has been pressed
by all parties to serve under them, for the maintenance of their own particular
form of Government: so that (as the Jews fable of the Manna), it has had a
different taste, according to the diversity of the palats of men. Those that
are for a Congregational Church, being the first receptacle of Church power,
set this place in the front of their arguments; Those who plead for Standing
Presbyteries, Lay Elders, subordination of Courts, fetch all these out of this
place; Those that are for a Power of Church Discipline to be only lodged in a
higher Order of Chur(...) Officers succeeding the Apostles, derive the
succession of that power from this place; nay lest quidlibet should not be
proved equolibet, the Papists despair not of proving the constant visibility of
the Church, the subordination of all to the Pope, the infallibility of general
Councils, all out of this place. Methinks then it might be argument enough of
the incompetency of this place to determine any one particular form, when it is
with equal confidence on all sides brought to prove so many; especially if it
be made appear that the general Rule laid down in these words, may be observed
under a diversity of forms of Government. For whether by the Church, we mean
the community of the faithful in a particular Congregation, or the standing
Officers of such a Church, or a Consistorial Court, or Synodical Assembly, or
higher Church Officers, it is still the duty of men in case of offenses, to
tell the Church for redress of grievances, or vindication of the person
himself, that he has discharged his duty.

This place then determines not what this Church is, nor what the form of it^
Government should be, when the sense of it holds good and true under such
diversity of forms. But we shall further enquire what influence this place can
have upon the modelling the Government in the Church of God. For Chamier tells
us, the prima Politia Ecclesiasticae origo is to be To. 2. l. 10. c. 5. s. 2.
found in these words; it will be then worth our enquiry to see what foundation
for Church government can be drawn out of these words. In which the variety of
Expositions (like a multitude of Physicians to a distempered Patient) have left
it worse then they found it; I mean more difficult and obscure. We shall
therefore endeavor to lay aside all pre-conceptions by other men's judgments
and opinions, and see what innate Light there is in the Text it self to direct
us to the full sense and meaning of it. Two things the great difficulty of the
place lies in, What the offenses are here spoken of? What the Church is which
must b^ spoken to? For the First, I conceive it evident to any unprejudicated
mind, that the matter our Savior speaks of, is a matter of private offense and
injury, and not a matter of scandal, as such considered in a Church-Society,
which I make appear thus First, From the parallel place to this Luke 17. 3.
(...)y Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive
him. This can be nothing else but a matter of private injury, because it is in
the power of every private person to forgive it; which it was not in his power
to do, were it a matter of scandal to the whole Church; unless we make it
among Christians (as it was among the Jews) that every private person might
excommunicate another, and to release him afterward. Secondly, It manifestly
appears from St. Peter's words next after this Paragraph, Matthew. 18. 20. Lord,
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times?
etc. Christ answers him, till seventy times seven, that is, as often as he does
it. And thence Christ brings the parable of the King forgiving his Servants, v.
23. Thirdly, Were it meant of any scandalous sin committed with the privacy of
any particular person (as many understand trespassing against thee, that is, te
conscio) then this inconvenience must necessarily follow, that matters of
scandal must be brought to the Churches cognizance when there can be no way to
decide them; that is, when one offends, and only one person knows it; here will
be a single affirmation on one side, and denial on the other side, and so there
can be no way to decide it; the matter here spoken of then is somewhat only
relating to the offense or injury of some particular person, and not a matter
of scandal to the whole Church. The Question then as propounded to be spoken to
by our Savior, is, What is to be done in case of private offenses between man
and man? and not in case of secret sins against God, and scandalous to the
Church? Now to this our Savior lays down his answer gradually: first, there
must be private admonition; if that succeed not, admonition before witnesses;
if not that, telling the Church; if not that neither, reputing him as a Heathen
and Publican. Now in this answer, we must conceive our Savior speaks as to an
ordinary case, so in a way easy to be understood by all that heard him: and
therefore he must speak in allusion to what was at that time among the Jews in
such cases, which is freely acknowledged both by Calvin and Beza Beza in loc.
upon the place. Nam certe tanquam de Iudais haec dici apparet, saltem ex eo
quod addit, Sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus. We must then see what the
custom was among the Jews in such cases, and how far our Savior does either
approve the custom received, or appoint new. The Law was very strict in case
of offenses, for every man in any wise to rebuke his Lev. 19. 17.
Neighbor, and not to suffer sin upon him, Arguendo argues, our old
Translation renders it, Thou shall plainly rebuke thy Neighbor. Now this piece
of necessary Discipline our Savior endeavors to recover among them, which it
seems was grown much out of use with them. For Rabbi Chanina, as De Syned. l.
1. c. 9. in Gemar. Babyl. ad tit. Rhabbath. c. 16. fo. 119.
Mr. Seldom observes, gave this as one reason of the destruction of Jerusalem,
because they left off reproving one another: Non excisa fuissent Hierosolyma,
nisi quoniam alter alterum non coarguebat. Our Savior therefore inforceth this
Law upon them in case of offenses; first, to deal plainly with their Neighbor
in reproving him: but our Savior rests not here, but being himself a pattern
of Meekness and Charity, he would not have them to rest in a bare private
admonition, but to show their own readiness to be reconciled, and willingness
to do good to the Soul of the offending party thereby, he advises further to
take two or three witnesses with them, hoping thereby to work more upon him:
but if still he continues refractory, and is not sensible of his miscarriage,
Tell it the Church. What the Church here is, is the great Controversy; Some,
as Beza and his followers, understand an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin among the
Jews* which had the proper cognizance of Ecclesiastical causes; but it will be
hard to prove any such V. Grotium in Matthew. 5. 22. Seldom de Syned. l. 2. c. 8.
Sanhedrin in use among them* the Priests and Levites indeed were very often
chosen into the Sanhedrin, (which it may be is the ground of the mistake, but
there was no such Sanhedrin among them, which did not respect matters criminal
and civil: So we must understand what Josephus speaks of the Priests among the
Jews: (...) Joseph. l. 2, cont. Appion.
. The Priests were always very studious of the Law, and other matters of
concernment. These were appointed as the Overseers of all things, Judges of
Controversies, and the punishers of condemned persons. Thus we see, he is so
far from attributing a distinct Ecclesiastical Court to them, that he seems to
make them the only Judges in civil and criminal causes. Others* by the Church,
understand the Christian*Church; but herein they are divided; some
understanding by it only the Officers of the Church: so Chrysostom, (...).
Euthemius Ecclesiam nunc vocat prasides fidelium Ecclesiae. Others understand
it not in its representative notion, but in its diffusive capacity, as taking
in all the members. But our Savior speaking to a present case, must be
supposed to lay down a present remedy, which could not be, if he gave only
Rules for governing his Church which was not as yet gathered nor formed, there
being then no Court Ecclesiastical for them to appeal unto. Suppose then this
case to have fallen out immediately after our Saviors speaking it, that one
brother should trespass against another, either then notwithstanding our
Saviors Speech (which speaks to the present time, Go and tell the Church) the
offended brother is left without a power of redress, or he must understand it
in some sense of the word Church, which was then in use among the Jews. And
these, who tell us, That unless (...) be understood for a Church as we
understand Gelespy Aaron's Rod, l. 3. c. 2. p. 552. l. 2. c. 9. p. 296.
it, it would be no easy matter for us now to conceive what the Holy Ghost
meant by it, would do well withal to consider how those to whom Christ spoke,
should apprehend his meaning if he spoke in a sense they never heard of before.
And certainly, our best way to understand the meaning of Scripture is to
consider what, of whom, to whom the Scripture speaks; for although the
Scripture, as a Rule of Faith for us, be supposed to be so written, as to be
easily understood by us, yet as the parcels of it were spoken upon several
Occasions, they must be supposed to be so spoken, as to be apprehended by them
to whom they were spoken in the common senss of the words, if nothing peculiar
be expressed in the Speech, whereby to restrain them to another sense. And
therefore the Church must be understood in the same sense wherein the word
(...) or the Syriack answering to it, was apprehended among the Jews in our
Saviors time. Which could not be for any new Consistory or Sanhedrin to be
erected under the Gospel. Thence others conceiving that Christ did speak
according to the Custom of the Jews* by the Church* understand nothing else
but the Sanhedrin, and so make the sense of the words to be this. The Case our
Savior speaks to is that of private Quarrels, wherein our Savior lays down
two Directions in a way of Charity, private admonition, and before witnesses;
but if the party continues refractory, then it may be lawful to convent him
before the Courts of Judicature among them, the Triumvirate, the 23. or the
great Sanhedrin* for although the Romans had taken away the power of the Jews
in Capital matters, yet they allowed them liberty of judgeing in the case of
private quarrels: but if he neglect to hear the Sanhedrin, then it may be
lawful to implead him before the Governor of the Province in his Court of
Judicature, by which Heathens and Publicans were to be judged; which is meant
by Let him be to thee, not as a brother Jew, but as a Heathen and a Publican.
This Exposition is said to be first Broached by Erastus; but much improved and
enlarged by Reverend Bishop Bilson, who spends a whole These* 41* Perpetual
Government. c. 4.
Chapter upon it. But this Exposition though it seems fair and plausible, yet
there are several things in it which keep me from embracing it; as First, It
seems not very probable that our Savior should send his Disciples to whom he
speaks, to the Jewish Sanhedrin for the ending any Controversies arising among
themselves; knowing how bitter Enemies they were to all who were the followers
of Christ. Secondly, it seems not very agreeable with the scope of our Saviors
Speech* which was to take up differences as much as may be among his Disciples,
and to make them show all lenity and forherance toward those that had offended
them, and to do good to the Souls of those that had injured and provoked them;
whereas this command of telling the Sanhedrin, and inpleading offenders before
Heathen Courts, tends apparently to heighten the bitterness and animosities of
Men's spirits one against another: and lays Religion so open to Obloquies,
which makes Paul so severely reprove the Christians at Corinth, for going to
Law 1 Cor. 6. 1. -- 6*
before Heathen Magistrates; therefore to say that Christ allows there going to
Law before Heathens, and Paul to forbid it, were, instead of finding a way to
end the differences among Christians, to make one between Christ and Paul.
Thirdly, the thing chiefly aimed at by Christ, is not a man's Vindication of
himself, or recovering losses by injuries received, but the recovering and
gaining the offending brother; which evidently appears by what our Savior adds
to the using admonition in private, If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. Now (...) in the New Testament is used for the Conversion and turning
others from sin. That I might gain them that are under the Law, 1 Corinthians. 9.
19, 20, etc. So 1 Pet. 3. 1. explained by James 5. 20. Our Savior then speaks
not to the manner of proceeding as to civil injuries, which call for
Restitution, but to such as call for Reconciliation. And so the Case I conceive
is that of private Differences and Quarrels between men, and not Law-Suites nor
civil Causes: I mean such Differences as respect persons and not things, which
our Savior lays down these Rules for the ending of. And therefore I cannot
but wonder to see some men insist so much on that place against such an
Exposition of this Luke 12. 14. where Christ says, Who made me a Judge, and a
Divider among you? For does it any ways follow, Because Christ would not take
upon him to be a temporal Judge among the Jews, therefore he should take no
course for the ending differences among his Disciples, and the taking away all
animosities from among them? Nay on the contrary does not our Savior very
often designedly speak to this very purpose, to root out all bitterness,
malice, envy, and rancour from men's spirits, and to persuade them to forgive
injuries, even to pray for persecutours, and by any means to be reconciled to
their Brethren. Which he makes to be a Duty of so great necessity, that if a
man had brought his gift Matthew. 5. 23, 24.
to the Altar, and remembered his brother had ought against him, he bids him
leave his gift there, and go, be reconciled to his Brother, and then offer up
the Gift. We see hereby how suitable it was to our Saviors Doctrine and Design
to lay down Rules for the ending of any differences arising among his
Disciples; and this being now cleared to be the state of the Case, it will not
be difficult to resolve what is meant by telling the Church. Which I make not
to be any appeal to a juridical court, acting authoritatively over the persons
brought before it, but the third and highest step of Charity in a man toward a
person that has offended him, viz. That when neither private admonition, nor
before two or three witnesses would serve to reclaim the offender, then to call
a select company together (which is the Natural importance of the word (...))
and before them all to lay open the cause of the breach and difference between
them, and to refer it to their Arbitration to compose and end it. Which Sense
of the place, I humbly conceive to have the least force in it, and in every
part of it to be most genuine and natural, and fully agreeable to the received
practice among the Jews: which the Author of the Book Musar cited by Drusius
fully acquaints Praeterit* lib. 1. p. 43.
us with, whose words I shall Transcribe, as being a plain Paraphrase on these
of our Savior. Qui arguit socium suum, debet primum hoc facere placide inter
se, and ipsum solum, verbis mollibus, ita ut non pudefaciat eum. Si resipiscit,
been est; sin, debet eum acriter arguere and pudefacere inter se and ipsum. Si
non resipiscit, debet adhibere socios, ipsumque coram illis pudore afficere; si
nec modo quicquam proficit, debet eum pudefacere coram multis, ejusque delictum
publicare. Nam certe detegendi sunt hypocritae. That which this Author calls
pudefacere eum coram multis, is that which our Savior means when he bids him
tell the Church, or the Congregation, as our Old Translation renders it. This
the Jews called reproving of men (...) before a multitude, as the Vulg. Latin
though falsely renders that place L^viticus 19. 17. public argue eum: and to
this the Apostle may allude when he speaks of the (...), 2 Corinthians. 2. 6.
censure of many; and the reproof (...) before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. which was to
be in matters of public scandal upon Religion, (...) as the Jews call them;
but in case the offender should still (...) slight this overture of
Reconciliation, before the company selected for hearing the Case* then says
our Savior, look upon him as an obstinate refractory creature, and have no
more to do with him, then with a Heathen and a Publican; by which terms the
most wilful obstinate sinners were set out among the Jews, and by which our
Savior means a man's withdrawing himself, as much as in him lies, from all
familiar society with such a person. And thus says Christ, Whatsoever you bind
in Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever you loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven, v. 18. that is, If after all your endeavors of
Reconciliation, the offender will hearken to no agreement, it is an evidence
and token that mars sin is bound upon him, (that is, shall not be pardoned so
long as he continues impenitent,) but if he repent of his offense, and you be
reconciled, as the offense is removed V. Rainolds Conf. with Heart. cap. 2. div.
3. Grot. in Mat. 16.
on Earth thereby, so the sin is loosed in Heaven, that is, forgiven. The guilt
of sin that binds, it being an Obligation to punishment; and so the pardon of
sin that loses, as it cancels that Obligation. And so Grotius observes, that
(...) is the same with (...), and (...) with (...), what is called retaining in
one place, is binding in another: and what is loosing in one place, is
remitting in the other. But now although I assert this to be the true, proper,
genuine meaning of this difficult place, yet I deny not but that this place
has influence upon Church Government; but I say the influence it has, is
only by way of Accommodation, and by Analogy deduced from it. According to
which, these things I conceive have Foundation in these words; First, gradual
appeals from the Method here laid down by our Savior. Secondly,
Church*censures, and the Duty of submitting to Church Authority; For although
before any Church Power was actually set up, (as when our Savior spoke these
words then there was none,) yet after that Church Government was fixed and set
up, it must in Reason be supposed that all matters of the Nature of scandals to
the Church must be decided there. Thirdly, The lawfulness of the Use of
excommunication in Christian Churches; for if every particular person might
withdraw from the Society of such a one as continues refractory in his
Offenses, then much more may a whole Society, and the Officers of it declare
such a one to be avoided both in religious and familiar civil Society, which is
the formal Nature of Excommunication. Herein we see the wisdom of our Savior,
who in speaking to a particular case, has laid down such general Rules as are
of perpetual use in the Church of God for accommodating differences arising
therein. Thus have we hitherto cleared that our Savior has determined no more
of Church-Govern-ment then what is appliable to a diversity of particular
Forms, and so has not by any Law or practice of his own determined the
necessity of any one form.

CHAP. VI.
The next thing pleaded for determining the Form of Government, is Apostolical
practice; two things inquired into concerning that, What it was? How far it
binds? The Apostles invested with the power and authority of Governing the
whole Church of Christ by their Commission, Io. 20. 21. Matthew. 28. 18. What the
Apostles did in order to the Church Government before Pentecost, (...)
explained. How the Apostles did divide Provinces; whether Paul and Peter were
confined to the circumcision and uncircumcision, and different Churches erected
by them in the same Cities? What the Apostles did in order to settling
particular Churches? The Names and Office of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons
considered. Four general Considerations laid down about the Apostles practice.
First, It cannot be fully known what is was. 2. Great probability, they observe
no one certain Form in settling Churches; proved from Epiphanius, Jerome,
Ambrose or Hilary. 3. Their Case different from ours in regard of the paucity
of Believers. 4. If granted for any Form, yet proves not the thing in question.
For, 1. Offices appointed by them are ceased. Widows, Deaconesses abolished.
2. Rites and Customs Apostolical grown out of use. 1. Such as were founded upon
Apostolical Precepts, Acts 15. 29. considered. 2. Such as were grounded on
their practice, Holy kiss, Love Feasts, dipping in Baptism, community of goods,
with several others.

HAving found nothing, either in our Saviors practice, or in. 1.
the rules laid down by him (conceived to respect Church Government) which
determines any necessity of one particular Form; the only argument remaining
which can be conceived of sufficient strength to found the necessity of any one
form of Government, is, the practice of the Apostles, who were by their
employment and commission entrusted with the Government of the Church of God.
For our Savior after his Resurrection taking care for the Planting and
Governing of his Church after his Ascension to Glory, does at two several times
call his Apostles together, and gives now their full Charter and Commission to
them; the first* containing chiefly the power it self conferred upon them, John
20. 21. The other, the Extent of that power, Matthew. 28. 19. In the former our
Savior tells them, As the Father had sent him, so did he send them* Which we
must not understand of a parity and equality of Power, but in a similitude of
the mission: that as Christ before had managed the great affairs of his Church
in his own Person; so now (having according to the Prophecies made of him at
the end of seventy weeks, made Reconciliation for iniquity by his Death, and
brought in everlasting Righteousness by his Resurrection) He dispatcheth abroad
his Gospel Heralds to proclaim the Iubilee now begun, and the Dan. 9. 24. with
Romans 4. 15*
Act of Indemnity now past upon all penitent Offenders; which is the Sense of
the other part of their Commission; Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted;
and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained, John 20. 23. i. e. as many as
upon the Preaching the Gospel by you, shall come in and yield up themselves to
the tenders of Grace proclaimed therein, shall have their former Rebellions
pardoned; but such as will still continue obstinate, their former guilt shall
still continue to bind them over to deserved punishment. And to the end the
Apostles might have some Evidence of the power thus conferred upon them, He
breathes the Holy Ghost on them, and Joh. 20. 12
said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; which we are not to understand of the
Extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were not received till the day of
Pentecost, Act. 2. 1. but of the Authoritative power of preaching the Gospel,
which was now conferred upon them, by the solemn Rite of breathing the Holy
Ghost on the Apostles. In which Sense the Church of England understands that
Expression in the Ordination of Ministers, as it implies only the conferring
thereby an authority for the preaching of the Gospel, which being conveyed by
Ordination, is fitly expressed by the same word^ which our Savior used in the
conferring the same Power upon his Apostles at his sending them forth to be
Gospel-Preachers.

After this comes the solemn appointed meeting of Christ with his Disciples at
the mountain of Galilee, (where in probability, Mat. 28. 16
besides the eleven, were present the five hundred 1 Cor. 15. 6
Brethren at once.) And here Christ more solemnly inaugurates the Apostles in
their Office, declaring all power to be in his hands; and therefore appoints
the Apostles to preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, to all men
indefinitely, Gentiles Mark 16. 15.
as well as Jews, which Matthew fully expresses by all Nations. Mat. 18. 19
Now are the Apostles left as chief Governors of the Church under Christ; and
in this last Commission wherein the extent of the Apostles power is more fully
expressed, there is nothing mentioned of any order for the Government of the
Church under them, not what course should be taken by the Church after their
decease. All that remains then to be inquired into, is what the Apostles
practice was, and how far they acted for the determining any one form of
Government as necessary for the Church.

The Apostles being thus invested in their authority, we proceed to consider
the Exercise of this authority for the Governing of the Church. And here we are
to consider, that the Apostles did not presently upon their last Commission
from Christ go forth abroad in the World to Preach, but were commanded by
Christ to go first to Jerusalem, and there to expect the coming of the Holy
Ghost according to our Saviors own appointment, Luke 24. 49. And therefore
what Mark adds, Mark 16. 20. that after Christ's appearance to them, the
Apostles* went abroad and preached every where, working Miracles, must either
be understood of what they did only in their way returning from Galile oo
Jerusalem: or else more probably of what they did indefinitely afterwarps. For
presently after we find them met together at Jerusalem, whence they came from
Mount Olivet where Christ's Ascension was. Here we find them employed (...),
says Saint Luke Luke 24 52 Acts 1. 12. Luke 14. 53
in his Gospel, which we render the Temple; but I understand it rather as
referring to the action than the place, and is best explained by what Luke
says in Acts 1. 14. they were (...), continuing in Prayer and Supplication.
And that it cannot be meant of the Temple, appears by the mention of the (...),
an upper room, where Acts 1. 13.
they continued together. For that it should be meant of any of the (...),
about the Temple, is most improbable to conceive, because not only those ninty
Cells about the Temple were destined and appointed for the Priests in their
several V. L. Empor. in Cod* Midd^th. c. 4. Sect. 5.
(...), or times of Ministration; and it is most unlikely the chief Priests and
Masters of the Temple should suffer those whom they hated so much, to continue
^o near them without any molestation or disturbance. While the Apostles
continue here, they proceed to the choice of a new Apostle instead of Judas,
thereby making it appear now necessary that number was to the first forming of
Churches, when the vacant place must be supplied with so great solemnity. Which
office of Apostleship (which Judas once had, and Matthias was now chosen into)
is called by Peter (...), Acts 3. 24. which a Learned Interpreter ^enders, the
portion of his Apostolacy, or the Province which fell to Judas his lot in the
distribution of them among the Apostles, which says he, is Annot. in loc.
Dissert. 3. c. 4. Schism. c. 4* Sect. 13. Answ. to the Cath. c. 4. s. 2. Schism
disarmed. Ans. c. 3. s. 4
called (...), into which Matthias did (...) go, and from which Judas fell by
his sin. This Exposition is very often suggested by that learned Author: but
(with all due reverence to his name and memory); I cannot see any such evidence
either from Scripture or reason, to enforce any such Exposition of either
phrase, yielding us sufficient ground to for sake the received sense of both of
them. For (...) is plainly nothing else but that office of the Apostleship
which belonged to Judas, without any relation to a Province; and (...), is that
proper place which belonged to Judas, as he is called (...), the Son of
perdition, and no other. But the very foundation of this mistake* is, that the
several Provinces, into which the Apostles were to go for preaching the Gospel,
were distributed among them before they were filled with the Holy Ghost, which
is an Hypothesis will not easily be granted by any one that does but
impartially consider these things. That if the Provinces were so distributed
among them, it must be either before the death of Christ, or after; and it must
be before, if Judas had a peculiar Province assigned to him, which this
Exposition necessarily implies; but how Provinces could be divided among them
before they had their Commission given them to preach to all Nations, is
somewhat hard to understand. It must be then immediately after Christ had bid
them preach to every creature, that they thus distributed the Provinces among
them; but several things make this very improbable. First, The gross mistake
of the Apostles concerning the very nature of Christ's Kingdom* which we read,
Acts 1. 6* when they jointly ask Christ, Lord, will thou at this time restore
the Kingdom to Israel? They dream^ still of a temporal Kingdom, according to
the common opinion of the Jews; and, Is it probable they should distribute
among themselves the several Provinces for Preaching the Gospel, who thought
that Christ's Kingdom would have been established by other means then going up
and down the World? They looked that Christ himself should do it by his own
power, Will thou at this time, etc. and did not think it must be done by their
means; much less by their single going into such vast parts of the World, as
the twelve divisions of the World would be. Secondly, It appears very
improbable any such division of Provinces should be made then, when they were
commanded to stay at Jerusalem, and not to stir thence till the promise of the
Spirit was fulfilled upon them. Tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem till ye be
endued with power from on high, Luke 24. 49. And being assembled together with
them, be commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise
of the Father, Acts 1. 4. Is it likely, when the Apostles were thus straightly
charged not to leave Jerusalem, till they were endued with the power of the
Holy Ghost, they should contrive the dispersing themselves abroad all over the
World? especially when Christ told them, that it should be after the coming of
the Spirit that they should go abroad, Acts 1. 8. and that the Spirit should
fit them for their work, ( John 15. 26, 27. John 16. 13.) by teaching them, and
testifying of Christ. Thirdly, If such a distribution of Provinces had been
made so early among the Apostles, how comes it to pass, that after they were
endued with the Holy Ghost, they did not every one betake himself to his
several Province? there could have been then no plea nor excuse made for their
stay any longer at Jerusalem after the promise of the Spirit was fulfilled upon
them. And yet after the persecution raised at Jerusalem, when most of the
Church were dispersed abroad, we find the Apostles remaining still at
Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1, 14. Would they have been so long absent from their
charge, if any such distribution had been made among themselves? Fourthly, The
Apostles occasional going to places as they did, argues there was no such set
division of Provinces among them. The first departure of any of the Apostles
from Jerusalem, was that of Peter and John, who were sent by common order of
the Apostles to Samaria, after they heard that by Philips preaching, they had
received the Word of God. Acts 8. 14.
Not the least mention of any peculiar Province of theirs which they were sent
to. So Peter's going from Ioppa to Casarea, was occasioned by Cornelius his
sending for him. Acts 10. 5, 32.
Fifthly, That Provinces were not divided, appears, because of so frequent
reading of many of the Apostles being together in one place: first the whole
twelve at Jerusalem, after that Peter and John together at Samaria; about four
years after Paul's conversion, we met with James and Peter together Gal. 1. 18,
19.
at Jerusalem; fourteen years after this, we find James, Peter* and John there.
Is it any ways probable, if all Gal. 2. 1, 9.
these had their distinct Provinces assigned then, they should be so often
found together at Jerusalem, which certainly must belong but to the Province of
one of them? Sixthly, It seems evident that they divided not the World into
Provinces among them, because it was so long before they thought it to be their
duty to preach unto the Gentiles; Peter must have a Vision first before he will
go to Cornelius, Acts 10. 11.
and as yet we see they retained that persuasion, that it is unlawful for a Jew
to keep company, or come unto one that is of another Nation, Acts 10. 28. Nay
more then this, Peter is accused for this very action* before the Apostles at
Jerusalem, Acts 11. 2, 3. and they laid this a^ the ground of their quarrel,
that he went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them: how this is
reconcilable with the whole Worlds being divided into Provinces so early among
the Apostles, is not easy to conceive: unless some of them thought it
unlawful to go to their own Provinces, which certainly must be of the Gentiles,
most of them. Seventhly, Another evidence that Provinces were not divided so
soon, is, that Peter's province so much spoken of, viz. That of the
circumcision, fell not to his share, till near twenty years after this time we
now speak of, upon the agreement between Paul and Peter at Jerusalem. If
Province had been so soon divided, how comes the Apostleship Gal. 2. 7, 8, 9.
of the Circumcision to be now at last attributed to Peter? Answ. to Cathol.
Gentl. chap. 4. s. 3. numb 7.
Was it not known what Peter's Province was before this time? and if it was* how
come Paul and he now to agree about dividing their Provinces? Nay further:
Eighthly, These Provinces after all this time were not so divided, as to
exclude one from another Province, which is requisite for a distribution of
them, much less were they so at first; for as to this division of the Jews and
Gentiles between Paul and Peter, it cannot be understood exclusively of others;
for, what work then had the rest of the Apostles to do? neither taking them
distributively, was Paul excluded from preaching to ^he Jews, or Peter to the
Gentiles? We see Paul was at first chosen to be a Vessel to bear Christ's name
before the Gentiles and Acts 9. 15.
Kings, and the children of Israel. We see hereby he was appointed Acts 9. 20,
22,
an Apostle as well to Jews as Gentiles: and accordingly we find him presently
preaching Christ in the Synagogues, and confounding the Jews. So in all places
where Paul came, he first preached to the Jew^ in the Synayogues, and when Acts
13. 5, 14.
they would not hearken to him, then he turned to the Gentiles. Neither was
this done only before the Apostles meeting at Jerusalem, supposed to be that
spoken of Acts 15* but after at Ephesus, we find him entering into the
Synagogues there, and preaching to the Jews. So likewise he Acts 19. 8.
did at Corinth, Acts 18. 4. And he reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath,
and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks. Act. 18. 19
Paul then we see thought not himself excluded from preaching to the Jews,
because they were St. Peter's Province. Neither did Peter think himself excluded
from the Gentiles, he Acts 10. 28.
was the first that opened the door of Faith to them by preaching to them; in
which respect it is not altogether improbably Matthew. 16. 19.
conceived by some, that the power of the Keys was peculiarly given to him. And
afterward in the open Council at Jerusalem, he owns himself as the Apostle to
the Gentiles: God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear Acts 15. 7.
the word of the Gospel and believe. This then evidently destroys any such
early distinction of Provinces; when Peter, whose Province seems most express
in Scripture, viz. the Circumcision, yet we find him acting as an Apostle to
the Gentiles too. I deny not but at the meeting of Paul and Peter at Jerusalem,
when they observed how God did bless the one most in the circumcision, the
other in the uncircumcision, there was an agreement between them, for the one
to lay out his pains chiefly upon the Jews, and the other upon the Gentiles;
and in probability where they met in any City, the one gathered a Church of the
Jews, and the other of the Gentiles; but this makes no such distinction of
Provinces, as to exclude the one from the others charge: and further, this
agreement between Paul and Peter then after both had preached so many years,
makes it fully clear, that the pretended division of Provinces so early among
the Apostles, is only the wind-egge of a working Fancy, that wants a shell of
Reason to cover it. As for the division of Provinces mentioned in
Ecclesiastical Writers, though as to some few they generally agree; as that
Thomas went to Parthia, Andrew to Scythia, John to the Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 1.
lesser Asia, etc. yet as to the most they are at a loss where to find their
Province^, and contradict one another in reference to them; and many of them
seem to have their first original from the Fable of Dorotheus, Nicephorus, and
such Writers.

Having showed that the Apostles observed no set-order. 3.
for distributing Provinces, we come to show what course they took for the
settling of Churches in the places they went to. In the clearing of which,
nothing is more necessary then to free our judgments of those prejudices and
prepossessions, which the practice either of the former ages of the Church, or
our own have caused within us. For it is easy to observe, that nothing has
been a more fruitful mother of mistakes and errors, then the looking-upon the
practice of the primitive Church through the glass of our own customs.
Especially when under the same name, (as it is very often seen) something far
different from what was primarily intended by the use of the word, is set forth
to us. It were no difficult task to multiply examples in this kind, wherein men
meeting with the same names, do apprehend the same things by them, which they
now through custom signify, without taking notice of any alteration in the
things themselves signified by those names. Thus since the name Missa was
appropriated by the Papists to that which they call the Sacrifice of the Altar,
wherever they meet among ancient Writers with that Name, they presently
conceive the same thing was understood by it then. Whereas it was then only
taken for the public Service of the Church, so called from the dismission of
the people after V. Picherellum de Missa, cap. 1. Casaub. Exercit. 16. sect. 58.
it, with an Ite, Missa est; and from the different forms of Christians, they
had two several Services, the one called Missa Catechumenorum, because at the
end of that the Catechumeni were dismissed out of the Assembly; the other Missa
fidelium, at which they received the Lords Supper; which afterward (the former
discipline of the Church decaying) engrossed the name Missa to its self; and
when the Sacrifice of the Altar came up among the Papists, it was appropriated
to that. For though they innovated things never so much, yet it has been
always the Policy of that Church not to innovate names, that so the
incautelous might be better deceived with a pretense of antiquity; and thus
under the anciently simple name of Missa, lies at this day couched a Mass of
errors. So after the word (...) was applied by them to that Sacrifice,
wherever they meet that word in Scripture, they interpret it in that sense; and
hence when we only read of the Teachers at Antioch, (...), no other rendering of
the words will be taken but Sacrificantibus illis, although it be not only Acts
13. 2.
contrary to the sense of the word in the New Testament, but to the Exposition
of Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius, who expound it by (...). Thus when
public Liturgies were grown into use in the Church after the decay of the
gifts of the first primitive Church, Eusebius his bare calling S. James (...)
(though he relates only to his Ministry in the Church of Jerusalem) is enough
to entitle him Father to a Liturgy, which soon crept forth under his name: by
an argument much of the same strength with that which some have brought for
reading Homilies, because it is said of St. Paul, Acts 20. 11. (...). Of the
same stamp is Bellarmin^s argument for Invocation of Saints, because of Jacobs
saying, Invocetur super eos nomen meum. But we need not go far for examples of
this kind. The business we are upon, will acquaint ^s with some of them. As
the argument for popular Election of Pastors, from the Grammatical sense of the
word (...), for L^y-Elders from the name (...), and modern Episcopacy from the
use of the word (...) in Scriptures. Names and Things must then be accurately
distinguished, and the sense of the names must neither be fetched from the
custom now used, nor from the Etymology of the word, but from the undoubted
practice of Apostolical times, if that can be made appear what it was. Which
will be best done, if we can once find out what course and order the Apostles
took in the forming and modelling the Churches by them planted.

That which we lay then as a foundation, whereby to clear. 4.
what Apostolical practice was, is, that the Apostles in the forming Churches
did observe the customs of the Jewish Synagogues. Totum regimen Ecclesiarum
Christi conformatum V. Bezam, in Acts 13. 15. in Acts 11. 30. -- 6. 3 -- 14.
12. -- 20. 28.
fuit ad Synagogarum exemplar, says Grotius truly. Praesides and curatores
Ecclesiarum ad instar Presbyterorum Synagogae Iudaicae constitutos fuisse
constat, as Salmasius often affirms. In which sense we understand that famous
speech of the Author of the Commentary on St. Paul's Epistles, which goes under
the name of Ambrose, but now judged by most to be Apparat. ad lib. de Prim.
Papae. p. 151. 220. In 1 Timothy 5. 1. v. etiam in 1 Cor. 12. 28. Aug. lib. 4. ad
Boni^. cap. 4.
done by Hilary a Deacon of the Church of Rome, under which name St. Augustine
quotes some words on the fifth to the Romans, which are found still in those
Commentaries. Nam apud omnes utique gentes honorabilis est senectus, unde and
Synagoga and postea Ecclesia Seniores habuit, sine quorum consilio nihil
agebatur in Ecclesia, which words are not to be understood of a distinct sort
of Presbyters from such as were employed in preaching the Word, but of such
Presbyters as were the common Council of the Church, for the moderating and
ruling the affairs of it; which the Church of Christ had constituted among
them, as the Jewish Synagogue had before. And from hence we observe that the
Ebionites, who blended Judaism and Christianity together (whence Jerome Ep. ad
Aug
says of them, Dum volent and Iudai esse and Christiani, nec Iudaei sunt nec
Christiani, they made a Linsey-woolsey Religion, C. Ebion.
which was neither Judaism nor Christianity). These, as Epiphanius tells us,
called their public Meeting Place (...), and the Pastors of their Churches
(...). Thereby implying the resemblance and Analogy between the form of
Government in both of them. But this will best be made appear by comparing them
both together. For which we are to take notice, how much our Savior in the New
Testament did delight to take up the received practices among the Jews only,
with such alterations of them as were suitable to the Nature and Doctrine of
Christianity, as has been abundantly manifested by many learned men, about the
Rites of the Lords Supper, taken from the post-coenium among V. Soaliger. de
Emend. temp. l. 6. and Lud. Capelli vind. c. Buxtor ^ii diss. Seldom. Com. in
Eutychium. p. 25.
the Jews; the use of Baptism, from the Baptism used in initiating Proselytes;
Excommunication from their putting out of the Synagogue. As to which things, it
may be observed, that those Rites which our Savior transplanted into the
Gospel-soyl, were not such as were originally founded on Moses his Law, but
were introduced by a confederate Discipline among themselves. And thus it was
in reference to the government of the Synagogues among them; for although the
reason of erecting them was grounded on a command in the Levitical Law, Levit.
23. 3. where holy Convocations are required upon the Sabbath-dayes; yet the
building of Synagogues in the Land, was not, as far as we can find, till a
great while after. For although Moses require the duty of assembling, yet he
prescribes no orders for the place of meeting, nor for the manner of spending
those days in Gods service, nor for the persons who were to super-intend the
public worship performed at that time. These being duties of a moral nature,
are left more undetermined by Moses his Law, which is most punctual in the
Ceremonial part of Divine Service. And therefore even then when God did
determine the positives of Worship, we see how much he left the performance of
morals to the wisdom and discretion of Gods people, to order them in a way
agreeable to the mind and will of God. We shall not here discourse of the more
elder Customs and observations of the Synagogues, but take the draught of them
by the best light we can about our Saviors time, when the Apostles copyed out
the Government of Christian-Churches by them.

About the time of Christ, we find Synagogues in very great request among the
Jews; God so disposing it, that the moral part of his service should be more
frequented now the Ceremonial was expiring; and by those places so erected, it
might be more facile and easy for the Apostles to disperse the Gospel by
preaching it in those places, to which it was the custom for the people to
resort. And as Paul at Athens observing the Altar inscribed (...), To the
unknown God, takes his Text from thence, and begins to preach God and Christ
Acts 17. 23*
to them; so the Apostles in every Synagogue meet with a Copy of the Law, from
whence they might better take their rise to discover* him who was the end of
the Law for Righteousness to all that believe. For Moses of old time has in
every City them that Preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Acts 15. 21
Sabbath day. It was their constant custom then every Sabbath day to have the
Law publicly read; for which every Synagogue was furnished with a most exact
Copy; which was V. Buxtorf. Synag Iud. c. 9. p. 216.
looked upon as the great Treasure and Glory of their Synagogue; in the Copying
out of which, the greatest care and diligence was used. In their Synagogues
they read only the Law and the Prophets, the (...) or Hagiographa were not V.
Lud. de Dieu in Acts 13. 15
ordinarily read in public; the Law, for the more convenient reading it, was
distributed into fifty four Sections, which they called (...), every week one
Section being read (joining twice two lesser Sections together) the whole Law
was read through once every year.

But here I cannot say that the Jews were absolutely bound up to read the
several Sections appointed for the days, as it is commonly thought (from which
Paraschae and the times prefixed of reading them, Cloppenburgh fetched a new
Interpretation V. Cloppenb. tract* de Sabb. deuteropr^to and Lud. Capelli ^p.
ad Clopp. p. 74. eum resp. Clopp. p. 143. Luke 4. 17*
of the (...), which is, that the first Sabbath was that of the civil year
which began with the Section (...) upon the twenty fourth of the month Tisri;
but the second Sabbath after the first, was the first Sabbath of the sacred
Year, which began with the Section (...) upon the Calends of Nisan) but I do
not see any such Evidence of so exact and curious a Division of the several
Sections, so long since as the time of our Savior is, which appears by our
Saviors reading in the Synagogue at Nazareth where it seems he read after the
Synagogue custom, as one of the seven called out by the (...) to read before
the people, but we find no Section assigned him by him that delivered the book
to him (the Office of the (...)) but it is said of him (...), when he had
unfolded the book he found out that place in Isaiah. So that then it seems
there was no such Precise Observation of the several Sections to be read. And
our Saviors reading the book of the Prophets in the Synagogue, puts us in mind
of the (...) the Sections of the Prophets answerable to those of the Law; which
Elias In Thisbi v. (...)
Levita tells us came up after the time of Antiochu^ Epiphanes, who so severely
prohibited the Jews the reading of their Law, but from that time has been
observed ever since: of Acts 1. 3. 27.
which we read in Paul's Sermon at Antioch in Pisidia speaking of Christ; For
they that dwell at Jerusalem and their Rulers, because they knew him not, nor
the voices of the Prophets Itiner. p. 114. ed. L'* Emper.
which are read every Sabbath day. Benjamin Tudelensis in his Itinerary, tells
us, that the same Custom was not observed among all the Jews for the reading
the Sections of the Law. For in Mitsraim (which he there takes not for V.
L'Emper. in Not. p. 220.
Egypt it self, as it is commonly taken, but for Grand Cairo) where there were
near two thousand Jews, there were two Synagogues, the one of Syrian, the
other of Babylonian Jews. The latter read over every week an entire Section of
the Law (as the Jews in Spain in his time did) and so finished the Law in a
years space. The Syrian Jews, or those that were born in Judea, divided every
Section into three parts, and read not the Law through, but in three years
time. These Synagogues were very much multiplied, both in Jerusalem and
elsewhere, about the time of our Saviors being in the world. When the common
Tradition of the Jews is, that in Jerusalem V. Serrarium. Rabb. prior. cap. 32.
its self, there were four hundred and eighty one Synagogues, which they
ridiculously observe by their Gematry, from the word (...) used Isa. 1. 20.
whose numeral Matthew. 4. 9.
Letters being put together, amount to that Number; but ^ Mark 1. 23
clearer Evidence of the multitude of Synagogues is our Saviors Luke 4. 17.
so often appearing in them; and so likewise the Apostles John 6. 59. 18. 20.
when they went abroad to preach the Gospel, we find in most Acts 13* 14* 14*
1. 17. 10. 18. 4* 19. 8.
places that they first entered into the Synagogues which were, by the liberty
given to the Jews, allowed them in all the Cities where they inhabited by the
Roman Governors. And so in all their Dispersions both in Babylon, Egypt, and
the Western parts, we read of the Synagogues which the Jews enjoyed, and the
liberty they had therein for exercise of their own way of Worship and
Discipline. And therefore even at Rome we read of their Proseuchae,

Ede ubi consistas* in qua te quaero Proseucha? Iuvenal. sat. 3.
Which by the old Scholiast upon Iuvenal is said to be the place ad quem
convenire solebant mendici ad stipem petendam, of which Turnebus gives this
account, Proseuchae fana Iudaeorum erant, ut Alexandriae and Romae, alibique;
sic nomen adeptae quod Oracula quaedam essent, vel (ut Christiani loquuntur)
Oratoria. Advers. l. 1 cap. 19.
Cum autem ad Eleemosynam Iudaei dandam essent propensissimi, eo ceu mendicorum
conventus coibat; sed and Iudaei and ipsi mendici, invisi erant omnibus, and
mendici ea loca quod domicilia non haberent, diversores interdum occupabant, in
iisque cubabant, ideoque Proseuches nomen in contemptum abierat. Scaliger
thinks that the Proseucha differed from the Not. in Frag. Graeca p. 25. in Mat.
4, 23. Leg. ad Ca^um.
Synagogue; for which he is checked by Grotius from that place of Philo, where
he speaks of Augustus giving the Jews the liberty of their Proseucha for the
learning the Religion of their Country, (...), which in brief is that the
Proseuchae were the Schools of all Religion and Learning, by which words he
seems to confound not only the Synagogue and the Proseucha together, but the
Synagogue and the (...) too, which was their Divinity-School, whither they used
to repair after dinner upon Sabbath days, and where the Questions about their
Law were discussed; but though I cannot say these were always distinguished,
yet in some places they were. Such seems the School of Tyrannus to be, where
Paul Acts 19. 9*
taught, having withdrawn himself from the Synagogue. And so sometimes the
Proseuchae were distinguished from the Synagogues, as Grotius himself elsewhere
acknowledeth, viz* Annot, in Acts 16, 13
either* where there was not a competent number of Jews (for ten Students in
the Law were required to make a Synagogue) or else where the Magistrate would
not permit the use of them, in which Case the poor Jews were fain to content
themselves with a place remote from the City, either by some River, as that
(...), mentioned, Acts 16. 13, or by some grove or wood, whence that of Iuvenal,

Nunc sacri fontis nemus, and delubra locantur*
Iudaeis, quorum cophinus foenumque suppellex.
Which Fountain, as Vossius observes was extra portam Capenam De Idol. l. 2.
cap. 80. p. 715. In Fragm* G^. p. 25.
in luco quem medium irrigabat; and from hence Scaliger gathers, Iudaeos in
nemoribus proseuchas collocasse. Thus it appears now what privileges the Jews
generally enjoyed in their dispersion for their Synagogues and public places
to meet, pray, and discourse in.

We now come to inquire after what manner the government. 6.
of the Synagogue was modeled. Wherein we must first inquire whether there were
any peculiar Government belonging to the Synagogue distinct from the civil
Consistories which were in use among them. This is often left untouched by
learned men in their discourse of Synagogues; some indeed D. Lightfoot Horae
Hebr. in Mat. 2. 23. p. 70.
make the least Consistory or Sanhedrin in use among the Jews, viz. the
Triumvirate, to be the Rulers of the Synagogue, and part of the Ten who were to
be where ever there was a Synagogue. But although I cannot see sufficient
evidence for a great Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin founded by Moses, answering to
the great Sanhedrin of LXXI. yet I conceive it probable, that when Synagogues
were so multiplied both at home and abroad, there was a distinct Bench of
Officers who did particularly belong to the Synagogue to superintend the
affairs of that, which I shall now endeavor to make out by these following
Reasons. First, because the Ten required for the Synagogue are set down by the
Jewish Writers as distinct from the number required for the civil Consistory.
For in the Gemara Babylonia (cited by Seldom) the account given why there De
Syned. l. 2. c. 5. s. 4.
must be 120. inhabitants where there was to be a Sanhedrin of twenty three, is
this; There must be twenty three to make up the Sanhedrin, and three orders of
twenty three, (who sat in a hemicycle under the Sanhedrin in the same Form as
they sat) and besides these the ten who were to be employed wholly in the
affairs of the Synagogue (for the Gloss there explains them to be (...) december
filii hominis vacantes ab omni opere, ut parati sint (...) (...) domui
Synagogae mane and vesperi, and there adds, that every City, though it be
walled, where ten such persons are wanting, is looked on only as a Village,
and thought unworthy to have a Sanhedrin of twenty three;) So that by this it
appears the number of the Decemvirate for the Synagogue, was distinct from the
persons employed in the civil Courts. To the same purpose Maimonides gives the
1^ I^d* tit: Sanhed. c. 1. sect. 5.
account of the number of 120. who likewise requires the ten for the Synagogue
as a distinct and peculiar number. Atque hi erant viri qui vacabant tantum
rebus divinis, nimirum lectioni Ad Mis^. tit. Sanhed. c. 1. sect. 6.
legit and sessioni in Synagogis, as Mr. Seldom quotes it from another place in
him. Whereby it is evident that those who were employed in the Synagogue, did
make a peculiar Bench and Consistory, distinct from the civil Judicature of the
place* And therefore the (...) are not the civil Rulers, but some peculiar
Officers belonging to the service of the Synagogue: And thence when all civil
Power and government was taken from the Jews, yet they retained their
Archisynagogues still. Whence we read of Archisynagogues, Patriarchs and Cod.
Theod. l. 16. tit. 8. l. 13. and 14.
Presbyters among the Jews in the time of Arcadius and Honorius, when all
civil Power and Jurisdiction was taken from them. The Second Reason is from the
peculiar Ordination of those who were the Rulers of the Synagogues. This I know
is denied by many: because, say they, Ordination was proper only to the
Presbyters among the Jews, who were thereby made capable of being members of
the Sanhedrin, thence it was called (...) Ordinatio Presbyterorum, i. e.
Impositio manuum qua Presbyteri fiunt. This Ordination was I grant primarily
used in order to the making men Members of the great Sanhedrin, and therefore
the Jews derive the custom of ordaining them, from Moses his first
constituting the LXX Elders, which say they, was done by imposition of Numb.
13. Numb. 37. 18.
hands: which was seconded by the example of Moses laying his hands on Joshua,
from whence the custom was continued down among them till the time of Adrian,
who severely prohibited it by an Edict, that whosoever should ordain another
Gem. Babyl. ad tit. Sanhed. c. 1. s. 13. 14. Scaliger Elench. Triher. c. 10.
Tzemach. David. p. 1. m l. 4. A^* 880.
should forfeit his life, and so every one that was so ordained. Thence the
Jews tell us that R. Iehuda Ben Baba is called (...) the Ordainer, because in
the time of that Edict he ordained five Presbyters, without which they had
wholly lost their succession of Presbyters for Courts of Judicature. But though
it be thus evident that their Ordination was chiefly used in Order to the
fitting men to be members of the Sanhedrin, yet that besides this there was a
peculiar Ordination for persons not employed in civil matters, will appear;
First, from the different Forms of their Ordination; some were general without
any restriction or limitation at all: which power was conferred in words to
this purpose; Ordinatus jam sis, and sit tibi facultas judicandi etiam causas
poenales. He that was thus ordained, was ^it for any Court of Judicature; but
there Seldom. id Eutych. p. 19. de Syned. l. 2. c. 7. s. 2.
was another Form of Ordination which was more particular and restrained; a
Form limiting the general power, either to pecuniary Cases, or criminal, or
only to the power of binding and loosing, without any judiciary power at all.
Now those that were thus Ordained, were the Jewish Casuists, resolving men
only in for^ conscientiae of the lawfulness and unlawfulness of things
propounded to them. This they called (...) Facultas decernendi circa ligatum
and solutum; that is, a power of Decreeing what was lawful or unlawful. For in
that sense binding and loosing is used by the Jewish Writers. In which sense
they tell us commonly that one School, as that of Hille^ (...) binds, that is,
judges V. Light. foot Horae Hebr. in Matthew. 16. 19.
a thing unlawful; another (...) loses (as that of Schammai) that is, judges
it lawful and free to be done. Now the persons thus ordained with this power
only, were thereby no Members of any civil Court of Judicature, nor thereby
made capable of it: it appears then that this Ordination was peculiar to a
particular function, which exactly answers to the Ministerial Office under the
Gospel. And that those who were thus ordained, either might not, or did not
exercise that Office of theirs in the Synagogue, I can see no reason; I am sure
it was most suitable to that place, or at least to the (...) where there was
such a one distinct from the Synagogue.

But a clearer evidence of the particular ordination of those employed in the
Synagogue, we have from Benjamin in his Itinerary; for granting his palpable
mistakes about the civil power of the Jews in his time (which was about the
middle of the twelfth Century) sufficiently discovered by the Learned
L'Empereur, yet as to the ordaining of persons for the several Dissertat. ad
Lectorem and in not. 193. etc.
Synagogues, we have no ground to suspect his Testimony, which is very plain
and evident. For speaking of R. Daniel Ben Hasdai, who was the (...) or the
(...), the Head of the Captivity then residing at Bagdad: He tells us, the
Synagogues of Babylon, Persia, Choresan, Sheba, Mesopotamia and many other
places, derived power from P. 73. ed. L'Emper. Heb. Lat.
him (...) of ordaining a Rabbi and Preacher over every Synagogue, which he
tells us was done by laying on his hands upon them. These two, the Rabbi and
the (...) he makes to be the fixed Officers of every Synagogue, and the Office
of the latter lay chiefly in expounding the Scriptures. The like he has of R.
Nathaniel the (...) in Egypt, to whose Office it belonged to ordain in all the
P. 115.
Synagogues in Egypt, (...) th(...)bbies and Lecturers of the Synagogue: by
which we see (...)arly* that there was a peculiar Ordination for the Ministers
belonging to the Synagogue. Thence Scaliger wonders how Christ at twelve
Elench. Triherc. 10*
years old should be permitted to sit among the Doctors asking Questions when
he was no ordained Rabbi, to whom that place belonged. But although (...) Luke
2. 46
may possibly mean no more then sitting on one of the lower seats belonging to
those who were yet in their (...) or Minority, where they sat at the feet of
their Teachers, which was not within the Temple its self; but, as Arias
Montanus In Appar. de Templo.
thinks, was at the Eastgate of the Temple where the Doctors sat; yet this is
evident by Scaliger, that he looked on an Ordination for that end, as necessary
to those who sat in the Synagogues, as the Doctors there: which is likewise
affirmed by Grotius, who tell us, that among the Jews, not only all public
civil Offices were conferred by imposition of hands, Sed and in Archisynagogis
and senioribus Synagogae, idem observatum; Annot. in Evang. p. 32.
unde mos (...) ad Christianos transiit: But likewise all the Rulers and Elders
of the Synagogue were so ordained, from whence the custom was translated into
Christianity (of which afterward.) Thus now we have cleared that there was a
peculiar Government belonging to the Synagogue, distinct from the civil
Judicatures.

Having thus far proceeded in clearing that there was a peculiar. 7.
Form of Government in the Synagogue; we now inquire what that was, and by what
Law and Rule it was observed. The Government of the Synagogue, either relates
to the Public Service of God in it, or the public Rule of it as a society. As
for the Service of God to be performed in it, as there were many parts of it,
so there were many Officers peculiarly appointed for it. The main part of
public service lay in the Reading and Expounding the Scriptures: For both, the
known place of Philo will give us light for understanding them. (...). Lib.
omnem probum liberum esse.
Coming to their Holy places called Synagogues, they sit down in convenient
order ac^^^ding to their several Forms, ready to hear, the young under
(...)der; then one takes the Book and reads, another of those best skilled
comes after, and expounds it. For so Grotius reads it (...) for (...), out of
Eusebius. In Luc. 4. 16:
We see two several Offices here, the one of the Reader in the Synagogue, the
other of him that did interpret what was read. Great difference I find among
Learned men about the (...) of the Synagogue: some by him understand the (...),
called sometimes in Scripture (...), and so make him the under. Reader in the
Synagogue; and hence I suppose it is Luke 4. 20.
(and not from looking to the poor, which was the Office of the Parnasim) that
the Office of Deacons in the Primitive Church is supposed to be answerable to
the (...) among the Jews; for the Deacons Office in the Church, was the
public Reading of the Scriptures: And hence Epiphanius parallels the (...),
and (...) among C. Ebeonites
the Jews, to the Bishop, Presbyters, and Deacons among the Christians. But
others make the Office of the (...) to be of a higher nature not to be taken
for the Reader himself, (for that was no office; but upon every Sabbath day
seven were called out to do that work, as Buxtorf tells us; first a Priest,
Synag. Iud. lib. 1^.
then a Levite, and after, any five of the people; and these had every one
their set-parts in every Section to read, which are still marked by the numbers
in some Bibles.) But the (...) was he that did call out every one of these in
their order to read, and did observe their reading, whether they did it exactly
Lex Rabb. ad verb.
or no. So Buxtorf speaking of the (...), Hic maxim oratione sive precibus and
cantu Ecclesi^ praeibat, praeerat lectioni legali, docens quod and quomodo
legendum, and similibus quae ad sacra pertinebant. So that according to him the
(...) was the Superintendent of all the public service, thence others make him
parallel to him they called (...) the Angel of the Church, Legatus Ecclesiae.
L'Empereur renders it, as though In Benjam, not p. 149.
the name were imposed on him as acting in the name of the Church, which could
only be in offering up public prayers; but he was Angelus Dei, as he was
inspector Ecclesiae, because the Angels are supposed to be more immediately
present in, and Supervisors over the public place, and duties of worship; see
1 Cor. 11. 10. this (...) is by L'Empereur often rendered Concionator Synagogae,
as though it belonged to him to expound the meaning of what was read in the
Synagogue, but he that did that was called (...) from (...) to enquire; thence
(...), the enquirer, or disputer of this world, i Cor 1. 20^
thence R. Moses Haddarsan; but it is in vain to seek for several Offices from
several Names; nay, it seems not evident, that there was any set-Officers in
the Jewish Church for expounding Scriptures in all Synagogues, or at least not
so fixed, but that any one that enjoyed any repute for Religion or knowledge in
the Law, was allowed a free liberty of speaking for the instruction of the
people; as we see in Christ and his Apostles; for the Rulers of the Synagogue
sent to Paul and Act. 13. 15.
Barnabas after the reading of the Law, that if they had any word of
exhortation, they should speak on. From hence it is evident, there were more
then one who had rule over the Synagogues, they being called Rulers here. It
seems very probable, that in every City where there were ten wise men, (as
there were supposed to be in every place, where there was a Synagogue) that
they did all jointly concur for the ruling the affairs of the Synagogue. But
what the distinct Offices of all these were, it is hard to make out, but all
joining together seem to make the Consistory, or Bench as some call it, which
did unanimously moderate the affairs of the Synagogue, whose manner of sitting
in the Synagogues, is thus described by Mr. Thorndike out of Maimonides, whose
words Service of God at Rel. Ass c. 3. p, 56.
are these: How sit the people in the Synagogue? The Elders sit with their
faces toward the people, and their backs toward the He^all (the place where
they lay the Copy of the Law) and all the people sit rank before rank, the face
of every rank toward the back of the rank before it, so the faces of all the
people are toward the Sanctuary, and toward the Elders, and toward the Ark;
and when the Minister of the Synagogue stands up to prayer, he stands on
the ground before the Ark with his face to the Sanctuary, as the rest of the
people. Several things are observable to our purpose in this Testimony of
Maimonides: First, That there were so many Elders in the Synagogue, as to make
a Bench or Consistory, and therefore had a place by themselves, as the
Governors of the Synagogue. And the truth is, after their dispersion we shall
find little Government among them, but what was in their Synagogues, unless it
was where they had liberty for erecting Schools of Learning. Besides this
College of Presbyters, we here see the public Minister of the Synagogue, the
(...) i. e. Episcopus congregationis, the Superintendent over the Congregation,
whose peculiar office it was to pray for, and to bless the people. We are here
further to take notice of the form of their sitting in the Synagogues; The
Presbyters sat together upon a Bench by themselves, with their faces toward
the people, which was in an Hemicycle, the form wherein all the Courts of
Judicature among them sat; which is fully described by Mr. Seldom, and De
Syned. l. 2. c. 6. s. 2. Thorndike Rel. Assem. cap. 3.
Mr. Thorndike in the places above cited. This was afterward the form wherein
the Bishops and Presbyters used to sit in the primitive Church, as the last
named learned Author largely observes and proves. Besides this College of
Presbyters, there seems to be one particularly called the Ruler of the
Synagogue, Mark 5. 35 Luke 8. 49 13. 14.
(...), in the Scriptures (...), or (...), which in the importance of the New
Testament Greek (following that of the Alexandrian Jews in the version of the
Old Testament) implies no more then a primacy of order in him above the rest he
was joined with. And thence sometimes we read of them in the Plural number,
(...), Acts 13. 15. implying thereby an equality of power Mark 2. 25
in many; but by reason of the necessary primacy of one in order above the
rest, the name may be appropriated to the President of the College. Acts 18.
8, 17. we read of two, viz. Crispus and Sosthenes, and either of them is called
(...), which could not be, did the name import any peculiar power of
Jurisdiction lodged in one exclusive of the rest, unless we make them to be of
two Synagogues, which we have no evidence at all for; I confess, Beza his
Annot. in Luc. 13. 14
argument from (...), Mark 5. 22. for a multitude of those so called in the
same Synagogue, is of no great force, where we may probably suppose there were
many Synagogues. But where there is no evidence of more then one in a place,
and we find the name attributed to more then one, we have ground to think that
there is nothing of power or Jurisdiction in that one, which is not common to
more besides himself. But granting some peculiarity of honor belonging to one
above the rest in a Synagogue, which in some places, I see no great reason to
to deny, yet that implies not any power over and above the Bench of which he
was a Member, though the first in order; Much as the (...) the Prince of the
Sanhedrin, whose place imported no power peculiar to himself, but only a
Priority of dignity in himself above his fellow Senators: as the Princeps
Senatus in the Roman Republic answering to the (...) in the great Sanhedrin,
who was next to the Nasi, as the Princeps Senatus to the Consuls, which was
only a Honorary Dignity and nothing else: Under which disguise that Politic
Prince Augustus ravished the Roman Commonwealth of its former liberty. The name
(...), may I suppose in propriety of speech be rendered in Latin Magister
ordinis, he being by his Office Praesul, a name not originally importing any
power, but only dignity; Those whom the Greeks call In Caligula. Lampr. vit.
Alex. Sever. Vopiscus in Saturn.
(...), the Latins render Magistros sui ordinis, and so Suetonius interprets
(...) by Magisterium sacerdotii. They who meet then with the name
Archisynagogues, either in Lampridius, Vopiscus, Codex Theodosii, Justinians
Novels, in all whom it occurs, and in some places as distinct from Presbyters,
Cod de Iud* Colic. and Eam. l. 13. Cod. Iud* l. 17. c. de Iudaeis.
will learn to understand thereby only the highest honor in the Synagogue;
considering how little, yea nothing of power the Jews enjoyed under either the
Heathen, or Christian Emperors.

One thing more we add, touching this honor of the Rulers of the Synagogue
among the Jews, that whatever honor, title, power or dignity is imported by
that name, it came not from any Law enforcing or commanding it, but from mutual
con^oederation and agreement among the persons employed in the Synagogue, whose
natural reason did dictate, that where many have an equality of power, it is
most convenient (by way of accumulation upon that person, of a power more then
he had, but not by deprivation of themselves of that inherent power which they
enjoyed) to entrust the management of the executive part of affairs of common
concernment to one person specially chosen and deputed thereunto. So it was in
all the Sanhedrins among the Jews, and in all well-ordered Senates and Councils
in the World. And it would be very strange, that any Officers of a religious
Society, should upon that account be Outlawed of those natural Liberties,
which are the results and products of the free actings of Reason. Which things,
as I have already observed, God has looked on to be so natural to man, as when
he was most strict and punctual in ceremonial Commands, he yet left these
things wholly at liberty. For we read not of any command, that in the Sanhedrin
one should have some peculiarity of honor above the rest; this men's natural
reason would prompt them to, by reason of a necessary priority of Order in some
above others; which the very instinct of Nature has taught irrational
creatures, much more should the Light of Reason direct men to. But yet all
order is not power, nor all power juridical, nor all juridical power a sole
power; therefore it is a mere Paralogism in any from Order to infer power, or
from a delegated power by consent, to infer a juridical power by Divine Right;
or lastly, from a power in common with others, to deduce a power excluding
others. All which they are guilty of, who merely from the name of an
Archisynagogue, would fetch a perpetual necessity of jurisdiction in one above
the Elders joined with him, or from the (...) in the Sanhedrin, a power of a
sole Ordination in one without the consent of his fellow Senators. But of these
afterward. Thus much may suffice for a draught in little of the Government of
the Jewish Synagogue.

Having thus far represented the Jewish Synagogue, that. 8.
the Idea of its government may be formed in our understandings, we now come to
consider how far, and in what the Apostles in forming Christian* Churches did
follow the pattern of the Jewish Synagogue. Which is a notion not yet so far
improved as I conceive it may be, and I know no one more conducible to the
happy end of composing our differences, touching the government of the Church
then this is. I shall therefore for the full clearing of it, premise some
general considerations to make way for the entertainment of this hypothesis in
men's minds, at least as probable; and then endeavor particularly to show how
the Apostles did observe the model of the Synagogue; in its public service, in
ordination of Church Officers, in forming Presbyteries in the several Churches,
in ruling and governing those Presbyteries* The general consideration I
premise, to show the probability of what I am asserting, shall be from these
things: from the community of name and customs between the believing Jews and
others, at the first forming of Churches: from the Apostles forming Churches
out of Synagogues in their traveling abroad; from the agreeableness of that
model of Government to the State of the Christian Churches at that time. I
begin with the first, From the community of names and customs between the
believing and unbelieving Jews at the first forming Churches. All the while our
blessed Savior was living in the World, Christ and his Disciples went still
under the name of Jews; they neither renounced the name, nor the customs in use
among them. Our Savior goes up to the Feasts at Jerusalem, conforms to all the
Rites and Customs in use then; not only those commanded by God himself, but
those taken up by the Jews themselves, if not contrary to Gods commands, as in
observing the feast of Dedication, in going into their Synagogues, and teaching
so often there, in washing the Feet of the Disciples, (a custom used by them
before the Passover) in using baptism, for the proselyting men to the
profession of Christianity, etc. In these and other things our Savior
conformed to the received practice among them, though the things themselves
were no ways commanded by the Law of Moses. And after his Resurrection, when
he took care for the forming of a Church upon the doctrine he had delivered,
yet we find not the Apostles withdrawing from communion with the Jews, but on
the contrary, we find the Disciples frequenting the Temple, Act. 2. 46. Act. 3.
1. Act. 5. 20, 21, 26. Whereby it appears how they owned themselves as Jews
still, observing the same both time and place for public Worship which were in
use among the Jews. We find Paul presently after his conversion in the
Synagogues, preaching Acts 9. 20.
that Christ whom he had before persecuted; and where ever he goes abroad
afterward, we find him still entering into the Synagogues to preach; where we
cannot conceive he should have so free and easy admission, unless the Jews
did look upon him as one of their own Religion, and observing the same customs
in the Synagogues with themselves, only Acts 13. 5, 14. 17. 10. 18. 4. 19. 8.
differing in the point of the coming of the Messiah, and the obligation of the
ceremonial Law, the least footsteps of which were seen in the
Synagogue-worship. But that which yet further clears this, is the general
prejudice of the Disciples against the Gentiles, even after the giving of the
Holy Ghost, as appears by their contending with Peter for going in to men Acts
11. 3.
uncircumcised. It is evident, that then the Apostles themselves did not
clearly apprehend the extent of their Commission; for else what made Peter so
shy of going to Corn^lius? but by every creature, and all nations, they only
apprehended the Jews in their dispersions abroad, or at least, that all others
who were to be Act. 10. 28.
saved, must be by being proselyted to the Jews, and observing the Law of
Moses, together with the Gospel of Christ. And therefore we see the necessity
of circumcision much pressed by the believing Jews which came down from
Jerusalem, which raised so high a Dispute, that a Convention of the Apostles
Acts 15. 1.
together at Jerusalem was called for the ending of it; And even there we find
great heats before the business could be decided, (...), After there had been
much 15. 7.
disputing. Nay after this Council, and the determination of the Apostles
therein, all the ease and release that was granted, was only to the
Gentile-converts; but the Jews stick close to their old Principles still, and
are as zealous of the customs of the Jews as ever before. For which we have a
pregnant testimony in Act. 21. 20, 21, 22. Where the Elders of the Church of
Jerusalem tell Paul there were many myriads (...) of believing Jews, who were
(...), all very zealous for the Law still, and therefore had conceived a
sinister opinion of Paul, as one that taught a defection from the Law of Moses,
saying, they might not circumcise their Children, nor walk after the customs.
One copy reads it as Beza tells us, (...), to follow the custom of their
Fathers. We see how equally zealous they are for the customs obtaining among
them, as for the Law its self. And is it then any ways probable that these who
continued such Zealots for the customs among them, should not observe those
customs in use in the Synagogues for the Government of the Church? Might not
they have been charged as well as Paul with relinquishing the customs, if they
had thrown off the model of the Jewish Synagogue, and take up some customs
different from that? And that which further confirms this, is, that this Church
of Jerusalem continued still in its zeal for the Law, till after the
destruction of the Temple; and all the Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c. 6. and Chronic.
Hist. sacr. l. 2. p 381. ed. Horn.
several Pastors of that Church (whom Ecclesiastical Writers call Bishops) were
of the circumcision. For both we have the testimony of Sulpitius Severus,
speaking of the time of Adrian. Et quia Christiani ex Iudaeis potissimum
putabantur ( namque tum Hierosolymae, non nisi ex circumcisione habebat
Ecclesia sacerdotem) militum cohortem custodias in perpetuum agitare jussit,
quae Iudaeos omnes Hierosolymae aditu arceret. Quod quidem Christiana fidei
proficiebat; quia tum pene omnes Christum Deum, sub legis observatione,
credebant. We see hereby that the Christians observed still the Law with the
Gospel; and that the Jews and Christians were both reckoned as one body, which
must imply an observation of the same Rites and Customs among them: For those
are the things whereby Societies are distinguished most. Now it is evident,
that the Romans made no distinction at first between the Jews and Christians.
Thence we read in the time of Claudius, when the Edict came out against the
Jews, Aquila and Acts 18. 2,
Priscilla, though converted to Christianity, were forced to leave Italy upon
that account, being still looked on as Jews; yet these are called by Paul, his
helpers in Christ Jesus. For Romans 16. 3.
which Onuphrius gives this reason, Nullum adhuc inter Iudaeos and Christianos
discrimen noscebatur, which account is likewise Annot. in vit. Petri. ap.
Platin. in vit. Petri.
given by Alphonsus Ciaconius; Congeneres and comprofessores ejusdem religionis
gentilibus censebantur (Christiani pariter ac Iudaei). The Edict of Claudius we
may read still in Suetonius, Iudaeos impulsore Christo assidue tumultuantes
Roma expulit. In Claud. cap. 25.
We find here the Edict fully expressed for banishing the Jews, and the
occasion set down; which most interpret of the Doctrine of Christ, as the
occasion of the stirs between the Jews and Christians. For the Romans called
Christ Chrestus, Lactant. l. 4. c. 7. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 3. V. Pet. Pithaeum
Hor. subseciv. l. 2. c. 3. Donatus Dilucid. in Sueton. in Claud. c. 25.
and Christians, Chrestiani, as the authors of the Christians Apologies against
the Heathens often tell us. But Marcellus Donatus conjectures this Christus to
have been some seditious Jew called by that name; for which he brings many
Inscriptions wherein the name occurrs, but none wherein it is given to a Jew;
which should be first produced, before we leave the received interpretation of
it. However that be, we see the Jews and Christians equally undergo the
punishment without any difference observed in them; and therefore when Paul was
brought before Gallio the Proconsul of Achaia, he looked upon the difference
between the Jews and Paul to be only a Question of words and names, and of
their Law, and thereupon Act. 18. 15. Apud. Orig. lib. 3. cont. Cells.
refused to meddle with it. And so Celsus upbraids both Jews and Christians, as
though their contentions were about a matter of nothing. By all this we may now
consider, how little the Christians did vary from the customs and practice of
the Jews, when they were thought by those who were equally enemies to both, to
be of the same body and community. Which consideration will make the thing I
aim at, seem more probable, when withal we observe that the Jewish customs in
their Synagogues, were those whereby they were most known among the Romans; and
therefore when they looked on the Christians as of the same Religion with the
Jews, it is evident they observed no difference as to their public practices
in their religious Societies. Which is the first consideration, to show how
probable it is that Christians observed the same form in Government with what
they found in the Synagogues.

To which I add a second Consideration; which is the. 9.
Apostles forming Christian Churches out of Jewish Synagogues. We have already
showed how much their resort was to them in their preaching from the constant
practice of Paul, although he was in a more peculiar manner the Apostle of the
uncircumcision; much more then is it probable that the others, especially
Peter, James, and John did resort to the Circumcision. And in the settling
things at first, we see how fearful the Apostles were of giving offense to the
Jews, how ready to condescend to them in any thing they lawfully might. And can
we think that Paul would yield so far to the Jews as to circumcise Timothy,
rather then give offense to the Jews in Acts 16 3.
those parts where he was, (and that in a thing which seemed most immediately
to thwart the design of the Gospel, as circumcision Gal. 5. 2.
did, witness the Apostle himself;) that yet he would scruple the retaining the
old model of the Synagogue, when there was nothing in it at all repugnant to
the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the nature and constitution of Christian
Churches? When the Apostles then, did not only gather Churches out of
Synagogues, but at some places in probability whole Synagogues were converted
as well as whole Churches formed, What show of reason can be given why the
Apostles should flight the constitution of the Jewish Synagogues, which had no
dependence on the Jewish Hierarchy, and subsisted not by any command of the
ceremonial Law? The work of the Synagogue not belonging to the Priest as such,
but as persons qualified for instructing others, and the first model of the
Synagogue government is with a great deal of probability derived from the
Schools of the Prophets and the Government thereof. This consideration would be
further improved, if the notion of distinct coetus of the Jewish and Gentile
Christians in the same places could be made out by any irrefragable Testimony
of Antiquity, or clear evidence of reason drawn from Scripture: Because the
same reason which would ground the distinction of the Jewish Church from the
Gentile, would likewise hold for the Jewish Church to retain her old form of
Government in the Synagogue way. For it must be some kind of peculiarity
supposed by the Jews in themselves as distinct from the Gentiles, which did
make them form a distinct Congregation from them; which peculiarity did imply
the observing those customs among them still, by which that peculiarity was
known to others; among which those of the Synagogue were not the least known or
taken notice of. But I must freely confess, I find not any thing brought by
that learned Person, who has managed this Hypothesis with the greatest
dexterity, to have Dr. Ham. of Schism chapter 4. sect. 6, 7, etc.
that evidence in it which will command assent from an unprejudicated mind. And
it is pity that such infirm Hypotheses should be made use of for the
justifying our separation from Rome, which was built upon reasons of greater
strength and evidence, then those which have been of late pleaded by some
assertors of the Protestant Cause, though men of excellent abilities and
learning. For there are many reasons convictive enough, that Peter had no
universal power over the Church, supposing that there was no such thing as a
distinction between the Jewish and Gentile Coetus. I deny not but at first,
before the Jews were fully satisfied of the Gentiles right to Gospel
privileges, they were very shy of communicating with them, especially the
believing Jews of the Church of Jerusalem,: Upon the occasion of some of whom
coming down to Antioch from James, it was, that Peter withdrew and separated
himself from the Gentiles, with whom before Gal. 2. 12.
he familiarly conversed. Which action of his is so far from being an argument
of the settling any distinct Church Schism sect. 8.
of the Jews from the Gentiles there, that it yields many reasons against it.
For first, Peter's withdrawing was only occasional, and not out of design;
whereas, had it been part of his commission to do it, we cannot conceive Peter
so mindlesse of his Office, as to let it alone till some Jews came down from
Jerusalem to tell him of it. Secondly, It was not for the sake of the Jews at
Antioch that he withdrew, but for the Jews which came down from Jerusalem;
whereas, had he intended a distinct Church of the Jews, he would before have
settled and fixed them as members of another body; but now it evidently appears,
that not only Peter himself, but the Jews with him, did before those Jews
coming to Antioch associate with the Gentiles, which is evident by v. 13. And
other Jews dissembled likewise with him, in so much that Barnabas also was
carried away with their dissimulation. Whereby it is clear, that these Jews did
before join with the Gentile-Christians, or else they could not be said to be
led away with the dissimulation of Peter. Thirdly, St. Paul is so far from
looking upon this withdrawing of Peter, and the Jews from the Gentiles society
to be a part of St. Peter's Office, that he openly and sharply reproves him for
it. What then, was Paul so ignorant, that there must be two distinct Churches
of Jews and Gentiles there, that he calls this action of his dissimulation? In
all reason then, supposing this Notion to be true, the blame lights on Paul,
and not on Peter: as not understanding, that the Jews were to be formed into
distinct bodies from the Gentile-Christians. And therefore it is observable
that the same Author who is produced, as asserting, Answ. to S^his. Dis. ch 2.
s. 5. Hieronym. in Gal. 1. 22.
that seorsim quae ex Iudais erant Ecclesiae habebantur, nec his quae ^rant ex
Gentibus miscebantur, is he, who makes this reproo^ of Peter by Paul, to be a
mere matter of dissimulation between them both; which sense of that action
whoever will be so favorable to it as to embrace it, (as some seem inclinable
to do it) will never be able to answer the arguments brought by St. Augustine
Reply to Cath. Gent. ch 4. s. 6. n. 6. Aug. ep. 8. 9, 19. Hier.
against it. This place then was unhappily light upon to ground a distinction
of the several Coeius, or distinct Churches of Jews and Christians at Antioch.
But, it may be, more evidence for it may be seen in the Rescript of the Council
of Jerusalem, which is directed (...), To the Brethren of Antioch, those of the
Gentiles. Act. 15. 23. Schism. p. 75.
But. lest some hidden mysteries should lie in this curtailing the words, let
us see them at large. Unto the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch,
and Syria, and Cilicia. There was nothing then peculiar to those of the
Gentiles at Antioch more then in Syria and Cilicia; and if those words (...)
imply a Coetus distinct of Gentile-Christians, from the Jews at Antioch, it
must do so through all Syria, and Cilicia, Act. 15. 41. 18. 18. 21. 3.
which was Paul's Province, and not Peter's, as appears by his travels in the
Acts. E^the^ then the Apostle of the uncircumcision must form distinct:
Churches of Jews and Gentiles in his preaching through Syria and Silicia*
(which is irreconcilable with the former pretense of distinct Provinces,
asserted by the same Author, who pleads for distinct Coetus) or the (...), can
imply no such thing as a distinct Church of Gentiles to whomsover it is spoken;
and so not at Antioch more then through all Syria and Silicia. The plain ground
then of the Apostles inscribing the order of the Council to the Brethren of the
Gentiles, was, because the matter of that Order did particularly concern them,
and not the Jews, as is obvious to any that will but cast an eye upon the 23,
24, 29. verses of the 15. of the Acts. As well might then an order supposed
from the Apostles to the several Pastors of the Churches in things concerning
them as such, imply that they make distinct Churches from their people, as this
order concerning the Gentile Brethren, being therefore directed to them, does
imply their making distinct Churches from the Jewish Brethren in the Cities
where they lived together. What is further produced out of Antiquity to this
purpose, has neither evidence nor pertinency enough, to stop the passage of
one who is returning from this digression to his former matter. Although then
we grant not any such distinct Coetus of the Jews from the Christians, yet that
hinders not, but that both Jews and Christians joining together in one Church,
might retain still the Synagogue form of Government among them; which there was
no reason at all, why the Christians should scruple the using of, either as
Jews or Gentiles, because it imported nothing either Typical and Ceremonial, or
heavy and burdensome, which were the grounds, why former customs in use among
the Jews were laid aside by the Christians. But instead of that, it was most
suitable and agreeable to the state of the Churches in Apostolical times, which
was the third consideration to make it probable, that the Synagogue form of
Government was used by the Christians. And the suitableness of this Government
to the Churches, lay in the convenience of it for the attaining all ends of
Government in that condition wherein the Churches were at that time. For Church
Officers acting then either in gathering or governing Churches* without any
authority from Magistrates, such a way of Government was most suitable to their
several Churches, as whereby the Churches might be governed, and yet have no
dependancy upon the secular power, which the way of Government in the
Synagogues was most convenient for; for the Jews, though they enjoyed a bare
permission from the civil state where they lived, yet by the exercise of their
Synagogue Government* they were able to order all affairs belonging to the
service of God, and to keep all members belonging to their several Synagogues
in unity and peace among themselves. The case was the same as to Synagogues and
Churches; these subsisted by the same permission which the others enjoyed; the
end of these was the service of God, and preserving that order among them which
might best become societies so constituted; there can be no reason then
assigned, why the Apostles in settling particular Churches should not follow the
Synagogue in its model of Government. These things may suffice to make it
appear probable that they did so, which is all these considerations tend to.

Having thus prepared the way by making it probable, I. 10.
now further enquire into the particular part of Government, and what orders in
the Synagogue were, which there is any evidence for, that the Apostles did take
up and follow. Here I begin with the thing first propounded, The orders of
public Worship, which did much resemble those of the Synagogue; Only with
those alterations which did arise from the advancing of Christianity. That the
Christians had their public and set*meetings for the service of God, is
evident from the first rising of a society constituted upon the account of
Christianity. We read of the three thousand converted by Peter's Sermon, That
they continued in the Apostles doctrine and Acts 2. 42.
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers. Where we have all that was
observed in the Synagogue, and somewhat more; here there is public joining
together, employed in the word (...), their solemn prayers expressed, which were
constantly observed in the Synagogue; instead of reading the Sections of the
Law and Prophets, we have the Apostles teaching by immediate inspiration; and
to all these as the proper service of Christianity, is set down the celebration
of the Lord's Supper, which we shall seldom or ever in the Primitive Church,
read the public service on Lords Days performed without. During the
Apostolical times, in which there was such a Landflood of extraordinary gifts
overflowing the Church, in the public meeting we find those persons who were
endued with those gifts, to be much in exercising them (as to the custom,
agreeing with the Synagogue; but, as to the gifts, exceeding it) concerning the
ordering of which for the public edification of the Church, the Apostle Paul
lays down so many Rules in the fourteenth Chapter to the Corinthians; but
as soon as this flood began to abate, which was then necessary for the quicker
softening the World for receiving Christianity, the public service began to
run in its former channel, as is apparent from the unquestionable testimonies
of Justin Martyr and Tertullian, who most fully relate to us, the order of
public Worship used among the Christians at that time. Justin Martyr, the most
ancient next to Clemens (whose Epistle is lately recovered to the Christian
World) of the unquestionable Writers of the Primitive Church, gives us a clear
Narration of the public Orders observed by the Church in his time: (...) Just.
Mart. Apol. 2 p. 98. ed. Par.
. Upon the Day called Sunday, all the Christians whether in Town or Country
assemble in the same place, wherein the Memoires or Commentaries of the
Apostles and the writings of the Prophets are read as long as the time will
permit; Then the Reader sitting down, the President of the Assembly stands up
and makes a Sermon of Instruction and Exhortation to the following so good
Examples. After this is ended, we all stand up to prayers; prayers ended, the
Bread, Wine and Water are all brought forth; then the President again praying
and praising to his utmost ability, the people testify their consent by saying
Amen.

What could have been spoken with greater congruity or correspondency to the
Synagogue, abating the necessary observation of the Bucharist as proper to
Christianity?

Here we have the Scriptures read by one appointed for that purpose, as it was
in the Synagogue; after which follows the word of Exhortation in use among them
by the President of the Assembly, answering to the Ruler of the Synagogue;
after this, the public prayers performed by the same President, as among the
Jews by the public Minister of the Synagogue (as is already observed out of
Maimoni), then the solemn acclamation of Amen by the people, the undoubted
practice of the Synagogue. To the same purpose Tertullian, who, if he had been
to set forth the practice of the Synagogue, could scarce have made choice of
words more accommodated to that purpose. Coimus (says he) in coetum and
congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus or antes --
Cogimur ad divinarum literarum Commemorationem, si quid praesentium temporum
qualitas aut praemonere cogit aut recognoscere. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus
pascimus, spem erigimus, fi^uciam figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus
inculcationibus densamus; ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and
censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut Apologe^. cap. 3^.
apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque futuri judicii prae judicium est,
siquis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione orationis and conventus and omnis
sancti commercii relegetur. Prasident probati quique seniores, honorem istum
non pretio sed testimonio adepti. Where we have the same orders for Prayers,
reading the Scriptures according to occasions, and Sermons made out of them for
increase of faith, raising hope, strengthening confidence. We have the
Discipline of the Church answering the admonitions, and excommunication of the
Synagogue; and last of all, we have the Bench of Elders sitting in these
Assemblies, and ordering the things belonging to them.

Thus much for the general correspondency between the public service of the
Church and Synagogue; they that would see more particulars, may read our
Learned Mr. Thorndikes Discourse of the service of God in Religious Assemblies.
Whose design throughout is to make this out more at large; But we must only
touch at these things by the way; as it were, look into the Synagogue, and go
on our way.

We therefore proceed from their service, to their custom of. 11.
Ordination, which was evidently taken up by the Christians from a
correspondency to the Synagogue. For which we are first to take notice, that
the Rulers of the Church under the Gospel, do not properly succeed the Priests
and Levites under the Law, who^e Office was Ceremonial, and who were not
admitted by any solemn Ordination into their Function, but succeeded by birth
into their places; only the great Sanhedrin did judge of their fitness, as to
birth and body, before their entrance upon their Function. So the Jewish
Doctors tell us (...) Cod. Middoth. c. 5. s. 3.
i. e. In the stone Parlour, the great Sanhedrin of Israel sat, and did there
judge the Priests. The Priest that was found defective, put on mourning
garments, and so went forth* he that was not, put on white, and went in and
ministered with the Priests his Brethren. And when no fault was found in the
sons of Aaron, they observed a festival solemnity for it. Three things are
observable in this Testimony: First, That the inquiry that was made concerning
V. Seldom. de succes. ad Pontif. Ebre. l. 2. c. 2, 3, 5, and 6.
the Priests, was chiefly concerning the purity of their birth, and the freedom
of their bodies from those defects which the Law mentions, unless in the case
of grosser and more scandalous sins, as Idolatry, Murder, etc. by which they
were excluded from the Priestly Office. The second, is, That the great
Sanhedrin had this inspection over, and examination of the Priests before their
admission; For what that Learned man Constable. L'Empereur there conjectures, That
there was an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin which did pass judgment Not in Cod.
Middoth. p. 187, 188.
on these things, is overthrown by the very words of the Talmudists already
cited. The last thing observable, is, The garments which the Priests put on,
viz. white raiment upon his approbation by the Sanhedrin, and soon after they
were admitted into the Temple with great joy; to which our savior manifestly
alludes, Revel. 3. 4. 5. Thou have a few names even in Sardis which have not
defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white Raiment. But
the Priests under the Law, were never ordained by imposition of hands, as the
Elders and Rulers of the Synagogue were; and if any of them came to that
Office, they as well as others had peculiar designation and appointment to it.
It is then a common mistake to think that the Ministers of the Gospel succeed
by way of correspondence and Analogy to the Priests under the Law; which
mistake has been the foundation and original of many Errors. For when in the
Primitive Church, the name of Priests came to be attributed to Gospel Ministers
from a fair Compliance (as was thought then) of the Christians only to the
name used both among Jews and Gentiles; in process of time, corruptions
increasing in the Church, those names that were used by the Christians by way
of Analogy and Accommodation, brought in the things themselves primarily
intended by those names; so by the Metaphorical names of Priests and Altars, at
last came up the sacrifice of the Mass; without which, they thought the names
of Priests and Altar were insignificant. This mistake we see run all along
through the Writers of the Church, as soon as the name Priests was applied to
the Elders of the Church, that they derived their succession from the Priests
of Aarons Isid Hisp. de Ecclesia offic. l. 2. c. 7 Ive Carnot. decret. p. 6. c.
11. Ep. 85.
order, Presbyterorum ordo exordium sumpsit a filiis Aaron. Qui enim sacerdotes
vocabantur in v^teri Testamento, hi sunt qui nunc appestantur Presbyteri: and
qui nuncupabantur principes sacerdotum, nuno Episcopi nominantur; as Isidorus;
and Ivo tell us. So before them both, Jerome in his known Epistle to Evagrius.
Et ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron
and filii ejus atque Levitae Dissert. 2. cap. 28.
in Temple fuerunt: hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri atque Diaconi vendicent in
Ecclesia. From which words a leo^ned Doctor, and strenuous assertor of the jus
divinum of Prelacy, questions not but to make Jerome, either apparently
contradictious to himself, or else to assert, that the superiority of Bishops
above Presbyters was by his Confession an Apostolical Tradition. For says he,
Nihil manifestius dici potuit; and S. 2. Quid ad hoc responderi possit, aut quo
(...) artificio deliniri aut deludi tam diserta affirmatio, fateor ego ^e
divinando assequi non posse; sed e contra exiis quae D. Blondellus, quae Walo,
quae Ludov. Capellus h^c in re praestiterunt, mihi persuasissimum esse, Nihil
uspiam contra aperta^ lucem obtendi posse. In a case then so desperate as poor
Jerome lies in, by a wound he is supposed to have given himself, when the
priest and the Levite has passed him by, it will be a piece of Charity in our
passing by the way a little to consider his Case, to see whether there be any
hopes of recovery. We take it then for granted, that Jerome has already said,
that Apostolus perspi^ue docet, eosdem esse Presbytsros quos and Episcopos, in
the same Epistle which he proves there at large; and in another place; Si^^t
ergo Presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae consuetudine, ei qui sibi praeposi^us
fuerit, esse subjectos; it a Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine, quam
disposition is Dominicae Comment. in 1. Tit.
veritate Presbyteris esse majores, and in commune debere Ecclesiam regere. The
difficulty now lies in the reconciling this with what is before c^ted out of
the same Author; Some solve it by saying, that, in Ieroms sense Apostolical
Tradition and Ecclesiaestical Custom are the same, as ad Marcellum, he says
the observation of Lent is Apostolica traditio, and advers. Luciferian, shith,
it is Ecclesiae consu^tudo; so that by Apostolical Tradition, he meant not an
Apostolical Institution, but an Ecclesiastical Custom. And if Jerome speak
according to the general Vogue, this Solution may be sufficient notwithstanding
what is said against it: for, according to that common rule of Austin, Things
that were generally in use, and no certain Author assigned of them, were
attributed to the Apostles. Two things therefore I shall lay down for
reconciling Jerome to himself: The first is, the difference between Traditio
Apostolica, and Traditio Apostolorum; this latter does indeed imply the thing
spoken of to have proceeded from the Apostles themselves; but the former may be
applied to what was in practice after the Apostles times; and the reason of it
is* that what ever was done in the Primitive Church, supposed to be agreeable
to Apostolical practice, was called Apostolical. Thence the Bishops See was
called Seeds De praescrip. adv. h^ret. c. 32. Epist. lib. 6. Ep. 1.
Apostolic^, as Tertullian tells us, ob consang^i^itatem doctrinae. So Sidonius
Apollinaris calls the Sea of L^p^s the Bishop of Tricassium in France, Sedem
Apostolicam. And the Bishops of the Church were called Viri Apostolici, and
thence the Constitutions which go under the Apostles names, were so called,
says* Albaspinaeus, ab antiquitate: ^nam cum little Observat. lib. 1 c. 13.
aliquot ab Apostolorum successoribus (qui test Tertullian^* Apostolici viri
^omi^ahantur.) facti essent, Apostolicorum primu^^ Canones, deinde nonnullorum
Latinorum ignorantia, aliquot literarum detractione, Apostolorum dicti sunt. By
which we see what ever was conceived to be of any great antiquity in the
Church, though it was not thought to have come from the Apostles themselves,
yet it was called Apostolioal* so that in this sense, Traditio Apostolica, is
no more then Traditio autiqua, or ab Apostolicis viris profecta, which was
meant rather of those that were conceived to succeed the Apostles, then of the
Apostles themselves. But I answer, Secondly, that granting Traditio Apostolica
to mean Traditio Apostolorum, yet Jerome is far from contradicting himself,
which is obvious to any that will read the words before, and consider their
coherence. The scope and drift of his Epistle, is to chastise the arrogance of
one who made Deacons superior to Presbyters. Audio quendam in tantam erupisse
vecordiam ut Diaconos Presbyteris, id est, Episcopis anteferret, and so spends
a great part of the Epistle, to prove that a Bishop and Presbyter are the same;
and at last brings in these words; giving the account, Why Paul to Timothy and
Titus mentions no Presbyters; Quia in Episcopo and Presbyter continetur. Aut
igitur ex Presbytero ordinetur Diaconus, ut Presbyter minor Diacono
comprobetur, in quem crescat ex parv^; aut si ex Diacono ordinatur Presbyter,
noverit se lucris minorem, Sacerdo^i^ esse majorem. And then presently adds, Et
ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron and
Filii ejus atq* Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri
atque Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. It it imaginable that a man who had been
proving all along the superiority of a Presbyter above a Deacon, because of his
Identity with a Bishop in the Aposties times, should at the same time say, that
a Bishop was above a Presbyter by the Apostles institution, and so directly
overthrow all he had been saying before? Much as if one should go about to
prove that the Pr^fectus urbis, and the Curatores urbis in Alexander Severus
his time^* were the same Office, and to that end should make use of the
Constitution of that Emperor whereby he appointed 14. Curatores urbis, and set
the Praefectus in an Office above them. Such an incongruity is scarce incident
to a man of very ordinary esteem for intellectuals, much less to such a one as
Jerome is reputed to be. The plain meaning then of Jerome is no more but this,
that as Aaron and his sons in the order of Priesthood were above the Levites
under the Law: So the Bishops and Presbyters in the order of the Evangelical
Priesthood are above the Deacons under the Gospel. For the comparison runs not
between Aaron and his sons under the Law, and Bishops and Presbyters under the
Gospel; but between Aaron and his sons as one part of the comparison under
the Law, and the Levites under them as the other; so under the Gospel, Bishops
and Presbyters make one part of the comparison, answering to Aaron and his
Sons in that wherein they all agree; viz. The Order of Priest hood; and the
other part under the Gospel is that of Deacons answering to the Levites under
the Law. The Opposition is not then in the power of jurisdiction between
Bishops and Priests, but between the same power of Order, which is alike both
in Bishops and Presbyters (according to the acknowledgement of all) to the
Office of Deacons which stood in Competition with them. Thus I hope we have
left Jerome at perfect Harmony with himself, notwithstanding the attempt made
to make him so palpably contradict himself; which having thus done, we are at
liberty to proceed in our former course; only hereby we see how unhappily
those arguments succeed which are brought from the Analogy between the
Aaronical Priest hood, to endeavor the setting up of a Ius Divinum of a
parallel superiority under the Gospel. All which arguments are taken off by
this one thing we are now upon, viz. that the orders and degrees under the
Gospel, were not taken up from Analogy to the Temple, but to the Synagogue:
Which we now make out as to Ordination, in three things; the manner of
conferring it, the persons authorized to do it, the remaining effect of it upon
the person receiving it.

First* For the manner of conferring it; that under the. 12.
Synagogue was done by laying on of hands: Which was taken up among the Jews
as a significative rite in the ordaining the Elders among them, and thereby
qualifying them either to be members of their Sanhedrins, or Teachers of the
Law. A^ twofold use I find of this Symbolical Rite, beside the solemn
designation of the person on whom the hands are laid. The first is to denote
the delivery of the person or thing thus laid hands upon, for the right, use,
and peculiar service of God, And that I suppose was the reason of laying Levit.
16. 21.
hands upon the Beast under the Law, which was to be sacrificed, thereby noting
their own parting with any right in it, and giving it up to be the Lords for a
sacrifice to him. Thus in the Civil Law this delivery is requisite in the
transferring Dominion, which they call translatio de manu in manum. The second
end of laying on of hands was the solemn Iuvocation of the Divine presence and
assistance to be upon, and with the person upon whom the hands are thus laid.
For the hands with us being the instruments of action, they did by stretching
out their hands upon the person, represent the efficacy of Divine Power which
they implored in behalf of the Ep ad Gallos* ep. 154. and. 166. Ioh. Cord. and
V. in Mat. 9. 19:
person thus designed. Tunc enim ^rabant ut sic Dei efficacia esset super
illum, sicut manus efficaciae symbolum, ei imponebatur as Grotius observes.
Thence in all solemn Prayers, wherein any person was particularly designed,
they made use of this Custom of imposition of Hands: from which Custom,
Augustine speaks, Quid aliud est manuum impositio nisi oration Genesis 48. 14*
super hominem? Thence when Jacob prayed over Joseph's Children, he laid his
hands upon them; so when Moses Numb. 27. 23.
prayed over Joshua. The practice likewise our Savior used in blessing
Children, healing the Sick, and the Apostles in conferring the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost; and from thence it was conveyed into the practice of the Primitive
Church* who used it in any more solemn invocation of the name of God in behalf
of any particular persons, As over the sick upon Repentance and Reconciliation
to the Church, in Confirmation, and in Matrimony; which (as Grotius observes)
is to this day used in the Abissine Churches. But the most solemn and peculiar
use of this Imposition of hands among the Jews was in the designing of any
Persons for any public employment among them: Not as though the bare
Imposition of hands, did confer any power upon the Person, (no more then the
bare delivery of a thing in Law gives a legal Title to it, without express
transferring Dominion with it) but with that Ceremony they joined those words
whereby they did confer that Authority upon them: Which were to this purpose
(...) Ecce sis tu Ordinatus, or (...) ego ordino te, or (...) sis ordinatus, to
which they added according to the authority they ordained them to, some thing
peculiarly expressing it, whether it was for causes finable, or pecuniary, or
binding and loosing, or ruling in the Synagogue. Which is a thing deserving
consideration by those who use the rite of imposing hands in Ordination,
without any thing expressing that authority they convey by that Ordination.
This custom being so generally in use among the Jews in the time when the
Apostles were sent forth with Authority for gathering and settling Churches, we
find them accordingly making use of this, according to the former practice,
either in any more solemn invocation of the presence of God upon any persons,
or designation and appointing them for any peculiar service or function: For we
have no ground to think that the Apostles had any peculiar command for laying
on their hands upon persons in Prayer over them, or Ordination of them: But the
thing its self being enjoined them, viz. the setting apart some persons for the
peculiar work of attendance upon the necessities of the Churches by them
planted, they took up and made use of a laudable Rite and Custom then in use
upon such occasions. And so we find the Apostles using it in the solemn
designation of some persons to the Office of Deacons, answering to the (...) in
the Synagogue, whose Acts 6. 6.
Office was to collect the moneys for the poor, and to distribute it among
them. Afterward we read it used upon an occasion not heard of in the
Synagogue, which was for the conferring the gifts of the Holy Ghost; but
although the occasion was Acts ^: 17.
extraordinary, yet supposing the occasion, the use of that rite in it, was
very suitable, in as much as those gifts did so much answer to the (...) and
the (...) which the Jews conceived did rest upon those who were so ordained by
imposition of hands. The next time we meet with this rite, was upon a peculiar
Designation to a particular service of persons already Acts 13. 3.
appointed by God for the work of the Ministry, which is of Paul and Barnabas
by the Prophets and Teachers at Antioch* whereby God does set forth the use of
that Rite of Ordination to the Christian Churches* Accordingly we find it after
practiced in the Church* Timothy being ordained by the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery. And Timothy has direction given him for the right
management of it afterward, (...) 14.
Lay hands suddenly on no man. For they that would interpret that of
reconciling men to the Church by that Rite, must (...) 5* ^^*
first give us Evidence of so early an use of that Custom, which does not yet
appear. But there is one place commonly brought to prove that the Apostles in
Ordaining Elders in the Christian Churches, did not observe the Jewish Form of
laying on of hands, but observed a way quite different from the Jewish
practice, viz. appointing them by the choice consent and suffrages of the
people. Which place is Acts 14* 23. where it is said of Paul and Barnabas
(...): We render it Ordaining them Elders in every Church. But others from the
signification of the word (...) would have it rendered* When they had appointed
Elders by the suffrages of the people. But how little the peoples power of
Ordination can be inferred from these words, will be evident to any one that
shall but consider these things. First, that though (...) did originally
signify the choosing by way of suffrage among the Greeks, yet before the time
of Lukes writing this, the word was used for simple designation without that
Ceremony. So Hesychius interprets it by (...), the word used Titus 1. 5. V.
Demost. Phil. 1. and advers. Simon. and Ulpian in Schol.
of Titus for ordaining Elders in every City; and in Demosthenes and others it
occurs for (...), and (...), to decree and appoint; and that sense of the word
appears in Saint Luke himself, Acts 10. 41. (...), Witnesses foreappointed of
God. Many examples of this signification are brought by Learned men of Writers,
before, and about the time when Luke Writ, from Philo Iudaeus, Josephus,
Appian, Lucian and others. But Secondly* V. Seldom. de Syned. l. 1. cap. 14*
Grot. de Imp. Sum. Potest. c. 10. s. 5.
granting it used in the primary signification of the word, yet it cannot be
applied to the people, but to Paul and Barnabas; for it is not said that the
people did (...), but that Paul and Barnabas did (...): now where ever that
word is used in its first signification, it is employed to be the action of the
persons themselves giving suffrages, and not for other persons appointing by
the suffrages of others. Thirdly, (...) may import no more then (...), in that
laying on of the hands must suppose the stretching them out: Which is only a
common figure in Scripture for the Antecedent to be put for the Consequent, or
one part for the whole action; and concerning this sense of the word in
Ecclesiastical Writers, see the large quotations in Bishop Bilson to this
purpose. Fourthly, It seems strangely improbable that Perpet. Govern. of
Christ's Church. c. 7.
the Apostles should put the choice at that time into the hands of the people,
when there were none fitted for the work the Apostles designed them for; but
whom the Apostles did lay their hands on, by which the Holy Ghost sell upon
them, whereby they were fitted and qualified for that work. The people then
could no ways choose men for their abilities when their abilities were
consequen^ to their ordination. So much to clear the manner of Ordination to
have been from the Synagogue.

The second thing we consider, is, The persons authorized to do it: whom we
consider under a double respect, before their liberties were bound up by
compact among themselves; and after. First, Before they had restrained
themselves of their own Tract. San. cap. 4. s. 5. Ad tit. Sanhed c. 1. De
Syned. l. 2. c. 7. s. ^.
liberty, then the general rule for Ordinations among them was (...) every one
regularly ordained, himself had the power of Ordaining his Disciples, as
Maimonides affirms. To the same purpose is that Testimony of the Gemara
Babylonia in Master Seldom (...) Rabbi Abba Bar Jonah said, that in times of
old, every one was wont to ordain his own Disciples: to which purpose many
instances are there brought. But it is generally agreed among them, that in the
time of Hillel this course was altered, and they were restrained from their
former liberty; in probability finding the many inconveniences of so common
Ordinations; or, as they say, out of their great reverence to the house of
Hillel, they then agreed that none should ordain others without the presence of
the (...) the Prince of the Sanhedrin, or a license obtained from him for that
end; and it was determined that all Ordinations without the consent of the
Prince of the Sanhedrin should be looked upon as null and void; which is
attested by the former Authors. The same distinct on may be observed under the
Gospel in reference to the fixed Officers of the Church; for we may consider
them in their first state and period, as the Presbyters did rule the Churches
in common, as Hierom tells us, communi Presbyterorum conci^io Ecclesi^ Hierony
n. in 1. Tit.
gubernabantur: before the jurisdiction of Presbyters was restrained by mutual
consent, in this instant doubtless, the Presbyters enjoyed the same liberty
that the Presbyters among the Jews did, of ordaining other Presbyters by that
power they were invested in at their own ordination. To which purpose we shall
only at present take notice of the Confession of two Canonists, who are the
h^ghest among the Papists, for defense of a distinct order of Episcopacy. Yet
Gratian himself confesses, Sacros ordines dicimus Diaconatum Did. 60. c.
Mull. ex urb. Pay.
and Presbyteratum; hos quidem solos Ecclesia primitiva habuisse dicitur. And
Johannes Semeca in his Gloss upon the Canon Law; Dicunt quidem quod in Ecclesia
prima-primitiva commune erat officium Episcoporum and Sacerdotum, and nomina
erant communia. -- Sed in secunda primitiva coeperunt Did. 95. Gloss.
distingui and nomina and officia. Here we have a distinction of the Primitive
Church very agreeable both to the opinion of Hierom, and the matter we are now
upon; in the first Primitive Church, the Presbyters all acted in common for the
welfare of the Church, and either did or might ordain others to the same
authority with themselves; because the intrinsecal power of order is equally in
them, and in those who were after appointed Governors over Presbyteries. And
the collation of orders does come from the power of order, and not mee^ly from
the power of jurisdiction. It being V. Francis Masons defense of Ordination of
Presbyters.
likewise fully acknowledged by the Schoolmen, that Bishops are not superior
above Presbyters, as to the power of order. But the clearest evidence of this,
is in the Church of Alexandria, of which Hierom speaks; Nam and Alexandria a
Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper
unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu coll^catum, Episcopum nominabant;
quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem Ep. 85. ad Evagrium.
faciat, aut Diaconi eligant de se quem industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum
vocent. That learned Doctor who would persuade us that the Presbyters did only
make choice of the person, but the ordination was performed by other Bishops,
would do well first to tell us, who and where those Bishops in Egypt were, who
did consecrate or ordain the Bishop of V. Seldom. ad E^tych. n. 22. p. 143.
Alexandria after his election by the Presbyters; especially, while Egypt
remained but one Province, under the Government of the Praefectus Augustalis.
Secondly, how had this been in the least pertinent to Hieroms purpose to have
made a particular instance in the Church of Alexandria, for that which was
common to all other Churches besides? For the Did. 6^. sect. her.
old Rule of the Canon Law for Bishops was, Electio clericorum est, consensus
principis, petitio plebis. Thirdly, this election in Hierom must imply the
conferring the power and authority whereby the Bishop acted. For first, the
first setting up of his power is by Hierom attributed to this choice, as
appears Advers. Lucil.
by his words. Quod autem postea unus electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur,
in schismatis remedium factum est, ne unusquisque ad se trahens Christi
Ecclesiam rumperet. Whereby it is evident Hierom attributes the first original
of that Exsors potestas, as he calls it elsewhere in the Bishop above
Presbyters, not to any Apostolical institution, but to the free choice of the
Presbyters themselves: which does fully explain what he means by consuetudo
Ecclesiae before spoken of, viz. that which came up by a voluntary act of the
Governors of Churches themselves. Secondly, it appears that by election, he
means conferring authority, by the instances he brings to that purpose; As the
Roman Armies choosing their Emperors, who had then no other power but what
they received by the length of the sword; and the Deacons choosing their
Archdeacon, who had no other power but what was merely con^erred by the choice
of the Co^ledge of Deacons. To which we may add what Eutychius, the Patriarch
of Alexandria, says in his Origines Ecclesiae Alexandrinae published in
Arabic by our Origin. p. 29, 30.
mo^^ learned Seldom, who expressly affirms, that the twelve Presbyters
constituted by Mark upon the vacancy of the Sea, did choose out of their number
one to be head over the rest, and the other eleven did lay their hands upon
him, and blessed him, and made him Patriarch. Neither is the authority of
Eutychius so much to be slighted in this case, coming so near to Hierom as he
does, who doubtless, had he told us that Mark and Anianus, etc. did all there
without any Presbyters, might have had the good fortune to have been quoted
with as much frequency and authority as the Anonymous Author of the martyrdom
of Timothy in Photius (who there unhappily B^blioth. Cod. 254.
follows the story of the seven sleepers) or the Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions, whose credit is everlastingly blasted by the excellent Mr.
Duille De Pseudepigraphis Apostolorum; so much does men's interest^tend to the
inhancing or abating the esteem and credit both of the dead and the living. By
these we see, that where no positive restraints from consent and choice, for
the unity and peace of the Church, have restrained men's liberty as to their
external exercise of the power of order or jurisdiction, every one being
himself advanced into the authority of a Church. Governor, has an internal
power of conferring the same upon persons fit for 1 Timothy 4. 14.
it. To which purpose the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, is no ways
impertinently alleged, although we suppose St. Paul to concur in the action,
(as it is most probable he did) because, if the Presbytery had nothing to do in
the ordination, to what purpose were their hands laid upon him? Was it only to
be witnesses of the fact, or to signify their consent? both those might have
been done without their use of that ceremony; which will scarce be instanced
in, to be done by any but such as had power to confer what was signified by
that ceremony. We come therefore to the second period or state of the Church,
when the former liberty was restrained, by some act of the Church it self* for
preventing the inconveniences which might follow the too common use of the
former liberty of ordinations, So Antonius de Rosellis fully expresses my
meaning in this; Rosellis de po^. Imper. and Papae. p. 4. c. 18
Quilibet Presbyter and Presbyteri ordinabant indiscrete, and schismata
oriebantur. Every Presbyter and Presbyters did ordain indifferently, and thence
arose schisms: thence the liberty was restrained and reserved peculiarly to
some persons who did act in the several Presbyteries, as the (...) or Prince of
the Sanhedrin, without whose presence no ordination by the Church was to be
looked on as regular. The main controversy is, when this restraint began, and
by whose act; whether by any act of the Apostles, or only by the prudence of
the Church its self, as it was with the Sanhedrin. But in order to our peace, I
see no such necessity of deciding it, both parties granting that in the Church
such a restraint was laid upon the liberty of ordaining Presbyters: and the
exercise of that power may be restrained still, granting it to be radically and
intrinsically in them. So that this controversy is not such as should divide
the Church. For those that are for ordinations only by a Superior order in the
Church, acknowledging a radical power for ordination in Presbyters, which may
be exercised in case of necessity, do thereby make it evident, that none who
grant that, do think that any positive Law of God has forbidden Presbyters the
power of ordination; for then it must be wholly unlawful, and so in case of
necessity it cannot be valid. Which Doctrine I dare with some confidence assert
to be a stranger to our Church of England, as shall be largely made appear
afterward. On the other side, those who hold ordinations by Presbyters lawful,
do not therefore hold them necessary, but it being a matter of liberty, and not
of necessity (Christ having no where said that none but Presbyters shall
ordain) this power then may be restrained by those who have the care of the
Churches Peace; and matters of liberty being restrained, ought to be submitted
to, in order to the Churches Peace. And therefore some have well observed the
difference between the opinions of Hierom and Aerius. For as to the matter it
self, I believe upon the strictest enquiry Medina's Mich Medinas de s^ ^. hom.
^ ^rig. and contin. l. 1. cap. 5.
judgment will prove true, that Hierom, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodores, Theophylact, were all of Aerius his judgment, as to
the Identity of both name and order of Bishops and Presbyters in the Primitive
Church: but here lay the difference* Aerius from hence proceeded to separation
from Bishops and their Churches, because they were Bishops. And Blondell well
observes that the main ground why Aerius was condemned, was for unnecessary
separation Praes. p. 58.
from the Church of Sebastia, and those Bishops too who agreed with him in
other things, as Eustathius the Bishop did: Whereas, had his mere opinion about
Bishops been the ground of his being condemned, there can be no reason
assigned, why this heresy, if it were then thought so, was not mentioned
either by Socrates, Theodoret; Sozomen, or Evagrius, before whose time he
lived; when yet they mention the Eustathiani, who were co-temporaries with him.
But for Epiphanius and Augustine, who have listed him in the roll of Heretics,
it either was for the other heretical opinions maintained by him, or they took
the name Heretic (as it is evident they often did) for one, who, upon a matter
of different opinion from the present sense of the Church, did proceed to make
separation from the Unity of the Catholic Church; which I take to be the
truest account of the reputed Heresy of Aerius. For otherwise it is likely
that Jerome, who maintained so great correspondency and familiarity with
Epiphanius, and thereby could not but know what was the cause why Aerius was
condemned for Heresy, should himself run into the same Heresy, and endeavor
not only to assert it, but to avouch and maintain it against the Judgment of
the whole Church? Jerome therefore was not ranked with Aerius, because, though
he held the same opinion as to Bishops and Presbyters, yet he was far from the
consequence of Aerius, that therefore all Bishops were to be separated from;
nay, he was so far from thinking it necessary to cause a schism in the Church,
by separating from Bishops, that his opinion is clear, that the first
institution of them, was for preventing schisms, and therefore for peace and
unity he thought their institution very useful in the Church of God. And among
all those fifteen testimonies produced by a learned Writer ou^ of Jerome for
the superiority of Bishop^ above Presbyters, I cannot find one that does found
it upon any Divine Right, but only upon the convenience of such an order for
the peace and unity of the Church of God: Which is his meaning in that place
most produced to this purpose; Ecclesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate
pendet, cui si non exsors quaedam Dial. ad Lucifer.
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata,
quot sacerdotes. Where nothing can be more evident than that he would have some
supereminent power attributed to the Bishop for preventing schisms in the
Church. But granting some passages may have a more favorable aspect toward
the superiority of Bishops over Presbyters in his other writings, I would fain
know whether a man's judgment must be taken, from occasional and incidental
passages, or from designed and set discourses; which is as much as to ask,
whether the lively representation of a man by picture, may be best taken, when
in haste of other business he passes by us, giving only a glance of his
Countenance, or when he purposely and designedly sits, in order to that end
that his countenance may be truly represented? Besides, it is well known that
Hierom in his Commentaries on Scripture, (where he does not expressly declare
his own opinion) does often transcribe what he finds in others, without setting
down the name of any Author he had it from. For which we have his ingenuous
confession in his Epistle to Augustine, Ep. August. ep. 11
Itaque ut simpliciter fatear, legi haec omnia (speaking of former
Commentaries) and in mente mea plurima conservans; accito notario, vel mea vel
aliena dictavi, nec ordinis, nec verborum interdum, nec sensuum memor. A
strange way of writing Commentaries on Scripture, wherein a man having jumbled
other men's notions together in his brain, by a kind of lottery draws out what
next comes to hand, without any choice: yet this we see was his practice, and
therefore he puts Austin to this hard task of examining what all other men had
writ before him, and whether he had not transcribed out of them, before he
would have him charge him with any thing which he finds in his Commentaries.
How angry then would that hasty Adversary have been, if men had told him he had
contradicted himself in what he writes on the forty fifth Psalm about Bishops,
if it be compared with his Commentaries on Titus, where he professes to
declare his opinion, or his Epistles to Evagrius and Oceanus! But yet some
thing is pleaded even from those places in Hierom, wherein he declares his
opinion more fully, as though his opinion was only, that Christ himself did not
appoint Episcopacy, which (they say) he means by Dominica dispositio, but that
the Apostles did it, which, in opposition to the former, he calls Ecclesiae
consuetudo, but elsewhere explains it by traditio Apostolica; and this they
prove by two things; First, The occasion of the institution of Episcopacy,
which is thus set down by him, antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia in religione
fierent, and diceretur in populis; Ego sum* Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem
Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae guber* nabantur. Thence it is
argued, that the time of this Institution of Bishops was when it was said at
Corinth, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, and I of Cephas; which was certainly in
Apostol call times. But to this it is answered; First, That it is impossible
Hieroms meaning should be restrained to that individual time, because the
arguments which Hierom brings that the name and office of Bishops and
Presbyters were the same, were from things done after this time. Paul's first
Epistle to the Corinthians, wherein he reproves their schisms, was written
according to Ludovicus Cappellus in the twe^fth year of Hist. Apostolica. p. 7^
Claudius, of Christ fifty one, after which Paul writ his Epistle to Titus,
from whose words Hierom grounds his discourse* but most certainly Paul's Epistle
to the Philippians was not written, till Paul was prisoner at Rome; the time of
the writing of it is placed by Cappellus in the third of Nero; of Christ 56. by
Blondell 57. by our Lightfoot 59. by all, long after the former to the
Corinthians; yet from the first verse of this Epistle, Hierom fetches one of
his arguments. So Paul's charge to the Elders at Miletus, Peter's Epistle to the
dispersed Jews, were after that time too, yet from these are fetched two more
of Hieroms arguments. Had he then so little common sense, as to say, that
Episcopacy was instituted upon the schism at Corinth, and yet bring all his
arguments for parity, after the time that he s^^s for the Institution of
Episcopacy? But secondly, Hierom does not say, cum diceretur apud Corinthios,
Ego sum Pauli, etc. but cum diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, etc: so that
he speaks not of that particular schism, but of a general and universal schism
abroad among most people, which was the occasion of appointing Bishops; and so
speaks of others imitating the schism and language of the Corinthians. Thirdly,
had Episcopacy been instituted on the occasion of the schism at Corinth,
certainly of all places, we should the soonest have heard of a Bishop at
Corinth for the remedying of it; and yet almost of all places, those Heralds
that derive the succession of Bishops from the Apostles times, are the most
plunged, whom to fix on at Corinth. And they that can find any one single
Bishop at Corinth at the time when Clemens writ his Epistle to them (about
another schism as great as the former, which certainly had not been according
to their opinion, if a Bishop had been there before) must have better eyes and
judgment, than the deservedly admired Grotius, who brings this in his Epistle
to Bignonius as one argument of the undoubted antiquity of that Ep. ad Gal. ep.
162.
Epistle: Quod nusquam meminit exsortis illius Episcoporum auctoritatis, quae
Ecclesiae consuetudine, post Marci mortem Alexandriae, atque eo exemplo alibi,
introduci coepit; sed plane, ut Paulus Apostolus ostendit, Ecclesias communi
Presbyterorum, qui iidem omnes and Episcopi ipsi Pauloque dicuntur consilio
fuisse gubernatas. What could be said with greater freedom, that there was no
such Episcopacy then at Corinth? Fourthly, They who use this argument, are
greater strangers to St. Ierom's language than they would seem to be: whose
custom it is upon incidental occasions to accommodate the phrase and language
of Scripture to them: as when he speaks of Chrysostom's fall, Cecidit Babylon,
cecidit; of the Bishops of Palestine, Multi utroque claudicant pede; of the
Roman Clergy, Pharisaeorum conclamavit Senatus; but which is most clear to our
purpose, he applies this very speech to the men of his own time; Quando non id
ipsum omnes loquimur, and alius dicit, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego Cephae,
dividimus spiritus unitatem, and eam in parts and membra discerpimus. All
which instances are produced by Blondell, but have the good fortune Apol. p. 4.
to be past over without being taken notice of. But supposing, say they, that
it was not till after the schism at Corinth, yet it must needs be done by the
Apostles; else how could it be said to be toto orb decretum, ut unus de
Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris? Quomodo enim (says a learned man)
fieri po^uit, ut toto hoc orb decerneretur, nullo jam Oecumenico Concilio ad
illud decernendum congrega^o, si non ab Apostolis ipsis, fidem toto orb
promulgantibiss, and cum fide hanc regendi Ecclesias formam constituentibus
factum sit? So that he conceives, so general an order could not be made, unless
the Apostles themselves at that time were the authors of it.

But First, Ieroms In toto orb dicret^m est, relates not to an antecedent
order, which was the ground of the institution of Episcopacy, but to the
universal establishment of that order which came up upon the occasion of so
many schisms; it is something therefore consequent upon the first setting up
Episcopacy, which is the general obtaining of it in the Churches of Christ,
when they saw its usefulness in order to the Churches peace; therefore the
Emphasis lies not in decretum est, but in toto orb; noting how suddenly this
order met with universal acceptance when it first was brought up in the Church
after the Apostles death. Which that it was Ieroms meaning, appears by what he
says after, Paulatim vero (ut dissensionum plantaria evellerentur) ad unum
omnem solicitudinem esse delatam: Where he notes the gradual obtaining of it:
which I suppose was thus, according to his opinion; first in the College of
Presbyters appointed by the Apostles, there being a necessity of order, there
was a President among them who had (...)* as the President of the Senate, i. e.
did moderate the affairs of the Assembly, by proposing matters to it, gathering
voices, being the first in all matters of concernment, but he had not (...), as
Casaubon very well distinguishes them, i. e. had no power Exercit. ad Annal.
Eccles. 15. s. 12.
over his fellow-Presbyters, but that still resided in the College or body of
them. After this when the Apostles were taken out of the way, who kept the main
power in their own hands of ruling the several Presbyteries, or delegated some
to do it (who had a main hand in the planting Churches with the Apostles, and
thence are called in Scripture sometimes Fellow Laborers in the Lord, and
sometimes Evangelists, and by Theodoret Apostles, but of a second order) after
I say, these were deceased, and the main power left in the Presbyteries, the
several Presbyters enjoying an equal power among themselves, especially being
many in one City, thereby great occasion was given to many schisms, partly by
the bandying of the Presbyters one against another, partly by the sidings of
the people with some against the rest, partly by the too common use of the
power of ordinations in Presbyters, by which they were more able to increase
their own party, by ordaining those who would join with them, and by this means
to perpetuate schisms in the Church; upon this, when the wiser and graver sort
considered the abuses following the promiscuous use of this power of
ordination; and withal having in their minds the excellent frame of the
Government of the Church under the Apostles, and their Deputies, and for
preventing of future schisms and divisions among themselves, they unanimously
agreed to choose one out of their number, who was best qualified for the
management of so great a trust, and to devolve the exercise of the power of
ordination and jurisdiction to him* yet so as that he ^ct nothing of
importance, without the consent and concurrence of the Presbyters, who were
still to be as the Common Council to the Bishop. This I take to be the true and
just account of the Original of Episcopacy in the Primitive Church according to
Jerome: Which model of Government thus contrived and framed, sets forth to us a
most lively character of that great Wisdom and Moderation, which then ruled the
heads and hearts of the Primitive Christians; and which, when men have searched
and studied all other ways, (the abuses incident to this Government, through
the corruptions of men and times being retrenched) will be found the most
agreeable to the Primitive form, both as asserting the due interest of the
Presbyteries, and allowing the due honor of Episcopacy, and by the joint
harmony of both carrying on the affairs of the Church with the greatest Unity,
Concord, and Peace. Which form of Government I cannot see how any possible
reason can be produced by either party, why they may not with cheerfulness
embrace it.

Secondly, another evidence that Jerome by decretum est did not mean an order
of the Apostles themselves, is by the words which follow the matter of the
decree, viz. Ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, one chosen
not only out of, but by the Presbyters, should be set above the rest; for so
Jerome must be understood; for the Apostles could not themselves choose out of
all Presbyteries one person to be set above the rest; and withal the instance
brought of the Church of Alexandria makes it evident to be meant of the
choosing by the Presbyters, and not by the Apostles. Besides, did Jerome mean
choosing by the Apostles, he would have given some intimations of the hand the
Apostles had in it: which we see not in him the least ground for. And as for
that pretense, that Ecclesiae consuetudo is Apostolica traditio, I have already
made it appear that Apostolica traditio in Jerome, is nothing else but
Consuetudo Ecclesiae, which I shall now confirm by a pregnant and unanswerable
testimony out of Jerome himself. Unaquaeque provincia abundet in sensu suo, and
praecepta Hieron. ep. 20. ad Lucinum.
majorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. Let every Province abound in its own
sense, and account of the ordinances of their Ancestors as of Apostolical Laws.
Nothing could have been spoken more fully to open to us what Jerome means by
Apostolical traditions, viz the practice of the Church in former ages, though
not coming from the Apostles themselves. Thus we have once more cleared Jerome
and the truth together; I only wish all that are of his judgment for the
practice of the primitive Church, were of his temper for the practice of their
own; and while they own not Episcopacy as necessary by a divine right, yet
(being duly moderated, and joined with Presbyteries) they may embrace it, as
not only a lawful, but very useful constitution in the Church of God. By which
we may see what an excellent temper may be found out, most fully consonant to
the primitive Church for the management of ordinations, and Church power, viz.
by the Presidency of the Bishop and the concurrence of the Presbytery. For the
Top-gallant of Episcopacy can never be so well managed for the right steering
the ship of the Church, as when it is joined with the under-sails of a Moderate
Presbytery. So much shall suffice to speak here as to the power of ordination,
which we have found to be derived from the Synagogue, and the customs observed
in it, transplanted into the Church.

There are yet some things remaining as to Ordination,. 14.
wherein the Church did imitate the Synagogue, which will admit of a quick
dispatch, as the number of the persons, which under the Synagogue were always
to be at least three. This being a fundamental constitution among the Misna and
Gemar. tit. Sanhedr. c. ^. Tic. Sanhed. cap. 4. s 3. Arcan. Cath. Viritat. l.
4. cap. 6.
Jews, as appears by their writings, (...) Ordination of Presbyters by laying
on of hands must be done. by three at the least. To the same purpose Maimonides
(...) They did not ordain any by imposition of hands into a power of judicature
without the number of three. Which number Peter Galatinus and Postellus
conceive necessary to be all ordained themselves; but Master Seldom thinks it
was sufficient if there De Concord. orbis p. 377
were but one of that number so ordained, who was to be as principal in the
action; whose opinion is favored by Maimonides, who adds to the words last
cited out of him; Of which Three, one at the least must be ordained himself.
Let us now see the Parallel in the Church of God. The first solemn Ordination
of Elders under the Gospel, which some think to be set down as a Pattern for
the Church to follow, is that we read of, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. Which was performed
by three; for we read in the first verse, that there were in the Church at
Antioch, five Prophets and Teachers, Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, and
Saul; of these five, the Holy Ghost said, that two must be separated for the
work whereto God had called them, which were, Barnabas and Saul; there remain
only the other three, Simeon, Lucius and Manaen to lay their hands on them,
and ordain them to their work. Accordingly Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 1.
those who tell us that James was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, do mention the
three Apostles who concurred in the ordaining of him. But most remarkable for
this purpose is the Canon of the Nicene Council, wherein this number is set
down as the regular number for the Ordination of Bishops, without which it was
not accounted Canonical. The words are these, (...), Can. 4.
(...) i. e. The Ordination of a Bishop should; if possible, be performed by
all the Bishops of the Province, which if it cannot easily be done, either
through some urgent necessity, or the tediousness of the way, three Bishops at
least must be there for the doing it, which may be sufficient for the
Ordination, if those that are absent do express their consent, and by Letters
approve Hist Eccles lib. 5. c. 23.
of the doing of it. To the same purpose Theodoret, (...). V. Iustell. not. in
Canon. Universae Eccles. p. 140.
The Canons enjoin all the Bishops of the Province to be present at the
Ordination of one: and forbid the Ordination of any without three being present
at it. Thus we see how the Constitution of the Synagogue was exactly observed
in the Church, as to the number of the persons concurring to a regular
Ordination. The last thing as to Ordination bearing Analogy to the Synagogue,
is the effect of this Ordination upon the person: It was the Custom of the
Jews, to speak of all that were legally Ordained among them, (...) and the
Divine Presence or Schecinah rested upon them, which sometimes they called
(...) the Holy Spirit supposed to be in a peculiar manner present after this
solemn Separation of them from others in the world, and Dedication of them unto
God. Answerable to this may that of our Savior be, when he gives his Apostles
authority to preach the Gospel, he does it in that Form of words, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost, and Joh. 20. 21*
then gives them the power of binding and loosing, usually conveyed in the
Jewish Ordinations. Whose sins ye remit, they v. 29.
are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. So that as under
the Law, they by their Ordination received a moral Faculty or Right to exercise
that power they were Ordained to; so under the Gospel, all who are Ordained
according to Gospel Rules, have a right, authority and power conveyed thereby
for the dispensing of the Word and Sacraments. Which right and power must not
be conceived to be an internal indelible Character, as the Papists groundlesly
conceive, but a moral legal Right, according to the Laws of Christ, because
the persons Ordaining do not act in it in a natural, but a moral Capacity, and
so the effect must be moral and not physical, which they must suppose it to be,
who make it a Character, and that indelible. Thus much may serve to clear how
Ordination in all its circumstances was derived from the Jewish Synagogue.

The other thing remaining to be spoken to, as to the correspondence. 15.
of the Church with the Synagogue in its constitution is, what order the
Apostles did settle in the several Churches of their Plantation for the Ruling
and Ordering the Affairs of them. Before I come to speak so much to it as will
be pertinent to our present purpose and design, we may take notice of the same
name for Church-Rulers under the Gospel, which there was under the Synagogue,
viz. that of Presbyters. The name Presbyter, as the Hebr. (...) though it
Originally import Age, yet by way of connotation it has been looked on as a
name both of Dignity and Power. Because Wisdom was supposed to dwell with a
multitude of years; therefore persons of age and experience were commonly
chosen to places of honor and trust, and thence the name importing age does
likewise carry dignity along with it. Thence we read in the time of Moses how
often the Elders were gathered together. Thence Exodus 3. 16. 18. 4. 29. 12. 21.
17. 5. ^8 12. etc.
Eliezer is called (...) Genesis 24. 2. which the Greek renders (...) the Seignior
Domo, the chief Officer in his house; and so we read Genesis 50. 6. (...) the
Elders of the Land of Egypt. So the Elders of M^dian, the Elders of Israel, the
Elders of the Cities; so among the Greeks (...) for their Council of State; and
among the Latins Senatus, and our Saxon Aldermen, in all importing both age
and honor and power together. But among the Jews, in the times of the
Apostles, it is most evident that the name (...)* imported not only dignity but
power; the Presbyters among the Jews, having a power both of judgeing and
teaching given them by their Semicha or Ordination. Now under the Gospel the
Apostles retaining the name and the manner of Ordination, but not conferring
that judiciary power by it, which was in use among the Jews, to show the
difference between the Law and the Gospel, it was requisite some other name
should be given to the Governors of the Church, which should qualify the
importance of the word Presbyters to a sense proper to a Gospel State; Which
was the Original of giving the name (...) to the Governors of the Church under
the Gospel: A name importing Duty more then Honor, and not a title above
Presbyter, but rather used by way of diminution and qualification of the power
employed in the name of Presbyter. Therefore to show what kind of power and Duty
the name Presbyter imported in the Church, the Office conveyed by that name is
called (...), and Presbyters are said (...), 1 Pet. 5* 2. where it is opposed
to that (...), Lording it over the people, as was the custom of the Presbyters
among the Jews. So that if we determine things by importance of words and
things signified by them, the power of Ordination was proper to the name (...)
and not (...), because the former name did then import that power, and not the
latter. We come therefore from the names to the things then employed by them;
and the Offices established by the Apostles for the ruling of Churches. But my
design being not to dispute the arguments of either party ( viz. those who
conceive the Apostles settled the Government of the Church in an absolute
parity; or else by Superiority and Subordination among the settled Officers of
the Church,) but to lay down those principles which may equally concern both,
in Order to accommodation* I find not my self at present concerned to debate
what is brought on either side for the maintaining their particular Opinion any
further then thereby the Apostles intentions are brought to have been to bind
all future Churches to observe that individual Form they conceived was in
practice then. All that ^ have to say then concerning the course taken by the
Apostles in settling the Government of the Churches, (under which will be
contained the full Resolution of what I promised, as to the correspondency to
the Synagogue in the Government of Churches) lies in these three Propositions,
which I now shall endeavor to clear, viz. That neither can we have that
certainty of Apostolical practice which is necessary to Constitute a Divine
right; nor Secondly, Is it probable that the Apostles did tie themselves up to
any one fixed course in modelling Churches; nor thirdly, if they did, does it
necessarily follow that we must observe the same. If these three considerations
be fully cleared, we may see to how little purpose it is to Dispute the
Significancy and Importance of words and names as used in Scripture, which
hitherto the main quarrel has been about. I therefore begin with the first of
these, That we cannot arrive to such an absolute certainty what course the
Apostles took in Governing Churches as to infer from thence the only Divine
Right of that one Form which the several parties imagine comes the nearest to
it. This I shall make out from these following arguments. First, from the
equivalency of the names, and the doubtfulness of their signification from
which the Form of Government used in the New Testament should be determined.
That the Form of Government must be derived from the Importance of the names of
Bishop and Presbyter, is hotly pleaded on both sides. But if there can be no
certain way sound out whereby to come to a Determination of what the certain
Sense of those names is in Scripture, we are never like to come to any certain
Knowledge of the things signified by those names. Now there is a fourfold
equivalency of the names Bishop and Presbyter taken notice of 1. That Dissert.
de jure Epis. 3. o 6. Vind cat. cap. ^. s. 1.
both should signify the same thing, viz. a Presbyter, in the modern Notion,
i. e. one acting in a parity with others for the Government of the Church. And
this Sense is evidently asserted by Theodoret, (...). The Apostle Theodoret. in
1 Timothy 3. 1.
Acts 20. 28. Philip. 1. 1. Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 1. does by Bishops mean
nothing else but Presbyters; otherwise it were impossible for more Bishops to
govern one City. 2. That both of them should signify promiscuously sometimes a
Bishop, and sometimes a Presbyter: so Chrysostom, and after him Occumenius and
Theophylact in Phil. 1. (...)* and in Acts 20. 28. (...). Where they assert the
Community and promiscuous use of the names in Scripture; so that a Bishop is
sometimes called a Presbyter, and a Presbyter sometimes called a Bishop. 3.
That the name Bishop, always imports a singular Bishop; but the name Presbyter
is taken promiscuously both for Bishop and Presbyter. 4. That both the names
Bishop and Presbyter, do import only one thing in Scripture, viz. the Office
of a singular Bishop in every Church^; which Sense, though a stranger to
antiquity, is above all other embraced by a late very Learned Man, who has
endeavored by set Discourses to reconcile all the places of Scripture where
the names occur to this sense; but with what success it is not here a place to
examine. By this variety of Interpretation of the Equivalency of the names of
Bishop and Presbyter, we may see how far the argument from the promiscuous use
of the names is from the Controversy in hand; unless some evident arguments be
withal brought, that the Equivalency of the words cannot possibly be meant in
any other Sense, then that which they contend for. Equivocal words can never of
themselves determine what Sense they are to be taken in, because they are
Equivocal, and so admit of different Senses. And he that from the use of an
Equivocal word would infer the necessity only of one sense, when the word is
common to many, unless some other argument be brought enforcing that necessity,
will be so far from persuading others to the same belief, that he will only
betray the weakness and shortness of his own reason. When Augustus would be
called only Princeps Tacitus hist. lib. 1.
Senatus, could any one infer from thence, that certainly he was only the
(...) in the Senate, or else that he had superiority of power over the Senate,
when that Title might be indifferent to either of those senses? All that can be
inferred from the promiscuous sense of the words, is, that they may be
understood only in this sense; but it must be proved that they can be
understood in no other sense, before any one particular form of Government as
necess^ry can be inferred from the use of them. If notwithstanding the
promiscuous use of the name Bishop and Presbyter, either that Presbyter may
mean a Bishop; or that Bishop may mean a Presbyter, or be sometimes used for
one, sometimes for the other; what ground can there be laid in the equivalency
of the words, which can infer the only Divine Right of the form of Government
couched in any one of those senses? So likewise, it is in the Titles of Angels
of the Churches; If the name Angel imports no incongruity, though taken only
for the (...) in the Jewish Synagogue, the public Minister of the Synagogue,
called the Angel of the Congregation, what power can be inferred from thence,
any more then such an Officer was invested with? Again, if the (...) or
President of the assembly of Presbyters, might be so called: what superiority
can be deduced thence, any more then such a one enjoys? Nay, if in the
Prophetical style, an unity may be set down by way of representation of a
multitude: what evidence can be brought from the name, that by it some one
particular person must be understood? And by this means Rev. 2. 4.
Timothy may avoid being charged with leaving his first Love, which he must of
necessity be, by those that make him the Angel of the Church of Ephesus at the
time of writing these Epistles. Neither is this any ways solved by the Answer
given, that the name Angel is representative of the whole Church, and so there
is no necessity, the Angel should be personally guilty of it. For first, it
seems strange that the whole diffusive body of the Church should be charged
with a crime by the name of the Angel, and he that is particularly meant by
that name should be free from it. As if a Prince should charge the Mayor of a
Corporation as guilty of rebellion, and by it should only mean that the
Corporation was guilty, but the Mayor was innocent himself. Secondly, If mady
things in the Epistles be directed to the Angel, but yet so as to concern the
whole body, then of necessity the Angel must be taken as Representative of the
Body; and then, why may not the word Angel be taken only by way of
representation of the body its self, either of the whole Church, or which is
far more probable, of the Consessus or Order of Presbyters in that Church? We
see what miserably unconcluding arguments those are, which are brought for any
form of Government from Metaphorical or Ambiguous expressions, or names
promiscuously used, which may be interpreted to different senses. What
certainty then can any rational man find what the form of Government was in the
Primitive times, when only those arguments are used which may be equally
accommodated to different forms? And without such a certainty, with what
confidence can men speak of a Divine Right of any one particular form?
Secondly, The uncertainty of the Primitive form is argued, from the places most
in controversy about the form of Government; because that without any apparent
incongruity they may be understood of either of the different forms. Which I
shall make out by going through the several places. The Controversy then on
foot is this, (as it is of late stated), Whether the Churches in the Primitive
times were governed by a Bishop only and Deacons, or by a College of
Presbyters acting in a parity of power? The places insisted on, on both sides
are these, Acts 11. 30. Acts 14. 23. Acts 28. 17 1 Timothy 3. 1. Titus 1. 5. The
thing in controversy, is, Whether Bishops with Deacons or Presbyters in a
parity of power, are understood in these places? I begin then in order with
Acts 11. 30. The first place wherein the name (...) occurrs, as applied to the
Officers of the Christian Church, Those that are for a College of Presbyters,
understand by these Elders, those of the Church of Jerusalem, who did govern
the affairs of that Church: those that are for a solitary Episcopacy, by these
Elders understand not the local Elders of Jerusalem, but the several Bishops of
the Churches of Judea. Let us now see whether there be any evidence from the
place to determine which of these two must necessarily be understood. There is
nothing at all mentioned in the place, but only that upon the occasion of the
Famine, they sent relief to the Brethren of Judea, and sent it to the Elders by
the hands of Barnabas and Paul; Which might either be to the Elders of the
Church at Jerusalem, to be distributed to the several Churches of Judea, or
else to the several Pastors of those Churches, either collectively as met
together at Jerusalem to receive this contribution, or distributively as they
were in their several Churches. The relief might be sent to all the Brethren of
Judea, and yet either be conveyed to the particular Elders of Jerusalem to send
it abroad, or to the several Elders of the Churches within the circuit of
Judea. But other places are brought by both parties for their particular sense
in this, As Acts 15. 6. here indeed mention is made of the Apostles and Elders
together at Jerusalem, but nothing expressed whereby we may know whether the
fixed Elders of that Church, or else the Elders of all the Churches of Judea
assembled upon this solemn occasion of the Council of the Apostles there. So
Acts 21. 11. when Paul went in to James, it is said, That All the Elders were
present. No more certainty here neither; for, either they might be the fixed
Officers of that Church, meeting with James upon Paul's coming; or else they
might be the Elders of the several Churches of Judea met together, not to take
account of Paul's Ministry (as some improbably conjecture,) but assembled
together there at the Feast of Pentecost, at which Paul came to Jerusalem,
which is more probable upon the account of what we read, v. 20. of the many
thousand believing Jews then at Jerusalem, who were zealous of the Law: who in
all probability were the believing Jews of Judea, who did yet observe the
annual Festivals of Jerusalem, and so most likely their several Elders might go
up together with them, and there be with James at Paul's coming in to him. No
certainty then of the Church of Jerusalem how that was governed; whether by
Apostles themselves, or other unfixed Elders, or only by James who exercised
his Apostleship most there, and thence afterward^ called the Bishop of
Jerusalem. We proceed therefore to the government of other Churches; and the
next place is, Acts 14. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every
Church. Here some plead for a plurality of Elders as fixed in every Church; but
it is most evident, that the words hold true if there was but one in each
Church. For (...) here, and (...) Titus 1. 5. (for both places will admit of
the same answer) does signify no more then oppidatim, or Ecclesiatim, as (...)
gradatim, (...), viritim, (...) particulatim, (...) vicatim. No more then is
imported than that Elders were ordained, City by City, or Church by Church, as
we would render i^, and thereby nothing is expressed, but that no Church wanted
an Elder, but not that every Church had more Elders then one. But the place
most controverted is, Acts 20. 17. And from Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus, and
called the Elders of the Church. Those that say, these Elders were those only
of the Church of Ephesus, seem to be most favored by the article (...), as
seeming to apply it to that particular Church of Ephesus, and by the Syriack
version which renders it, Venire fecit Presbyteros Ecclesiae Ephesi; to the
same purpose likewise Hierome understands it. On the contrary those that say,
that these Elders were those of the several Churches of Asia, are favored by
v. 18. that from the first day he came into Asia, he had been with them at all
seasons. Now Paul did not remain all the time at Ephesus, as appears by Acts
19* 10, 22, 26. where he is said to preach the Word abroad in Asia, and so in
probability Churches were planted, and Rulers settled in them; and that these
were at this time called to Miletus by Paul, is the express affirmation of
Irenaeus; Advers. ^^aeres. l. 1. c, 14.
In Mileto enim convocatis Episcopis and Presbyteris qui era^t ab Epheso and a
reliquis proximis civitatibus, quoniam ipse festinavit Hierosolymis Pentecostem
agere. Here is nothing then either in the Text or Antiquity, that does
absolutely determine whence these Elders came; but there may be a probability
on either side; and so no certainty or necessity of understanding it either
way. And so for the other places in Timothy and Titus, it is certain the care
of those persons did extend to many places, and therefore the Elders or Bishops
made by them, are not necessarily to be understood of a Plurality of Elders in
one place. Thus we see, that there is no incongruity in applying either of
these two forms to the sense of the places in Question. I dispute not which is
the true, or at least more probable sense, but that we can find nothing in the
several places which does necessarily determine, how they are to be understood
as to one particular form of Government, which is the thing I now aim at the
proving of. And if neither form be repugnant to the sense of these places, how
can any one be necessarily inferred from them? As if the several motions and
phenomenon of the Heavens may be with equal probability explained according to
the Ptolemaick or Copernican Hypothesis, viz. about the rest or motion of the
earth; then it necessarily follows, that from those Phenomenon no argument can
be drawn evincing the necessity of the one Hypothesis, and overturning the
probability of the other. If that great wonder of Nature the flux and reflux of
the Sea, might with equal congruity be solved according to the different
opinions, of its being caused by Subterraneous fires, or from the motion of the
Moon, or the depression of the Lunar vortex, or (which to me is far the most
probable) by a motion of consent of the Sea with all the other great bodies of
the World; we should find no necessity at all of entertaining one opinion above
another, but to look upon all as probable, and none as certain. So likewise for
the composition and motion of all Natural Bodies, the several Hypotheses of the
old and new Philosophy, implying no apparent incongruity to Nature, do make it
appear that all or any of them, may be embraced as Ingenious Romances in
Philosophy (as they are no more) but that none of them are the certain truth;
or can be made appear so to be to the minds of men. So it is in Controversies
in Theology, If the matter propounded to be believed, may as to the truth and
substance of it be equally believed under different ways of explication, then
there is no necessity as to the believing the truth of the thing, to believe it
under such an explication of it, more then under another. As for instance, in
the case of Christ's Descent (...) (...), if I may truly believe that Christ did
Descend (...), whether by that we understand the state of the Dead, or a local
Descent to Hell, then there is no necessity in order to the belief of the
substance of that article of the ancient Creed (called, The Apostles) under
that restriction of a local Descent. By this time I suppose it is clear, that
if these places of Scripture may be understood in these two different senses of
the word Elders, viz. either taken collectively in one City, or distributively
in many, then there is no certainty which of these two senses must be embraced,
and so the form of Church Government, which must be thence derived, is left
still at as great uncertainty as ever, notwithstanding these places of
Scripture brought to demonstrate it; (...).

Thirdly, The uncertainty of the Primitive Form of Government. 16.
will be made appear from the Defectivenesse, Ambiguity, Partiality and
Repugnancy of the Records of the succeeding Ages which should inform us what
Apostolical practice was. When men are by the force of the former arguments
driven off from Scripture, then they presently run to take Sanctuary in the
Records of succeeding ages to the Apostles. Thus Estius, no mean School-man,
handling this very Question of the difference of Bishops and Presbyters, very
fairly quits the Scriptures, and betakes himself to other Weapons. Quod autem
jure divino sint Episcopi Presbyteris superiores, et si non ita clarum est e
sacris Literis, aliunde tamen In Sentent. lib. 4. did. 4. sect. 25.
satis efficaciter probari potest. Ingenuously said, however; but all the
difficulty is, how a Ius divinum should be proved when men leave the
Scriptures, which makes others so loath to leave this hold; although they do it
in effect, when they call in the help of succeeding Ages to make the Scripture
speak plain for them. We follow therefore the scent of the Game into this wood
of Antiquity, wherein it will be easier to lose our selves, then to find that
which we are upon the pursuit of, a Ius Divinum of any one particular form of
Government. I handle now only the Testimony of Antiquity (for the practice of
it will call for a particular Discourse afterward) and herein I shall
endeavor to show the incompetency of this Testimony, as to the showing what
certain form of Church Government was practiced by the Apostles; for that, I
shall make use of this four fold Argument; From the defectivenesse of this
Testimony, from the Ambiguity of it, from the Partiality of it, and from the
Repugnancy of it to its self. First, then, for the defectivenesse of the
Testimony of antiquity, in reference to the showing what certain form the
Apostles observed in settling the Government of Churches; A threefold
defectivenesse I observe in it, as to places, as to times, as to persons.
First, defectivenesse as to places; for him that would be satisfied, what
course the Apostles took for governing Churches, it would be very requisite to
observe the uniformity of the Apostles practice in all Churches of their
plantation. And if but one place varied, it were enough to overthrow the
necessity of any one form of Government, because thereby it would be evident,
that they observed no certain or constant course, nor did they look upon
themselves as obliged so to do. Now the ground of the necessity of such an
universal Testimony as to places, is this; We have already made it appear, that
there is no Law of Christ absolutely commanding one form, and forbidding all
other. We have no way then left to know, whether the Apostles did look upon
themselves as bound to settle one form, but by their practice; this practice
must be certain and uniform in them; this uniformity must be made known to us
by some unquestionable way: the Scriptures they are very silent in it,
mentioning very little more then Paul's practice, nor that fully and clearly;
therefore we must gather it from Antiquity, and the Records of following ages;
if these now fall short of our expectation, and cannot give us an account of
what was done by the Apostles in their several Churches planted by them, how is
it possible we should attain any certainty of what the Apostles practice was?
Now that antiquity is so defective as to Places, will appear from the general
silence as to the Churches planted by many of the Apostles. Granting the truth
of what Eusebius tells us, That Thomas went into Parthia, Andrew into Scythia,
John into the lesser Asia, Peter to the Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia,
Cappadocia, Hist. Eccles. tib. 3. c. 1.
Asia; besides what we read in Scripture of Paul, what a pitiful short account
have we here given in, of all the Apostles Travels, and their several
fellow laborers! And for all these, little or nothing spoke of the way they
took in settling the Churches by them planted, Who is it will undertake to tell
us what course Andrew took in Scythiae, in governing Churches? If we believe
the Records of after-ages, there was but one Bishop, viz. of Tomis for the
whole Country; how different is this from the pretended course of Paul,
setting up a single Bishop in every City? Where do we read of the Presbyteries
settled by Thomas in Parthia or the Indies? what course Philip, Bartholomew,
Matthew, Simon Zelotes, Matthias took. Might not they for any thing we know,
settle another kind of Government from what we read Paul, Peter, or John did,
unless we had some evidence that they were all bound to observe the same? Nay,
what evidence have we what course Peter took in the Churches of the
Circumcision? Whether he left them to their Synagogue*way, or altered it, and
how or wherein? These things should be made appear, to give men a certainty of
the way and course the Apostles did observe in the settling Churches by them
planted. But instead of this, we have a general silence in antiquity, and
nothing but the forgeries of latter ages to supply the vacuity: whereby they
filled up empty places as Plutarch Plut. in Theseo.
expresses it, as Geographers do Maps with some fabulous creatures of their
own invention. Here is work now for a Nicephorus Callisthus, a Simeon
Metaphrastes, the very Iacobus de Voragine of the Greek Church (as one well
calls him) those Historical Tinkers, that think to mend a hole where they find
it, and make three instead of it. This is the first defect in Antiquity as to
places. The second is as observable as to times; and what is most considerable:
Antiquity is most defective where it is most useful, viz. in the time
immediately after the Apostles, which must have been most helpful to us in
this inquiry. For, who dare with confidence believe the conjectures of Eusebius
at three hundred years distance from Apostolical times, when he has no other
Testimony to vouch, but the Hypotyposes of an uncertain Clement (certainly not
he of Alexandria, if Ios. Scaliger may be credited) and the Commentaries of
Hegesippus, whose Relations and Authority are as questionable as many of the
reports of Eusebius himself are in reference to those elder times: For which I
need no other Testimony but Eusebius in a place enough of its self to blast the
whole credit of antiquity, as to the matter now in debate. For speaking of Paul
and Peter, and the Churches by them planted, and coming to enquire after their
Successors, he makes this very ingenuous Confession. (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 3.
c. 4.
Say you so? Is it so hard a matter to find out who succeeded the Apostles in
the Churches planted by them, unless it be those mentioned in the writings of
Paul? What becomes then of our unquestionable Line of Succession of the Bishops
of several Churches, and the large Diagramms made of the Apostolical Churches
with every ones name set down in his Order, as if the Writer had been
Clarenceaulx to the Apostles themselves? Is it come to this at last that we
have nothing certain, but what we have in Scriptures? And must then the
Tradition of the Church be our rule to interpret Scriptures by? An excellent
way to find out the Truth doubtless, to bend the Rule to the crooked Stick, to
make the Judge stand to the Opinion of his Lacquey, what sentence he shall pass
upon the Cause in question; to make Scripture stand cap in hand to Tradition,
to know whether it may have leave to speak or no! Are all the great outcries of
Apostolical Tradition, of personal Succession, of unquestionable Records
resolved at last into the Scripture its self by him from whom all these long
pedegrees are fetched? then let Succession know its place, and learn to veil
Bonnet to the Scriptures? And withal let men take heed of over-^eaching
themselves when they would bring down so large a Catalogue of single Bishops
from the first and purest times of the Church for it will be hard for others to
believe them, when Eusebius professes it is so hard to find them. Well might
Scaliger then complain that the Intervall from the last Chapter of the Acts to
the middle of Trajan, in which time Quadratus and Ignatius began to Proleg in
Chron. Eusebii.
flourish, was tempus (...), as Varro speaks, a mere Chaos of time filled up
with the rude concept ons of Papias, Hermes, and others, who like Hann ibal,
when they could not find a way through, would make one either by force or
fraud. But yet Thirdly, here is another defect consequent to that of Time,
which is that of Persons; arising not only from a defect of Records, the
Diptychs of the Church being lost, which would have acquainted us with the
times of suffering of the several Martyrs (by them called their Natalitia) at
which times their several names were enrolled in these Martyrologies, which
some, as Iunius observes, have ignorantly mistaken for the time of their being
made Bishops of the places wherein their Cont. 3. l. 2. c. 5. not. 18.
names were entered, as Anacletus, Clytus and Clemens at Rome; I say the defect
as to Persons, not only arises hence, but because the Christians were so much
harassed with persecutions, that they could not have that leisure then to write
those things, which the leisure and peace of our ages have made us so eagerly
inquisitive after. Hence even the Martyrologies are so full stuffed with
Fables, witness one for all, the famous Legend of Catharina who suffered, say
they, in Diocletian's V. Chamier. Tom. 1. l. 2. cap. 16.
time. And truly the story of Ignatius (as much as it is defended with his
Epistles) does not seem to be any of the most probable. For, wherefore should
Ignatius of all others be brought to Rome to suffer, when the Proconsuls and
the Praesides provinciarum did every where in time of persecution execute their
power in punishing Christians at their own Tribunals, without sending them so
long a journey to Rome to be martyred there? And how came Ignatius to make so
many and such strange excursions, as he did by the story, if the Soldiers that
were his Guard were so cruel to him, as he complains they were? Now all those
uncertain and fabulous Narrations as to Persons then, arising from want of
sufficient Records made at those times, make it more evident how incompetent a
Judge antiquity is as to the certainty of things done in Apostolical times. If
we should only speak of the Fabulous Legends of the first Planters of Churches
in these Western parts, we need no further evidence of the great defect of
antiquity as to persons. Not to go out of our own Nation; Whence come the
stories of Peter, James, Paul, Simon, Aristobulus, besides Joseph of Arimathea,
and his company; all being Preachers of the Gospel, and planters of Churches
here, but only from the great defect in Antiquity, as to the Records of
persons employed in the several places for preaching the Gospel? Thus much to
show the defectiveness as to the Records of antiquity, and thereby the
incompetency of them for being a way to find out the certain course the
Apostles took in Settling and Governing Churches by them Planted.

The next thing showing the incompetency of the Records. 17.
of the Church for deciding the certain Form of Church Government in the
Apostles times, is, the ambiguity of the Testimony given by those Records. A
Testimony sufficient todecide a Controversy, must be plain and evident, and
must speak full and home to the Case under debate. Now if I make it appear that
antiquity does not so; nothing then can be evident from thence, but that we are
left to as great uncertainties as before. The matter in Controversy is,
whether any in a Superior Order to Presbyters were instituted by the Apostles
themselves for the Regulating of the Churches by them planted? For the proving
of which, three things are the most insisted on: First, the Personal succession
of some persons to the Apostles in Churches by them planted: Secondly, the
appropriating the name (...) to Bishops in a Superior Order to Presbyters,
after the Apostles decease: Thirdly, the Churches owning the Order of
Episcopacy, as of Divine Institution. If now we can make these three things
evident: First, That personal Succession might be without such superiority of
Order: Secondly, That the names of Bishop and Presbyters were common after the
Distinction between them was introduced: and Thirdly, That the Church did not
own Episcopacy as a Divine Institution, but Ecclesiastical; and those who seem
to speak most of it, do mean no more: I shall suppose enough done to invalidate
the Testimony of antiquity as to the matter in hand. First, Then for the matter
of Succession in Apostolical Churches* I shall lay down these four things, to
evince that the argument drawn from thence, cannot fully clear the certain
course which the Apostles took in settling the Government of Churches. First,
That the Succession might be only as to different Degree, and not as to a
different Order; where the Succession is clear, nothing possibly can be
inferred from it beyond this. For bare Succession implies no more then that
there was one in those Churches succeeding the Apostles, from whom afterward
the succession was derived. Now then supposing only at present, that it was
the Custom, in all the Churches at that time to be ruled by a College of
Presbyters acting in a parity of Power, and among these, one to sit as the Nasi
in the Sanhedrin, having a priority of Order above the rest in place, without
any superiory of Power over his Colleagues; will not the matter of Succession
be clear and evident enough notwithstanding this? Succession of Persons was the
thing inquired for, and not a Succession of Power; if therefore those that
would prove a Succession of Apostolical Power, can only produce a List and
Catalogue* of names in Apostolical Churches, without any evidence of what power
they had, they apparently fail of proving the thing in question, which is not,
whether there might not be found out a List of persons in many Churches derived
from the Apostles times; but whether those persons did enjoy by way of
peculiarity and appropriation to themselves, that power which the Apostles had
over many Churches while they lived? Now this, the mere Succession will never
prove which will best appear by some Parallel instances. At Athens, after they
grew weary of their ten years (...); the people chose nine every year to
Govern the affairs of the Commonwealth: These nine enjoyed a parity of power
among themselves, and therefore had a place where they consulted together about
the matters of State which was called (...), as Demosth. in Midiam. Plut. in
Peril. and vit. Niciae* V. Meursi^m de A^chont. Athen. l. 1. c. 9. Ennium de
Ep. Ath.
Demosthenes, Plutarch, and others tell us: Now although they enjoyed this
equality of power, yet One of them had greater Dignity then the rest, and
therefore was called (...) by way of excellency, and his name was only set in
the public Records of that year, and therefore was called (...) and the year
was reckoned from him, as Paus. in Lacon* Pollux. Onom. lib. 8. c. 9.
Pausanias, and Julius Pollux inform us. Here we see now the Sccession clear in
one single person and yet no superiority of power in him over his Colleagues
The like may be observed among the Ephori and Bidiaej at Sparta; the number of
the Ephori was always five from their first institution by Lycurgus, and not
nine (as the Greek Etymologist imagines): these enjoyed likewise a parity of
power among them; but among these to give name to the year, they made choice of
one who was called (...) here too, ^s the (...) at Athens, and him they called
(...), as Plutarch tells us. Where we have the very name (...) attributed Pans.
Lacon V. Nic. ^ragium de Rep. L^ced. lib. 2. c. 4.
to him that had only his primacy of order without any superiority of power,
which is used by Justin Martyr of the President of assemblies among the
Christians.

Now from hence we may evidently see that mere succession of some single
persons named above the rest, in the successions in Apostolical Churches,
cannot enforce any superiority of power in the persons so named, above others
supposed to be as joynt*Governours of the Churches with them. I dispute not
whether it were so or no; whether according to Blondel the Succession was from
the (...), or whether by choice, as at Alexandria; but I only now show that
this argument from Succession is weak, and proves not at all the certainty of
the power those persons enjoyed. Secondly* This Succession is not so evident
and convincing in all places as it ought to be, to demonstrate the thing
intended. It is not enough to show a List of some persons in the great Churches
of Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria, (although none of these be
unquestionable) but it should be produced at Philippi, Corinth, Caesarea, and
in all the seven Churches of Asia (and not only at Ephesus) and so likewise in
Creet, some succeeding Titus; and not think Men will be satisfied with the
naming a Bishop of Gortyna so long after him. But, as I said before, in none of
the Churches most spoken of is the Succession so clear as is necessary. For at
Jerusalem it seems somewhat strange how fifteen Bishops of the Circumcision
should be crowded into so narrow a room as they are; so that many of them could
not have above two years time to rule in the Church. And it would bear an
inquiry where the Seat of the Bishops of Jerusalem was from the time of the
Destruction of the City by Titus, when the Walls were laid even wih the Ground
by Musonius) till the time of Adrian; for till that time the succession of the
Bishops of the Circumcision continued. For Antioch, it is far from being
agreed, whether Evodius or Ignatius succeeded Peter, or Paul; or the one Peter,
and the other Paul; much less at Rome, whether Cletus, Anacletus, or Clemens
are to be reckoned first; (but of these afterward). At Alexandria where the
succession runs clearest, the Original of the power is imputedito the choice
of Presbyters, and to no Divine Institution. But at Ephesus the succession of
Bishops from Timothy is pleaded with the greatest Confidence; and the Testimony
brought Conc* Chalce^o^ens. Part. 2. Act. 11. apud ^^in. Council. Gr. La To 3.
p. 410.
for it, is from Leontius Bishop of Magnesia in the Council of Chalcedon, whose
words are these, (...) From Timothy to this day there has been a succession of
seven and twenty Bishops, all of them ordained in Ephesus. I shall not insist
so much on the incompetency of this single witness to pass a judgment upon a
thing of that Nature, at the distance of four hundred Years, in which time
Records being lost, and Bishops being after settled there, no doubt they would
begin their account from Timothy, because of his employment there once for
settling the Churches thereabout. And to that end we may observe that in the
aftertimes of the Church, they never met with any of the Apostles, or
Evangelists in any place, but they presently made them Bishops of that place.
So, Philip is made Bishop of Trallis, Ananias Bishop of Damascus, Nicolaus
Bishop of Samaria, Barnabas Bishop of Milan, Silas Bishop of Corinth, Sylvanus
of Thessalonica, Crescens of Chalcedon, Andreas of Byzantium* and upon the same
grounds Peter Bishop of Rome. No wonder then if Leontius make Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, and derive the succession down from him. But again, this was not an
act of the Council its self, but only of one single person delivering his
private opinion in it; and that which is most observable, is, that in the thing
mainly insisted on by Leontius, he was contradicted in the face of the whole
Council, by Philip a Presbyter of Constantinople. For the case of B^ssianus and
Stephen, about their violent intrusion into the Bishopric of Ephesus, being
discussed before the Council; A question was propounded by the Council where
the Bishop of Ephesus was to be regularly ordained, according to the Canons.
Leontius Bishop of Magnesia says, that there had been twenty seven Bishops of
Ephesus from Timothy, and all of them ordained in the place. His business was
not to derive exactly the succession of Bishops, but speaking according to
vulgar tradition, he insists that all had been ordained there. Now if he be
convicted of the crimen falsi in his (...), no wonder if we meet with a mistake
in his (...) i. e. if he were out in his allegation, no wonder if he were
deceived in his tradition. Now as to the Ordination of the Bishops in Ephesus,
Philip, a Presbyter of Constantinople, convicts him of falsehood in that; for,
says he, John Bishop of Constantinople going into Asia, deposed fifteen
Bishops there, and ordained others in their room. And Aetius Archdeacon of
Constantinople instanceth in Castinus, Heraclides, Basilius Bishop of Ephesus,
all ordained by the Bishop of Constantinople. If then the certainty of
succession relyes upon the credit of this Leontius, let them thank the Council
of Chalcedon, who have sufficiently blasted it, by determining the cause
against him in the main evidence produced by him. So much to show how far the
clearest evidence for succession of Bishops from Apostolical times is from
being convincing to any rational Man. Thirdly, the succession so much pleaded
by the Writers of the Primitive Church, was not a succession of Persons in
Apostolical Power, but a succession in Apostolical Doctrine; Which will be
seen by a view of the places produced to that purpose. The first is that of
Irenaeus. Quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali Advers. haeres. l. 3. cap. 3.
volumine omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, maximae and antiquissimae,
and omnibus cognitae a gloriossimis duobus Apostolis Petro and Paulo, Romae
fundatae and constitutae Ecclesiae, eam quam habet ab Apostolis traditionem,
and annunciatam hominibus fidem, per successiones Episcoporum perveni^n^es
usque ad nos. indicantes, confundimus omnes eos, etc. Where we see Irenaeus
does the least of all aim at the making out of a Succession of Apostolical
power in the Bishops he speaks of, but a conveying of the Doctrine of the
Apostles down to them by their hands: (which Doctrine is here called Tradition,
not as that word is abused by the Papists to signify something distinct from
the Scriptures, but as it signifies the conveyance of the Doctrine of the
Scripture it self.) Which is cleared by the beginning of that Chapter.
Traditionem itaque Apostolorum in toto mundo manifestatam in Ecclesia adest
perspic ^re omnibus qui vera v^lint audire; and habemus annumerare eos qui ab
Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and successores eorum usque ad
nos qui nihil tale docuerunt n^que cognoverunt, quale ab his deliratur. His
plain meaning is, that those persons who were appointed by the Apostles to
oversee and govern Churches, being sufficient witnesses themselves of the
Apostles Doctrine, have conveyed it down to us by their successors, and we
cannot learn any such thing of them, as Valentinus and his followers broached.
We see it is the Doctrine still he speaks of, and not a word what power and
superiority these Bishops had over Presbyters in their several Churches. To the
same purpose Tertullian in that known speech of his; Edant Origines Ecclesiarum
suarum, evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones ab initio
decurrentem, ut primu^ De praescript. advers. haere^. cap. 32.
ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis aut Apostolicis viris habuerit authorem
and antecessorem. Hoc modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt; sicut
Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum a Johanne conlocatum refert, sicut
Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit; Proinde utique and caeterae
exhibent, quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici seminis
traduces habeant. A succession I grant is proved in Apostolical Churches by
these words of Tertullian, and this succession of persons, and those persons
Bishops too* but then it is only said that these persons derived their office
from the Apostles, but nothing expressed what relation they had to the Church
any more then is employed in the general name of Episcopi; nor what power they
had over Presbyters: only that there were such persons, was sufficient to his
purpose, which was to prescribe against heretics, i. e. to Nonsuit them, or
to give in general reasons why they were not to be proceeded with as to the
particular debate of the things in question between them. For praescribere in
the civil Law (whence Tertullian transplanted that word as many other into the
Church) is, cum quis adversarium certis exceptionibus removet a lite
contestanda, ita ut de summa rei neget agendum, eamve causam ex juris
praescripto judicanda^: three sorts of these prescriptions Tertullian elsewere
mentions; De Virgin. veland. c. 1.
Hoc exigere veritatem cui nemo praescribere potest, non spatium temporum, non
patrocinia personarum, non privilegium regionum. Here he stands upon the first
which is a prescription of time, because the Doctrine which was contrary to
that of the Heretics was delivered by the Apostles, and conveyed down by their
successors, which was requisite to be showed in order to the making his
prescription good. Which he thus further explains; Age jam qui voles
curiositatem Dap. 37. de pr^scrip^.
melius exercere in negotio salutis tuae; percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud
quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur, apud quas*
ipsae authenticae eorum literae recitantur, sonantes vocem and praesentantes
faciem uniuscujusque. Proxime est tibi Achaia? habes Corinthum. Si non long es
a Macedonia, habes Philippos, habes Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Asiam
tendere, habes Ephesum. S^ autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam, unde nobis
quoque auctoritas praesto est. What he spoke before of the persons, he now
speaks of the Churches themselves planted by the Apostles, which by retaining
the authentic Epistles of the Apostles sent to them, did thereby sufficiently
prescribe to all the novell opinions of the Heretics. We see then evidently
that it is the Doctrine which they speak of as to succession, and the persons
no further then as they are the conveyers of that Doctrine; either then it must
be proved that a succession of some persons in Apostolical power is necessary
for the conveying of this Doctrine to men, or no argument at all can be
inferred from hence for their succeeding the Apostles in their power, because
they are said to convey down the Apostolical Doctrine to succeeding ages. Which
Aug. Ep. 42.
is Austins meaning in that speech of his, Radix Christianae societatis per
seeds Apostolorum and successiones Episcoporum, certa per orbem propagatione
diffunditur* The root of Christian society, (i. e. the Doctrine of the Gospel)
is spread abroad the world through the channels of the Apostolical Sees, and
the continued successions of Bishops therein. And yet if we may Aug^ Ep. 29.
believe the same Austin, Secundum honorum vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major est. The difference between Episcopacy
and Presbytery rise from the custom of the Church, attributing a name of
greater honor to those it had set above others. And as for Tertullian, I
believe neither party will stand to his judgment as to the original of Church
power: For he says expressly, Differenti^m Exhort. ^asil. c. 7.
inter ordinem and plebem constituit Ecclesia auctoritas; all the difference
between Ministers and people comes from the Churches authority; unless he mean
something more by the following words, and honor per Ordinis concessum
sanctificatus a Deo, viz. that the honor which is received by ordination from
the Bench of Church Officers, is sanctified by God, i. e. by his appointment as
well as blessing. For otherwise I know not how to understand him. But however,
we see here he makes the Government of the Church to lie in a Concessus
ordinis, which I know not otherwise to render, than by a Bench of Presbyters*
because only they were said in ordinem cooptari, who were made Presbyters, and
not those who were promoted to any higher degree in the Church. By the way we
may observe the original of the name of Holy Orders in the Church, not as the
Papists, and others following them, as though it noted any thing inherent by
way of (I know not what) character in the person; but because the persons
ordained were thereby admitted in Ordinem among the number of Church Officers.
So there was Ordo Senatorum, V. Seldom in Eutych. p. 28, etc.
Ordo Equestris, Ordo Decurionum, and Ordo Sacerdotum among the Romans, as in
this Inscription.

ORDO SACERDOT. DEI HERCULIS INVICTI. From hence the use of the word came into
the Church; and thence Ordination, ex vi vocis, imports no more than solemn
admission into this order of Presbyters; and therefore it is observable, that
laying on of hands never made men Priests under the Law, but only admitted them
into public Office. So much for Tertullians Concessus ordinis, which has thus
f^r drawn us* out of our way, but we now return. And therefore Fourthly, This
personal suceession so much spoken of, ^^ sometimes attributed to Presbyters,
even after the distinction came into use between Bishops and them. And that
even by those Adver. haeres. l. 3. c. 2.
Authors who before had told us the succession was by Bishops, as Irenaeus. Cum
autem ad eam iterum traditionem, qu^ est ab Apostolis, qu^ per successiones
Presbyterorum in Ecclesiis custoditur, provocamus eos qui adversantur
traditioni; dicent, se non solum Presbyteris sed etiam Apostolis existentes
sapientiores, etc. Here he attributes the keeping of the Pradition of
Apostolical Doctrine to the succession of Presbyters, which before he had done
to Bishops. And more fully afterward, Quapropter iis qui in Ecclesia sunt
Presbyteris obaudire Lib. 4. cap. 43.
oportet, his qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, sicut ostendimus, qui cum
Episcopatus successione, charisma veritatis certum secundum placitum patris
acceperunt. In this place he not only asserts the succession of Presbyters to
the Apostles, but likewise attributes the successio Episcopatus to these very
Presbyters. What strange confusion must this raise in any ones mind, that seeks
for a succession of Episcopal power above Presbyters from the Apostles, by the
Testimony of Irenaeus, when he so plainly attributes both the succession to
Presbyters, and the Episcopacy too, which he speaks of? And in the next chapter
adds, Tales Presbyteros nutrit Ecclesia, Cap. 44.
de quibus and Propheta ait, and dabo principes tuos in pace, and Episcopos
tuos in justitia. Did Irenaeus think that Bishops in a superior order to
Presbyters were derived by an immediate succession from the Apostles, and yet
call the Presbyters by the name of Bishops? It is said, indeed that in the
Apostles times the names, Bishop and Presbyter were comman, although the Office
was distinct, but that was only during the Apostles life, say some, when after
the name Bishop was appropriated to that order that was in the Apostles (so
called before); but, say others, it was only till subject Presbyters was
constituted, and then grew the difference between the names. But neither of
these (...) can draw forth the difficulty in these places of Irenaeus; for now
both the Apostles were dead, and subject Presbyters certainly in some of these
Apostolical Churches were then constituted, whence comes then the community of
names still, that those who are said to succeed the Apostles, are called
Bishops in one place, but Presbyters in another, and the very succession of
Episcopacy attributed to Presbyters? Can we then possibly conceive that these
testimonies of Irenaeus can determine the point of succession, so as to make
clear to us what that power was which those persons enjoyed, whom he sometimes
calls Bishops, and sometimes Presbyters. But it is not Irenaeus alone; who
tells us that Presbyters succeed the Apostles; even Cyprian who pleads so much
for obedience to the Bishops as they were then constituted in the Church, yet
speaks often of his compresbyteri* and in his Epistles to Florentius E^ 69. ed.
Pamel s. 4.
Pupianus, who had reproached him, speaking of those words of Christ, He that
hears you, hears me, etc. Qui dicit ad Apostoles, a^ per hoc ad omnes
praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt* where he attr^butes
Apostolical succession to all that were praepositi, which name implies not the
relation to Presbyters as over them, but to the people, and is therefore common
both to Bishops and Presbyters; V. Cyprian. ep. 3. a Cler* Romans ep. 62. and 65.
in Mich. 2. epist. 1. Ep* ad M^g. p. 33. ^d. ^s. Vossi p. 31. Vedel* p. 50.
for so afterward he speaks, nec fraternitas habuerit Episcopum, nec pl^bs
Praepositum, etc. Jerome says, that Presbyters are loco Apostolorum, and that
they do Apostolico gradui succeders; and the so much magnified Ignatius, (...),
that the Presbyters succeeded in the place of the Bench of Apostles; and
elsewhere of Sotion the Deacon (...), as it is read in the Florentine copy set
out by Vossius; but in the former Editions, both by Vedelius and the most
learned Primate of Armagh it is read (...) but that Usser. p. 49.
of Vossius seems to be the true reading, to which the old Latin version in
Bishop Usher fully agrees; Quoniam subjectus est Episcopo ut grati^ Dei, and
Presbyterio ut legi Jesu Christi. It might be no improbable conjecture to guess
from hence at Ignatius his opinion concerning the original both of Episcopacy
and Presbytery. The former he looks on as an excellent gift of God to the
Church; so a learned Doctor Ep. 69.
paraphraseth Grati^ Dei, i. e. Dono a Deo Ecclesiae ^ndulto; so Cyprian often
Divina dignatione, speaking of Bishops; i. e. that they looked on it as an act
of Gods special favor to the Church to find out that means for unity in the
Church, to pitch upon one among the Presbyters who should have the chief Rule
in every particular Church* but then for Presbytery, he looks on that as
(...), an institution and Law of Jesus Christ, which must on that account
always continue in the Church. And ^o Sotion did commendably in submitting to
the Bishop as a Favor of God to the Church for preventing schism^* on which
account it is, and not upon the account of divine institution, that Ignatius is
so earnest in requiring obedience to the Bishop, because, as Cyprian faith,
Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo coad^nata, and grex Pastori adhaerens* and the
Bishops then being Orthodox, he lays such a charge upon the people to adher^
to them, (for it is to the people, and not to the Presbyters he speaks most)
which was as much as to bid them hold to the unity of the faith, and avoid
those pernicious heresies which were then abroad; and so Ignatius and Jerome
may easily be reconciled to one another; both owning the Council of Presbyters
as of divine institution, and both requiring obedience to Bishops as a singular
privilege granted to the Church, for preventing schisms, and preserving unity
in the Faith. And in all those thirty five Testimonies produced out of Ignatius
his Epistles for Episcopacy, I can meet but with one which is brought to prove
the least femblance of an Institution of Christ for Episcopacy* and if I be not
much deceived, the sense of that place is clearly mistaken too. the place is
Ep. ad Ephesios; He is exhorting the Ephesians (...)* which I suppose may be
rendered P. 19. Voss^.
to fulfill the will of God; so (...) signifies Apocalypse. 17. 17. and adds
(...). He begins to exhort them to concur with the will of God, and concludes
his Exhortation to concur with the will or counsel of the Bishop; and in the
middle he shows the ground of the connection of these two together; for Christ,
says he, who is our inseparable life is the counsel of the Father: and the
Bishops who are scattered abroad to the ends of the earth, are the counsel of
Jesus Christ, i. e. do concur with the will of Christ; therefore follow the
counsel of your Bishop, which also you do. Every thing is plain and obvious in
the sense here, and very coherent to the expressions both before and after;
only the (...) must be left out as plainly redundant, and (...) must not be
rendered determinati, but rather disterminati, because it refers to a place
here, and so it notes their being dispersed into several places, and separated
from one another, thereby implying the unity of their faith, and the coagulum
fidei, notwithstanding their distance from one another as to place in the
World, which in Cyprians words is, Ecclesiae universae per totum mundum
unitatis vinculo copulatae. And certainly a stronger argument then this could
not have been given for the Ephesians cheerful obedience to their Bishop
(which is the thing beaims at) then the universal consent of all the Bishops in
the Christian World in the unity of the faith of Christ; so that as Christ is
the will and counsel of the Father, because of that Harmony and consent which
is between their wills; so the Bishops are the will and counsel of Christ, as
cheerfully uniting in the profession of his Faith. So that we see Ignatius
himself cannot give a doubting mind satisfaction of the Divine institution of
Bishops, when in the only place brought to that purpose, his sense is quite
different from what it is brought for. So that the Records of the Church are
far from deciding this controversy as to the certainty of the form of
Government instituted by Christ, because of the Ambiguity of those Records as
to the point of succession to the Apostles* in that this succession might be
only of a different degree, in that it is not clear and convincing in all
places: in that where it is clearest, it is meant of a succession of Doctrine,
and not of persons; in that if it were of persons, yet Presbyters are said to
succeed the Apostles as well as Bishops, by the same persons who speak of
these. By which last thing we have likewise cleared the Second thing
propounded, to show the ambiguity of the Testimony of Antiquity, which was the
promiscuous use of the names of Bishop and Presbyters, after the distinction
between their office was brought in by the Church. For we have made it appear
that the names are promiscuously used, when that succession which is sometimes
attributed to Bishops, is at other times given to Presbyters. Other instances
might be brought of that nature* as, first, that of Clemens Romanus in his
excellent Epist^e, which like the River Alp^eus had run under ground for so
many centuries of years* but has now in these last times of the world appeared
publicly to the view of the World, to make it appear how true that is which he
says the Apostles did foresee, (...), Ep. gr. lat. p. 57.
that there would be great contentions about the name of Episcopacy* and so
there are still and that from his Epistle too. For when in one place he tells
us that the Apostles ordained their first fruits to be Bishops and Deacons,
(...) Page 54.
of those that should believe: afterward he makes no scruple of calling those
Bishops Presbyters in several places, (...), Page 57.
etc. and speaking of the present schism at Corinth, he says, it was a most
shameful thing and unworthy of Christians, (...). To hear the firm and ancient
Church of Corinth, for the sake of one or two persons to raise a sedition
against the Presbyters* and afterward, (...); Page 69. and p. 73. p. 2, 3.
Only let the flock of Christ enjoy its peace with the Presbyters which are set
over it. But because this is said to be spoken before the time of distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters, it being supposed that there were no subject
Presbyters then (although no reason can be assigned why the Apostles should
ordain Bishops (...) of those that should believe, and should not likewise
ordain Presbyters for them) yet to take away all scruple, we shall go farther;
when subject Presbyters, as they are called, are acknowledged to be, and yet
Bishops are called Presbyters then too* For which we have the clear testimony
of the Martyrs of the Gallican Church in their Epistle to Eleutherius Bishop of
Rome, who call Irenaeus (...), when as Blondell observes he had been nine years
Apol* p. 3^.
Bishop of Lions in the place of Pothinus; neither does Blondels argument lie
here, that because they call him the Presbyter Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 3.
of the Church, therefore he was no Bishop, as his Antagonist supposes; but he
freely acknowledges him to have succeeded Pothinus there in his Bishopric;
but because after the difference arose between Bishop and Presbyters, yet they
called him by the name of Presbyter, it seems very improbable that when they
were commending one to the Bishop of another Church, they should make use of
the lowest name of honor then appropriated to subject Presbyters, which
instead of commending, were a great debasing of him, if they had looked on a
superior order above those Presbyters, as of divine institution, and thought
there had been so great a distance between a Bishop and subject Presbyters, as
we are made to believe there was. Which is, as if the Master of a College in
one University should be sent by the Fellows of his Society to the Heads of the
other, and should in his Commendatory letters to them, be styled a Senior
Fellow of that House* Would not any one that read this, imagine that there was
no difference between a Senior Fellow and a Master, but only a primacy of
order, that he was the first of the number without any power over the rest?
This was the case of Irenaeus: he is supposed to be Bishop of the Church of
Lions; he is sent by the Church of Lions on a Message to the Bishop of Rome;
when notwithstanding his being Bishop they call him Presbyter of that Church,
(when there were other Presbyters who were not Bishops,) what could any one
imagine by the reading of it, but that the Bishop was nothing else but the
Seniour Presbyter, or one that had a primacy of order among, but no divine
Right to a power of jurisdiction over his Fellow Presbyters? More instances of
this nature are brought there by that learned Author, which the Reader may
compare with the answers, and then let him judge whether the Testimony of
Antiquity have not too much ambiguity in it to decide the Controversy clearly
on either side. But that which seems yet more material, is, that which we
observed in the third place, that those who acknowledge the superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters, do impute it to an act of the Church, and not ascribe
it to any divine institution. The testimony of Jerome to this purpose is well
known, and has been produced already; that of the counterfeit Ambiose, but
true Hilary, is in every ones mouth upon this Controversy; Quia primum
Presbyteri Episcopi In Ephesians. 4.
appellabantur, ut recedente uno sequensti succederet; sed quia coeperunt
sequentes Presbyteri indigni inveniri ad primatus tenendos, immutata est ratio,
prospiciente Co^cilio, ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum multorum
Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, ne indignus temer^ Usurparet and esset multis
scandalum* Very strange that an opinion so directly contrary to the Divine
right of Episcop^cy should be published by a Deacon of the Church of Rome, and
these Commentaries cited by Austin, with applause of the person, without
stigmatizing him for a heretic with Aerius, if it had been the opinion of the
Church, that Bishops in their power over Presbyters did succeed the Apostles by
a Divine Right. Nothing more clear, then that he asserts all the difference
between a Bishop, and Presbyters to arise from an act of the Church choosing
men for their deserts, when before they succeeded in order of place; It is a
mistake of Blundels, to attribute this to the Nicene Council; doub less he
means no more then that Hierom calls Concilium Presbyterorum, or which he
himself means by judicium Sacerdotum. The testimony of Austin has been already
mentioned. Secundum honorum vocabula quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit,
Episcopatus Presbyterio major est. Thereby implying it was not so always: else
to what purpose serves that jam obtinuit, and that the original of the
difference was from the Church? But more express and full is Isidore himself
the De Eccles. Officiis l. 7. cap. 7.
Bishop of Sevill in Spain speaking of Presbyters. His sicut Episcopis
dispensatio mysteriorum Dei commissa est; praesunt eni^ Ecclesiis Christi, and
in confectione corporis and sanguinis consortes cum Episcopis sunt; similiter
and in doctrina populi and in Officio praedicandi, sed sola propter
auctoritatem summo sacerdoti Clericorum Ordinatio reservata est, ne a multis
Ecclesiae Disciplina vindicatae, concordiam solueret, scandala generaret. What
could be spoken more to our purpose then this is? he asserts the identity of
power as well as name, in both Bishops and Presbyters in governing the Church,
in celebrating the Eucharist, in the Office of preaching to the people, only
for the greater Honor of the Bishop, and for preventing Schisms in the Church,
the power of Ordination was reserved to the Bishop; by those words propter
Auctoritatem, he cannot possibly mean the Authority of a Divine Command, for
that his following words contradict, that it was to prevent Schisms and
Scandals, and after produces the whole place of Jerome to that purpose.
Agreeable to this, is the judgment of the second Council of Sevil in Spain,
upon the occasion of the irregular proceeding of some Conc. Hispal. secundum
decret. 7. apud Bin. T. 4. p. 560.
Presbyters ordained by Agapius Bishop of Corduba. Their words are these: Nam
quamvis cum Episcopis plurima illis Ministeriorum communis sit dispensatio,
quaedam novellis and Ecclesiasticis regulis sibi prohibita noverint, sicut
Presbyterororum and Diaconorum and Virginum consecratio* etc. Haec enim omnia
illicita esse Presbyteris, quia Pontificatus apicem non habent, quem solis
deberi Episcopis authoritate Canonum praecipitur: ut per hoc and discretio
graduum, and dignitatis fastigium summi Pontificis demonstretur. How much are
we beholding to the ingenuity of a Spanish Council, that does so plainly
disavow the pretense of any divine right to the Episcopacy by them so
strenuously asserted? All the right they plead for, is from the novellae and
Ecclesiasticae regula, which import quite another thing from Divine
institution; and he that has not learnt to distinguish between the authority
of the Canons of the Church, and that of the Scriptures, will hardly ever
understand the matter under debate with us: and certainly it is another thing
to preserve the honor of the different Degrees of the Clergy, but especially
of the chief among them, viz. the Bishop, than to observe a thing merely out of
Obedience to the command of Christ; and upon the account of Divine institution.
That which is rejoyned in answer to these Testimonies, as far as I can learn,
is only this, that the Council and Isidore followed Jerome, and so all make up
but one single Testimony. But might it not as well be said, that all that are
for Episcopacy did follow Ignatius or Epiphanius, and so all those did make up
but one single Testimony on the other side? Ye^ I do as yet despair of finding
any one single Testimony in all Antiquity, which does in plain terms assert
Episcopacy, as it was settled by the practice of the Primitive Church in the
ages following the Apostles, to be of an unalterable Divine right. Some
expressions I grant in some of them seem to extol Episcopacy very high; but
then it is in Order to the Peace and Unity of the Church, and in that Sense
they may sometimes be admitted to call it Divine and Apostolical, not in regard
of its institution, but of its end, in that it did in their Opinion tend as
much to preserve the Unity of the Church, as the Apostles Power did over the
Churches while they were living. If any shall meet with expressions seeming to
carry the Fountain of Episcopal power higher, let them remember to distinguish
between the power it self, and the restrained Exercise of that power; the
former was from the Apostles, but common to all Dispensers of the Word; the
latter was appropriated to some, but by an Act of the Church, whereby an
eminency of power was attributed to one, for the safety of the whole. And
withal let them consider, that every Hyperbolical expression of a Father will
not bear the weight of an Argument: and how common it was to call things
Divine, which were conceived to be of excellent use, or did come from persons
in authority in the Church. One would think that should meet with (...) in the
Conc. Chal. Part. 2. Act. 11.
Acts of the Council of Chalcedon, it could be rendered by nothing short of the
Scriptures: whereas they mean no more by it, but only the Emperors Letters to
the Council. It has been already observed how ready they were to call any
custom of the Church before their times an Apostolical Tradition. And as the
Heathens when they had any thing which they knew not whence it came, they
usually called it (...), as though it came immediately from Heaven; So the
Fathers when Traditions were conveyed to them without the names of the Authors,
they conclude they could have no other Fountain but the Apostles. And thus we
see, many Traditions in several Churches directly contrary to one another, were
looked on as Apostolical, only from the prevalency of this persuasion, that
whatever they derived from their Fathers, was of that nature. But then for that
answer to the Council, and Isidore, and Jerome, that they make but one
testimony: I say, that although the words be of the same Sense, yet they have
the nature of a different testimony, upon these accounts. First as produced by
persons of different condition in the Church; some think they are even with
Jerome, when they tell us what a pique there was between him and John Bishop of
Jerusalem; and, that he might have the better advantage of his adversary, when
he could not raise himself up to the Honor of Episcopacy, he would bring that
down to the State of Presbytery; but as such entertain too unworthy thoughts of
one of those Fathers, whom they profess themselves admirers of; so this
prejudice cannot possibly lie against Isidore, or the Council: For the first
was himself a Bishop of no mean account in the Church of God; and the Council
was composed of such; it could be no biass then of that nature could draw them
to this Opinion: and no doubt they would have been as forward to maintain their
own authority in the Church, as the Truth and Conscience would give them leave.
Therefore on this account one Testimony of a single Bishop, much more of a
whole Council of them, against their acting by Divine Authority in the Church,
is of more validity then ten for it; in as much as it cannot but be in Reason
supposed that none will speak any thing against the authority they are in, or
what may tend in the least to diminish it, but such as make more Conscience of
the Truth, then of their own Credit and Esteem in the World. Secondly, in that
it was done in different ages of the Church: Jerome flourished about 380.
Isidore succeeded Leander in Sevill, 600. The Council sat, 619. The Council of
Aquen which tanscribes Isidore, and owns his Doctrine, 816. So that certainly
supposing the words of all to be the same, yet the Testimony is of greater
force, as it was owned in several Ages of the Church, by whole Councils,
without any the least control that we read of. And if this then must not be
looked on as the Sense of the Church at that time, I know not how we can come
to understand it: if what is positively maintained by different persons in
different ages of the Church, and in different places without any opposing it
by Writers of those ages, or condemning it by Councils, may not be conceived to
be the Sense of the Church at that time. So that laying all these things
together, we may have enough to conclude the Ambiguity at least, and thereby
incompetency of the Testimony of Antiquity for finding out the certain form
which the Apostles observed in planting Churches.

We proceed to the third thing to show the incompetency. ^8.
of Antiquity for deciding this Controversy, which will be from the Partiality
of the Testimony brought from thence. Two things will sufficiently manifest the
Partiality of the judgment of Antiquity in this Case. First their apparent
judging of the practice of the first Primitive Church, according to the
Customs of their own. Secondly, their stiff and pertinacious adhering to
private traditions contrary to one another, and both sides maintaining theirs
as Apostolical. First, judging the practice of the Apostles by that of their
own times; as is evident by Theodoret, and the rest of the Greek Commentators,
assigning that as the Reason why the Presbyters spoken of in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, were not Bishops in the Sense of their age, because there
could be but one Bishop in a City, whereas there are more expressed in those
places, as being in the several Cities: whereas this is denied of Apostolical
times by the late pleaders for Episcopacy; and it is said of them, that they
spoke according to the custom of their own time. And it is now thought there
were two Bishops in Apostolical times in several Cities: the one the head of
the Jewish Coetus, and the other of the Gentile. I enter not the Dispute again
here, whether it were so or no, only I hence manifest, how far those persons
themselves who plead for the judgment of the Fathers as deciding this
Controversy, are from thinking them impartial Judges, when as to the grounds
of their Sentence they are confessed to speak only of the practice of their
own time. Who can imagine any force in Chrysostomes argument, That the
Presbyters who laid hands on Timothy must needs be Bishops, because none do
Ordain in the Church, but Bishops, unless he makes this the medium of his
argument. That whatever was the practice of the Church in his days, was so in
Apostolical times. There is, I know not what strange influence in a received
custom, if generally embraced, that does possess men with a ^ancy, it was
never otherwise then it is with them; nay* when they imagine the necessity of
such a custom at present in the Church, they presently think it could never be
otherwise then it is. But of this I have spoken somewhat already. Secondly,
that which makes it appear how partial the judgment of Antiquity is, in
adhering to their particular Traditions, and calling them Apostolical, though
contrary to one another. How can we then fix upon the Testimony of Antiquity as
any thing certain or impartial in this Case? when it has been found so
evidently partial in a Case of less concernment then this is. A witness that
has once betrayed his faithfulness in the open Court, will hardly have his
Evidence taken in a Case of moment, especially when the Cause must stand or
fall according to his single Testimony. For my part, I see not how any man that
would see Reason for what he does, can adhere to the Church for an
unquestionable Tradition received from the Apostles; when in the case of
keeping Easter, whether with the Jews on the fourteenth Moon, or only on the
Lords day, there was so much unreasonable heat showed on both sides, and such
confidence, that on either side their Tradition was Apostolical. The Story of
which is related by Eusebius, and Socrates, and many others. They had herein
all the advantages Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 25. Socrat. l. ^5. c. 21.
imaginable in order to the knowing the certainty of the thing then in question
among them. As their nearness to Apostolical times, being but one remove from
them: yea the persons contending pleaded personal acquaintance with some of the
Apostles themselves, as Polycarp with John, and Anicetus of Rome, that he had
his Tradition from Saint Peter; and yet so great were the heats, so
irreconcilable the Controversy, that they proceeded to dart the Thunderbolt of
excommunication in one another faces; as Victor with more zeal then piery,
threw presently the Asiatick Churches all out of Communion, only for differing
as to this Tradition. The small coals of this fire kindled a whole Aetna of
contention in the Christian world, the smoke and ashes, nay the flames of
which, by the help of the Prince of the Air were blown over into the bosom of
the then almost Infant Northern Churches of Britain, where a solemn dispute
was caused upon this quarrel between Colmannus on one side, and Wilfride on the
other. The like contest was upon this Occasion between Augustine the Monk, and
the British Bishops. The Observation of this strange combustion in the
Primitive Church upon the account of so vain, frivolous, unnecessary a thing as
this was, drew this note from a Learned and Judicious Man, formerly quoted, in
his Tract of Schism; By this we may plainly see the danger of our appeal to
Antiquity, for resolution in controverted points of Faith. O how small relief
are we to expect from thence! For if the discretion of the chiefest Guides and
Directors of the Church did in a point so trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainly
fail them, as not to see the Truth in a Subject, wherein it is the greater
marvel how they could avoid the fight of it; Can we, without the imputation of
great grossness and folly, think so poor-spirited persons, competent Judges of
the questions now on foot betwixt the Churches? Thus that person, as able to
make the best improvement of the Fathers as any of those who profess themselves
the most superstitious admirers of Antiquity. But if we must stand to the
judgment of the Fathers, let us stand to it in this, that no Tradition is any
further to be embraced, then as it is founded on the Word of GOD. For which
purpose those words of Cyprian are very Cyprian ep. 47. n. 13.
observable; In compendio est autem apud religios as and simplices mentes, and
errorem deponere, and invenire atque eruere veritatem: Nam si ad Divinae
Traditionis caput and Originem revertamur, cessat error humanus. He asserts it
an easy matter, for truly religious and plain-hearted men to lay aside their
Error, and to find out the Truth, which is by returning to the head and spring
of Divine Tradition, viz. the Scriptures; Which he expresses further, with an
elegant similitude: Si Canalis aquam ducens, qui copiose prius and largiter
profluebat, subito deficiat, nonne ad fontem pergitur ut illic Ib. n. 14.
defectionis ratio noscatur, utrumne arescentibus venis, in capite unda
siccaverit; an vero integra deinde and plena procurrens, in medio itinere
destiterit? ut si vitio interrupti aut bibuli canalis effectum est, quo minus
aqua continua perseveranter and jugiter flueret, refecto and confirmato canali
ad usum atque ad potum civitatis aqua collecta eadem ubertate atque integritate
repraesentaretur, qua de font proficiscitur. Quod and nunc facere oportet Dei
sacerdotes praecepta divina servantes, ut si in aliquo mutaverit (l. nutaverit)
and vacillaverit veritas, ad originem Dominicam, and Evangelicam* and
Apostolicam Traditionem revertamur, and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, unde
and ordo and origo surrexit. His meaning is; That as when a channel suddenly
fails, we presently inquire where and how the breach was made, and look to the
Spring and Fountain, to see the waters be fully conveyed from thence, as
formerly: so upon any failure in the Tradition of the Church, our only
recourse must be to the true Fountain of Tradition the Word of God, and ground
the Reason of our Actions upon that which was the Foundation of our profession.
And when Stephen the Bishop of Rome would tedder him to tradition, Cyprian
keeps his liberty by this close question, Unde illa Traditio ^ utrumne de
Dominica and Evangelica auctoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis
atque Epistolis veniens, -- Si ergo aut Evangelio praecipitur, aut in
Apostolorum Epistolis, aut Actibus continetur -- observetur Divina haec and
Sancta traditio. We see this good man would not baulk his way on foot for the
great bugbear of Tradition, unless it did bear the Character of a Divine Truth
in it, and could produce the credentials of Scripture to testify its authority
to him. To the same purpose that stout Bishop of Cappadocia, Firmilian, whose
unhappiness with Cyprians, was only that of Jobs Friends, that they
excellently managed a bad Cause, and with far more of the Spirit of
Christianity, then Stephen did, who was to be justified in nothing but the
Truth he defended. Eos autem, says Firmilian, Firmil. ep. inter ep. Cyprian.
75. ^. 5.
qui Roma sunt, non ea in omnibus observare quae sint ab origin tradita, and
frustra Apostolorum auctoritatem pr^tendere, which he there makes out at large,
viz. That the Church of Rome had gathered corruption betimes, which after broke
out into an Impostume in the head of it. Where then must we find the certain
way of resolving the Controversy we are upon? The Scriptures determine it not,
the Fathers tell us there is no believing tradition any further then it is
founded in Scripture; thus are we sent back from one to the other, till at last
we conclude there is no certain way at all left to find out a decision of it.
Not that we are left at such uncertainties as to matters of Faith (I would not
be so mistaken) We have Archimedes his Postulatum granted us for that, a place
to fix our Faith on, though the World be moved out of its place, I mean the
undoubted Word of God: but as to matters of Fact not clearly revealed in
Scripture, no certainty can be had of them, from the hovering light of
unconstant Tradition. Neither is it only unconstant, but in many things
Repugnant to its self, which was the last Consideration to be spoke to, in
reference to the showing the incompetency of Antiquity for deciding our
Controversy. Well then, suppose we our selves now waiting for the final
Verdict of Church-Tradition to determine our present cause; If the Jury cannot
agree, we are as far from satisfaction as ever; and this is certainly the Case
we are now in. The main difficulty lies in the immediate succession to the
Apostles: if that were but once cleared, we might bear with interruptions
afterward: but the main seat of the controversy lies there, whether the
Apostles upon their withdrawing from the Government of Churches did substitute
single persons to succeed them or no: so that u^less that be cleared, the very
Deed of Gift is questioned: and if that could be made appear, all other things
would speedily follow. Yes, say some, that is clear: For at Jerusalem, Antioch,
and Rome, it is evident that single persons were entrusted with the Government
of Churches.

In Jerusalem, say they, James the brother of our LORD, was made Bishop by the
Apostles: But whence does that Hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 22.
appear? It is said from Hegesippus in Eusebius. But what if he say no such
thing? his words are these (...), which is there interpreted, Ecclesiae
administrationem una cum caeteris Apostolis suscepit. And no more is thereby
meant, but that this James who is by the Ancients conceived to be only a
Disciple before, is now taken into a higher charge; and invested in a power of
governing the Church as the Apostles were. His power, it is plain, was of the
same nature, with that of the Apostles themselves: And who will go about to
degrade them so much as to reduce them to the Office of Ordinary Bishops? James
in probability did exercise his Apostleship the most at Jerusalem, where by the
Scriptures we find him Resident, and from hence the Church afterward, because
of his not traveling abroad as the other Apostles did, according to the
Language of their own times, they fixed the Title of Bishop upon him. But
greater difference we shall find in those who are pleaded to be successors of
the Apostles. At Antioch some, as Origin and Eusebius, make Ignatius to succeed
Peter. Jerome makes him the third Bishop, and places Evodius before him.
Others therefore to solve that, make them cotemporary Bishops; the one of the
Church of the Jews, the other of the Gentiles: with what congruity to their
Hypothesis of a single Bishop and Deacons placed in every City, I know not: but
that Salvo has been discussed before. Come we therefore to Rome, and V.
M^gdeburg, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10.
here the succession is as muddy as the Tiber it self; for here Tertullian,
Rufinus, and several others place Clement next to Peter. Irenaeus and Eusebius
set Anacletus before him: Epiphanius and Optatus both Anacletus and Cletus;
Augustinus and Damasus with others, make Anacletus, Cletus, and Linus, all to
precede him. What way shall we find to extrica e our selves out of this
Labyrinth, so as to reconcile it with the certainty of the Form of Government
in the Apostles times? Certainly, if the Line of Succession fail us here, when
we most need it, we have little cause to pin our Faith upon it as to the
certainty of any particular Form of Church Government settled in the Apostles
times, which can be drawn from the help of the Records of the Primitive Church:
which must be first cleared of all Defectiveness, Ambiguity, Partiality, and
Confusion; before the thing we inquire for, can be extracted out of them.

Having thus far showed that we have no absolute certainty. 19.
of what Form of Government was settled by the Apostles in the several Churches
of their Plantation: The next Consideration which follows to be spoken to, is,
that the Apostles in probability did not observe any one fixed course of
settling the Government of Churches, but settled it according to the several
circumstances of places and persons which they had to deal with. This will be
ex abundanti as to the thing by me designed, which would be sufficiently
cleared without this: and therefore I lay it not as the Foundation of my
Thesis, but only as a Doctrine of Probability, which may serve to reconcile
the Controversies on foot about Church Government. For if this be made appear,
then it may be both granted that the Apostles did settle the Government in the
Church in a College of Presbyters, and in a Bishop and Deacons too, according
to the diversity of places, and the variety of circumstances. It is easy to
observe, that as to Rites and Customs in the Church, the Original of most men's
mistakes, is, Concluding that to be the general Practice of the Church, which
they meet with in some places: whereas that is most true which Firmiliam tells
us, In plurimis Provinciis, multa pro Cypr. Ep. 75. ^. 5.
locorum and nominum ( l. hominum) diversitate, variantur; nec tamen propter
hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque unitate discossum est. Those Rites
varied in diverse places, retaining still the Unity of the Faith; so, as to
matter of Government, men's mistakes do arise from an universal conclusion
deduced out of particular premises; and what they think was done in one place,
they conclude must be done in all: Whereas these are the grounds inducing me
probably to conclude that they observed not the same course in all places.
Which when an impartial Reader has soberly considered (with what has gone
before,) I am in hopes, the Novelty of this Opinion may not prejudicate its
entertainment with him. My grounds are these; First, From the different state,
condition and quantity of the Churches planted by the Apostles. Secondly, From
the multitude of unfixed Officers in the Church then, which acted with
authority over the Church where they were resident. Thirdly, from the different
customs observed in several Churches, as to their Government after the
Apostles decease. I begin with the first, The different State, Condition, and
Quantity of the Churches planted by the Apostles: For which we are to consider
these things; First, That God did not give the Apostles alike success of their
labors in all places. Secondly, That a small number of believers did not
require the same number, which a great Church did, to teach and govern them.
Thirdly, That the Apostles did settle Church Officers according to the
probability of increase of believers, and in order thereto, in some great
places. First, That God did not give the Apostles equal success to their
labors in all places. After God called them to be Fishers of men, it was not
every draught which filled their Net with whole shoals of Fishes; sometimes
they might toil all Night still and catch nothing, or very little. It was not
every Sermon of Peter's which converted three thousand: the whole world might at
that rate soon have become Christian, although there had been but few Preachers
besides the Apostles. God gave them strange success at first, to encourage them
the better to meet with difficulties afterward; In (...)es God told them he
had much people, in others we read but of few that believed. At Corinth, Paul
Plants, and Apollos Waters, and God gives an abundant increase; but at Athens
(where if moral dispositions had fitted men for Grace, and the improvements of
Nature, we might have expected the greatest number of Converts) yet here we
read of many mocking, and others delaying, and but of very few believing:
Dionysius and Damaris, Act. 17. 34.
and some others with them. The Plantations of the Apostles were very
different, not from the Nature of the soil they had to deal with, but from the
different influence of the Divine Spirit upon their Endeavors in several
places. We cannot think that the Church at Cenchrea (for so it is Romans 16 2.
called) was as well stockt with Believers, as that at Corinth. Nay, the
Churches generally in the Apostles times were not so filled with Numbers, as
men are apt to imagine them to be. I can as soon hope to find in Apostolical
times Diocesan Churches as Classical and Provincial; yet this does not much
advantage the Principles of the Congregational men, Par. 1. ch 6 s. 8 p. 129.
as I have already demonstrated. Yet I do not think that all Churches in the
Apostles times were but one Congregation; but as there was in Cities many
Synagogues, so there might be many Churches out of those Synagogues enjoying
their former liberties and privileges. And they that will show me where five
thousand Jews and more did ordinarily meet in one of their Synagogues for
public worship, may gain something upon me, in order to believing the Church
of Jerusalem to be but one Congregation, and yet not persuade me, till they
have made it appear, that the Christians then had as public solemn set
meetings as the Jews had; which he that understands the state of the Churches
at that time, will hardly yield to the belief of. I confess, I cannot see any
rule in Scripture laid down for distributing Congregations: but this necessity
would put them upon; and therefore it were needless to prescribe them; and very
little, if any, reason can I see on the other side, why, where there were so
much people as to make distinct Congregations, they must make distinct Churches
from one another; but of that largely in the next chapter. All Churches then we
see were not of an equal extent. The second premisal Reason will grant, viz.
that a small Church did not require the same number of Officers to rule it,
which a great one did. For the duty of Officers lying in Reference to the
People, where the People was but few, one constant settled Officer with Deacons
under him, might with as much ease discharge the work, as in a numerous Church,
the joint help of many Officers was necessary to carry it on. The same reason
which tells us that a large flock of Sheep consisting of many thousands does
call for many Shepherds to attend them, does likewise tell us that a small
flock may be governed with the care of one single Shepherd watching continually
over them. The third premisall was that in great Cities the Apostles did not
only respect the present guidance of those that were converted, but
established such as might be useful for the converting and bringing in of
others to the Faith, who were as yet strangers to the Covenant of promise, and
aliens from the (...), society of Christians. And here I conceive a mistake of
some men lies, when they think the Apostles respected only the Ruling of those
which were already converted; for though this were one part of their work, yet
they had an eye to the main Design then on foot, the subjecting the World to
the Obedience of Faith; in order to which it was necessity in places of great
resort and extent, to place not only such as might be sufficient to
superintend the Affairs of the Church, but such as might lay out themselves the
most in Preaching the Gospel in order to converting others. Having laid down
these things by way of premisal, we will see what advantage we can make of them
in order to our purpose. First, then I say, that in Churches consisting of a
small number of Believers, where there was no great probability of a large
increase afterward: One single Pastor With Deacons under him, were only
constituted by the Apostles for the ruling of those Churches. Where the work
was not so great, but a Pastor and Deacons might do it, what need was there of
having more? and in the great scarcity of fit Persons for settled Rulers then,
and the great multitude and necessity of unfixed Officers for preaching the
Gospel abroad, many persons fit for that work could not be spared to be
constantly Resident upon a place. Now that in some places at first there were
none placed but only a Pastor and Deacons, I shall confirm by these following
Testimonies. The first is that of Clement in his Epistle, (...). P. 54.
The Apostles therefore preaching abroad through Countries and Cities, ordained
the First Fruits of such as believed, having proved them by the Spirit, to be
Bishops and Deacons for them that should afterward believe. Whether by (...)
we understand Villages or Regions, is not material; for it is certain here the
Author takes it as distinct from Cities; and there is nothing, I grant,
expressed where the Apostles did place Bishops and Deacons exclusive of other
places, i. e. whether only in Cities or Countries; but it is evident by this,
that wherever they planted Churches, they ordained Bishops and Deacons,
whether those Churches were in the City or Country. And here we find no other
Officers settled in those Churches, but Bishops and Deacons; And that there were
no more in those Churches then he speaks of, appears from his Design of
paralleling the Church Officers in the Gospel, to those under the Law: and
therefore it was here necessary to enumerate all that were then in the
Churches. The main controversy is, what these Bishops were; whether many in
one place; or only one; and if but one, whether a Bishop in the modern Sense
or no. For the first, here is nothing implying any necessity of having more
then one in a place, which will further be made appear by and by, out of other
Testimonies which will help to explain this. As for the other thing, we must
distinguish of the Notion of a Bishop: For he is either such a one as has none
over him in the Church; or he is such a one as has a power over Presbyters
acting under him, and by authority derived from him. If we take it in the first
Sense, so every Pastor of a Church having none exercising jurisdiction over
him, is a Bishop; and so every such single Pastor in the Churches of the
Primitive times was a Bishop in this Sense, as every Master of a Family before
Societies for Government were introduced, might be called a King, because he
had none above him to command him: but if we take a Bishop in the more proper
Sense, for one that has power over Presbyters and People, such a one these
single Pastors were not, could not be. For it is supposed that these were only
single Pastors. But then it is said that after other Presbyters were appointed,
then these single Pastors were properly Bishops; but to that I answer: First,
they could not be proper Bishops by virtue of their first Constitution; for
then they had no power over any Presbyters, but only over the Deacons and
People; and therefore it would be well worth considering how a power of
jurisdiction over Presbyters can be derived, from those single Pastors of
Churches that had no Presbyters joined with them. It must be then clearly and
evidently proved that it was the Apostles intention that these single Pastors
should have the power over Presbyters, when the Churches necessity did require
their help, which intention must be manifested and declared by some
manifestation of it as a Law of Christ, or nothing can thence be deduced of
perpetual concernment to the Church of Christ. Secondly, either they were
Bishops before, or only after the appointment of Presbyters; if before, then a
Bishop, and a Presbyter having no Bishop over him, are all one; if after only,
then it was by his communicating power to Presbyters to be such, or their
choice which made him their Bishop; if the first, then Presbyters quoad ordinem
are only a humane institution, it being acknowledged that no Evidence can be
brought from Scripture for them; and for any Act of the Apostles not recorded
in Scripture for the constituting of them, it must go among unwritten
Traditions; and if that be a Law still binding the Church, then there are such
which occur not in the Word of GOD, and so that must be an imperfect copy of
Divine Laws: If he were made Bishop by an Act of the Presbyters, then
Presbyters have power to make a Bishop, and so Episcopacy is an humane
institution depending upon the voluntary Act of Presbyters. But the clearest
Evidence for one single Pastor with Deacons in some Churches at the beginning
of Christianity, is that of Epiphanius, which though somewhat large, I shall
recite, because, if I mistake not, the curtailing of this Testimony has made
it speak otherwise then ever Epiphanius meant. (...), Epiph. c. Aerium. haeres.
75. p. 90^, etc. ed. Pe^av.
etc. The Sense of Epiphanius is very intricate and obscure; we shall endeavor
to explain it: He is giving Aerius an account why Paul in his Epistle to
Timothy mentions only Bishops and Deacons, and passes over Presbyters. His
account is this: first he cha^geth Aerius with ignorance of the Series of
History (which he calls (...)) and the profound and ancient Records the Church,
wherein it is expressed, that upon the first Preaching of the Gospel, the
Apostle writ according to the present state of things. Where Bishops were not
yet appointed (for so certainly it should be read (...), not (...), for then he
must contradict himself) the Apostle writes to Bishops and Deacons; (for the
Apostles could not settle all things at first) for there was a necessity of
Presbyters and Deacons; for by these two Orders all Ecclesiastical Offices
might be performed: for where (so I read it (...), not (...) as the Sense,
clearly carries it) there was not found any worthy of being a Bishop, the place
remained without one; But where necessity required one, and there were some
found fit for that Office, there some were ordained Bishops; but for want of
convenient number, there could be no Presbyters found out to be Ordained, and
in such places they were contented with the Bishop and Deacons; for without
their Ministry the Bishop could not be. So that according to Epiphanius, there
were three several states of Churches in the Apostles times; first some
Churches where there were only Presbyters and Deacons without a Bishop. For,
if Epiphanius speaks not at first of places where Presbyters were without a
Bishop; he must be guilty of a vain and empty Tautology, for he after tells us
where the necessity of the Church required it, a Bishop was made; therefore
before he speaks of places only where Presbyters and Deacons were; and
otherwise he would not answer Aerius about 1 Timothy 4. 14. which it is his design
to do, about The laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. He grants then that
at first in some places there were only Presbyters and Deacons, as when the
Apostle writes to Bishops and Deacons (where Bishops at that time of the Church
were only Presbyters) of which two orders, Presbyters and Deacons, there was an
absolute necessity; and the account he gives why they settled no higher order,
above them is, (...), the Apostles could not settle all things at first; which
words are to be read with a Parenthesis, giving an account why sometimes only
Bishops and Deacons were settled, that is, Presbyters so called. But, says he,
where necessity called for a higher order of Bishops above Presbyters, and any
were found qualified for it, there such were appointed; and if by reason of the
want of persons of sufficient abilities to be made Presbyters in those places,
there they were contented with such a superior Bishop and Deacons assisting of
him; Some Churches then according to his judgment, had a company of Presbyters
to rule them being assisted with Deacons; others had only a single Bishop with
Deacons; and after when the numbers were increased, and persons qualified were
found, there were both Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. For, the account which
he gives of the former want of some Officers in some Churches, is this, (...)
(Read (...), as the learned Dr. well corrects it) (...) For the Church not yet
having all her offices filled, things were fain to remain in that state. For
nothing can be completed at first, but in process of time every thing receives
its due perfection. So that Epiphanius does not (as it is thought by some) say,
that in the first times of the Church, there were none but Bishops and Deacons
in all Churches, but in some Churches there were Presbyters and Deacons, in
others Bishops and Deacons, according to the state, condition and necessity of
the Churches. Epiphanius then fully and clearly expresses my opinion, in
reference to the Apostles not observing any one constant course in all
Churches, but settling sometimes many Presbyters with Deacons, sometimes only
one Pastor (who is therefore called a Bishop) with Deacons, and so settling
Officers according to the particular occasions of every Church. The next
considerable testimony to our purpose, is that of Clemens Alexandrinus in
Eusebius, concerning St. John after his return out of the ^sle of Patmos to
Ephesus, upon the death of Domitian. (...). He went abroad upon invitation into
the neighbor-provinces, in some places constituting Bishops; in some setting
in order whole Churches, in others choosing out one from among the rest of
those who were designed by the spirit of God, whom he set over the Church. So
Salmasius contends Wal^. Messal. cap. 4. p. 224. etc.
it must be translated, (...), choosing one into the Clergy; for, those who
were chosen Bishops, are sald (...), and they that choose are said, (...).
Whence Salmasius gathers out of these words the very thing I am now upon; In
majoribus urbibus plures, in minoribus pauciores Presbyteros ordinari solitos,
probabile est. In pagis autem aut vicis, vel pusillis oppidis, quales (...) vel
(...) vocabant Graeci, unum aliquem Presbyterum per illa praecipue tempora
quibus non magnus erat numerus sidelium, suffecisse verisimile est. That the
Apostles set a greater number of Presbyters in great Cities, fewer in less, and
in small Villages but one, when the number of Believers was but small. We have
yet one Author more who speaks fully to our purpose. It is the author of the
Commentaries under Ambrose his name, who frequently asserts-this opinion I am
now making good. Upon the fourth of Ephesians, he largely discourses how
things were settled at first, by the Apostles, by degrees, in the Church of God,
evidently showing that the Apostles did not at first observe any settled
constant course, but acted according to present convenience, as they saw good,
in order to the promoting and advancing the Churches Interest. Post quam
omnibus locis Ecclesiae sunt constitutae and officia ordinata, aliter composita
res est quam coeperat. Thereby declaring his opinion, that while Churches were
constituting, no certain course was observed. For, as he goes on, Primum enim
omnes docebant, and omnes baptizabant, quibuscunque diebus vel temporibus
fuisset occasio, etc. Ut ergo cresceret plebs and multiplicaretur, Omnibus
inter initia concessum est and Evangelizare, and baptizare, and scripturas in
Ecclesia explanare. At ubi omnia loca circumplexa est Ecclesia, conventicula
constituta sunt, and rectores and caetera officia in Ecclesiis sunt ordinata;
ut nullus de Clero auderet, qui ordinatus non esset, prasumere ossicium quod
sciret non sibi creditum vel concessum; and coepit alio ordine and providentia
gubernari Ecclesia; quia si omnes eadem possent, irrationabile esset, and
vulgaris res, and vilissima videretur, etc. Ideo non per omnia convenient
scripta Apostoli ordinationi quae nunc est in Ecclesia, quia haec inter
primordia sunt scripta; Nam and Timotheum, ( Presbyterum a se creatum)
Episcopum vocat; quia primum Presbyteri Episcopi appellabantur, ut recedente
uno sequens ei succederet, etc. At first, he says, All Church-Offices lay open
to all persons, and every one did preach and baptize upon all occasions; but
afterward, when Congregations were established and Churches settled, then none
undertook that office but those that were ordained to it. Thence it is, that
the Apostles Writings are not suitable to the present state of the Church,
because they were penned in the time when things were not fully settled. For he
calls Timothy, who was made a Presbyter by him, Bishop; for so at first the
Presbyters were called, among whom this was the course of governing Churches,
that as one withdrew, another took his place. This opinion of his, he takes
occasion to speak of in several other places. Upon Romans 16. Adhuc rectores
Ecclesiae paucis erant in locis; Governors of Churches were as yet set up but
in few places. And upon 1 Cor. 1. Propterea Ecclesiae scribit, quia adhuc
singulis Ecclesiis rectores non erant instituti. And on 1 Cor. 11.
Convenientibus Presbyteris, quia adh^o rectores Ecclesiis non omnibus locis
erant constituti. By all which it is most evident, that this both learned and
ancient Author, cited with no small respect by St. Austin, does not conceive
that the Apostle, did observe any settled form in the governing of Churches, but
act^d according to principles of prudence, according to the necessities and
occasions of the several Churches by them planted: So that where there were
small Churches, one Pastor with Deacons might suffice: in greater Churches some
were governed by Presbyters acting in common Council: others, though very few
at first, had Rectors placed over them, for superintending the affairs of the
Church.

Secondly, In Churches consisting of a multitude of believers, or where there
was a probability of great increase by preaching the Gospel; the Apostles did
settle a College of Presbyters, whose office was partly to govern the Church
already formed, and partly to labor in the Converting more. So that in all
great Cities, where either the work was already great by the number of
believers, in order to the discharging of Pastoral duties to them, or where it
was great in reference to the number they labored in converting of, it seems
most consonant to reason and Scripture, that the work should be carried on by
the joint assistance of many associated in the same work. For, is it any ways
probable that the Apostles should ordain Bishops (...), as Clemens speaks, of
such as should believe; and not ordain persons in order to the making them
believe? They have either a very low opinion of the work of a Gospel-Bishop, or
very little consideration of the zeal, activity and diligence which was then
used in preaching, reproving, exhorting, in season, out of season, that think
one single person was able to undergo it all* Discipline was a great deal more
strict the^, Preaching more diligent, men more apprehensive of the weight of
their function, than for any to undertake such a care and charge of souls, that
it was impossible for them ever to know, observe, or watch over so as to give
an account for them. Besides, while we suppose this one person employed in the
duties of his flock, what leisure or time could such a one have to preach to
the Gentiles and unbelieving Jews in order to their Conversion? The Apostles
did not certainly aim at the setting up the honor of any one person, making
the Office of the Church a matter of State and Dignity more then employment,
but they chose men for their activity in preaching the Gospel, and for their
usefulness in laboring to add continually to the Church. Men that were
employed in the Church then, did not consult for their ^ase or honor, and
thought it not enough for them to sit still and b^d others work, but they were
of Paul's mind, Necessity was laid upon 1 Cor. 9. 16.
them, yea, Woe was unto them if they preached not the Gospel. Public prayers
were not then looked on as the more principal end of Christian assemblies then
preaching, nor consequen^ly that it was the more principal office of the
Steward^ of the Mysteries of God, to read the public prayers of the Church,
then to preach in season and out of season. And is it not great pity, two such
excellent and necessary duties should ever be set at variance, much less one so
preferred before the other, that the one must be esteemed as Sarah, and the
other almost undergo the hardship of Hagar, to be looked on as the Bondwoman
of the Synagogue, and be turned out of doors? Praying and preaching are the
Iackin and Boaz of the Temple, like Rachel and Leah, both which built up the
house of Israel: but though Rachel be fair and beautiful, yet Leah is the more
fruitful: though prayer be lovely and amiable in the sight of God, when it
comes from a heart seriously affected with what it speaks, yet preaching tends
more to the turning men's souls from sin unto God. Were the Apostles
commissioned by Christ to go pray or preach? and what is it wherein the
Ministers of the Gospel succeed the Apostles? Is it in the office of Praying,
or preaching? Was Paul sent not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel? and shall
we think those who succeed Paul in his office of preaching, are to look upon
any thing else as more their work then that? Are Ministers in their ordination
sent forth to be readers of public Prayers, or to be Dispensers of Gods holy
Word? Are they ordained wholly to this, and shall this be the less principal
part of their work? I, but the reason is unanswerable, that praying is the more
principal end of Christian-assemblies then preaching; For, the one is the End,
and the other the Means. If by End, be meant the ultimate end of all Christian
duties, that cannot be Prayer: for that is a means it self in order to that;
but the chief end is the fitting souls for eternal praises; if then this
unanswerable reason hold good, the principal end of Christian assemblies must
be only praises of God, and not prayers: If by the End, be meant the immediate
end of preaching as that it referrs to, that cannot be; for the immediate end
of preaching, if the Apostle may be judge, is instruction and edification in
the faith; Rather preaching is the end of praying, in as much as the blessings
conveyed by preaching, are the things which men pray for. But this is but one
of those unhappy consequences which follows men's judging of the service of*
God, rather by the practices of the Church, when it came to enjoy ease and
plenty, than by the ways and practices of the first and purest Apostolical
times: when the Apostles who were best able to judge of their own duty, looked
upon themselves as most concerned in the preaching of the Gospel. But to this
it is commonly said, that there was great reason for it then, because the world
was to be converted to Christianity, and therefore preaching was the more
necessary work at that time; but when a Nation is converted to the faith, that
necessity cease. It is granted, that the preaching of the Gospel in regard of
its universal extent was more necessary then, which was the foundation of
Christ's instituting the Apostolical Office with an unlimited commission; but if
we take Preaching as referring to particular Congregations, there is the same
necessity now that there was then. People need as much instruction as ever, and
so much the more in that they are apt to think now the name of Christians will
carry them to Heaven. It is a too common and very dangerous deceit of men, to
look upon Religion more as a profession, then matter of Life, more as a Notion
then an inward temper. Men must be beat off from more things which they are apt
to trust to for salvation now, than in those times: Men could not think so much
then, that diligence in public assemblies, and attendance at public prayers,
was the main Religion. Few would profess Christianity in those times, but such
as were resolved before hand rather to let go their lives then their
profession: but the more profess it now, without understanding the terms of
salvation by it; the greater necessity of preaching to instruct men in it. But
I think more need not be said of this to those that know it is another thing to
be a Christian, then to be called so. But however it is granted, that in the
Apostles times preaching was the great Work; and if so, how can we think one
single person in a great City was sufficient, both to preach to, and rule the
Church, and to preach abroad in order to the conversion of more from their
Gentilisme to Christianity? Especially if the Church of every City was so large
as some would make it, viz. to comprehend all the Believers under the civil
jurisd^ction of the City, and so both City and Country the only charge of one
single Bishop. I think the vastness of the work, and the impossibility of a
right discharge of it by one single person, may be argument enough to make us
interpret the places of Scripture which may be understood in that sense, as of
more then one Pastor in every City; as when the Apostles are said to ordain
Elders in every City, and Paul's calling for the Elders from Ephesus, and his
writing to the Bishops and Deacons of the Church of Philippi; this
consideration, I say, granting that the Texts may be otherwise understood, will
be enough to incline men to think that in greater Cities there was a society of
Presbyters acting together for the carrying on the work of the Gospel in
converting some to, and building up of others in the faith of Christ. And it
seems not in the least manner probable to me, that the care of those great
Churches should at first be entrusted in the hands of one single Pastor and
Deacon, and afterward a new order of Presbyters erected under them, without
any order or rule laid down in Scripture for it, or any mention in
Ecclesiastical Writers of any such after institution. But instead of that in
the most populous Churches, we have many remaining footsteps of such a College
of Presbyters there established in Apostolical times. Thence Ignatius says, Ep.
ad Tral.
The Presbyters are (...), C. cel sum. l. 6. c. 3. p. 1^9.
the Sanhedrin of the Church appointed by God; and the Bench of Apostles
sitting together for ruling the affairs of the Church. And Origin calls it;
(...), a College in every City of Gods appointing; and Victor Bishop of Rome;
Colligium nostrum, and Collegium fratrum; Pius, Pauperem Pius* ep. ad Just.
Vien. Apol. c. 39. Cypri. ep. 55. s. 19. s. 21. Hi^ronym. in Is. l. 2. c. 3.
Ep. ad Evag in 1 Timothy 5.
Senatum Christi apud Romam constitutum. Tertullian, Probatos seniores;
Cyprian, Cleri nostri sacrum venerandumque Concessum; and to Cornelius Bishop
of Rome, and his Clergy, Florentissimo Clero tecum praesidenti. Jerome, Senatum
nostrum, coetum Presbyterorum, and commune Concilium Presbyterorum quo
Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Hilary, Seniores sin^ quorum consilio nihil agebatur
in Ecclesia; the author de 7 Ordinibus ad Rusti^um; calls the Presbyt^^s
negotiorum judices. En^ychius tells us there were twelve Presbyters at
Alexandria to govern the Church; and the author of the I^inerary of Peter* of
as many constituted at Caesaria, who though counterfeit, must be allowed to
speak, though not ver^, yet verisimilia; though not true, yet likely things. Is
i^ possible all these authors should thus speak of their several places, of a
College of Presbyters acting in power with the Bishop, if at first Churches
were governed only by a single Bishop, and afterward by subject Presbyters
that had nothing to do in the rule of the Church, but were only deputed to some
particular offices under him, which they were empowered to do only by his
authority? But the joint-rule of Bishop and Presbyters in the Churches will be
more largely deduced afterward. Thus we see a Company of Presbyters settled in
great Churches; now we are not to imagine that all these did equally attend to
one part of their wo^k; but all of them according to their several abilities
laid out themselves; some in ^verseeing and guiding the Church; but yet so as
upon occasion to discharge all pastoral acts belonging to their function;
others betook themselves chiefly to the conversion of others to the faith,
either in the Cities or the adjacent countries. By which we come to a full,
clear, and easy understanding of that so much controverted place, 1 Timothy 5.
17. (...), The Elders that rule well are counted worthy of double honor;
especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. Not as though it employed
a dist^^ct sort of Elders from the Pastors of Churches, but among those Elders
that were ordained in the great Churches, some attended most to ruling the
flock already converted, others labored most in converting others to the Faith
by preaching; though both these being entered into this peculiar function of
laying themselves forth for the benefit of the Church, did deserve both respect
and maintenance, yet especially those who employed themselves in converting
others, in as much as their burden was greater, their labors more abundant,
their sufferings more; and their very Office coming the nearest to the
Apostolical function. So Chrysostom resolves it upon the Chrysostom. in 4. Ephesians.
hom. 11.
fourth of the Ephesians, that those who were (...), as Theodoret expresses
it, the (...)* the fixed Officers of particular Churches were inferior to
those who went abroad preaching the Gospel; (...) says he (...). An evident
argument that the Apostle does not intend any sort of Elders dictinct from
these ordained Presbyters of the Cities, is from that very argument which the
greatest friends to Lay Elders draw out of this Epistle, which is from the
promiscuous acception of the words (...) and (...) in this very Epistle to
Timothy: The argument runs thus: The Presbyters spoken of by Paul in his
Epistle to Timothy, are Scripture-Bishops; but Lay Elders are not
Scripture-Bishops; therefore these cannot here be meant. The major is their
own, from 1 Timothy 3. 1. compared with 4. 14. Those which are called Presbyters
in one place, are Bishops in another; and the main force of the argument lies
in the promiscuous use of Bishop and Presbyter; now then if Lay Elders be not
such Bishops, then they are not Paul's Presbyters; now Paul's Bishops must be
(...) fit to teach, and therefore no Lay Elders. Again, we may consider where
Timothy now was, viz at Ephesus, and therefore if such Lay Elders anywhere they
should be there; Let us see then whether any such were here It is earnestly
pleaded by all who are for Lay Elders, that the Elders spoken of Acts 20. 17.
were the particular Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to whom Paul spoke, v. 28.
where we may find their Office at large described Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and all the flock over which God has made you (...) Bishops or
Overseers. Here we see both the names Elders and Bishops confounded again, so
that he that was an Elder was a Bishop too, and the Office of such Elders
described to be a Pastoral charge over a flock, which is inconsistent with the
notion of a Lay-Elder* Paul sent indefinitely for the Elders of the Church to
come to him; If any such then at Ephesus, they must come at this summons, all
the Elders that came, were such as were Pastors of Churches: therefore there
could be no Lay Elders there* I insist not on the argument for maintenance
employed in double Honor, which Chrysostom explains by (...) a supply of
necessaries to be given to them, as appears by ver. 18. which argument Blondel
saw such strength in, that it brought him quite off from Lay Elders in that
place De ^ure pleb^s in regim. Eccles. p. 79. etc.
of Timothy. And he that will remove the Controversy from the Scriptures, to
the Primitive Church, (as we have no reason to think, that if such were
appointed, they should be so soon laid aside) will find it the greatest
d^fficulty to trace the footsteps of a Lay-Elder, through the Records of
antiquity for the three first centuries especially. The Writers of the Church
speak of no Presbyters, but such as preached, as appears by Origin, Cyprian,
and Clement of! O^ig hom. 1. in Psalm. 37.
Alexandria; Origin says, Omnes Episcopi atque omn^s Presbyteri vel Diaconi
^rudiunt nos, and erudientes adhibent correptionem, and verbis austerioribus
increpant. We see all Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons were in his time
Preachers. So Cyprian, Et cre^ideram quidem Presbyteros and Diaconos Cyprian.
l. 1. ep. 11.
qui illic praesentes sunt, monere vos and instruere plenissime circa Evangelii
Legem, sicut semper ab antecessoribus nostris factum est* and in another
Epistle about making Numidicus a Presbyter, he thus expresses it, ut
ascribatur Presbyterorum Ep. 35.
Carthaginensium numero, and nobiscum sedeat in Clero; where to sit as one of
the Clergy, and to be a Presbyter, are all one. Again, had there been any such
Elders, it would have belonged to them to lay hands on those that were
reconciled to the Church after Censures; now hands were only laid on Ep. 12.
ab Episcopo and Clero, as the same Cyprian tells us. Clemens Alexandrinus
describing the Office of a Presbyter, has these Strom. l. 6. p. 667. ed. Heins.
words, (...) etc. (...), where Teaching is looked on as his proper work: And
elsewhere, more fully and expressly discoursing of the service of God, and
distinguishing it according to the twofold service of men, (...), he applies
these to the Churches, (...). Strom. l. 7. p. 700.
The former he explains afterward, (...). A Presbyter is one that is ordained
or appointed for the instruction of others in order to their amendment,
implying thereby the Office of a Presbyter to be wholly conversant about
teaching others, to whom on that account the art of making others better does
properly belong. So much may suffice for those first times of the Church, that
there were no Presbyters then, but such as had the Office of Teaching. And for
the times afterward of the Church, let it suffice at present to produce the
Testimony of a Council held in the beginning of the seventh Century, who
absolutely Decree against all Lay-persons meddling in Church Affairs; Nova
action didicimus, quosdam Council. Hispal. 2. decret. 9.
ex nostro Collegio contra mores Ecclesiasticos, laicos habere in rebus Divinis
constitutos Oeconomos. Proinde pariter tractantes eligimus, ut unusquisque
nostrum secundum Chalcedonensium Patrum decreta, ex proprio Clero Oeconomum
sibi constituat. Indecorum est enim Laicum esse vicarium Episcopi, and
saculares in Ecclesia judicare; i^ uno enim eodemque Offici^ non debet esse
dispar professio. A Canon directly leveld against all Lay-Chancellours in
Bishops Courts, and such Officials: But does with the same force take away all
Lay Elders, as implying it to be wholly against the rule of the Church to have
secular persons to judge in the Church. But although I suppose this may be
sufficient to manifest the no Divine right of Lay Elders; yet I do not
therefore absolutely condemn all use of some persons chosen by the people to be
as their representatives, for managing their interest in the affairs of the
Church. For, now the voice of the people (which was used in the Primitive
times) is grown out of use: such a constitution, whereby two or more of the
peoples choice might be present at Church debates, might be very useful, so
they be looked on only as a prudential humane constitution, and not as any
thing founded on Divine right. So much may serve for the first Ground of the
probability of the Apostles not observing one settled Form of Church Government,
which was from the different state, quantity and condition of the Churches by
them planted. The second was from the multitude of unfixed Officers residing in
some places, who managed the Affairs of the Church in chief, during their
Residence. Such were the Apostles and Evangelists, and all persons almost of
note in Scripture. They were but very sew, and those in probability not the
ablest, who were left at home to take care of the spoil; the strongest and
ablest, like Commanders in an Army, were not settled in any Troop, but went up
and down from this company to that, to order them and draw them forth: and
while they were, they had the chief authority among them; but as Commandets of
the Army, and not as Officers of the Troop. Such were Evangelists who were sent
sometimes into this Country to put the Churches in order there, sometimes into
another; but where ever they were, they acted as Evangelists and not as fixed
Officers. And s^c^ were Timothy and Titus, notwithstanding all the Opposition
made against it, as will appear to any that will take an impartial Survey of
the arguments on both sides. Now where there were in some places Evangelists,
in others not, and in many Churches it may be no other Officers but these, it
will appear, that the Apostles did not observe one constant Form, but were with
the Evangelists traveling abroad to the Churches, and ordering things in them
as they saw cause. But as to this I have anticipated my self already. The last
ground was from the different custom observed in the Churches, after the
Apostles times. For no other rational account can be given of the different
opinions of Epiphanius, Jerome, and Hilary, but this, that one speak^ of the
Custom of some Churches, and the other of others. In some as at Alexandria,
the Presbyters might choose their Bishop; in other places it might be, as
Hilary says, that when the first withdrew, another succeeded him. Not by a
monthly or Annual rotation of Presidents, as some have imagined, but by a
Presidency for life of one, upon whose death another succeeded in his room. For
the former Opinion has not any Evidence at all for it in Scripture or
Antiquity; or in the place brought to prove it. For, according to this Opinion,
Timothy must have but his course in the rotation of Elders at Ephesus, which
seems very incongruous to the Office of Timothy. I conclude th^n that in all
probability the Apostles tied not themselves up to one certain course, but in
some Churches settled more or fewer Officers as they saw cause, and in others
governed themselves during life; and that at their death they did not determine
any form, is probably argued from the different customs of several Churches
afterward.

The third Consideration touching Apostolical practice, is. 20.
concerning the Obligatory force of it in reference to us; which I lay down in
these terms, That a mere Apostolical practice being supposed, is not sufficient
of its self for the founding an unalterable and perpetual right, for that Form
of Government in the Church, which is supposed to be founded on that practice.
This is a Proposition I am sure, will not be yielded without proving it; and
therefore I shall endeavor to do it by a fourfold argument. First, because
many things were done by the Apostles without any intention of obliging any who
succeeded them afterward to do the same. As for instance, the twelve Apostles
going abroad so unprovided as they did when Christ sent them forth at first,
which would argue no great wisdom or reason in that man, that should draw
that practice into consequence now. Of the like nature was Paul's preaching
(...) to some Churches, receiving no maintenance at all from some Churches, as
that at Corinth. Which instance is a manifest evidence of the monstrous
weakness of Discourse in those who would make that example of Paul Obligatory
to all Ministers of the Gospel now. And while they would by this argument take
away their Lands and Tithes, instead of them, they give them Plaustra
convitiorum, whole loads of the most reproachful Speeches that ever were given
to any, but Christ and his Apostles. For my part, I think the Ministers of the
Gospel would want one of the Badges of Honor belonging to their Office, were
they not thus reproachfully used* It is part of the State which belongs to the
true Ministers of the Gospel to be followed by such blackmouthed Lacqueyes, who
by their virulent Speeches are so far their Friends, as to keep them from
that Curse which our Savior pronounces; Woe be unto you when all men speak
well of you. But let us see how much wool there is after all this cry* too
little to cloth the backs of Ministers, if such persons might be their
Tythe-men; but it is well they are so little befriended, yea so much opposed by
the great Apostle, in that singular practice of his. For does he say, It was
unlawful for him to receive a maintenance from the Churches he preached to? Nay
does he not set himself to prove not only the lawfulness of Ministers taking
it, but the duty of peoples giving it, 1 Cor. 9. from the seventh to the
f^^teenth verse, giving many pregnant arguments to that purpose? Does he not
say that all the Apostles besides him 1 Cor. 9. 6.
and Barnabas, did forbear working, and consequen^ly had all their necessities
supplied by the Churches? Nay does not Paul himself say that he robbed other
Churches, taking wages 2 Cor. 11. 8.
of them to do service to them? What Paul turned hireling? and in the plainest
terms take Wages of Churches? Yet so it is, and his forbearing it at Corinth,
was apt to be interpreted as an argument that he did not love them, 2 Cor. 11.
11. So far were they from looking upon Paul as a hireling in doing it. Paul is
strong and earnest in asserting his right: he might have done it at Corinth as
well as elsewhere: But from some prudent considerations of his own, mentioned 2
Cor. 11. 12. he forbo^e the exercise of his right among them, although at the
same time he received maintenance from other places. As for any Divine right of
a particular 2 Cor. 11. 9.
way of maintenance, I am of the same Opinion as to that which I am in
reference to particular Forms of Church Government: and those that are of
another Opinion. I would not wish them so much injury, as to want their
maintenance till they prove it. But then I say, these things are clear in
themselves, and I think sufficient grounds for conscience, as to the duty of
paying on the one side, and the lawfulness of receiving it on the other* First
that a maintenance in general be given to Gospel Ministers, is of Divine right:
else the Labourer were not worthy of his hire; nor could that be true which
Paul says, that our Lord has ordained; 1 Cor. 9. 14.
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Secondly, A
maintenance in general being due, Lawful authority may determine the particular
way of raising it; the equity of which way may be best derived from what was
the most ancient pract^ce of the World in dedicating things to God, and was
approved by God himself among his own people, the Jews: So that the way of
maintenance by Tithes is the most just and equitable way. Thirdly, It being in
the Magistrates power to determine the way of maintenance, what is so
determined, does bind the Consciences of all subject to that power, to an
obedience to it for conscience sake: In as much as all men are bound thus to
obey the Magistrate in all things established by him as Laws; and the very same
reasons any can plead for disobedience as to this, may equally serve for
disobedience to any other Laws made by the Supreme Magistrate. This I suppose
is the clearest Resolution of that other more vexed then intricate Controversy
about the right of Tithes; which I have here spoken of by occasion of the
mention of the Apostles practice; and because it is resolved upon the same
principles with the subject I am upon. Mere Apostolical practice we see does
not bind, because the Apostles did many things without intention of binding
others. Secondly, the Apostles did many things upon particular Occasions,
Emergencies, and circumstances, which things so done, cannot bind by virtue of
their doing them any further then a parity of reason does conclude the same
things to be done in the same circumstances. Thus Paul's Coelibate is far from
binding the Church, it being no universal practice of the Apostles by a Law,
but only a thing taken up by him upon some particular grounds, not of
perpetual 1 Cor. 9. 5.
and universal concernment. So community of goods was used at first by the
Church o^ Jerusalem as most suitable to the present state of that Church; but as
far as we can find, did neither perpetually hold in that Church, nor
universally obtain among other Churches; as is most clear in the Church at
Corinth by their Law-sui^^, by the different offerings of the 1 Cor. 6. 2. 11.
21, 22. ^6* ^^
rich and poor at the Lords Supper, and by their personal contributions. So the
Apostles Preaching from house to house, was, for want of convenience then of
more public places, as free only for Christians; although that practice binds
now as far as the Reason does; viz. in its tendency the promoting the work of
Salvation of men's Souls Laying on hands for conferring the gifts of the Holy
Ghost can never certainly bind where the Reason of it is ceased, but may still
continue ^s a rite of solemn Prayer, and not by virtue of that practice.
Observing the Apostolical Decrees of abstaining from blood, and things
strangled and offered to Idols, did hold as long as the ground of making them
did, which was condescension to the Jews, although it must be withal
acknowledged Exercit. Theol n. 26. Curcellaeus de esu sanguinis, etc. Grotius
in Act. 15. 29.
that the Primitive Christians of the second and third Centuries did generally
observe them; and the Greek Church to this day; and some men of note and
learning have pleaded for the necessary observation of them still, as Christ.
Beckman, Steph. Curcellaeus in a Diatriba lately published to this purpose, to
which Grotius is likewise very inclinable. The arguments are too large here to
examine, although I see 1 Cor. 10. 25.
not how possibly that place of Paul can be avoided, Whatever is set in the
shambles eat, making no scruple for conscience sak^.

I conclude this with what I laid down at the entrance of Part. 1. chap. 1. s.
6.
this Treatise, that where any Act or Law is founded upon a particular reason
or occasion as the ground of it, it does no further oblige then the reason or
occasion of it does continue. Therefore before an acknowledged Apostolical
practice be looked on as Obligatory, it must be made appear that what they did,
was not according as they saw reason and cause for the doing it, depending upon
the several circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons; but that they did it
from some unalterable Law of Chr^ist, or from some such indispensable reasons,
as will equally hold in all Times, Places, and Persons. And so the Obligation
is taken off from Apostolical practice, and laid upon that Law and Reason which
was the ground of it. Thirdly, Offices that were of Apostolical appointment,
are grown wholly out of use in the Church, without men's looking upon themselves
as bound now to observe them. As the Widows of the Churches afterward from
their Office called Deaconnesses of the Church, of which number 1 Timothy 5. 9.
Phoebe was one, whom Paul calls the Deaconness of the Church at Cenchrea: so
both Origin and Chrysostom understand Romans 16. 1.
it. Of them and their continuance in the Church for Plin. ep. ^. ^0. ep. 97.
Th^od l. 3. cap. 14. Sozom. l. ^. cap. 24. Codex Theod leg. 27. tit. de Epis.
Co^c. Chalc. cap. 14. Co^c. No^m^t. c. 73. Epi^h. har. 79. V. Iust^ll. No^ ^n
Can. u^ivers. Eccles. p. 154. etc. Vossium i^ Pli^. ep. 97. l. 10. Salmas. in
Aparat. p 176.
some Centuries of years, much is spoken by several Writers, and resolved by
several Councils; and yet we see these are laid aside by the p^etenders to hold
close to Apostolical practice: if that binds, certainly it does in its plain
institutions; if it does not bind in them* how can it in that which is only
gathered but by uncertain conjectures to have been ever their practice; So that
in the issue, those who plead so much for the obligatory nature of Apostolical
practice, do not think it obligatory; for if they did, how comes this office of
Widows and Deaconesses to be neglected? If it be answered, that these are not
useful now; then we must say, that we look upon Apostolical practice to be
binding no further then we judge it useful, or the reason of it holds; which is
as much as to say, of its self it binds not. Fourthly, Rites and customs
Apostolical are altered; therefore men do not think that Apostolical practice
does bind. For if it did, there could be no alteration of things agreeable
thereunto. Now let any one consider but these few particulars, and judge how
far the pleaders for a divine Right of Apostolical practice, do look upon
themselves as bound now to observe them: as Dipping in baptism, the use of
Love*Feasts, community of goods, the Holy kiss, by De Orat.
Tertullian called Signa^ulum orationis: yet none look upon themselves as bound
to observe them now, and yet all acknowledge them to have been the practice of
the Apostles: and therefore certainly though when it may serve for their
purpose, men will make Apostolical practice to found a divine Right: yet when
they are gone off from the matter in hand, they change their opinion with the
matter, and can then think themselves free as to the observation of things by
themselves acknowledged to be Apostolical. Thus we are at last come to the end
of this chapter, which we have been the longer upon, because the main hinge of
this controversy did ly^ in the practice of the Apostles, which I suppose now
so far cleared as not to hinder our progress toward what remains; which we
hope will admit of a quicker dispatch. We come therefore from the Apostles to
the Primitive Church, to see whether by the practice of that we can find any
thing whereby they looked on themselves as obliged by an unalterable Law to
observe any one particular form of Church Government.

CHAP. VII.
The Churches Polity in the ages after the Apostles considered: Evidences
thence that no certain unalterable Form of Church Government was delivered to
them. 1. Because Church Power did in large as the Churches did. Whether any
Metropolitan Churches established by the Apostles. Seven Churches of Asia,
whether Metropolitical. Philippi no Metropolis either in Civil or
Eccl^siastical sense. Several degrees of inlargemext of Churches. Churches
first the Christians in whole Cities, proved by several arguments, the Eulogiae
an evidence of it. Churches extended into the neighbor Territories by the
preaching there of City Presbyters; thence comes the subordination between then
Churches by degrees enlarged to Diocesses; from thence to Provinces. The
Original of Metropolitans and Patriarchs. 2. No certain Form used in all
Churches. Some Churches without Bishops, Scots, Goths. Some with but one Bishop
in their whole Country. Scythian, Ethiopian Churches how governed. Many
Cities without Bishops. Diocesses much altered. Bishops discontinued in several
Churches for many years. 3. Confor^eing Ecclesiastical Government to the civil
in the extent of Diocesses. The suburbicarian Churches what. Bishops answerable
to the civil Governors. Churches power rises from the greatness of Cities. 4.
Validity of Ordination by Presbyters in places where Bishops were. The case of
Ischyras discussed; instances given of Ordination by Presbyters not pronounced
null. 5. The Churches prudence in managing its affairs, by the several Canons,
Provincial Synods, Codex Canonum.

HAving largely considered the actions of Christ, and. 1.
the practice of the Apostles, so far as they are conceived to have reference
to the determining the certain form of Government in the Church; our next stage
is, according to our propounded method, to examine what light the practice of
the Church in the ages succeeding the Apostles will cast upon the controversy
we are upon. For although, according to the principles established and said
down by us, there can be nothing settled as an universal Law for the Church but
what we find in Scriptures: yet because the general practice of the Church is
conceived to be of ^o great use for understanding what the Apostles intentions,
as well as actions were, we shall cheerfully pass over this Rubicon, because
not with an intent to increase divisions, but to find out some further evidence
of a way to compose them. Our Inquiry then is, Whether the primitive Church did
conceive its self obliged to observe unalterably one individual form of
Government, as delivered down to them either by a Law of Christ, or an
universal constitution of the Apostles; or else did only settle and order
things for Church Government, according as it judged them tend most to the
peace and settlement of the Church, without any antecedent obligation, as
necessarily binding to observe only one course. This latter I shall endeavor
to make out to have been the only Rule and Law which the primitive Church
observed as to Church Government, viz. the tendency of its constitutions to the
peace and unity of the Church; and not any binding Law or practice of Christ or
his Apostles. For the demonstrating of which, I have made choice of such
arguments as most immediately te^d to the proving of it. For, If the power of
the Church and its officers did increase merely from the enlargement of the
bounds of Churches, if no one certain form were observed in all Churches, but
great varieties as to Officers and Diocesses; if the course used in settling the
power of the chief Officers of the Church was from agreement with the civil
government, if notwithstanding the superiority of Bishops, the ordination of
Presbyters was owned as valid; if in all other things concernning the Churches
Polity, the Churches prudence was looked on as a sufficient ground to establish
things; then we may with reason conciude, that nothing can be inferred from the
practice of the primitive Church* Demonstrative of any one fixed form of
Church Government delivered from the Apostles ^o them. Having thus by a l^ght
(...) drawn ou^ the several lines of the pourtraiture of the Polity of the
ancient Church, we now proceed to fill them up, though not with that life which
it deserves, yet so far as the model of this Discourse will permit. Our first
argument then is from the rise of the extent of the power of Church Governors,
which I assert not to have been from any order of the Apostles, but from the
gradual increase of the Churches committed to their charge. This will be best
done by the observation of the growth of Churches, and how proportionably the
power of the Governors did increase with it. As to that, there ^re four
observable steps or periods, as so many ages of growth in the primitive
Churches. First, when Churches and Cities were of the same extent. Secondly,
when Churches took in the adjoining Terri^ories with the Villages belonging to
the Cities. Thirdly, when several Cities with their Villages did associate for
Church Government in the same Province. Fourthly, when several provinces did
associate for Government in the Roman Empire. Of these in their order.

The first period of Church government observable in the. 2.
primitive Church, was, when Churches were the same with Christians in whole
Cities. For the clearing of this, I shall first show, that the primitive
constitution of Churches was in a society of Christians in the same City.
Secondly, I shall consider the form and manner of Government then observed
among them. Thirdly, consider what relation the several Churches in Cities had
to one another. First, That the Primitive Churches were Christians of whole
Cities. It is but a late and novel acception of the word Church, whereby it is
taken for stated, fixed congregations for public Worship, and doubtless the
original of it is only from the distinction of Churches in greater Cities into
their several (...) or public places for meeting, whence the Scotch Kirk, and
our English Church; so that from calling the place Church, they proceed to call
the persons there meeting by that name; and thence some think the name of
Church so appropriated to such a society of Christians as may meet at such a
place, that they make it a matter of Religion not to call those places
Churches, from whence originally the very name, as we use it, was derived. But
this may be pardoned among other the religions weaknesses of well meaning, but
less knowing people. A Church in its primary sense, as it answers to the Greek
(...), applied to Christians, is a society of Christians living together in one
City, whether meeting together in many Congregations, or one, is not at all
material; because they were not called a Church as meeting together in one
place, but as they were a Society of Christians inhabiting together in such a
City: not but that I think a society of Christians might be called a Church,
wherever they were, whether in a City or Country, but because the first and
chief mention we meet with in Scripture of Churches, is of such as did dwell
together in the same Cities; as is evident from many pregnant places of
Scripture to this purpose. As Acts 14. 23. compared with Titus 1. 5. (...), in
one place, is the same with (...) in the other. Ordaining Elders in every
Church, and ordaining Elders in every City; which implies, that by Churches
then were meant the body of Christians residing in the Cities: over which the
Apostles ordained Elders to rule them. So Acts 16. 4. 5. As they went through
the Cities, etc. and so were the Churches established in the faith. The
Churches here were the Christians of those Cities which they went through. So
Acts 20. 17. He sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church. If by the
Elders we mean, as all those do we now deal with, the Elders of Ephesus, then
it is here evident, that the Elders of the Church and of the City are all one;
but what is more observable, ver. 28. he calls the Church of that City, (...).
Take heed to your selves, and to the flock over which God has made you
overse^rs, to feed the Church of God. Where several things are observable to
our purpose; first, that the body of Christians in Ephesus is called (...) and
(...), the flock of the Church, and not the several flocks and Churches, over
which God has made you Bishops. Secondly, That all these spoken to were such
as had a pastoral charge of this one flock; Paul calls them (...), and charge
them (...), to do the work of a Pastor toward it. So that either there must be
several Pastors taking the pastoral charge of one Congregation, which is not
very suitable with the principles of those I now dispute against; or else many
congregations in one City are all called but one Church, and one flock, which
is the thing I plead for. And therefore it is an observation of good use to the
purpose in hand, that the New Test^ment speaking of the Churches in a Province,
always speaks of them in the plural number, as the Churches of Iudaea, Gal.
1. 22, 1 These. 2* 14. The Churches of Sama^i^ and Galilee, Acts 9. 31. The
Churches of Syria and C^icia, Acts 15. 41. The Churches of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16.
1. Gal, 1. 1, 2. The Churches of Asia, Romans 16. 16. Rev. 1. 11. But when it
speaks of any particular City, then it is always used in the Singular number,
as the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. -- 15 4, 22. The Church at Antioch, Acts
11. 26 -- 13. 1. The Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1^ and so of all
the seven Churches of Asia, the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. So that we
cannot find in Scripture the least footstep of any difference between a Church
and the Christians of such a City; whereas had the notion of a Church been
restrained to a particular congregation, doubtless we should have found some
difference as to the Scriptures speaking of the several places. For it is
scarce imaginable that in all those Cities spoken of (as for example Ephesus,
where Paul was for above two years together) that there should be no more
converts then would make one Congregation. Accordingly in the times immediately
after the Apostles, the same language and custom continued still. So Clement
inscribes his Epistle, (...), The Church of God which is at Rome, to the Church
of God which is at Corinth. So by that it is plain that all the Believers at
that time in Rome, made up but one Church, as likewise did they at Corinth. S^
Polycarp in the Epistle written by him from the Church at Smyrna to the Church
at Phylomilium, (...); and so in his Epistle Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 1^ (...) Ignat.
ep p. 13.
to the Philippians, (...). Polycarp and the Elders with him to the Church
which is at Philippi. Origin compares the Church of God at Athens, Corinth,
Alexandria, and other places, with the people of those several Cities; and so
the C. Celsum. l. 3 p. 128. etc.
Churches Senate with the peoples, and the Churches (...) (that is his word)
chief Ruler, with the Mayor of those Cities, implying thereby that as there was
one civil Society in such places to make a City, so there was a Society of
Christians incorporated together to make a Church. So that a Church settled with
a full power belonging to it, and exerc sing all acts of Church Discipline
within its self, was anciently the same with the Society of Christians in a
City. Not but that the name Church is attributed sometimes to Families, in
which sense Tertullian speaks, Ubi duo aut tres sunt, ibi Ecclesia est, Exhort.
ad. cust.
licet Laici: And may on the same account be attributed to a small place, such
as many imagine the Church of Cenchrea to be, it being a port to Corinth on the
Sinus Saronicus; but Stephanus Byzantinus calls it (...). Suidas Steph. de
Urbibus.
says no more of it then that it is (...). Strabo and Pausanias only speak of
the situation of it, as one of the po^ts of Corinth, lying in the way from
Tegaea to Argos; nor is Strabo Geog^. l. 8. Paus. Corinth. p. 44. 45. Plin.
hist. l. 4. c. 4.
any more said of it by Pliny, then that it answers to Lechaeum, the port on
the other side upon the Sinus Corinthiacus. Ubbo Emmius in his description of
old Greece, calls both of them oppidula duo cum duobus praeclaris portubus in
ora utriusq, maris, but withal adds that they were duo urbis emporia, the two
Marts of Corinth; therefore in probability, because Emmius de Graec. Vet. li 2.
of the great Merchandise of that City, they were much frequented. Cenchrea was
about twelve furlongs distance from Corinth; Where Pareus conjectures the place
of the meeting of the Church of Corinth was, because of the troubles they
Pareus in Romans 16. 1.
met with in the City, and therefore they retired thither for greater
convenience and privacy: which conjecture will appear not to be altogether
improbable, when we consider the furious opposition made by the Jews against
the Christians at Corinth, Acts 18. 12. and withal, how usual it was both for
Jews and Christians to have their place of meeting at a distance from the City.
As Acts 16. 13. They went out from Philippi to the River side, where there was
a Proseucha, or a place of V. He^ns. E^er^it. sac^. l. 5. cap 10.
prayer, where the Jews of Philippi accustomed to meet. According to this
interpretation the Church at Cenchrea is nothing else but the Church of Corinth
there assembling: as the Reformed Church at Paris has their meeting place at
Charenton, which might be called the Church of Charenton from their public
Assemblies there, but the Church of Paris from the Residence of the chief
Officers and people in that City. So the Church of Corinth might be called the
Church at Cenchrea upon the same account, there being no evidence at all of any
settled Government there at Cenchrea distinct from that at Corinth. So that this
place which is the only one brought against that position I have laid down has
no force at all against it. I conclude then, that Churches and Cities were
originally of equal extent, and that the formal constitution of a Church lies
not in their capacity of assembling in one place, but acting as a society of
Christians imbodyed together in one City, having Officers and Rulers among
themselves, equally respecting the whole number of Believers: Which leads to
the second thing, the way and manner then used for the modelling the government
of these Churches, Which may be considered in a double period of time, either
before several Congregations in Churches were settled, or after those we now
call Parishes, were divided. First, before distinct Congregations were settled;
and this as far as I can find, was not only during the Apostles times, but for
a competent time after, generally during the persecution of Churches. For we
must distinguish between such a number of Believers as could not conveniently
assemble in one place, and the distributing of Believers into their several
distinct congregations. I cannot see any reason but to think that in the great
Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, and the like, there were more
Believers then could well meet together, considering the state of those times;
but that they were then distributed into their several (...) or Centuries (as
the Athenians, and Romans divided their people) i. e. into several worshipping
congregations with peculiar Officers, I see no reason at all for it. They had
no such conveniences then of settling several congregations under their
particular Pastors: but all the Christians in a City looked upon themselves as
one body, and met together as occasion served them, where either the chief of
the Governors of the Church, the (...) in Justin Martyrs language, did perform
the solemn part of divine Worship, or some other of the Elders that were
present with them. Is it not strange for men to dream of set-times, and
Canonical hours, and public places of assemblies at that time, when their
chief times of meeting were in the night, or very early Ep 95. l. 10.
in the morning, which Pliny. calls conventus antelucanus, whence they were
called latebrosa and lucifugax natio; and Tertut. de Cor. Mil^ti^ ad Uxo^. l.
2. c. 4. V. Vossium in Pl^n. cp. p. 45. V. Gersom. Bucer. de (...). Eccl. p. 2
^0. ^ etc. V. Iustel. Not. in Cod. Can Eccles. n. p 200. and Blo^del Ap. s. 3.
de Basil. origin p. ^16. p. 243 p. 131. ed. Cl. Samas.
were fain to make use of wax-lights: (which from that custom the Papists
continue still in their Tapers always burning upon the Altar; from what reason
I know not, unless to show the darkness of error and superstition which that
Church lies under still) and the places of the Christians meetings were
generally either some private rooms, or some grotts or Cryptae, Vaults under
ground where they might be least discerned or taken notice of; or in the
Coemeteria, the Martyrum memoriae, as they called them, where their common
assemblies were. Thence Pontius Paulinus, speaking of the Edict of Valerian
against the Christians, Iussum est ut nulla conciliabula faciant, neque
coemeteria ingrediantur. Indeed, when they had any public liberty granted
them, they were so mindful of their duties of public profession of the Faith,
as to make use of public places for the worship of God, as appears by
Lampridius in the life of Alexander S^verus Quum Christiani quendam locum qui
publicus fuerat occupassent, contra popinarii dicerent, sibi cum deberi;
rescripsit, melius esse ut quom^docunque illic Deus colatur, quam popinariis
dedatur. But in times of persecution it is most improbable that there should be
any fixed Congregations and places, when the Christians were so much hunted
after, and inquired for, as appears by the former Epistle of Pliny, and the
known Rescript Apol. c. 2.
of Trajan upon it, so much exagitated by Tertullian. They did meet often it is
certain, ad confaederandum disciplinam, at which meetings Tertullian tells us,
Praesident probati quique seniores, which he elsewhere explains by Consessus
ordi^is, the bench of officers in the Church, which did in common consult for
the good of the Church, without any Cantonizing the Christians into several
distinct and fixed Congregations. But after that believers were much increased,
and any peace or liberty obtained, they then began to contrive the distribution
of the work among the several Officers of the Church, and to settle the several
bounds over which every Presbyter was to take his charge; but yet so, as that
every Presbyter retained a double aspect of his Office* the one particular to
his charge; the other general respecting the Church in common. For it is but a
weak conceit to imagine that after the settling of Congregations, every one had
a distinct presbytery to rule it, which we find not any obseure footsteps of in
any of the ancient Churches; but there was still one Ecclesiastical Senate
which ruled all the several Congregations of those Cities in common, of which
the several Presbyters of the Congregations were members, and in which the
Bishop acted as the President of the Senate, for the better governing the
affairs of the Church. And thus we find Cornelius at Rome sitting there cum
florentissimo Clero: thus Cyprian at Carthage, E^igr. ep. s. 21.
one who pleads as much as any for obedience to Bishops, and yet none more
evident for the presence and joint concurrence and assistance of the Clergy at
all Church debates; whose resolution from his first entrance into his
B^shoprick, was, to do all things communi concilio Clericorum, with the
Common Council Ep. 6. 10. 18, 24, 33, 34, 28. 32.
of the Clergy; and says, they were cum Episcopo sacerdotali honor conjuncti.
Victor at Rome decreed Easter to be kept on the Lords day, collatione facta cum
Presbyteris and Diaconibus (according to the Latin of that age) as Damasus Ep.
58. Apud. Bin. To. 1. Conc. p. 91.
the supposed Author of the lives of the Popes tells us. In the proceedings
against Novatus at Rome, we have a clear Testimony of the concurrence of
Presbyters: where a great Synod was called, as E^sebius expresses it, of sixty
Bishops, but Eccles. hist. l. 6. cap. 43.
more Presbyters* and Deacons: and what is more full to our purpose, not only
the several Presbyters of the City, but the Country Pastors ((...)) did
likew^se give their advice about that business. At this time Cornelius tells us
there were forty six Presbyters in that one City of Rome, who concurred with
him in condemning Novatus. Eccles. hist. l. 7. cap. 30.
So at Antioch in the case of Paulus Samosatenus we find a Synod gathered,
consisting of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and in their name the Synodal
Epistle is penned and directed to the same in all the Catholic Church; At the
Council of Eliberis in Spain, were present but ninteen Bishops and twenty six
Presbyters. The case between Sylvanus Apud. Nun. sub Zenoph. Consul.
Bishop of Cirta in Africa, and Nundinaris the Deacon, was referred by
Purpuriu^ to the Clergy to decide it, For the presence of Presbyters at Synods,
instances are brought (...) by Blondel in his Apology. And that they concurred
P. 200.
in governing the Church, and not only by their Counsel but Authority, appears
from the general Sense of the Church of God, even when Episcopacy was at the
highest: Nazianzen speaking of the Office of Presbyters, (...), Orat. p. 3.
he knew not whether to call it, Ministry or Superintendency, and those who are
made Presbyters (...), from being ruled, they ascend to be rulers themselves,
And their power by him, is in several P. 34^ 37, 41. P. 29, 42. In 1 Timothy hom.
11.
places* called (...). they are called by him, (...). Chrysostom gives this as
the reason of Paul's passing over from Bishops to Deacons without naming
Presbyters, (...). Because there is no great matter of difference between a
Bishop and Presbyters, for these likewise have the instruction and charge of
the Church committed to them; which words Theophylact, Chrysostomes Echo,
repeats after him, Conc. Aquis. c. 5. 1.
which the Council of Aquen thus expresses, Presbyterorum vero qui praesunt
Ecclesi^ Christi ministerium esse videtur, ut in doctrina praesint populis and
in Officio praedicandi, nec in aliquo desides inv^nti appareant. Clemens
Alexandrinus before all these, speaking of himself and his fellow-Presbyters,
(...). We are Pastors, Paedag. l. 1. cap. 6.
and Rulers of the Churches. And that proper Acts of Discipline were performed
by them, appears both by the Epistles of the Roman Clergy about their
preserving Discipline to Cyprian, and likewise by the Act of that Clergy in
excluding Marcion from communion with them. So the Presbyters Epiph haer. 4^.
of the Church of Ephesus excommunicated Noetus; for after they had cited him
before them, and found him obstinate in his Heresy, (...), they put both him
and his Disciples Id. h^res. 57. c. 1.
out of the Church together. Thus we see what the manner of Government in the
Church was now: The Bishop sitting as the (...) in the Sanhedrin, and the
Presbyters (...), as Ignatius expresses it, acting as the Common Council of
the Church to the Bishop; the Bishop being as the (...), answering to the
(...), and the Presbytery as the (...), answering to the (...) C. Celsum. l. 3.
p. 129.
as Origin compares them. Whereby he fully describes the form of Government in
his time in the Church, which was by an Ecclesiastical Senate, and a President
in it, ruling the Society of Christians in every City. So that the Presbytery
of a great City joining together for Government, were never accounted a
Provincial Assembly, but only the Senate for Government of the Church in the
whole City. The erecting Presbyteries for every particular congregation in a
City, is a stranger to the ancient constitution of Churches, and has given the
greatest rise to the Independency of particular congregations. For if every
particular congregation be furnished with a Government within its self, then
men are apt presently to think that there is no necessity of subordination of
it to any higher Church Power. Whereas, if that p^imitive constitution of
Churches be held, that they are Societies of Christians under an Ecclesiastical
Senate in a City* then it is evident that the congregations must truck^e under
the great body, as receiving their government by, and their Officers from that
Senate of the Church, which superintends, and orders the affairs of that whole
Body of Christians residing in such a place. And this crumbling of Churchpower
into every congregation is a thing absolutely disowned by the greatest, and
most learned Patrons of Presbytery beyond the Seas as may be seen both in
Calvin, B^za, Salmasius, Blondel, Gersome, Bucer and others. It is much
disputed when the first division of Parochial Congregations in Cities began;
Platina attributes it to Evaristus, and so does Damasus, Hic Titulos in Urbe
Roma divisit Presbyteris. He divided the several Parish Churches to the
Presbyters; these were called then Tituli: Baronius gives a double reason A.
Dom. ^ 12. n. 4, 5, 6.
of the name; either from goods belonging to the Princes Exc^equer, which have
some sign imprinted, upon them that it may be known whose they are; So, says
he, the sign of the Cross was put upon the Churches to make it known that they
were devoted to Gods Service; or else they are called Tituli, because the
several Presbyters did receive their Titles from them; but, by the Leave of
the great Cardinal, another Reason may be given of the name more proper then
either of these. It has been observed by Learned men, that the general
meetings of the Christians were in the Coemeteria or Dormitories of Christians;
So they called the Sepulchers then, which were great and capacious Vaults fit
to receive many people in them; two chief grounds of the Christians meeting in
those places: the first was their own security, because the Heathens looked on
it as a matter of Religion -- manes temerare sepultos, to disturb the ashes of
the dead; but the chief Reason was to encourage themselves to suffe^ Martyrdom
by the examples of those who had gone before them, and lay buried there; thence
they were called Martyrum memoriae, because they did call to mind their actions
and constancy in the Faith. Now from these Coemeteria was afterward the
original of Churches (whence persons most reverenced for Piety, were wont still
to be buried in Churches, not for any Holiness of the place, but because in
such places the Martyrs lay buried) the Churches being raised over the Vaults
wherein the Martyra lay intombed. Now Churches being raised from these
Coemeteries, which were called memoriae Martyrum, that they might still retain
somewhat intimating their former use, were called Tituli. For in Ezekiel 39. 15.
Titulus, as Santius observes, is signum aliquod aut monumentum quod docet ibi
latere aliquid aut accidisse, cujus nolumus perire memoriam; thence Statues are
called Tituli. So Genesis 35. 20. Erexit Jacob Titulum super Sepulchrum, as the
Vulgar Latin renders it: and Genesis 28. 18. Surgens ergo Jacob mane tulit
lapidem quem su^posuerat capiti suo, and erexit in titulum. So Absalom 2 Samuel
18. 18. erexit sibi Titulum. So that what was erected to maintain and preserve
the memory of any thing, was called Titulus; and thence the Churches being
built upon the Coemiteries of the Martyrs, were on that account called Tituli,
because intended for the preservation of their memories. This account of the
Original of the name I leave to the judgment of Learned men; but to proceed. I
confess, it seems not probable to me that these Tituli were so soon divided as
the time of Evaristus, who lived in the time of Trajan when the persecution was
hot against the Christians; but Damasus seems not to believe himself; for in
the life of Dionysius, ^e says, Hic Presbyteris ecclesias divisit, coemeteria,
paroecias, and dioeceses instituit; but most probably it began as soon as the
Churches enjoyed any ease and peace, it being so necessary for the convenient
meeting of such a multitude of Christians as there was then. In the life of
Marcellus about forty years after Dionysius, we read of twenty five Titles in
the Church of Rome; of which number what use is made for interpreting the
number 666. may be seen in Mr. Potters ingenuous Tract on that Subject. But
when afterward these Titles were much increased, those Presbyters that were
placed in the ancient Titles which were the chief among them, were called
Cardinales Presbyteri, V. O^phrium* de Episcop. ti^ul. and Div. Cardinalium.
which were then looked on as chief of the Clergy, and therefore were the chief
members of the Council of Presbyters to the Bishop. So that at this day, the
Conclave at Rome and the Pope's Consistory is an evident Argument in this great
degeneracy of it, of the Primitive constitution of the Government of the Church
there, by a Bishop acting with his College of Presbyters. Neither was this
proper to Rome alone, but to all other great Cities, which when the number of
Presbyters was grown so great, that they could not conveniently meet, and join
with the Bishop, for ordering the Government of the Church, there were some as
the chief of them chosen out from the rest, to be as the Bishops Council, and
these in many places, as at Milan, Ravenna, Naples, etc. were called Cardinales
Presbyteri, as well as at Rome; which were abrogated by Pius Quintus 1568* but
the memory of them is preserved still in Cathedral Churches, in the Chapter
there, where the Dean was nothing else but the Archipresbyt^r, and both Dean
and Prebendaries were to be assistant to the Bishop in the regulating the
Church Affairs belonging to the City, while the Churches were contained
therein. So much shall suffice for the model of Government in the Churches,
while they were contained within the same precincts with the City its self.

We come in the third place to consider what relation these * 3.
Churches in greater Cities had one to another, and to the lesser Cities which
were under them. And here the grand question to be discussed is this. Whether
the Churches in greater Cities by Apostolical institution, had the Government
Ecclesiastical, not* only of the lesser Villages under them, but likewise of
all lesser Cities under the civil Jurisdiction of the Metropolis. The
affirmative is of late asserted by some persons of great renown and learning.
The first I find maintaining this Hypothesis* of the divine right of
Metropolitans, is Fregevilaeus Gantius one of the Reformed Church of France,
who has Palma Christiana cap. 4.
spent a whole Chapter in his Palma Christian^ to that purpose, and has made
use of the same Arguments which have been since improved by all the advantages
which the learning of a Reverend Dr^ could add to them. But because this
principle manifestly destroys the main foundation of this discourse, it is
here requisite to examine the grounds on which it stands, that thereby it may
be fully cleared whether the subordination of less Churches to greater, did
only arise from the mutual association of Churches among themselves, or from
Apostolical appointment and institution. The two pillars which the divine right
of Metropolitans is built upon, are these. First, that the Cities spoken of in
the New Testament, in which Churches are planted, were Metropoles in the civil
Sense. Secondly, that the Apostles did so far follow the model of the civil
Government as to plant Metropolitan Churches in those Cities. If either of
these prove infirm, the Fabric erected upon them, must needs fall; and I doubt
not but to make it appear that both of them are. I begin with the first. The
notion of a Metropolis is confessed to be this, A City wherein the Courts of a
civil Judicature were kept by the Roman Governors, under whose Jurisdiction
the whole Province was contained. The Cities chiefly insisted on, are the seven
Cities of the Lydian Asia, and Philippi which is called (...). As for the
Cities of the Proconsular Asia, although the bounds and limits of it are not so
clear as certainly to know whether all these Cities were comprehended under it
or no, Strabo telling us that Phrygia, Lydia, Caria and Geogr^l. 13
Mysia, are (...), very hard to be distinguished from one another; it being
true of all four which was said of Mysia and Phrygia,

(...)
(...)
The Phrygian and Mysian Borders are distinct; but it i^ is hard to find them
out* For Laodicea is by Ptolomy referred to Caria; Strabo and many others,
place it in Phrygia, only Stephanus Bizantinus places it in Lydia; but
granting all that is produced by the late most excellent Primate of Armagh in
his Learned Discourse of the Proconsular Asia, to prove all these seven Cities
to be in the bounds of this Lydian Asia; yet it is far from being evident that
all these Cities were Metropoles in the Civil Sense. For Strabo tells us, That
^ Georg l. 13 p. 432 ^d. Is. Ca^a^b.
the Romans did not divide these places by Nations; ^but according to the
Dioc^sses wherein they kept their Courts, and exercised Judicature. These
Cities wherein the Courts of Judicature were kept, were the Metropoles, and no
other. Of five of them, Laodicea, Smyrna, Sardis, Ephesus and Not. hist. l. 5.
c. 29. and 30.
Pergamus, Pliny says, that the Conventus, the Civil Courts, were kept in
them: and they had Jurisdiction over the other places by him mentioned; but for
the other two, Thyatira and Philadelphia, Philadelphia is expressly mentioned as
one of those Cities which was under the jurisdictio Sardiana; so far was it
from being a Metropoles of its self; and Thyatira mentioned as one of the
ordinary Cities, without any addition of Honor at all to it. And for
Philadelphia, it was so ^ar unlikely to be a Metropolis, that Strabo tells us
it was (...); very subject to Earthquakes, and therefore had very few
inhabitants; those that ^^^, live most part in the fields, where they have
(...) a very rich soil: but Strabo for all that, wonders at the boldness of the
men that durst to venture their lives there; and most of all admires what was
in those men's heads who first built a City there. Is it then any ways probable
that this should be chosen for a Metropolis, in such an abundance of fair and
rich Cities as lay thereabout? But a Salvo is found out for Plinyes not
mentioning them as Metropoles, because the addition of these two mother Cities,
seems to have been made when Vespasian added those many new Provinces to the
old Government which Su^tonius speaks of; but this Salvo does not Sueton. in
V^syas c 8.
reach the sore: For first, Pliny wrote his natural History, not in the
beginning, but toward the latter end of the Empire of Flavius Vespasianus, when
Titus had been six times Consul ^s he himself says in his Preface; therefore
if there had been any such change, Pliny would have mentioned it. Secondly, the
Provinces added by Vespasian, are expressly set down by Su^^oniu^* viz. Achaia,
Lysia* Rhodus, Byzantium, Samos, Thracia, Cilivia* Comagena, not the least
mention of the Lydian or Proco^sular Asia, or any alteration made in the
Metropolis there. But yet there is a further attempt made to make Philadelphia
a Metropolis, which is from a subscription of Eustathius in the Council of
Constantinople sub Menna, Act 5. who calls himself the Bishop of the Metropolis
of Philadelphia; but what validity there is in such a subscription in the time
of the fifth Century to prove a Metropolis in the first, let any one judge that
does but consider how common ^ thing it was to alter Metropoles, especially
after the new disposition of the Roman Empire by Constantin^: But if we do
stand to the Notiti^ to determine this controversy, which are certainly more
to be valued then a single subscription, the Metropolitanship of these Cities
of the Lydian Asia will be irrecoverably overthrown. For in the old Notitia,
taken out of the Vatican MS. and set forth with the rest by Caro^^^^
Sancto-Paulo in his Appendix to his Geographia sacra, Ephesus is made the
Metropolis of the Province of Asia, Sardis of Lydia, Laodicea of Phrygia
Capatiana, as it is there written for Pacatiana, but Pergamus placed in the
Province of Caesarla Cappadocia, Philadelphia under Sardis, with Thyatyra* In
the Notitia attributed to Hier^cl^s under the Metropolis of Ephesus is placed
Smyrna and Pergamu^, under Sardi^, Thyatyra and Philadelphia, so likewise in
the Notitia of the French Kings Library. So that neither in the Civil no^
Ecclesiastical sense can we find these seven Cities to be all Metropoles. We
therefore observe St. Paul's course, and leaving Asia, we come into Macedonia,
where we are told, that Philippi was the Metropolis of Macedonia: I know not
whether with greater incongruity to the Civil or Ecclesiastical sense: in ^oth
which I doubt not but to make it appear, that Philippi was not the Metropolis
of Macedonia, and therefore the Bishops there mentioned could not be the
Bishops of the several Cities under the jurisdiction of Philippi, but must be
understood Phil. ^. ^.
of the Bishops resident in that City. We begin with it in the Civil sense*
which is the foundation of the other. It is confessed not to have been a
Metropolis during its being called (...) and (...), it being by Pausanias
called (...). Elia^. I^. P. 182.
By Theophylact out of an old Geographer (as it is supposed) it is said to be
(...); and is it not very improbable that so Dio l. 47.
small a City, as it is acknowledged to be by Dio and others, should be the
Metropolis of Macedonia, where were at least S. 4 c. 11. L ^. c. 2.
one hundred and fifty Cities, as Pliny and Pomponius Mela tell us; by both
whom Philippi is pl^ced in Thracia, and not in Macedonia, But two arguments are
brought to prove Philippi to have been a Metropolis; the first is from St.
Luke, calling it (...), Acts 16. 12. The first City of that Part of Macedonia:
but rendered by the learned Doctor, the prime City of the province of Macedonia;
but it would be worth knowing where (...) in all the Notitiae of the Roman
Empire was translated a Province; and it is evident that Luke calls it the
first City, not ratione dignitatis, but ratione (...), in regard of its
situation, and not its dignity. So Camerarius understands Luke, hanc esse
primam coloniam pa^tis seu Plagae Macedonicae; nimirum a Thracia vicinia iter
in Macedoniam ordiens. It is the first City of that part of Macedonia, when one
goes from Thracia into it. And* so it appears Lib. 47. p. 397.
by Dio, describing the situation of Philippi, that it was the next town to
Neapolis, only the Mountain Symbolon comeing between them, and Neapolis being
upon the shore, and Philippi built up in the plain near the Mountain Pangaeus,
where Brutus and Cassius encamped themselves: its being then the first City of
entrance into Macedonia, proves no more that it was the Metropolis of
Macodonia, then that Calice is of France, or Dover of England. But it is
further pleaded, that Philippi was a Colonie, and therefore it is most probable
that the seat of the Roman Judicature was there. But to this I answer, first,
that Philippi was not the only Colonie in Macedonia; for Pliny reckons up
Cassandria, Paria* and others: for which P^^er^. l. 2. c. 37.
we must understand that Macedonia was long since made a Province by Paulus:
and in the division of the Roman Provinces by Augustus, Strabo reckons it with
Illyricum among the Provinces belonging to the Roman people and Senate, and so
likewise does Dio. But it appears by Suetonius, that Tiberius Geog^. l 17.
hist. l. 53. V. Claudii cap. 25.
(according to the custom of the Roman Emperors in the danger of War in the
Provinces,) took it into his own hands, but it was re^urned by Claudius to the
Senat^ again, together with Achaia: thence Dio speaking of Macedonia H^st. l.
57*
in the time of Tiberius, says, it was governed (...), that is, by those who
were (...); the praefecti Casaris, such as were sent by the Emperor to be his
Presidents in the provinces, the (...) were the Proconsuli, who were chosen by
lot after their Consulship into the several Provinces* and therefore Dio
expresses Claudius his returning Macedonia into the Senates hands by (...), he
put it to the choice of the Senate again. Now Macedonia having been thus long a
Province o^ the Roman Empire, what probability is there, because Philippi was a
Colonie, therefore it must be the Metropolis of Macedonia? Secondly, We find
not the least evidence either in Scripture or elsewhere* that the Proconsul of
Macedonia had his residence at Philippi, yea, we have some evidence against it
out of Scripture* Acts 16, 20, 22. (...), and brought them to the Magistrates*
if there had been the Tribunal of a Proconsul here, we should certainly have
had it ment^oned, as Gallio Proconsul of Achaia is mentioned in a like case at
Corinth, Acts 18. 12. Two sorts of Magistrates are here expressed: V. Pan^ir.
de Magist. Municipal. cap. 8.
the (...), which seem to be the Rulers of the City, the (...), to be the
Duumviri of the Colonie, or else the Deputies of the Proconsul residing there*
but I incline rather to the former, (...), being only a Duumvir* but Exerc.
sacr. l. 5. c. 10.
(...) is a Praetor* as Heinsius observes from the Glossary of H. Stephen. For
every Colonie had a Duumvirate to rule it, answering to the Consuls and
Praetors at Rome. But all this might have been spared, when we consider how
evident it is that Thessalonica was the Metropolis of Macedonia, as appears by
Antipater in the Greek Epigram.

(...) Antholog. l. 1.

(...)
And the Praefectus pr^torio Illy^ici had (...)dence a^ Th^ssalonica, as
Theodore^ tells us, (...), etc* (...). Hist. eccles. l. 5. c. 17. V. Berter*
Pithan. Dial. cap. ^. l. 2. c 12.
Th^ssalonica was a great populous City, where the Leiutenant of Illyricum did
reside* and so in probability did the Vi^arius Macedonia. It is called the
Metropolis of Macedonia likewise by Socr^^^s, and in the Ecclesiastical sense
it is so called by Aetius the Bishop thereof in the Council of Sardica^ and
Carolus a Sancto Paulo, thinks it was not only Conc. Sard. cop. 16.
the Metropolis of the Province of Macedonia, but of the whole Dioce^s (which
in the East was much larger then the Province)* I suppose he means that which
answered to the Geogr. sacr. l. 8. s. 14.
V^carius Macedoniae. And thence in the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, the
subscription of the Bishop of Th^ssalonic^ wa^ next to the Patriarchs. But for
Philippi the same Author acknowledges it not to have been a Metropolitan
Church in the first six Centuries; but, after that Macedonia was divided into
prima and secunda (which was after the div^sion of it in the Empire into prima
and salutaris) then Philippi came to have the honorary Title of a Metropolitan:
although in Hierocles his Notitia, Philippi is placed as the twenty first City
under the Metropoles of Th^ssalonica. So much to evidence the weakness of the
first pillar, viz. that these Cities were Metropoles in the civil sense: and
this being taken away, the other falls of its self; for if the Apostles did
model the Ecclesiastical Government according to the Civil, then Metropolitan
Churches were planted only in Metropolitan Cities, and these being cleared not
to have been the latter, it is evident they were not the former. But however,
let us see what evidence is brought of such a subordination of all other
Churches to the Metropolitans, by the institution of the Apostles. The only
evidence produced out of Scripture for such a subordination and dependence of
the Churches of lesser Cities upon the greater, is from Act^ 16. 1, 4 compared
with Acts 15. 23. the argument runs thus: The question was started at Antioch,
Acts 14. 26. with Acts 15. 2. from thence they sent to Jerusalem for a
resolution: the decree of the Council there concerns not only A^tioch, but
Syria and Cilicia, which were under the Jurisdiction of Antioch: and therefore
Metropolitan Church (...)e jure divino. I am afraid the argument would
sc(...)ow its self in the dress of a Syllogism. Thus it runs; If upon the
occasion of the question at Antioch, the decree of the Apostles made at
Jerusalem, concern all the Churches of Syria, and Cilicia, then all these
Churches had a dependence upon the Metropolis of Antioch, but the an^ecedent is
true, therefore the consequent. Let us see how the argument will do in another
^orm. If upon the occasion of the question at Antioch, the decree of the
Apostles concerned all the Churches of Christians conversing with Jews; then
all these Churches had dependence upon the Church of Antioch; But, etc. How
thankful would the Papists have been, if only Rome had been put instead of
Antioch^ and then the conclusion had been true, what ever the premises were.
But in good earnest, does the Churches of Syria and Cilicia being bound by this
Decree, prove their subordination to Antioch, or to the Apostles? Were they
bound because Antioch was their Metropolis, or because they were the Apostles
who resolved the question? but were not the Churches of Phrygia, and Galatia,
bound to observe these decrees as well as others? For of these it is said, that
the Apostles went through the Cities of them, delivering the decrees to keep,
as it is expressed* Acts 16. 4. compared with the 6. verse. Or do the decrees
of the Apostles concern only those to whom they are inscribed, and upon whose
occasion they are penned? Then by the same reason Paul's Epistles being written
many of them upon occasions, as that to the Corinthians being directed to the
Metropolis of Corinth, does only concern the Church of that City, and those of
Achaia that were subject to the jurisdiction of the City; and so for the rest
of the Epistles. A fair way to make the Word of God of no effect to us; because
for sooth, we live not in obedience to those Metropoles to which the Epistles
were directed! From whence we are told, how many things we may understand by
this notion of Metropolitans: Especially why Ignatius superscribes his Epistle
to the Romans, (...), to the Church which pre^ides in the place of the Roman
region, or the suburbicari^n Provinces. But let us see whether this place may
not be understood better without the help of this notion. Casaubon calls it
locutionem barbar^m; Exercit. 16. n. 150 Exercit. in ep. Ignat. a^ ^om. c. 2.
Vedelius is more favorable to it, and thinks si non elegans saltem vi^ii
libera est, and explains it by the suburbicarian Provinces: and makes the sense
of it to be (...), in the place which is the Roman region, and parallels it
with the (...), Luke 9. 10. Bellarmine thinks he has ^ound the Popes universal
power in his (...), but methinks the (...), should hardly be rendered Orbis
universus, unless Bellarmine were no more skilled in Greek, then Casaubon thinks
he was, whom he calls in the p^ace forecited, hominem Graecarum literarum
prorsus (...). The most ingenuous conjecture concerning this place, is that of
our learned Mr. Thorndike. The word Laws of the Ch^r. cap. 18. p. 164.
(...), says he, is here used as many times besides, speaking of those places
which a man would neither call Cities nor Towns, as Acts 27 2. (...), being to
sail by the places of Asia; (...), it is plain it signifies the country;
(...), then must necessarily signify here the Vaticane lying in the Fields as
a suburb to Rome, and being the place where St. Peter was buried, and where the
Jews of Rome then dw^lt, as we learn by Philo, legatione ad Caium, out of whom
he produces a large place to that purpose, and so makes this the Church of the
Jewish Christians, the Vaticane being then the Iewry of Rome; but there being
no clear evidence of any such distinction of Churches there, and as little
reason why Ignatius should write to the Church of the Jewish Christians, and
not to the Church of the Gentile Christians, I therefore embrace his sense of
the (...) for the Vatican, but explain it in another way, viz. as we have
already showed, that the chief places of meeting for the Christians in
Gentile*Rome, was in the Coemeteries of the Martyrs; now these Coemeteria were
all of them without the City; and the Coemeteria where Peter, Linus, Cletus,
and some other of the Primitive Martyrs lay interred in the Vatican, beyond the
River Tiber. So Damasus in the life of Cletus, Qui etiam sepultus est juxta
corpus B. Petri in Vaticano. The Church then in the p^ace of the region of the
Romans, is the Christian-Church of Rome, assembling chiefly in the Coemeteries
of the Vatican, or any other of those Vaults which were in the Fields at a good
distance from the City. But yet there is one argument more for Metropolitans*
and that is from the importance of the word (...), which is taken to signify
both the City and Country; and so the inscription of Clemens his Epistle is
explained, (...), i. e. the Church of God dwelling about Rome, to the Church
dwelling about Corinth, whereby is supposed to be comprehended the whole
Territories, which (being these were Metropoles) takes in the whole Province.
And so Polycarp, (...), But all this arises from a mistake of the
signification of the word (...), which signifies not so much accolere as
incolere: and therefore the old Latin Version renders it, Eccl^siae Dei quae
est Philippis, (...), one that removes from one City to sojourn in another. And
the ground of attributing that name to the Christian Churches, was either
because that many of the first Christians being Jews, they did truly (...),
being as strangers out of their own country, or else among the Christians,
because by reason of their continual persecutions, they were still put in mind
of their flitting uncertain condition Phil. 3. ^0*
in the World, their (...), country, citizenship being in Heaven. Of this the
Apostles often tell them: from hence i^ came to signify the Society of such
Christians so living together; which as it increased, so the notion of the word
(...) increased, and so went from the City into the country, and came not from
the country into the City; for, if (...) should be taken for accolere, then it
necessarily follows, that (...) cannot signify the Church of Rome, and the
Territories belonging to it, but the Church adjacent to Rome, distinct from the
City, and the Church in it. For in that sense (...) is opposed to living in
the City, and so (...) are distinct from the Citizens, as in Thucydides and
others; but, I believe no instance can possibly be produced wherein (...),
taken in that sense, does comprehend in it both City and Country. But being
taken in the former sense, it was first applied to the whole Church of the
City: but when the Church of the City did spread it self into the Country,
then the word (...) comprehended the Christians, both in City and Country
adjoining to it.

Which leads me to the second step of Christian Churches,. 4.
when Churches took in the Villages and Territories adjoining to the Cities:
For which we must understand, that the ground of the subordination of the
Villages and Territories about, did primarily arise from hence, that the Gospel
was spread abroad from the several Cities into the Countries about. The
Apostles themselves preachedmost, as we read in Scripture, in the Cities,
because of the great resort of people thither; there they planted Churches, and
settled the Government of them in an Ecclesiastical Senate, which not only took
care for the government of Churches already constituted, but for the gathering
more. Now the persons who were employed in the conversion of the adjacent
Territories, being of the Clergy of the City, the persons by them converted
were adjoined to the Church of the City; and all the affairs of those lesser
Churches were at first determined by the Governors of the City; Afterward
when these Churches increased, and had peculiar Officers set over them by the
Senate of the City-church, although these did rule and govern their flock, yet
it always was with a subordination to, and dependence upon the government of
the City-church. So that by this means, he that was President of the Senate in
the City, did likewise superintend all the Churches planted in the adjoining
Territories, which was the original of that which the Greeks call (...); the
Latins, the Diocese of the Bishop. The Church where the Bishop was peculiarly
resident with the Clergy, was called Matrix Ecclesia, and Cathedra principali^,
^Cod. Eccles. Afric. c. 33. can. 71.
as the several Parishes which at first were divided according to the several
regions of the City, were called Tituli, and those planted in the Territories
about the City, called Paroeciae, when they were applied to the Presbyters; but
when to the Bishop, it noted a Diocese: those that were planted in these
country-parishes, were called (...), by the Greeks, and by the Latins,
Presbyteri regionarii, conregionales, forastici, ruri^ agrorum Presbyteri, from
whom the (...) were distinct, as evidently appears by the thirteenth Canon of
the Council of Neocaesarea* where the country Presbyters are forbidden to
administer the Lords Supper in the presence of the Bishop on the Presbyters of
the City; but the Chorepiscopi were allowed to do it. Salmasiu^ thinks these
(...) were so called, as (...) the Episcopi Apparatu^ pr. 240. de primat. c. 1
p. 10. c. 11. p. 164.
villani, such as were only Presbyters, and were set over the Churches in
Villages: but though they were originally Presbyters, yet they were ^aised to
some higher authority over the rest of the Presbyters, and the original of them
seems to be, that when Churches were so much multiplied in the Countries
adjacent to the Cities, that the Bishop in his own person could not be present
to oversee the actions and carriages of the several Presbyters of the country
Churches, then they ordained some of the fittest in their several Dioceses to
super intend the several Presbyters lying remore from the City; from which
office of theirs they were called (...): because they did (...), go about, and
visit the several Churches. This is the account given of them by Beza and
Blondel, as well as others. All those Beza de M^^is* gr^d. c. 24. ^londel. Ap
p. 94.
several places that were converted to the says by the assistance of the
Presbyters of the City, did all make but one Church with the City. Whereof we
have this twofold evidence* First, from the Eulogi^ which were at first parcels
of the bread consecrated for the Lords Supper, which were sent by the Deacons
or Ac^luthi to those that were absent, in token of their communion in the same
Church. Justin Martyr is the first who acquaints us with this custom of the
Apol. 22 p. 97.
Church; After, says he, the President of the Assembly has consecrated the
bread and wine, the Deacons stand ready to distribute it to every one person,
(...), and carry it to those that are absent. Damascus attributes the beginning
of this custom to Miltiades Bishop of Rome. Hic fecit ut Oblationes consecrat^
per Ecclesias ex consecratione Episcopi Cap. 5*
dirigerentur: quod declaratur fermentum. So Innocentius ad Decentium; De
fermento vero quod die Dominica per titulos mittimus, etc. ut se a nostra
communione maxim illa die non judicent separa^os^ Whereby it appears to have
been the custom of Rome and other places to send from the Cathedral Church,
the bread consecrated to the several parish-Churches, to note their
joint-communion in the faith of the Gospel. Neither was it sent only to the
several tituli in the City, but to the Villages round about, as appears by the
Question propounded by D^centius; although at Rome it seems they sent it only
to the Churches within the City, as appears by the answer of Innocentius: but
Albaspinus takes it for Observat. l. 1. c 8.
granted, as a general custom upon some set-dayes to send these Eulogi^
through the whole Diocese. Nam cum per vicos and agros sparsi and diffus^, ex
^adem non p^ssint sumere communione, cuperentque s^mper union is Christian^,
and Christi corporis speciem quam p^ssint maximam r^tinere, sol^^nissimis
di^bus and festivis ex matrice per parochias, been dictus mit^ebatur panis, ex
^ujus p^rceptione communitas quae inter omnes fideles ^jusdem D^oecesis
intercedere debet, intelligebatur and repraesentabatur. Surely then the
Diocesses were not very large; i^ all the several parishes could communicate on
the same day with what was sent from the Cathedral Church. Afterward they sent
not part of the bread of the Lord's Supper, but some other V. Casaub. Exercit:
16. s. 33. Salmas. App p. 243
in Analogy to that, to denote their mutual contesseration in the says and
communion in the same Church* Secondly, It appears that still they were of the
same Church, by the presence of the Clergy of the Country, or the choice of
the Bishop of the City, and at Ordinations and in Councils. So Ep. ad Honor. a
Presbi^. Romans
at the choice of Boniface, Relictis singuli titulis suis Presbyteri omnes
aderunt qui voluntatem suam* hoc est D^i judicium, proloquantur: whereby it is
evident that all the Clergy had their voices in the choice of the Bishop. And
therefore Pope L^o requires these things as necessary to the ordination of a
Bishop, Subscriptio clericorum, Honoratorum testimonium. Ordinis consensus and
plebis: and in the same chapter speaking Ep. 90.
of the choice of the Bishop, he says it was done subscribentibus plus minus
septuagint^ Presbyteris. And therefore it is observed, that all the Clergy
con^urred to the choice even of the Bishop of Rome, till after the time of that
Hildebrand called Greg. 7. in whose time Popery came to Age: thence Cypr. ep.
52.
Casaubon calls it Haeresin Hildebrandinam. Cornelius Bishop of Rome was chosen
Clericoram pene omnium testimonio; and in the Council at Rome under Sylv^ster
it is decreed, that none of the Clergy should be ordained, nisi cum tota
adunata Ecclesia. Con 3. c. ^: and 5. Con. 2. c. 10, 11.
Many instances are brought from the Councils of Carthage to the same purpose,
which I pass over as commonly known. It was accounted the matter of an
accusation against Chrysostom by his enemies, (...), Ph^ti^^ Co^ 59* n. 15.
that he ordained without the Council and assistance of his Clergy. The
p^esence of the Clergy at Councils has been already showed. Thus we see how,
when the Church of the City was enlarged into the Country, the power of the
Governors of the Churches in the City was extended with it.

The next step observable in the Churches increase, was,. 5.
when several of these Churches lying together in one Province did associate
one with another. The Primitive Church had a great eye to the preserving unity
among all the members of it, and thence they kept so strict a correspondency
among the several Bishops in the Commercium Formatarum (the formula of writing,
which to prevent deceit, may be seen in Iustellus his Notes on the Codex
Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae) and for a maintaining Page 127.
of nearer correspondency among the Bishops themselves of a Province, it was
agreed among themselves for the better carrying on of their common work, to
call a Provincial Synod twice every year to debate all causes of concernment
there among themselves, and to agree upon such ways as might most conduce to
the advancing the common interest of Christianity. Of these Tertullian speaks;
Aguntur praecept^ per Gracias illas certis in locis Concilia ex universis
Eccles^is, per quae and altiora quaeque in communi tractantur, and ipsa De
jejuni^ advers. Psych.
repraesentatio nominis Christiani magna v^neratione celebratur. Of these the
thirty eighth Canon Apostolical (as it is called) expressly speaks, (which
Canons, though not of authority sufficient to ground any right upon, may yet be
allowed the place of a Testimony of the practice of the Primitive Church,
especially toward the third Century) (...). Can. Ap^st. cap. 38.
Twice a year a Synod of Bishops was to be kept for discussing matters of
faith, and resolving matters of practice. To the same purpose the Council of*
Antioch, A. D. 343* (...). Ca^ 20 in* Cod. C^^. 99.
To these Councils; the Presbyters and Deacons came, as appears by that Canon
of the Council of Antioch; and in the seventh Canon of the Nicene Council by
Alphon us Pisanus the same custom is dec^eed* but no such thing occurrs in the
Codex Canonum, either of Tilius or Iustellus his Edition* and the Arabic
edi^^^^ of that Council is conceived to have been compiled above four hundred
years after the Council set. But however, we see evidence enough of this
practice of celebrating Provincial Synods twice a year; now in the assembling
of these Bishops together for mutual counsel in their affairs, there was a
necessity of some order to be observed. There was no difference as to the power
of the Bishops themselves, who had all equal authority in their several
Churches, and none over one another. For, Episcopatus unus ^st cujus ^ singulis
in solidum pars tenetur, Do veritate Ecceles.
as Cyprian speaks; and as Jerome, Ubicunq, Episcopus fuerit, sive Romae, sive
Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive R^egii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis,
ejusdem est meriti* ejusdem est and Sacerdotii. Ep. ad Evagrun.
Potentia divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem
Episcopum non facit: Caterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. There being
then no difference between them, no man calling himself Episcopum Episcoporum,
as Cyprian elsewhere speaks, some other way must be found out to preserve order
among them, and to moderate the affairs of the Councils; and therefore it was
determined in the Council of Antioch, that he that was the Bishop of the
Metropolis, should have the honor of Metropolitan among the Bishops, (...),
Can. 17.
because of the great confluence of people to that City, therefore he should
have the pr^heminence above the rest. We see how far they are from attributing
any Divine Right to Metropolitaus; and therefore the rights of Metropolitans
are called by the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council, (...), which had been a
dishonorable introduction for the Metropolitan Rights, had they thought them
grounded upon Apostolical institution. Nothing more evident in antiquity then
the honor of Metropolitans depending upon their Sees; thence when any Cities
were raised by the Emperor to the honor of Metropoles, their Bishop became a
Metropolitan, as is most evident in Iustiniana prima, and for it* there are
Canons in the Councils decreeing it; but of this more afterward. The chief
Bishop of Africa was only called primae sedis Episcop(...)* thence we have a
Canon in the Codex Ecclesiae African^* (...). Can. 39.
That the Bishop of the chief See, should not be called the Exarch of the
Priests, or chief Priest, or any thing of like nature, but only the Bishop of
the chief seat. Therefore it has been well observed that the African Churches
did retain longest the Primitive simplicity and humility among them; and when
the voice was said to be heard in the Church upon the flowing in of riches,
Hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam, by the working of which poison the
spirits of the Prelates began to swell with pride and ambition (as is too
evident in Church History) only Africa escaped the infection most, and resisted
the tyrannical encroachments of the Roman Bishop, with the greatest magnanimity
and courage, as may be seen by the excellent Epistle of the Council of
Carthage, to Boniface Bishop of Rome Page 341*
in the Codex Ecclesiae Africanae. So tha^ however Africa has been always
fruitful of Monsters; yet in that ambitious age it had no other wonder but
only this, that it should escape so free from that typhus saecularis (as they
then called it) that monstrous itch of pride and ambition. From whence we may
well rise to the last step of the power of the Church, which was after the
Empire grew Christian, and many Provinces did associate together, then the
honor and power of Patriarchs came upon the stage. And now began the whole
Christian world to be the Cock*pitt, wherein the two great Prelates of Rome and
Constantinople strive with their greatest force for mastery of one another, and
the whole world with them, as may be seen in the actions of Paschasinus the
Roman Legate in the Council of Chalcedon. From whence forward the great
Levi^than by his tumbling in the waves, endeavored to get the Dominion of all
into his hands: but God has at last put a hook into his nostrils, and raised
up the great instruments of Reformation, who like the Sword* fish have so
pierced into his bowels, that by his tumbling he may only hasten his
approaching ruin, and give the Church every day more hopes of seeing its self
freed from the tyranny of an U^urped power. By this Scheme and draught now of
the increase of the Churches power, nothing can be more evident, then that it
rise not from any divine institution, but only from positive and Ecclesiastical
Laws, made according to the several states and conditions wherein the Church
was; which as it gradually grew up, so wa^ the power of the Church by mutual
consent fitted to the state of the Church in its several ages. Which was the
first argument, that the Primitive Church did not conceive its self bound to
observe any one unalterable form of Government. This being the chief, the rest
that follow, will sooner be dispatched.

The second is from the great varieties as to Government. 6.
which were in several Churches. What comes from divine right, is observed
unalterably in one uniform and constant tenor: but what we find so much
diversified according to several places, we may have ground to look on only as
an Ecclesiastical constitution, which was followed by every Church as it judged
convenient. Now as to Church Government we may find some Churches without
Bishops for a long time, some but with one Bishop in a whole Nation, many
Cities without any, where Bishops were common; many Churches discontinue
Bishops for a great while where they had been; no certain rule observed for
modelling their D^ocesses where they were still continued. Will not all these
things make it seem very improbable that it should be an Apostolical
institution, that no Church should be without a Bishop? First, then some whole
Nations seem to have been without any Bishops at all, if we may believe their
own Historians. So if we may believe the great Antiquaries of the Church of
Scotland, that Church was governed by their Culdei as they called their
Presbyters, without any Bishop over them, for a long time. Johannes Mayor
speaks of their instruction in the faith, per Sacerdotes and Monachos sine
Episcopis Scoti in fide eruditi, but least De gestis Scot. lib. 2. cap 2.
that should be interpreted only of the^r conversion, Johannes Fordonus is
clear and full to their government, from the time of their conversion about A.
D* 263. to the coming of Palladius A. D. 430. that they were only governed by
Presbyters Scot. chron. l. 3. cap. 1.
and Monks. Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei D^ctores ac
Sacramentorum Ministratores Presbyteros solunmodo, vel Monachos ritum sequentes
Ecclesiae Primitivae. V. B^ondel. Apol. s 3. page 314.
So much mistaken was that learned man, who says, That neither Beda nor any
other affirms that the Scots were formerly ruled by a Presbytery, or so much
as that they had any Presbyter among them. Neither is it any ways sufficient
to say, that these Presbyters did derive their authority from some Bishops: for
however we see here a Church governed without such, or if they had any, they
were only chosen from their Culdei, much after the custom of the Church of
Alexandria, as Hector Boethiu^ does imply. And if we believe Scot. hist. lib.
6. Eclog. l. 2. cap. 5.
Philostorgius, the Gothic Churches were planted and governed by Presbyters
for above seventy years* for so long it was from their first conversion to the
time of Ulphilas whom* he makes their first Bishop. And great probability there
is, that where Churches were planted by Presbyters, as the Church of France by
Andochius and Benignus, that afterward upon the increase of Churches, and
Presbyters to rule them, they did from among themselves choose one to be as the
Bishop over them, as Pothinus was at Lions. For we nowhere read in those early
plantations of Churches, that where there were Presbyters already, they sent to
other Churches to derive Episcop^l ordination from them. Now for whole Nations
having but one Bishop, we have the testimony of Sozomen, that in Scythia which
by the Romans was called Masia inferior, Hist. Eccl. l 7. cap. 19.
(...). Although there were many Cities they had but one Bishop. The like
Godignus De rebus Abassin. b^ 1. c. 321.
relates of the Ab^ssine Churches, Though their Territories be of vast extent,
there is but only one Bishop in all those Dominions, who is the Bishop of
Abuna. And where Bishops were most common, it is evident they looked not on it
as an Apostolical rule for every City to have a Bishop, which it must have if
it was an Apostolical institution for the Church to follow the civil
Government. Theodoret mentions 800 Churches Ep. 113.
under his charge, in whose Di^cess Ptolomy places many other Cities of note
besides Cirus, as Ariseria, Regia, Ruba, G^^gr. l. 5. c^p* 15
Heraclea, etc. In the Province of Tripoly he reckons nine Cities which had but
five Bishops, as appears by the Notitia Ecclesiae Africanae* In Thracia every
Bishop had several Cities under him. The Bishop of Heraclea that and Panion*,
the Bishop of Byze had it and Arcadiapolis; of Coela had Ephesians. synod. 1. ad
sia. Act. 7.
it and Callipolis; Sabsadia had it and Aphrodisias. It is needless to produce
more instances of this nature either ancient or modern, they being so common
and obvious. But further, we find Bishops discontinued for a long time in the
greatest Churches. For if there be no Church without a Bishop, where was the
Church of Rome when from the Martyrdom of Fabian, and the banishment of Lucius
the Church was governed only by the Clergy? Cyprian ep. 3. 26, 30, 31.
So the Church of Carthage when Cyprian was banished; the Church of the East,
when Meletius of Antioeh, Eusebius Samosatenus, Pelagius of Laodicea, and the
rest of the Orthodox Bishops were banished for ten years space, and Flavianus
and Diodorus, two Presbyters ruled the Church of Antioch Theodoret l. 4. c. 22.
the mean while, The Church of Carthage was twenty four years without a Bishop
in the time of Hunerik, King of the Vandals; and when it was offered them that
V^ctor l. 2. de pers. Vand.
they might have a Bishop upon admitting the Arrians to a free exercise of
their Religion among them, their answer was upon those terms, Ecclesia
Episcopum non delictatur habere; In can. 57. Laod.
and Balsamon speaking of the Christian Churches in the East, determines it
neither safe nor necessary in their present state to have Bishops set up over
them. And lastly for their Diocesses, it is evident there was no certain Rule
for modelling them. In some places they were far less then in others. Thorndike
right of the Ch^r. p. 62. De rebus Eccl siast.
Generally in the primitive and Eastern Churches they were very small and
little, as far more convenient for the end of them in the government of the
Churches under the Bishops charge: it being observed out of Walafridus Strabo
by a learned man, Fertur in Orientis partibus per singulas urbes and
praefecturas singulas esse Episcoporum gubernationes. In Africa, if we look but
into the writings of Augustine, we may find hundreds of Bishops resorting to
one Council. In Ireland alone, Saint Patrick is said by Ninius at the first
Plantation of Lib. 7. c. 19
Christianity to have founded 365. Bishoprics. So Sozomen te^ls us, that among
the Arabians, and Cyprians, Novatians Montanists, (...), the very Villages had
Bishops among them.

The next evidence that the Church did not look upon it. 7.
self as by a Divine Law to observe any one model of Government, is, the
conforming the Ecclesiastical Government to the Civil. For, if the Obligation
arose from a Law of GOD; that must not be altered according to civil
co^stitutions, which are variable according to the different state and
conditions of things. If then the Apostles did settle things by a standing Law
in their own times, how comes the model of Church Government to alter with the
civil Form? Now that the Church did generally follow the civil Government, is
freely acknowledged and insisted on by Learned Persons of all sides; especially
after the division of the Roman Empire by Constantine the Great. The full
making out of Berteri, Pithan (...) Diatribae. Salmas. ep. ad Am. Eucharisti*
adver. Sirmond, De pri^^. Pan. Iac. Gotho^^. Conjectur. Vindiciae Conjectur.
Blondel de la primau^e en la ^glise, etc.
which is a work too large to be here undertaken, and has been done to very
good purpose already, by Berterius, Salmasius, Gothofred, Blondel and others,
in their Learned discourses of the suburbicarian Provinces. Which whether by
them we understand that which did correspond to the Praefecture of the Provost
of Rome, which was within a hundred miles compass of the City of Rome, or that
which answered to the Vicarius Urbis, whose jurisdiction was over the ten
Provinces distinct from Italy, properly so called, whose Metropolis was Milan;
or, which is most probable, the Metropolitan Province answering to the
jurisdiction of the Praefectus Urbis, and the Patriarchate of the Roman Bishop
to the Vicarius Urbis; which way soever we take it, we see, it answered to the
Civil Government. I shall not here enter that debate, but only Discourse of
the Patriarchal Government of the ancient Chur* 9. 1.
briefly at present set down the Scheme of both Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, as it is represented by our Learned Breerwood. The whole Empire of
Rome was divided into XIII. Dioceses, whereof ^even belonged to the East
Empire, and six (beside the Praefecture of the City of Rome) to the West. Those
thirteen Dioceses, together with that Praefecture contained among them 120.
Provinces, or thereabout; so that to every Diocese belonged the administration
of sundry Provinces: Lastly, every Province contained many Cities within their
Territories. The Cities had for their Rulers, those inferior Judges, which in
the Law are called Defensores Civitatum; and their seats were the Cities
themselves; to which all the Towns and Villages in their several Territories
were to resort for Justice. The Provinces had for theirs either Proconsuls, or
Consulares, or Praesides, or Correctores; four sundry appellations, but almost
all of equal authority; and their Seats were the chiefest Cities or Metropoles
of the Provinces: of which in every Province there was one, to which all
inferior Cities for Judgment in matters of importance did resort. Lastly, the
Dioceses had for theirs the Lieutenants called Vicarii, and their Seats were
the Metropoles or Principal Cities of the Diocese, whence the Edicts of the
Emperor or other*Lawes were publ^shed, and sent abroad into all the Provinces
of the Diocese, and where the Praetorium and chief Tribunal for Judgment was
placed to de^ermiue Appeals, and minister Justice (as might be occasion) to all
the Provinces belonging to that Jurisdiction. And this was the Disposition of
the Roman Governor. -- And truly it is wonderful (says that Lear^ed Author)
how nearly and exactly the Church in her Government did imitate this Civil
Ordination of the Roman Magistrates. For first, in every City, as there was a
Defensor Civitatis for secular Government, so was there placed a Bishop for
Spiritual Regiment (in every City of the East, and in every City of the West,
almost a several Bishop) whose Jurisdiction extended but to the City, and the
places within the Territory. For which cause the Jurisdiction of a Bishop was
anciently called (...), signifying not (as many ignorant Novelists think) a
Parish, as now the word is taken, that is, the places or habitations near a
Church, but the Towns and Villages near a City: all which, together with the
City, the Bishop had in charge. Secondly, in every Province, as there was a
President, so there was an Archbishop, and because his Seat was the principal
City of the Province, he was commonly known by the name of Metropolitan.
Lastly, in every Diocese, as there was a Lievtenant-General, so was there a
Primate seated also in the principal City of the Diocese as the Lieutenant was,
to whom the last determining of Appeals from all the Provinces in differences
of the Clergy, and the sovereign care of all the Diocese for sundry points of
Spiritual Government did belong. By this you may see that there were XI.
Primates besides the three Patriarchs; for of the XIII. Dioceses (besides the
Praefecture of the City of Rome, which was administered by the Patriarch of
Rome) that of Egypt was governed by the Patriarch of Alexandria, and that of
the Orient by the Patriarch of Antiochia, and all the rest by the Primates:
between whom and the Patriarchs was no difference of Jurisdiction and power,
but only of some Honor which accrued to them by the Dignity of their Sees; as
is clearly expressed in the third Canon of the Council of Constantinople,
(...), In Cod. C^n. 166.
whereby Constantinople is advanded to the honorary Title of a Patriarch next
to Rome, because it was New Rome. Whereby it is evident that the Honor
belonging to the Bishop of old Rome did arise from its being the Imperial City.
The Honor of the Bishop rising, as Austin says, that of the Deacons of Rome
did, Quest. ex ut^oque Test. q. 101.
propter magnificentiam urbis Romanae quae caput esse videour omnium civitatum.
Hereby we now fully see what the Original was of the power of Archbishops,
Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, in the Church, viz. the contemperating the
Ecclesiastical-Government to the civil.

The next Evidence that the Church did not look upon its. 8.
self as bound by a Divine Law, to a certain Form of Government, but did order
things itself in order to Peace and Unity, is, that after Episcopal Government
was settled in the Church, yet Ordination by Presbyters was looked on as valid.
For which these instances may suffice. About the year 390. Johannes Cassianus
reports that one Abbot Daniel in^eriour Collat. 4. c. 1.
to none of those who lived in the Desert of Scetis, was made a Deacon, a B.
Pa^hnutio solitudinis ejusdem Presbytero: In tantum enim virtutibus ipsius
adgaudebat, ut quem vitae meritis sibi and gratia parem noverat, coaequare sibi
etiam Sacerdotti Honor festinaret. Siquidem nequaquam ferens in inferiore eum
ministerio diutius immorari, optansque sibi^et success^rem dignissimum
providere, superstes eum Presbyterii honor provexit* What more plain and
evident then that here a Presbyter ordained a Presbyter, which we now here read
was pronounced null by Theophilus then Bishop of Alexandria, or any others that
at time? It is a known instance, that in the ordination of Pelagius first
Bishop of Rome, there were only two Bishops concurred, and one Presbyter:
whereas according to the fourth Canon of the Nicene Council* three Bishops are
absolutely required for Ordina^ion (...) Bishop; either ^hen Pelagius was no
Canonical Bishop, and so the point of succession Anast Bil. vit. Pelag. Prim.
thereby fails in the Church of Rome: or else a Presbyter has the same
intrinsecal power of Ordination which a Bishop has, but it is only restrained
by Ecclesiastical Laws. In the time of Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, which was
done A. D. 328, as Iacobus Goth^^redus proves, till the time of the ordination
Dissert. in Philost. l. 2. cap. 7.
of Paulinus A. D. 362. which was for thirty four years space, when the Church
was governed by Paulinus and his Colleagues withdrawing from the public
Assemblies; it will be hard to say by whom the Ordinations were performed all
this while, unless by Paulinus and his Colleagues. In the year 452. it appears
by Leo in his Epistle to Rusticus Narbonensis, that some Presbyters took upon
them to ordain as Bishops; Ep. 9^. c. 1.
about which he was consulted by Rusticus what was to be done in that Case with
those so ordained: Leo his resolution of that Case is observable, Siqui autem
Clerici ab is it is pseudo-Episcopis in iis Ecclesiis ordinati sunt, quae ad
pr^prios Episcopos pertinebant, and ordinatio ^orum cum consensn and judicio
praesidentium facta est, potest rata haberi, ita ut in ipsis Ecclesiis
perseverent. Those Clergy men who were ordained by such as took upon them the
Office of Bishops, in Churches belonging to proper Bishops, if the Ordination
were performed by the consent of the Bishops, it may be looked on as valid, and
those Presbyters remain in their Office in the Church. So that by the consent
ex post facto of the true Bishops those Presbyters thus ordained, were looked
on as Lawful Presbyte^s, which could not be, unless their ordainers had an
intrinsecal power of Ordination; which was only restrained by the Laws of the
Church; for if they have no power of Ordination, it is impossible they should
confer any thing by their O^d^nation. If to this it be answered, that the
validity of their Ordination did depend upon the consent of the Bishops, and
that Presbyters may ordain, if delegated thereto by Bishops, as Paulinus might
ordain on that account at Antioch. It is easily answered, that this very power
of doing it by delegation, does imply an intrinsecal power in themselves of
doing it. For i^ Presbyters be forbidden ordaining others by Scriptures, then
they can neither do it in their own persons, nor by delegation from others. F^^
Q^od alicui suo nomine ^on lices, nec (...): An^ ^^^^ Rule o^ Cyprian must Reg.
juris 67.
hold true, Non aliquid c^i ^^^^ largiri potest humana indulgentia, ubi
interc^dit and leg^^ tribuit Divina ^r^scriptio. Ep^st. 8.
There can be no dispensing with Divine Laws; which must be, if that may be
delegated to other persons, which was required of men in the Office wherein
they are. And if Presbyters have power of conferring nothing by their
Ordination, how can an after-consent of Bishops make that Act of theirs valid,
for conserring Right and Power by it? It appears then, that this Power was
restrained by the Laws of the Church, for preserving U^ity in its self; but
yet so, that in case of necessity what was done by Presbyters, was not looked
on as invalid. But against this the case of Ischyras, ordained, as it is said,
a Presbyter by Collutbus, and pronounced null by the Council of Alexandria, is
commonly pleaded. But there is no great difficulty in answering it. For first,
the pronouncing such an Ordination null, does not evidence that they looked on
the power of Ordination as belonging of Divine right only to Bishops; for we
find by many instances, that acting in a bare contempt of Ecclesiastical Canons
was sufficient to degrade any from being Presbyters. Secondly, V. Blondel. Ap.
p. 325.
If Ischyras had been ordained by a Bishop, there were c^rcumstances enough to
induce the Council to pronounce it null. First, as done out of the Diocese, in
which case Ordinations are nulled by Council. Arel. cap. 13. Secondly, done by
open and pronounced Schismatics. Thirdly, done sine titulo (...), and ^o
nulled by the Canons then. Thirdly, Colluthns did not act as a Presbyter in
ordaining, but as a Bishop of the Meletian party in Cynus, as the Clergy of
Mareotis speaking of Ischyras his ordination, (...), by Collytbus a Presbyter,
making show of being a Bishop; and is supposed to have been ordained a Bishop
by Meletius. More concerning this may be seen in Apol S. 3. a 317. ad 327.
Blondel, who fully clears all the particulars here menti^^e^. So that
notwithstanding this Instance, nothing appears, but that the power of
Ordination was restrained only by Ecclesiastical Law^.

The last thing to prove that the Church did act upon prudence. 9.
in Church Government, is from the many restraints in other cases made by the
Church, for restraint of that Liberty which was allowed by Divine Laws. He must
be a stranger to the ancient Canons, and Constitutions of the Church, that
takes not notice of such restraints made by Canons, as in reference to
observation of several Rites and Customs in the Churches, determined by the
Provincial Synods of the several Churches; for which purpose their Provincial
Synods were still kept up in the Eastern Church, as appears by the Testimony of
Firmilian in his Epistle to Cyprian: Qua ex causa Ep 75.
necessario apud nos fit, ut per singulos annos Seniores and Praepositi in unum
conveniamus, ad disponenda ea quae curae nostrae commissa sunt: Ut si quae
graviora sunt communi consilio dirigantur* lapsis quoque fratribus, etc. medela
quaeratur: non quasi a nobis remissionem peccatorum consequ^nt^r; sed ^t per
nos ad intelligentiam delictorum suorum convertantur, and Domino before
satisfacere cogantur. The several orders about the Discipline of the Church
were det^rmined in these Synods; as to which, he that would find a command in
Scripture for their orde^s about the Catechumeni, and Lapsi, will take pains to
no purpose, the Church ordering things it self for the better Regulating the
several Churches they were placed over. A demonstrative Argument, that these
things came not from Divine command, is, from the great diversi^y of these
customs Hist. lib. 7. cap. 19.
in several places: of which besides Socrates, Sozomen largely speaks, and may
easily be gathered from the History of the several Churches. When the Church
began to enjoy ease V. Iustel. praef^^. in Cod. Canonum Uni^ers. Eccl.
and liberty, and thereby had opportunity of enjoying greater convenience for
Councils; we find what was detrrmined by those Councils, were entered into a
Codex Canonum for that purpose, which was observed next to the Scriptures; not
from any Obligation of the things themselves, but from the conduceablene^s of
those things (as they judged them) to the preserving the Peace and Unity of the
Church.

CHAP. VIII.
An Inquiry into the Judgment of Reformed Divines concerning the unalterable
Divine Right of particular Forms of Church Government: wherein it is made
appear, that the most ^minent D^vines of the Reformation did never conceive any
one Form necessary; manifested by three arguments. 1. From the judgment of
those who make the Form of Church Government mutable, and to depend upon the
wisdom of the Magistrate and Church. This cleared to have been the judgment of
most Divines of the Church of England since the Reformation. Archbishop
Cranmers judgment, with others of the Reformatiion in Edward the Sixth's, time,
now first published from his authentic MS. The same ground of settling
Episcopacy in Queen Elizabeth's time. The judgment of Archbishop W^itgift,
Bishop Bridges, Dr. ^oe, Mr. Hooker, largely to that purpose, in King James his
time. The Kings own Opinion. Dr. Su^cl^ffe. Since of ^rakan^horp, Mr. Hales,
Mr. Chillingworth. The Testimony of Foreign Divines to the same purpose.
Chemnitius, Zanchy French Divines, Peter Moul^n, Fregevil, Blondel, Bochartus,
Amyraldus. Other learned men, Gro^^u^, Lord Bacon, etc. 2. Those who look upon
equality as the Primitive Form, yet judge Episcopacy* lawful. Augustane
Confession, Mel^nchthon, Ar^icu^^ Sma^caldici. Prince of Anhalt, Hyperius,
Hemingius: The practice of most Foreign Churches. C^lvin and Beza both
approving Episcopacy and Diocesan Churches. Salmasius, etc. 3. Those who judge
Episcopacy to be the Primitive Form, yet look not on it as nec^ssary. Bishop
Jewel, Fulk, Field, Bishop Downam, Bishop Banc^o^t, Bishop Morton, Bishop
Andrews, Saravia, Francis Mason, and others. The Conclusion hence laid in Order
to Peace Principles conducing thereto. 1. Prudence must be used in
Church Government, at last confessed by all parties. Independents in elective
Synods, and Church Covenants, admission of Members, number in Congregations.
Presbyterians in Classes, and Synods, Lay Elders etc. E^iscopal in Diocesses,
Causes, Rites, etc. 2. That Prudence best, which comes nearest Primitive
practice. A Presidency for life over an Ecclesiastical Senate showed to be that
Form, in order to it. Presbyteries to be restored. Diocesses l^ssened.
Provincial Synods kept twice a year. The reasonableness and easiness of
accommodation showed. The whole concluded.

HAving thus far proceeded, through Divine assistance, in. 1.
our intended method, and having found nothing determining the necessity of any
one Form of Government in the several Laws of Nature and Christ, nor in the
practice of Apostles, or Primitive Church; the only thing possible to raise a
suspicion of Novelty in this opinion, is, that it is contrary to the judgment
of the several Churches of the Reformation. I know it is the last Asylum which
many run to, when they are beaten off from their imaginary Fancies, by pregnant
Testimonies of Scripture and Reason, to shelter themselves under the (...) of
some particular persons, to whom their understandings are bored in perpetual
slavery: But if men would but once think their understandings at age to judge
for themselves, and not make them live under a continual Pupillage; and but
take the pains to travel over the several Churches of the Reformation, they
would find themselves freed of many strange misprisions they were possessed
with before, and understand far better the ground and reason of their pitching
upon their several Forms, than they seem to do, who found all things upon a
Divine Right. I believe there will, upon the most impartial survey, scarce be
one Church of the Reformation brought, which does embrace any Form of
Government, because it looked upon that Form as only necessary by an
unalterable standing Law, but every one took up that Form of Government which
was judged most suitable to the state and condition of their several Churches:
But that I may the better make this appear, I shall make use of some Arguments
whereby to demonstrate, that the most eminent Divines that have lived since the
Reformation, have been all of this mind, That no one Form is determined as
necessary for the Church of God in all ages of the World. For if many of them
have in thesi asserted the Form of Church Government mutable; if those who have
thought an equality among Ministers the Primitive Form, have yet thought a
Government by Episcopacy lawful and useful: If, lastly, those who have been
for Episcopacy, have not judged it necessary, then I suppose it will be
evident, that none of them have judged any one Form taken exclusively of
others, to be founded upon an unalterable Right: For whatsoever is so founded,
is made a necessary duty in all Churches to observe it, and it is unlawful to
vary from it, or to change it according to the prudence of the Church,
according to the state and condition of it. I now therefore undertake to make
these things out in their order.

First, I begin with those who have in thesi asserted the mutability. 2.
of the Form of Church Government. Herein I shall not follow the English
humor, to be more acquainted with the state of Foreign places then their own;
but it being of greatest concernment to know upon what accounts Episcopal
Government was settled among our selves, in order to our submission to it; I
shall therefore make inquiry into the judgment of those persons concerning it,
who either have been instrumental in settling it, or the great defenders of it
after its setlement. I doubt not but to make it evident, that before these late
unhappy times, the main ground for settling Episcopal Government in this Nation,
was not accounted any pretense of Divine Right, but the convenience of that
Form of Church Government to the State and condition of this Church at the time
of its Reformation: For which we are to consider, that the Reformation of our
Church was not wrought by the Torrent of a popular fury, nor the Insurrection
of one part of the Nation against another, but was wisely, gravely, and
maturely debated, and settled with a great deal of consideration. I meddle not
with the times of Henry 8. when I will not deny but the first quickening of the
Reformation might be, but the matter of it was as yet rude and undigested; I
date the birth of it from the first setlement of that most excellent Prince
Edward 6. the Phosphorus of our Reformation. Who, A. D. 1547. was no sooner
entered upon his Throne, but some course was presently taken in order to
Reformation. Commissioners with Injunctions were dispatched to the several
parts of the Land, but the main business of the Reformation was referred to the
Parliament called November 4. the same year; when all former Statutes about
Acts and Mon. To. 2: p. 657.
Religion were recalled, as may be seen at large in Mr. Fox, and Liberty
allowed for professing the Gospel according to the principles of Reformation,
all banished persons for Religion being called home. Upon this, for the better
establishing of Religion, and the public order for the service of God, an
Assembly of select Divines is called, by special order from the Kings Majesty,
for debating of the settlement of things according to the Word of God, and the
practice of the Primitive Martyrol. in To. 2. p. 658, 659
Church. These sat, as Mr. Fox tells us, in Windsor Castle; where, as he
expresses it, after long, learned, wise, and deliberate advises, they did
finally conclude and agree upon one uniform order, etc. No more is said by him
of it, and less by the late Historian. The proceedings then in order to
Reformation, being so dark hitherto, and obscure, by what is as yet extant,
much light may accrue thereto by the help of some authentic MS. which by a
hand of providence, have happily come into my hands; wherein the manner and
method of the Reformation will be more evident to the World, and the grounds
upon which they proceeded. In the Convocation that year sitting with the
Parliament, I find two Petitions made to the Archbishop and the Bishops of the
upper house, for the calling an Assembly of select Divines, in order to the
settling Church Affairs, and for the Kings Grant for their acting in
Convocation. Which not being yet (to my knowledge) extant in public, and
conducing to our present business, I shall now publish from the MS. of Bishop
Cranm^rs.

They run thus:

Certain Petitions and requests made by the Clergy of the lower house of the
Convocation, to the most Reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Grace, and the Residue of the Prelates of the higher house, for
the furtherance of certain Articles following.

First, That Ecclesiastical Laws may be made and established in this Realm by
xxxij. persons, or so many as shall please the Kings Majesty to name and
appoint; according to the effect of a late Statute made in the thirty fifth
year of the most noble King, and of most Famous memory, King Henry the eighth.
So that all Judges Ecclesiastical proceeding after those Laws, may be without
danger and peril.

Also that according to the ancient custom of this Realm, and the Tenor of the
Kings Writs for the summoning of the Parliament, which be now, and ever have
been directed to the Bishops of every Diocese, the Clergy of the lower house of
the Convocation may be adjoined and associate with the lower house of
Parliament, or else that all such Statutes and Ordinances as shall be made
concerning all matters of Religion and Causes Ecclesiastical may not pass
without the sight and assent of the said Clergy.

Also that whereas by the commandment of King Henry 8. certain Prelates and
other Learned men were appointed to alter the service in the Church, and to
dewise other convenient and uniform order therein, who according to the same
appointment did make certain books a^ they be informed, their request is, that
the said books may be seen and perused by them for a better expedition of
divine service to be set furthe accordingly.

Also that men being called to spiritual promotions or benefices, may have sum
allowance for their necessary living, and other charges to be sustained and
born concerning the said Benefices in the first year wherein they pay the first
Fruits.

The other is,

Where the Clergy in the present Convocation Assembled have made humble suite
unto the most Reverend Father in God my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and all
other Bishops. That hit may please them to be a mean to the Kings Majesty, and
the Lord Protectors Grace; that the said Clergy, according to the tenor of the
Kings will, and the ancient Laws and customs of this noble Realm, might have
their rowme and place, and be associated with the Communs in the nether house
of this present Parliament; as members of the Communwealth, and the Kings most
humble subjects; and if this may not be permitted and granted to them, that
then no Laws concerning the Christi^n Religion, or which shall concern
especially the persons, possessions, rowmes, lyveings, jurisdictions, goods or
cattalls of the said Clergy may pass nor be enacted, the said Clergy not being
made privy thereunto, and their aunswers and reasons not heard. The said Clergy
do most humbly beseech an answer and declaration to be made unto them, what the
said most Reverend Father in God, and all other the Bishops have done in this
their humble suit and request, to the end that the said Clergy if need be, may
chose of themself such able and diserete persons which shall effectually follow
the same suite in name of them all.

And where in a Statute ordained and established by auctorite of Parliament at
Westminster, in the twenty fifth year of the reign of the most excellent
Prince, King Henry the eighth, the Cleregy of this Realm, submitting themself
to the Kings Highness, did knowledge and confess according to the truth, that
the Convocations of the same Cleregie has been and ought to be assembled by the
Kings writ, And did promise further in verbo sacerdotii, that they never from
thenceforth would presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure or enact,
promulge or execute any new Canons, constitutions, ordinances, provincialls or
other, or by whatsoever other name they shall be called in the convocation,
oneles the Kings most royal Assent and Lisence may to them be had, to make,
promulge and execute the same. And his Majesty to give his most royal Assent
and Auctorite in that behalf upon pain of every one of the Cleregie doeyng
the contrary, and being thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment, and make Fine
at the Kings will* And that noe Canons, constitutions, or ordinances shall be
made or put in execution within this Realm by auctorite of the convocation of
the Cleregie, which shall be repugnant to the Kings Prerogative royal, or the
Customs, Laws, or Statutes of this Realm. Which Statute is eftsoons renewed
and established in the xxvij. year of the reign of the said most noble King,
as by the tenor of both Statutes more at large will appear, the said Cleregie
being presently assembled in Convocation by auctorite of the Kings Writ, do
desire that the Kings Majesty's license in writeing may be for them obtained
and granted according to the effect of the said Statutes auctoriseing them to
attempt, entreat and commune of such matters, and therein freely to geve their
consents, which otherwise they may not do, upon pain and peril premised.

Also the said Cleregie desires that such matters as concerns religione
which be disputable, may be quietly, and in good order reasond and disputed
emongst them in this howso, whereby the verites of such matters shall the
better appear. And the doubts being opened and resolutely discussed, men may
be fully persuaded with the quyetnes of their consciences, and the time well
spent.

Thus far those Petitions, containing some excellent proposalls for a through
Reformation. Soon after were called together by the Kings special order, the
former select Assembly at Windsor Castle, where met (as far as I can guess by
the several papers delivered* in by every one of them singly, and subscribed
with their own hands, all which I have perused) these following persons.
Thomas* Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Edward* Archbishop of York, the Bishop of
Rochester, Edmund Bishop of London, Robert Bishop of Carlisle, Dr. George Day,
Dr. Thomas Robertson. Dr. I. Redmayne, Dr. Edward Leighton, Dr. Simon Matthew,
Dr. William Tresham, Dr. Richard Cozen, Dr. Edgeworth, Dr. Owen Oglethorp, Dr.
Thyrleby. These all gave in their several resolutions in papers, to the
Questions propounded, with their names subscribed; (a far more prudent way then
the confusion of verbal and tedious disputes) all whose judgments are
accurately summed up, and set down by the Archbishop of Canterbury himself.
Their resolutions contain distinct answers to several Sets of questions
propounded to them. The first Set contained several Questions about the Mass,
about the instituting, receiving, nature, celebration of it; and whether in the
Mass it be convenient to use such speech as the people may understand, whether
the whole were fit to be translated, or only some part of it; with several
other questions of the same nature. The second Set is more pertinent to our
purpose, wherein are 17 Questions proposed to be resolved; Ten of them belong
to the number of Sacraments, the other 7. concern Church Government. The
Questions are these:

Whether the Appostells lacking a higher power, as in not Q. 9.
having a Christian-King among them, made Bishops by that necessity, or by
auctorite given them of God?

Whether Bishops or Priests were first; and if the Priests were 10.
first, then the Priest made the Bishop?

Whether a Bishop has auctorite to make a Priest by the Scripture 11.
or no, and whether any other but only a Bishop may make a Priest?

Whether in the New Testament be required any consecration 12.
of a Bishop and Priest, or only appointeinge to the office be sufficient?

Whether (if it fortuned a Prince Christien learned to conquer 13.
certain domynyons of Infidells, having non but the temporal learned men with
him) it be defended by Gods Law, that be and they should preche and teache the
word of God there or no, and also make and constitute Priests or not?

Whether it be forefended by Gods Law, that if it so fortuned 14.
that all the Bishopps and Priests were dedde, and that the word of God should
there unpreached, the Sacrament of baptism and others unministred, that the
King of that region should make Bishops and Priests to supply the same or not?

Whether a Bishop or a Priest may excommunicate* and for 16.
what crimes, and whether they only may excommunicate by Gods Law?

These are the questions, to which the answers are severally returned in
distinct papers, all of them bound together in a large Volume by Archbishop
Cranmer; and every one subscribed their names, and some their seals, to the
Papers delivered in. It would be too tedious a work to set down their several
opinions at large; only for the deserved reverence all bear to the name and
memory of that most worthy Prelate, and glorious Martyr, Archbishop Cranmer, I
shall set down his answer distinctly to every one of these questions, and the
answers of some others to the more material questions to our purpose.

To the 9. Q. All Christian Princes have committed unto Archbish. Cranme^s
answ. ex ipso ejus autographe.
them immediately of God the holle cure of all their subjects, as well
concerning the administration of Gods word for the cure of soul, as
concerning the ministration of things Political, and civil governaunce.

And in both these ministrations they must have sundry ministers under them to
supply that which is appointed to their several office.

The Cyvile ministers under the Kings Majesty in this realm of England, be
those whom yt shall please his highness for the time to put in auctorite under
him; as for example, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Great Master,
Lord privy seal, Lord Admyral, Mayres, Shryves, etc.

The Ministers of Gods wourde under his Majesty be the Bishops, Parsons,
Vicars, and such other Priests as be appointed by his highness to that
ministration; as for example, the Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Duresme,
the Bishop of Winchester, the Parson of Wynwicke, etc.

All the said officers and ministers, as well of the one sort as the other, be
appointed, assigned, and elected in every place, by the Laws and orders of
Kings and Princes.

In the admission of many of these officers be diverse comely ceremonies and
solemnities used, which be not of necessity, but only for a good order and
semely fashion. For if such offices and ministrations were committed without
such solemnitye, they were nevertheles truly committed.

And there is no more promise of God, that grace is given in the committing of
the Ecclesiastical office, then it is in the committing of the Cyvile. In the
Apostles time, when there was no Christien Princes by whose authority Ministers
of Gods Word might be appointed; nor sins by the sword corrected; there was
no remedy then for the correction of vice, or appoynteinge of ministers, but
only the consent of Christien multitude among themself, by an uniforme
consent to follow the advice and persuasion of such persons whom God had most
endued with the spirit of wisdom and counsa^le. And at that time, for as much
as Christian people had no sword nor Governer among them, they were constrained
of necessity to take such Curates and Priests, as either they knew themselfes
to be meet thereunto, or else as were commended unto them by other, that were
so replete with the spirit of God, with such knowledge in the profession of
Christ, such wisdom, such conversation and counsel, that they ought even of
very conscience to give credit unto them, and to accept such as by them were
presented. And so some time the Appostles and other unto whom God had given
abundantly his spirit, sent or appointed Ministers of Gods word, sometime the
people did chose such as they thought meet thereunto. And when any were
appointed or sent by the Appostles or other, the people of their own voluntary
will with thanks did accept them; not for the supremitie, Imperie, or dominion,
that the Apostells had over them, to command as their Princes or Masters: but
as good people, ready to obey the advice of good counselors; and to accept
any thing that was necessary for their edification and benefit.

The Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two Answ. to the 10. Q.
things, but both one office in the beginning of Christ's Religion.

A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scriptures, and so may 11.
Princes and Governors also, and that by the authority of God committed
them, and the people also by their election. For as we read that Bishops have
done it, so Christien Emperors and Princes usually have done it. And the
people before Christien Princes were, commonly did elect their Bishops and
Priests.

In the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop or a 12.
Priest, needs no consecration by the Scripture; for election or appointeing
thereto is sufficient.

It is not against Gods Law, but contrary they ought in deed 13.
so to do, and there be historyes that witnesses, that some Christien Princes
and other Lay men unconsecrate have done the same.

It is not forbidden by God's Law. 14.


A Bishop or a Priest by the Scripture, is neither commanded nor forbidden to
excommunicate. But where the Laws of any 16.
Region gives him authority to excommunicate, there they ought to use the
same in such crimes as the Laws have such authority in. And where the Laws of
the Region forbids them, there they have none authority at all. And they
that be no Priests, may also excommunicate, if the Law allow thereunto. Thus
fa^ that excellent Person; in whose judgment nothing is more clear, then his
ascribing the particular Form of Government in the Church to the determination
of the Supreme Magistrate. This judgment of his, is thus subscribed by him
with his own hand,

T. Cantuariens. This is mine opinion and sentence at this present, which I do
not temerariously define, but do remit the judgment thereof holly to your
Majesty.

Which I have exactly transcribed out of the Original, and have observed
generally the Form of writing at that time used. In the same M S. it appears,
that the Bishop of S. Asaph, Therleby, Redman, and Cox, were all of the same
Opinion with the Archbishop, that at first Bishops and Presbyters were the
same; and the two latter expressly cite the Opinion of Jerome with approbation.
Thus we see by the Testimony chiefly of him who was instrumental in our
Reformation, that he owned not Episcopacy* as a distinct order from Presbytery
of divine Right; but only as a prudent constitution of the Civil Magistrate f^r
the better governing in the Church.

We now proceed to the re-establishment of Church Government. 3.
under our most happy Queen Elizabeth. After our Reformation had truly
undergone the fiery trial in Queen Mary's days, and by those flames was made
much more refined and pure, as well as splendid and Illustrious; In the
articles of Religion agreed upon, our English Form of Church Government was
only determined to be agreeable to Gods Holy Word; which had been a very low
and diminishing expression, had they looked on it as absolutely prescribed and
determined in Scripture, a^ the only necessary Form to be observed in the
Church. The first who solemnly appeared in Vindication of the English
Hierarchy, was Archbishop Whi^gi^t a sage and prudent person, whom we cannot
suppose either ignorant of the Sense of the Church of England, or afraid or
unwilling to defend it. Yet he frequently against Page 3. Page 77. P. 81, 82,
83, 84. Page 658.
Cartwright ^sserts, that the Form of Discipline is not particularly and by
name set down in Scripture: and again, No kind of Government is expressed in
the Word, or can necessarily be concluded from thence; which he repeats over
again, No Form of Church Government is by the Scriptures prescribed to, Page 58.
or commanded the Church of God. And so Doctor Cosins his Chancellor in Answer
to the Abstract, All Churches have not the same Form of Discipline, neither is
it necessary that they should, seeing it cannot be proved that any certain
particular Form of Church Government is commended to us by the Word of God. To
the same purpose Doctor Low, Complaint of the Church; P. 64, 66.
No certain Form of Government is prescribed in the Word, only general Rules
laid down for it. Bishop Bridges; God has not Church Gov. page 167.
expressed the Form of Church Government, at least not so as to bind us to it.
They who please but to consult the third book of Learned and Judicious Master
Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity, may see the mutability of the Form of
Church Government largely asserted, and fully proved. Yea, this is so plain and
evident to have been the chief opinion of the Divines of the Church of England,
that Parker looks on it as one of the main foundations of the Hierarchy, and
sets himself might De Polit. Eccles. l. 2. c. 39, etc.
and main to oppose it; but with what success, we have already seen. If we come
lower to the time of King James* His Majesty himself declared it in Print, as
his judgment; Christiano cuique Regi, Principi, ac Reipublicae concessum,
externam in rebus Ecclesiasticis regiminis formam suis prascribere, quae ad
civilis administrationis formam quam proxime accedat. That the Civil power in
any Nation, has the right of prescribing what external Form of Church
Government it please, which does most agree to the Civil Form of Government in
the State. Doctor Sutcliffe de Presbyterio largely disputes against those who
assert c. 11. p. 66.
that Christ has laid down certain immutable Laws for Government Defens.
Eccl. Angl. c. 28. s. 1^.
in the Church. Crakanthorp against Spalatensis does assert the mutability of
such things as are founded upon Apostolical Tradition* Traditum igitur ab
Apostolis, sed traditum and mutabile, and pro usu ac arbitrio Ecclesiae
mutandum. To the like purpose speak the forecited Authors, as their
Testimonies are extant in Parker. Bishop Bridges, Number unumquodque exemplum
Ecclesiae Primitivae praeceptum aut De Polit. Eccles l. 2. c. 24.
mandatum faciat? And again, Forte rerum nonnullarum in Primitiva Ecclesia
exemplum aliquod ostendere possunt, sed nec id ipsum generale, nec ejusdem
perpetuam regulam aliquam, quae omnes ecclesias and aetates omnes ad illud
exemplum astringat. So Archbishop Whitgift, Ex facto aut exemplo legem facere,
iniquum est. Nunquam licet, inquit Zuinglius, a facto ad jus argumentari. By
which Principles, the Divine right of Episcopacy as founded upon Apostolical
practice, is quite subverted and destroyed. To come nearer to our own unhappy
times; Not long before the breaking forth of those never sufficiently to be
lamented Intestine broyls, we have the judgment of two Learned, Judicious,
rational Authors fully discovered as to the point in Question. The first is
that incomparable man Master Hales in his often cited Tract of Page 13.
Schism: whose words are these; But that other head of Episcopal Ambition*
concerning Supremacy of Bishops in diverse See's, one claiming Supremacy over
another, as is has been from time to time a great Trespass against the
Churches peace, so it is now the final ruin of it: The East and West through
the fury of the two prime Bishops being irremediably separated without all hope
of Reconcilement. And besides all this mischief, it is founded on a Vice
contrary to all Christian Humility, without which no Man shall see his Savior.
For they do but abase themselves and others, that would persuade us, that
Bishops by Christ's Institution have any Superiority over men further then of
Reverence, or that any Bishop is Superior to another, further then Positive
Order agreed upon among Christians has prescribed: For we have believed him
that has told us, that in Jesus Christ there is neither high nor low: and that
in giving Honor, every Man should be ready to prefer another before himself:
Which saying cuts off all claim certainly of Superiority, by Title of
Christianity, except Men think that these things were spoken only to poor and
private Men. Nature and Religion agree in this, that neither of them had a hand
in this Heraldry of secundum sub and supra, all this comes from composition and
agreement of men among themselves; wherefore this abuse of Christianity to make
it Lacquey to Ambition, is a vice for which I have no extraordinary name of
Ignominy; and an ordinary I will not give it, lest you should take so
transcendent a vice to be but trivial. Thus that grave and wise person, whose
words savor of a more then ordinary tincture of a true Spirit of Christianity,
that scorns to make Religion a footstool to pride and ambition. We see plainly
he makes all difference between Church Officers to arise from consent of
parties, and not from any Divine Law. To the same purpose Master Chillingworth
propounds this Question among many others Chilling. Ep. 1. chapter 6. s. 39.
to his adversary: Whether any one kind of these external Forms and Orders and
Government be so necessary to the being of a Church, but that they may be
diverse in diverse places, and that a good and peaceable Christian may and ought
to submit himself to the Government of the place where he lives whosoever he
be? Which Question according to the tenor of the rest to which it is joined,
must as to the former part be resolved in the Negative, and as to the latter in
the Affirmative. Which is the very thing I have been so long in proving of,
viz. that no one Form of Church Government is so necessary to the being of a
Church, but that a good and peaceable Christian may and ought to conform
himself to the Government of that place where he lives. So much I suppose may
suffice to show that the Opinion which I have asserted, is no stranger in our
own Nation, no not among those who have been professed Defenders of the
Ecclesiastical Government of this Church.

Having thus far acquainted our selves with the state and. 4.
customs of our own Country, we may be allowed the liberty of visiting
Foreign Churches: to see how far they concur with us in the matter in
question. The first person whose judgment we shall produce asserting the
mutability of the Form of Church Government, is that great light of the German
Church Chemnitius, whom Brightman had so high an opinion of as to make him to
be one of the Angels in the Churches of the Revelation. He, discoursing about
the Sacrament of Order, as the Papists call it, lays down these following
Hypotheses, as certain truth^. 1. Non esse Dei verbo mandatum, Exam. Con Trid
c. 2 de sacram ord can. 1. 413, 414.
qui vel quot tales gradus seu ordines esse debeant. 2. Non fuisse tempore
Apostolorum in omnibus Ecclesiis and semper, cosdem and totidem gradus seu
ordines id quod ex Epistolis Pauli ad diversas Ecclesias scriptis manifest
colligitur. 3. Non fuit tempore Apostolorum talis distributio graduum illorum,
quin saepius unus and idem omnia illa officia, quae ad ministerium pertinent,
sustineret. Liberae igitur fuerunt Apostolorum tempore tales ordinationes,
habita ratione ordinis, decori and aedificationis, etc. Illud Apostolorum
exemplum Primitiva Ecclesia, eadem ratione and simili liberate imitata est.
Gradus enim officior um ministerii distributi fuerunt: non autem eadem plane
ratione sicut in Corinthiaca vel Ephesina Ecclesia, sed pro ratione
circumstantiarum cujusque Ecclesiae; unde colligitur quae fuerit in
distributione illorum graduum libertas. The main thing he asserts, is, the
Curches freedom and liberty as to the orders and degrees of those who
superintend the affairs of the Church, which he builds on a threefold
foundation. 1. That the Word of God no where commands, what or how many degrees
and Orders of Ministers there shall be. 2. That in the Apostles times, there
was not the like number in all Churches, as is evivident from Paul's Epistles.
3. That in the Apostles times in some places one person did manage the several
Offices belonging to a Church. Which three Propositions of this Learned Divine,
are the very basis and foundation of all our foregoing Discourse, wherein we
have endeavored to prove these several things at large. The same Learned
person has a set Discourse to show how by degrees the Offices in the Church
did rise, not from any set or standing Law, but for the convenient managery of
the Churches Affairs, and Page 413.
concludes his Discourse thus: Et haec prima graduum seu ordinum origo in
Ecclesia Apostolica ostendit quae causa, quae ratio, quis usus and finis esse
debeat hujusmodi seu graduum, seu ordinum; ut scilicet pro ratione coetus
Ecclesiastici, singula Officia quae ad ministerium pertinent, commodius,
rectius, diligentius, and ordine cum aliqua gravitate ad aedificationem
obeantur. The sum is, It appears by the practice of the Apostolical Church,
that the state, condition, and necessity of every particular Church, ought to
be the Standard, and measure what Offices and Degrees of persons ought to be in
it. As to the uncertain number of Officers in the Churches in Apostolical
times, we have a full and express Testimony of the Famous Centuriatours Cen^.
1. l. 2. cap 7.
of Magdeburge. Quot vero in qualibet Ecclesia personae Ministerio functae
sint, non est in Flistoriis annotatum, nec usquam est praeceptum, ut aeque
multi in singulis essent, sed prout paucitas aut multitudo coetus postulavit,
ita pauciores aut plures administerium Ecclesiae sunt adhibiti. We see by them
there is no other certain rule laid down in Scripture, what number of persons
shall act in the governing every Church; only general prudence according to
the Churches necessity, was the ground of determining the number then, and must
be so still. The next person whose judgment is fully on our side, is a person
both of Learning and Moderation, and an earnest restorer of Discipline as well
as Doctrine in the Church. I mean Hieron Zanchy, who in several places has
expressed his judgment to the purpose we are now upon. The fullest place is in
his Confession of Faith, penned by him in the LXX. year of his Age; and if ever
a man speaks his mind, it must be certainly when he professes his judgment in
a solemn manner by way of his last Will and Testament to the world (that when
the Soul is going into another world, he may leave his mind behind him) Thus
does Zanch; in that Confession, in which he declares this to be his judgment
as Confess. sidei cap. 25. s. 10. 11. Tom. 7. op. Miscel.
to the form of Church Government; That in the Apostles times there were but
two orders under them, viz. of Pastors and Teachers: but presently subjoyns
these words, Interea tamen non improbamus Patres, quod juxta variam, tum verbi
dispensandi, tum regendae Ecclesiae rationem, varios quoqu^ ordines ministrorum
multiplicarint, quando id iis liberum fuit, sicut and nobis; and quando constat
id ab illis factum honestis de causis, ad ordinem, ad decorum and ad
aedificationem Ecclesiae pro co tempore pertinentibus. And in the next Section,
Novimus enim Deum nostrum, Deum esse Ordinis non confusionis; and Ecclesiam
servari ordine, perdi autem (...): qua de causa multos etiam and diversos, non
solum olim in Israele, verum etiam post in Ecclesia ex Iudaeis and Gentibus
collecta, ministrorum ordines instituit; and eandem etiam ob causam, liberum
reliquit Ecclesiis, ut plures adderent vel non adderent, modo ad aedificationem
fieret. He asserts it to be in the Churches power and liberty to add several
orders of Ministers according as it judges them tend to edification; and
says, he is far from condemning the Course of the Primitive Church in erecting
one as Bishop over the Presbyters, for better managing Church Affairs; yea,
Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs as instituted by the Primitive
Church before the Nicene Council, he thinks may be both excused and defended,
although afterward they degenerated into Tyranny and Ambition. And in his
Observations upon his Confession, penned chiefly upon the occasion of the
exceptions of Magnus quidam Vir (some will guess who that was) taken at the
free delivery of his mind concerning the Polity of the Primitive Church, he
has expressions to this purpose: That what was unanimously determined by the
Primitive Church without any contradiction to Scripture, did come from the Holy
Spirit. Hinc fit, says he, ut quae sint hujuscemodi, ea ego improbare nec
velim, nec audeam bona conscientia. Quis autem ego sim, qui quod tota Ecclesia
approbavit, improbem? Such things, says he, as are so determined, I neither
will nor can with a safe Conscience condemn. For who am I, that I should
condemn that which the whole Church of God has approved? A Sentence as full of
judgment as modesty. And that he might show he was not alone in this opinion,
he produces two large and excellent Discourses of Martin Bucer concerning the
Polity of the ancient Church, which he recites with approbation; the one out of
his Commentaries on the Ephesians, the other de Disciplina Clericali: whereby
we have gained another Testimony of that famous and peaceable Divine, whose
Tom. 4. op. l. 1. in 4. praecept. q. ^.
judgment is too large to be here inserted. The same opinion of Zanchy may be
seen in his Commentaries upon the fourth Command, wherein he asserts no
particular Form to be prescribed, but only general Rules laid down in
Scripture, that all be done to Edification; speaking of the Original of
Episcopacy which came not dispositione Divina, but consuetudine Ecclesiastica,
atque ea quidem minime improbanda; neque enim hunc ordinem prohibuit Christus
sed potius regulam generalem reliquit per Apostolum, nt in Ecclesia omnia fiant
ad edificationem. It is then most clear and evident that neither Bucer,
Chemnitius or Zanchy did look upon the Church as so bound up by any immutable
Form of Church Government laid down in Scripture, but it might lawfully and
laudably alter it for better edification of the Church. For these Learned
Divines conceiving that at first in the Church there was no difference between
Bishop and Presbyter, and commending the Polity of the Church when Episcopacy
was set in a higher order, they must of necessity hold that there was no
obligation to observe that Form which was used in Apostolical times.

Our next inquiry is into the opinion of the French Church, and the eminent
Divines therein. For Calvin and B^z^a, we have designed them under another
rank. At present we speak of those who in Thesi assert the Form of
Church Government mutable. The first we meet with here who fully lays down
his opinion as to this matter, is, Ioh. Fregevil, who although in his Palma
Christiana he seems to assert the Divine p. 70. etc.
right of Primacy in the Church, yet in his Politic Reformer, he asserts both
Forms of Government by equality and inequality, to be lawful. And we shall the
rather produce his Testimony, because of the high Character given of him by the
late Reverend Bishop Hall. Wise Fregevil, a deep head, Episcopacy by Divine
Right, s. 5. p. 20.
and one that was able to cut even betwixt the League, the Church and State:
His words are these; As for the English Government, I say, it is grounded upon
Gods Word so far forth as it keeps the State of the Clergy instituted in the
Old Testament, and confirmed in the New. And concerning the Government of the
French Church, so far as concerns the equality of Ministers, it has the like
foundation in Gods Word: namely in the example of the Apostles; which may
suffice to authorize both these Forms of Estate; albeit in several times and
places. None can deny but that the Apostles among themselves were equal, as
concerning authority, albeit there were an Order for their precedence. When the
Apostles first planted Churches, the same being small and in affliction, there
were not as yet any other Bishops, Priests or Deacons but themselves; they,
were the Bishops and Deacons, and together served the Tables. Those men
therefore whom God raises up to plant a Church, can do no better, then after
the examples of the Apostles to bear themselves in equal authority. For this
cause have the French Ministers, planters of the Reformed Church in France
usurped it, howbeit provisionally -- reserving liberty to alter it, according
to the occurrences. But the equality that rested among the Bishops of the
primitive Church, did increase as the Churches increased; and thence proceeded
the Creation of Deacons, and afterward of other Bishops and Priests; yet
ceased not the Apostles equality in authority; but they that were created, had
not like authority with the Apostles; but the Apostles remained as Sovereign
Bishops, neither were any greater then they. Hereof I do infer that in the
State of a mighty and peaceable Church, as is the Church of England, or as the
Church of France is (or such might be, if God should call it to Reformation)
the State of the Clergy ought to be preserved. For equality will be hurtful to
the State, and in time breed confusion. But as the Apostles continued Churches
in their equality so long as the Churches by them planted were small; so should
equality be applied in the planting of a Church, or so long as the Church
continues small, or under persecution; yet may it also be admitted as not
repugnant to Gods Word in those places where already it is received, rather
then to innovate anything. I say therefore, that even in the Apostles times the
state of the Clergy increased as the Church increased. Neither was the
Government under the bondage of Egypt, and during the peace of the Land of
Canaan alike; for Israelites had first Judges, and after their state increased,
Kings. Thus far that Politic Reformer. Whose words are so full and pertinent
to the scope and drift of this whole Treatise, that there is no need of any
Commentary to draw them to my sense. The next I shall pitch upon in the French
Church, is, a Triumvirate of three as learned persons in their several ways as
most that Church or any since the reformation has bred; they are Blondel,
Bochartus, and Amyraldus. The first is that great Church Antiquary, Blondel the
known and learned assertor of Ieromes opinion concerning the primitive equality
of Presbyters, who was likewise of Ieromes mind as to the mutability of that
form if the Church saw fit, as appears by these words of his speaking of that
Form of Ecclesiastical Polity Apol. pro Hieron. s. 2. p. 53.
which Hilary speaks of, viz. the Eldest Presbyters having the primacy of order
above the rest. Fac tamen, says he, Apostolis non modo non improbantibus, sed
palam laudantibus ortam, ego sane libere ab initio observatam, Christianisque
sive ab Apostolis sive ab eorum discipulis traditam, sed ut mutabilem and pro
usu ac arbitrio Ecclesiae mutandam (prout in causa consimili piae memoriae
Crakanthorpius sensis) crediderim: and not long after, Nec concessus capite
carentes, aut multicipites, minus horremus, quam fervidiores Hierarchici:
quibus indagandum curatius incumbit; An pastorum cuiquam quocunque ritulo nun^
gaudeat, divino jure (...) eaque perpetua decreta sit; An vero in Arbitrio
Ecclesiae, ipse (qui praeest Ecclesiae) Spiritus religuerit, ut, quocunque modo
liberet, sibi de capite (...) collegia providerent. Whereby that most learned
Writer for Presbytery (as some have called him) evidently asserts the
mutability of the particular Form of Church Government, and that it is left to
the prudence and arbitrament of the Church, to conclude and determine, in what
way and manner the Rulers of the Church shall act, for moderating the common
concernments of the Church. The next is the learned and ingenuous Bochartus,
who ex professo, does assert the opinion I have been pleading thus long in the
behalf of, in his Epistle to Dr. Morley. He having ^^d. q. 1. ^. 5.
declared himself to be of Ieromes mind, as to the Apostles times, that the
Churches were governed communi consilio Presbyterorum; and withal, asserting
the great antiquity of Episcopacy, as arising-soon after the Apostles times,
and that magno cum fructu, as a very useful Form of Government: He subjoyns
these words directly overthrowing the Divine Right of either Form of
Government, by Episcopacy or Presbytery. N^^ Apostolorum praxim puto vim
habuisse legis, in rebus su^ natura (...). Proinde tam qui Presbyteralem, quam
Episcopalem ordinem juris divini esse asserunt, videntur (...). And therefore
asserts, that the Form of Government must be determined, as that in the State
is, according to the suitableness of it to the state, temper, De secessione ab
Ecclesia^ Romans Deque pace cum Evang. cons. p. 29. etc.
and condition of the people it is intended for. The last is, judicious
Amyraldus, whom one deservedly calls, One of the greatest wits of this Age. In
his proposals for peace with the Lutherans, speaking of the different Forms of
Church Government in the several Churches of the Reformation, he lays down
this for a foundation of union among the several Churches. Quando igitur
Christus quidem and Apostoli hoc diserte constituerunt, Debere particulares
Ecclesias omnes gubernari a Pastoribus, and aliqua regiminis forma temperari,
quod ipsa rei necessitas flagitat; quae vero regiminis ista forma potissimum
esse debeat, utrum alii aliis auctoritate praecellant, necne, neque rei natura
definivit, neque a Christo aut Apostolis aeque diserte constitutum est; id
primo in pacificatione statuendum esse videtur, ut quo jure hactenus fuerunt
Ecclesiarum Evangelicarum Pastores, eodem porro esse pergant, neque aliae
aliarum statum convellere nitantur. That every Church be permitted freely to
enjoy its own Form, since some kind of Government is necessary in all Churches,
but no one Form is prescribed by Christ or his Apostles; and more fully
afterward to the same purpose. Quemadmodum igitur etsi Politiarum formae aliae
aliis aptiores ad finem illum Politicum obtinendum, and accomodatiores esse
videntur, Deus tamen qui omnis societatis auctor est atque custos, noluit omnes
hominum coetus eodem jure teneri, sed cuique communitati potestatem esse voluit
suas leges sibi condendi, quas ipse divina sua auctoritate sancit; sic
dubitandum quidem non est quin ex variis illis administrandarum Ecclesiarum
rationibus, nonnullae sint aliquanto quam aliae conducibiliores ad eum finem
adipiscendum quem religio constitutune habet: At voluit tamen sapientissimus
indulgentissimusque Deus, cuique Ecclesiaejus esse sibi leges eas ferendi quae
ad De Imperi^ sum. Potest. circa sacra, c. 11: Lord Bacon Considerat. touching
Chapter Govern: Sir Will. Morice of the Sacrament, in sect 9. Mr. Pry^'s 12 queries
to the Arsembly.
disciplinam spectant, and ad ordinem conservandum. Whereby he grants as much
freedom and liberty to every Church, to prescribe Laws to its self, for the
regulating the affairs of the Church, as to any State to pitch upon its
particular rules and ways of Government. So the Church do in its orders but
observe the general rules laid down in Scripture. Having thus fully showed how
many of he most eminent Divines of the Reformation have embraced this opinion
of the mutability of the Form of Church Government, both in our own and
Foreign Churches, who were far from being the Proselytes of Erastus; it were
easy to add Mantissae loco: the concurrent judgment of many very learned men,
as the excellent Hugo Grotius, my Lord Bacon, Sir Will. Morice, and others, who
have in print delivered this as their judgment; but seeing such is the temper
of ma ny, as to cast by their judgments with an opinion of their partiality
toward the Government of the Church; I have therefore contented my self with
the judgment of Divines, most of them of the highest rank since the
Reformation: whose judgments certainly will be sufficient to remove that
prejudice, wherewith this opinion has been entertained among the blind
followers of the several parties. So much for those, who in terms assert the
Form of Church Government not to depend upon an unalterable Law, but to be left
to the prudence and discretion of every particular Church, to determine it
according to its suitableness to the state, condition, and temper of the people
whereof it consists, and conduceableness to the ends for which it is instituted.

We come now in the second place to those, who though. 6.
they look upon equality of Ministers as the Primitive Form, yet do allow
Episcopal Government in the Church as a very lawful and useful constitution. By
which it is evident, that they did not judge the Primitive Form to carry an
universal obligation along with it, over all Churches, ages, and places. Upon
this account, our learned Crakanthorp frees all the Reformed Churches from the
charge of Aerianisin, laid upon them by the Archbishop of Spalato (when he
licked up his former vomit in his Consilium reditus). Crakanthorps words are
Defens. Eccles. Angl. cap. 42. s. 6.
these, speaking of Luther, Calvin, Beza, and all the Reformed Churches; Non
habent illi, scio, distinctos a Presbyteris, eisque in ordinandi and
excommunicandi potestate superiores Episcopos. At Imparitatem istam, quod fecit
Aerius, non verbo Dei repugnare docent; non damnant eam vel in nostra, vel in
universali per annos super mill quingentos Ecclesia. Per verbum Dei and Ius
Divinum, liberum and licitum utrumvis censent, vel Imparitatem istam admittere
vel Paritatem; In arbitrio hoc esse ac potestate cujusvis Ecclesiae censent,
utrum Paritatem ordinum admittant, an Imparitatem. So that according to the
opinion of this learned Divine, all the Reformed Churches were free from the
Imputation of Aerianism, because they asserted not an Imparity among the
Ministers of the Gospel to be unlawful; but thought it was wholly in the
Churches liberty, to settle either a Parity or Imparity among them, as they
judged convenient. But to descend more particularly to the Heroes of the
Reformation: we have a whole Constellation of them together in the Augustane
Confession, where they fully express Apolog. Confess. Aug. ad art. 14.
their minds to this purpose, Hac de re in hoc conveni^ saepe testati sumus,
nos summa voluntate cupere, conservare Politiam Ecclesiasticam, and gradus in
Ecclesia factos etiam humana authoritate. Scimus enim bono and utili consilio a
Patribus Ecclesiasticam disciplinam, hoc modo, ut veteres Canones describunt,
constit utam esse. And afterward, Saevitia Episcoporum in causa est, quare
alicubi dissolvitur illa Canonica Politia, quam magnopere cupiebamus
conservare. And again, Hic iterum volumus testatum, nos libenter conservaturos
esse Ecclesiasticam and Canonicam Politiam, si modo Episcopi desinant in
Ecclesias nostras saevire. Haec nostra voluntas, and coram Deo and apud omnes
gentes ad omnem posteritatem excusabit nos, ne nobis imputari possit, quod
Episcoporum authoritas labefactetur. And Confess. August. per Chytr. p. 365.
yet further: Saepe jam testati sumus, nos non solum potestatem Ecclesiasticam,
quae in Evangelio instituta est, summa pietate venerari, sed etiam
Ecclesiasticam Politiam, and gradus in Ecclesia magnopere probare; and, quantum
in nobis est, conservare cupere. We see with what industry they purge and clear
themselves from the imputation of bearing any ill will to the several degrees
that were instituted by the Church; nay, they profess themselves desirous of
retaining them, so the Bishops would not force them to do any thing against
their consciences. To the same purpose they speak in the Smaraldian Articles.
None speaks more fully of the agreeableness of the Form of Government used in
the Ages after the Apostles to the Word of God; then that excellent servant of
God, as Bishop Downam often calls him, Calvin does: For in his Iustitutions he
speaks thus of the Polity of the Primitive Institut. l b. 4. cap 4^ sect. 1.
Church; Tametsi enim multos Canones ediderunt illorum temporum Episcopi quibus
plus viderentur exprimere quam sacris literis expressum esset; ea tamen
cautione totam suam Oeconomiam composuerunt ad unicam illam verbi Dei normam,
ut facile videas nihil fere hac part h^buisse a verbo Dei alienum. Although
the Bishops of those times did make many Canons, wherein they did seem to
express more then was in the word of God; yet they used such caution and
prudence in the establishing the Churches Polity according to the word of God,
that hardly will any thing be found in it disagreeing to Gods Holy word. And
afterward speaking of the Institution of Archbishops and Patriarchs, he says
it was ad-Disciplinae conservationem, for Sect. 4.
preserving the Churches Discipline: and again, Si rem omisso vocabulo
intuemur, reperiemus Veteres Episcopos non aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam
voluisse fingere, ab ea quam Deus verbo suo praescripsit, If we consider the
matter its self of the Churches Polity, we shall find nothing in it discrepant
from, or repugnant to that Form which is laid down in the Word of God. Calvin
then, what ever form of Government he judged most suitable to the state and
temper of the Church wherein he was placed, was far from condemning that Polity
which was used in the Primitive Church by a difference as to degrees among the
Ministers of the Gospel. He did not then judge any form of Government to be so
delivered in Scriptures as unalterably to oblige all Churches and ages to
observe it. Beza says, He was so far from thinking that the humane order of
Episcopasy was brought into the Church through rashness or ambition, that none
can deny it to have been very useful as long as Bishops were good. And those
that both will and can, let them enjoy it still. His words are these: Absit De
Ministr. gradibus, cap. 23. p. 144.
autem, ut hunc ordinem, et si Apostolica and mere divina dispositione non
constitutum, tamen ut temere aut superbe invectum reprehendam; cujus potius
magnum usum fuisse quamdiu boni and sancti Episcopi Ecclesiis praefuerunt, quis
inficiari possit? Fruantur igitur illo qui volent and poterunt. And elsewhere
Cap. 21. p. 116, 127.
professes all reverence, esteem, and honor to be due to all such modern
Bishops, who strive to imitate the example of the Primitive Bishops in a due
reformation of the Church of God, according to the rule of the word. And looks
on it as a most false and impudent Calumny of some that said, as though they
intended to prescribe their form of Government to all other Churches; as though
they were like some ignorant fellows who think nothing good but what they do
themselves. How this is reconcilable with the novell pretense of a Ius
divinum, I cannot understand. For certainly, if Beza had judged that only Form
to be prescribed in the Word which was used in Geneva, it had been but his duty
to have desired all other Churches to conform to that. Neither ought Beza then
to be looked on as out-going his Master Calvin in the opinion about the right
of Church Government. For we see he goes no further in it then Calvin did. All
that either of them maintained, was, that the form of Government in use among
them, was more agreeable to the primitive form, then the modern Episcopacy was,
and that Episcopacy lay more open to Pride, Laziness, Ambition, and Tyranny, as
they had seen and felt in the Church of Rome. Therefore not to give occasion to
snch encroachments upon the liberty of men's consciences, as were introduced by
the tyranny of the Roman Bishops, they thought it the safest way to reduce the
Primitive parity; but yet so, as to have an Ecclesiastical Senate for one
Church containing City and Territories, as is evident at Geneva, and that
Senate to have a President in it; and whether that President should be for
life, or only by course, they judged it an accidental and mutable thing: but
that there should be one, essential and necessary. This is expressly and fully
the judgment of that most Reverend and Learned man Th. Beza, as he declares it
himself. Essentialefuit De Ministr. gradibus, cap. 23. p. 153.
in eo de quo hic agimus, quod ex Dei Ordinatione perpetud necesse fuit, est,
and erit, ut in Presbyterio quispiam and loco and dignitate primus actioni
gubernandae praesit, cum eo quod ipsi divinitus attributum est jure.
Accidentale autem fuit, quod Presbyteri in hac (...) alii aliis per vices
initio succedebant; qui (...) modus paulatim postea visus est mutandus, ut unus
quispiam judicio caeterorum compresbyterorum delectus, Presbyterio (...) esset,
and permaneret. It will be worth our while truly to state the Question of
Church Government between the Church of England, and that of Geneva in the time
of Queen Elizabeth, and thereby we shall see how, small the difference was
between them. That the Churches in the Primitive times, did take in the
Christians in whole Cities, and adjoining Territories, is acknowledged on both
sides; Calvin and Beza being both express in it, and the Constitution of the
Church of Geneva speaks as much. Vnicuique civitati (says Calvin) erat
attributa certa regio; Instit. l. 4. c. 4. s. 2. De Ministr. grad. cap 24. p.
167.
quae Presbyteros inde sumeret, and velut corpori Ecclesiae illius
accenserentur. In oppido cujusque Dioeceseos (says Beza) praecipuo, primus
Presbyter etc. in quotidiana communi jurisdictione praeerat caeteris tum
urbanis, tum aliis ejus regionis compresbyteris, i. e. toti Dioecesi. That the
Government of the City did take in the City and Territories, is likewise
acknowledged by them. That for more convenient order, there was one to preside
over the Ecclesiastical Senate, is confessed as essential by Beza; and Calvin
acknowledges that even in Apostolical times, non eam fuisse tunc aequalitatem
inter Ecclesiae ministros, quin unus aliquis authoritate and consilio ^ Tit. 1.
5.
prae^sset. There was no such equality among the Ministers of the Church, but
that some one was over the rest in authority and counsel. Wherein then lay the
difference For we have already seen that our Great Divines then, did not look
upon their form of Government as necessary, but only lawful; and Calvin and
Beza, would not be thought to prescribe their form to other Churches. All the
difference then was, not Whether their form of Government was founded on Divine
Right? not Whether Episcopacy in the Church was lawful or no? not Whether
Diocesan Churches were unlawful? or Whether every Congregation should have an
Ecclesiastical Senate? But, Whether it were more agreeable to the Primitive
form, that the President of the Ecclesiastical Senate should have only an order
among, or a degree above the Senate its self? But chiefly it was, Whether in
the present state of the Reformed Churches it were more convenient wholly to
lay aside the form of Government by Bishops, which had been so much abused in
the Roman Church: and to reduce all Ministers of the Gospel to an equality with
only a Presidency of order, thereby to free themselves from the imputation of
Ambition, and to prevent it* in others; or else it were more prudent only to
retrench the abuses of Episcopacy under the Papacy, and to reduce it to that
form wherein it was practiced in the Church, before the tyranny and Usurpation
of the Roman Bishop had engrossed all Ecclesiastical power into his own hands?
The former part was embraced generally by the Reformed Churches, the latter by
our Church of England, so that the Question was not about Divine Right, but
about a matter of prudence; not What form was settled by a Law of Christ; but
what form was suitable to the present state of the Churches of the Reformation.
Therefore we see none of these foreign Divines did charge the Government of
this Church with unlawfulness, but inconveniency, as it was a step to pride and
ambition, and an occasion whereby men might do the Church injury by the excess
of their power, if they were not men of an excellent temper and moderation.
Thence that prediction of Padre Paul, that the Church of England would then,
find the inconveniency of Episcopacy, when a high-spirited Bishop should once
come to rule that Church; and so Beza when he had freed the Bishops of the
Reformation from that imputation of Lording it over their Brethren, which he
had charged the Roman Bishops with, yet he adds, that he would beg them rather
to lay down their power, then to transmit that power to those after them, hanc
ipsorum moderationem and aequitatem minime forsan sequuturis, Who it may be
were not like De Ministr* grad. p. 158.
to succeed them in their meekness and moderation. What just reason there was
for such fears, or may be still, let those judge who are fittest to do it;
those I mean who have the power not only to redress, but prevent abuses
incroaching by an irregular power. It was not then any unlawfulness in the
Government of Episcopacy its self, but its lyableness to abuses, which made the
Reformed Churches reduce Modern Episcopacy into a mere Presidency of Order,
which was not so liable to the same inconveniences. A clear evidence that they
judged not the Government unlawful, is, their often profession of a ready and
cheerful obedience to Bishops, if they would embrace the Gospel, and stand up
in defense of the true Doctrine. For which we have the testimony of George
Prince of Anhalt, in the Preface to his Sermon about false Super. Mat. tit. de
Ordinat.
Prophets, speaking of Bishops and Archbishops. Utinam sicut nomina gerunt and
titulos, ita se reipsa praestarent Episcopos Ecclesia. Utinam Evangelio
docerent consona, ipsoque Ecclesias fideliter regerent. O quam libenter,
quantaque cum cordis laetitia, pro Episcopis ipsos habere, revereri, morem
gerere, debitam jurisdictionem, and ordinationem eis tribuere, eaque sine
recusatione frui vellemus: id quod nos semper, and D. Lutherus etiam saepissime
tam ore quam scriptis, imo and in concione publica in Cathedrali Templ^
Marsburgensi contestati promisimus^ He professes it to be both his own
judgment and Luthers, that if Bishops would but teach and rule their Churches
according to the Word of God, they would obey them with all cheerfulness and
joy of heart. To the same purpose Melancthon writing to Camerarius; By what Ep.
ad Co^er. A. D. 1530.
right or Law may we dissolve the Ecclesiastical Polity, if the Bishops will
grant us that which in reason they ought to grant? and though it were lawful
for us so to do, yet surely it were not expedient. Luther was ever of this
opinion. The same is professed by Calvin, and that according to his temper in a
higher manner; Verum autem nobis si contribuant Hierarchiam Tom. 7. ad
Sadoletum. and de neces. Reform. Eccl. p. 69.
in qua emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent, ut ab illo tanquam
ab unico Capite pendeant, and ad ipsum referantur, in qua si fraternam
charitatem inter se colant, and non alio modo quam ejus veritate colligati, tum
vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fatemur, si qui erunt, qui eam non reverenter
and sumnia cum obedientia observent. If Bishops would but submit themselves to
Christ, those that would not then submit themselves to them, he thinks there is
no Anathema In loc. com. de Eccl. p. 767.
of which they are not worthy. Iacobus Heerbrandus, Divinity Professor at
Tubinge, professes it to be the most found constitution of Church Government,
wherein every Diocese had its Bishop, and every Province an Archbishop.
Saluberrimum esset si singulae Provinciae suos Episcopos, and Opuscul. Theol.
Clas. 3. cap. 10. p. 439.
Episcopi suos Archiepiscopos haberent. Hemingius: acknowledges a disparity
among Church Officers, and accounts it a piece of barbarism to remove it.
Quanquam enim potestas omnium eadem est ministrorum, quantum ad spiritualem
jurisdictionem atti^et; tamen dispares dignitatis ordines and gradus sunt;
idque partim Jure divino, partim Ecclesia approbatione. But he qualifies what
he had said of Ius divinum by his following words; Ecclesia cui Dominus
potestatem dedit in aedificationem, ordinem ministrorum instituit pro commodo
suo, ut omnia sint rite ordinata ad instaurationem corporis Christi. Hinc
Ecclesia purior secuta tempora Apostolorum, fecit alios Patriarchas, alios
Chorepiscopos, alios Pastores and Catechetas; and afterward, Inter ministros
agnoscit etiam Ecclesia nostra gradus dignitatis, and ordines pro diversitate
donorum, laborum magnitudine, ac vocationum diversitate; ac judicat, Barbaricum
esse de Ecclesia hunc ordinem tollere velle. Three things he places a
superiority of Dignity in; Excellency of gifts, Greatness of labors,
difference of calling. And the truth is, the two former ought to be the measure
of dignity in the Church, the Eminency of men's abilities, and the abundance of
their labors above others. The necessity Lib. 2. c. 10.
of a Superintendent, or an Inspector over other Ministers, is largely
discovered by Zepper de Politeid Ecclesiastica, who likewise agrees with the
former Divines in his judgment of the first institution of Episcopacy. Eadem
officia in De Polit. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 1.
primitiva etiam Ecclesia, post Apostolorum tempora in usu manserunt, paucis,
quibusdam gradibus, pro illorum temporum necessitate additis, qui tamen nihil
fere a mente D. Pauli and verbi divini alienum habuerunt. Whereby he both
assert it to be in the power of the Church to add distinct degrees from what
were in the Primitive Church, and that such so added, are no ways repugnant to
the Word of God. According to this judgment of their Divines is the practice
of the foreign Protestant Churches. In Sweden there is See Mr. Duree's
Government of Protestant Churches beyond the Seas.
one Archbishop, and seven Bishops: and so in Denmark, though not with so
great authority in Holstein, Pomeren, Mecklenburgh, Brunswicke, Luneburgh,
Bremen, Oldenburgh, East Frieseland, Hessen, Saxony, and all the upper part of
Germany and the Protestant Imperial Cities, Church government is in the hands
of Super-intendents. In the Palatinate they had Inspectores and Praepositi,
over which was the Ecclesiastical Consistory of three Clergy men, and three
Counselors of State with their President: and so they have their Praepositos
in Wetteraw, Hessen and Anhalt. In Transylvania, Polonia, and Bohemia, they
have their Seniores enjoying the same power with anclent Bishops. So that we
see all these Reformed Churches, and Divines, although they acknowledge no such
thing as a divine Right of Episcopacy, but stiffely maintain Ieromes opinion of
the primitive equality of Gospel Ministers; yet they are so far from accounting
it unlawful to have some Church Officers acting in a higher degree above
others, that they themselves embrace it under different names and titles, in
order to the Peace, Unity, and Government of their several Churches; Whereby
they give us an evident demonstration that they looked not upon the primitive
form to be immutable, but that the orders and degrees of Ministers is only a
Prudential thing, and left in the liberty of every particular Church, to be
determined according to their tendency to preserve the peace and settlement of
a Church.

We come in the last place to those who hold Episcopacy. 7.
to be the Primitive Form, yet not unalterably binding all Churches and places,
but that those Churches who are without it, are truly constituted Churches; and
Ministers are lawfully ordained by mere Presbyters. This is largely proved by
Mr. Francis Mason, in his excellent Defense of the Ordination Certain brief
treatises, etc. Oxford. 1641. Sect. 18.
of Ministers beyond the Seas: to which I refer the Reader. Only I shall show
out of him how the State of the Question about the Ius divinum of Episcopacy is
formed. First, If by jure divino you mean that which is according to Scripture,
then the pre-eminence of Bishops is jure divino; for it has been already
proved to be according to Scripture. Secondly, If by jure divino you mean the
Ordinance of God, in this sense also it may be said to be jure divino. For it
is an ordinance of the Apostles, whereunto they were directed by Gods Spirit,
even by the Spirit of Prophecy, and consequently the ordinance of God. But if
by jure divino you understand a Law and Commandment of God, binding all
Christian Churches universally, perpetually, unchangeably, and with such
absolute necessity, that no other form of Regiment may in any case be admitted;
in this sense neither may we grant it, nor yet can you prove it to be jure
divino.

Whereby we see this learned and moderate man was far from unchurching all who
wanted Bishops; and absolutely declares, that though he look on Episcopacy as
an Apostolical Institution, yet that no unalterable Divine Right is founded
thereupon. So before him the both learned and pious Bishop G. Downham explains
himself concerning the Right of Episcopacy, in these remarkable words: Though
in respect of the first Defense of Sermon. l. 4. cap. 6. p. 139.
Institution, there is small difference between an Apostolical and Divine
Ordinance, because what was, ordained by the Apostles, proceeded from God (in
which sense, and no other, I do hold the Episcopal function to be a divine
Ordinance, I mean in respect of of the first Institution) yet in respect of
perpetuity, difference by some is made between those things which be divini,
and those which be Apostolici juris; the former in their understanding being
perpetually, generally, and immutably necessary: the latter not so. So that the
meaning of my defense plainly i^, that the Episcopal Government has this
commendation above other forms of Ecclesiastical Government, that in respect of
the first Institution; it is a divine Ordinance; but that it should be such a
divine Ordinance as should be generally, perpetually, immutably, necessarily L.
4. chapter 7. p. 146.
observed, so as no other form of Government may in no case be admitted, I did
not take upon me to maintain: With more to the same purpose in several places
of that defense. And from hence it is acknowledged by the stoutest Champions
for Episcopacy, before these late unhappy divisions, that ordination performed
by Presbyters in cases of necessity is valid; which I have already showed does
evidently prove that Episcopal Government is not founded upon any unalterable
Divine Right: For which purpose many evidences are produced from Dr. Field of
the Church, lib. 3. c. 39 B. Downam, l. 3. c. 4. B. Iew^l, P. 2. p. 131.
Saravia. cap. 2. p. 10. 11. B. Alley, Praelect. 3. and 6. B. Pilkinton, B.
Bridges, B. Bilson, D. Nowel. B. Davenant, B. Prideaux, B. Andrews, and others:
by our From p. 53. to. p. 63.
Reverend and learned M. Baxter in his Christian Concord, to whom may be added
the late most Reverend and eminent the Bishop of Durham, Apolog. Cathol. p. 1.
l. 1. c. 21. and the Primat of Armagh, whose judgment is well known as to the
point of Ordination. So much may suffice to show that both those who hold an
equality among Ministers to be the Apostolical Form, and those that do hold
Episcopacy to have been it, do yet both of them ag^ee at last in this; that no
one Form is settled by an unalterable Law of Christ, nor consequently founded
upon Divine Right. For the former, notwithstanding their opinion of the
primitive Form, do hold Episcopacy lawful; and the latter, who hold Episcopacy
to have been the primitive Form, do not hold it perpetually and immutably
necessary, but that Presbyters (where Bishops cannot be had) may lawfully
discharge the offices belonging to Bishops; both which Concessions do
necessarily destroy the perpetual Divine Right of that Form of Government they
assert: Which is the thing I have been so long in proving, and I hope made it
evident to any unprejudicated mind.

Having laid down this now as a sure foundation for peace. 8.
and union, it were a very easy matter to improve it, in order to an
Accommodation of our present differences about Church Government. I shall only
lay down three general Principles deducible from hence, and leave the whole to
the mature consideration of the Lovers of Truth and Peace. The first Principle,
is, That Prudence must be used in settling the Government of the Church. This
has been the whole design of this Treatise, to prove that the Form of
Churchgovernment is a mere matter of prudence, regulated by the Word of God.
But I need not insist on the Arguments already brought to prove it; for, as far
as I can find, although the several parties in their contentions with one
another plead for Divine Right; yet when any one of them comes to settle their
own particular Form, they are fain to call in the help of Prudence, even in
things supposed by the several parties, as necessary to the establishment of
their own Form. The Congregational men may despair of ever finding Elective
Synods, an explicit Church Covenant, or positive signs of Grace in admission
of Church Members in any Law of Christ: nay, they will not generally plead for
any more for them, then general rules of Scripture, fine Similitudes, and
Analogies, and evidence of natural Reason; and what are all these at last to an
express Law of Christ, without which it was pretended nothing was to be done in
the Church of God? The Presbyterians seem more generally to own the use of
General Rules, and the Light of Nature, in order to the Form of Church
Government, as in the subordination of Courts, Classical Assemblies; and the
more moderate sort, as to Lay elders. The Episcopal men will hardly find any
evidence in Scripture, or the practice of the Apostles, for Churches consisting
of many fixed Congregations for worship, under the charge of one Person; nor in
the Primitive Church, for the ordination of a Bishop without the preceding
election of the Clergy, and at least consent and approbation of the people; and
neither in Scripture, nor antiquity, the least footstep of a delegation of
Church Power. So that upon the matter at last, all of them make use of those
things in Church Government, which have no other foundation but the Principles
of Humane prudence, guided by the Scriptures; and it were well if that were
observed still. The second Principle is, That Form of Government is the best
according to principles of Christian Prudence, which comes the nearest to
Apostolical practice, and tends most to the advancing the peace and unity of
the Church of God. What that Form is, I presume not to define and determine,
but leave it to be gathered from the evidence of Scripture and Antiquity, as to
the Primitive practice; and from the nature, state, and condition of that
Church wherein it is to be settled, as to its tendency to the advancement of
peace and unity in it. In order to the finding out of which, that proposal of
his late most excellent Majesty of glorious memory, His Majesters second Paper
to the Ministers at Nowport. ad sin^.
is most highly just and reasonable. His Majesty thinks it well worthy the
studies and endeavors of Divines of both opinions, laying aside emulation and
private interests, to reduce Episcopacy and Presbyteri^ into such a
well-proportion'd Form of superiority and subordination, as may best resemble
the Apostolical and Primitive times, so far forth as the different condition of
the times, and the exigences of all considerable circumstances will admit.

If this Proposal be embraced, as there is no reason why it should not; then,
all such things must be retrieved which were unquestionably of the Primitive
practice, but have been grown out of use through the length and corruption of
times. Such are the restoring of the Presbyteries of several Churches, as the
Senate to the Bishop, with whole counsel and advice all things were done in the
Primitive Church. The contracting of Dioceses into such a compass as may be
fitted for the personal inspection of the Bishop, and care of himself and the
Senate; the placing of Bishops in all great Towns of resort, especially County
Towns; that according to the ancient course of the Church, its Government may
be proportioned V. Bishop* ushers reduction of Episcopacy, etc.
to the Civil Government. The constant preaching of the Bishop in some Churches
of his charge, and residence in his Diocese; The solemnity of Ordinations, with
the consent of the people; The observing Provincial Synods twice every year.
The employing of none in judging Church matters but the Clergy. These are
things unquestionably of the Primitive practice, and no argument can be drawn
from the present state of things, why they are not as much, if not more
necessary then ever. And therefore all who appeal to the practice of the
Primitive Church, must condemn themselves, if they justify the neglect of
them. But I only touch at these things, my design being only to lay a
foundation for a happy union. Lastly, What Form of Government is determined by
lawful authority in the Church of God, ought so far to be submitted to, as it
contains nothing repugnant to the Word of God. So that let men's judgments be
what they will concerning the Primitive Form, seeing it has been proved, that
that Form does not bind unalterably and necessarily, it remains that the
determining of the Form of Government is a matter of liberty in the Church; and
what is so may be determined by lawful authority; and what is so determined by
that authority, does bind men to obedience, as has been proved by the 5.
Hypothesis, in the entrance of Pur. 1. chapter ^a. s. 12.
this Treatise. I conclude all with this earnest desire, That the wise and
Gracious God would send us one heart and one way, that he would be the Composer
of our differences, and the repairer of our breaches, that of our strange
divisions and unchristian animosities; While we pretend to serve the Prince of
peace, we may at last see,

THE END
Glory to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2. 14.
A Discourse concerning the Power of EXCOMMUNICATION in a Christian Church.
The Name of Power in a Church explained. The mistake of which, the Foundation
of Erastianism. The Notion of the Church opened, as it is the subject of Power.
The Church proved to be a Society distinct from the Commonwealth; by reason of
its different Nature, and divine Institution; distinct Officers, different
Rights, and Ends, and peculiar Offenses. The Power of the Church does not arise
from me^r confederation. The Churches Power founded on the nature of the
Christian Society, and not on particular Precepts. The Power of Church Officers
not merely Doctrinal, proved by several Arguments. Church Power as to
particular persons antecedent to confederation. The Power of the Keys relates
to Baptism. The Churches Power extends to Excommunication: what it is, and what
grounds it had under the Law. No exclusion from Temple-worship among the Jews.
Excommunication necessary in a Christian Church, because of the conditions
supposed to communion in it. Of the Incestuous person, and the Grounds of the
Apostolical censure. Objections against Excommunication answered. The
fundamental Rights of the Church continue after its being incorporated into the
civil State. The Magistrates Power, as to Excommunication, cleared.

IT is a matter of daily observation and experience Append. 10 c. 8. part. 1..
1.
in the World, how hard it is to keep the eyes of the understanding clear in
its judgment of things, when it is too far engaged in the dust of
Controversy. It being so very difficult to well manage an impetuous pursuit
after any Opinion; nothing being more common than to see men outrun their
mark, and through the force of their speed to be carried as far beyond it, as
others in their Opinion fall short of it. There is certainly a kind of ebriety
of the mind, as well as of the body, which makes it so unstable and pendulous,
that it often times reels from one extreme* unto the quite contrary. This as it
is obvious in most eager controvertists of all Ages, so especially in such, who
have discovered the ^alsity of an opinion they were once confident of, which
they think they can never after run far enough from: So that while they start
at an apparition they so much dread, they run into those untroden paths,
wherein they lose both themselves and the Truth they sought for.

Thus we find it to be in the present controversy, for many. 2.
out of their just zeal against the extravagancies of those who scrued up
Church Power to so high a peg, that it was thought to make perpetual discord
with the Common wealth, could never think themselves free from so great an
inconvenience, till they had melted down all Spiritual Power into the civil
State, and dissolved the Church into the Commonwealth. But that the World way
see I have not been more forward to assert the just power of the Magistrate in
Ecclesiasticals, as well as Civils, than to defend the Fundamental Rights of
the Church. I have taken this opportunity, more fully to explain and vindicate
that part of the Churches-Power, which lies in reference to Offenders? It being
the main thing struck at by those who are the followers of that noted
Physician, who handled the Church so ill, as to deprive her of her expulsive
faculty of Noxious humors, and so left her under a Miserere mei.. 3.


I shall therefore endeavor to give the Church her due, as well as Caesar his,
by making good this following Principle or Hypothesis, upon which the whole
hinge of this Controversy turns, viz. That the power of inflicting censure,
upon Offenders in a Christian Church, is a fundamental Right, resu^^^^g from
the constitution of the Church, as a Society by Jesus Christ; and that the seat
of this Power is in those Officers of the Church, who have derived their power
Originally from the Founder of this Society, and act by virtue of the Laws of
it.

For the clear stating of this Controversy, it will be necessary. 4.
to explain, what that Power is, which I attribute to the Church, and in what
notion the Church is to be considered as it exercises this Power. First,
concerning the proper notion of Power; by it I cannot see any thing else to be
understood, than a right of governing or ordering things which belong to a
Society. And so Power implies only a moral faculty in the person enjoying it,
to take care ne quid civitas detrimenti capiat, whereby it is evident that
every well constituted Society must suppose a Power within its self of ordering
things belonging to its welfare, or else it were impossible, either the being,
or the rights and privileges of a Society could be long preserved. Power then
in its general and abstracted notion, does not necessarily import either mere
Authority, or proper Coaction; for these, to any impartial judgment, will
appear to be rather the several modes whereby power is exercised, than any
proper ingredients of the specific Nature of it: which; in general, imports no
more then a right to govern a constituted Society; but how that right shall be
exercised, must be resolved not from the notion of Power, but from the nature
and constitution of that particular Society in which it is lodged and inherent.

It appears then from hence to be a great mistake and abuse. 5.
of well-natured Readers, when all Power is necessarily restrained, either to
that which is properly Co^rcive, or to that which is merely Arbitrary, and
only from consent. The Original of which mistake is, the stating the Notion of
Power from the use of the Word, either in ancient Roman Authors, or else in
the Civil Laws, both which are freely acknowledged to be strange^ to the
exercise of any other Power, than that which i^ merely authoritative and
persuasive, or that which is Coactive and Penal. The ground of which is,
because they were ignorant of any other way of conveyance of power, besides
external force, and Arbitrary consent; the one in those called Legal Societies,
or Civitates, the other Collegia and Hetaeriae. But to as that do acknowledge
that God has a right of commanding men to what Duty he please himself, and
appointing a Society upon what terms best please him, and giving a Power to
particular persons to govern that Society, in what way shall tend most to
advance the Honor of such a Society, may easily be made appear, that there is
a kind of Power neither properly Coactive, nor merely Arbitrary, viz. such a
one as immediately results from Divine Institution, and does suppose consent to
submit to it as a necessary Duty in all the members of this Society.

This Power, it is evident, is not merely Arbitrary either in. 6.
the Governors or Members: for, the Governors derive their Power or right of
Governing from the institution of Christ, and are to be regulated by his Laws
in the execution of it; and the Members, though their consent be necessarily
supposed, yet that consent is a Duty in them, and that duty does imply their
submission to the Rulers of this Society: neither can this power be called
Coactive, in the ^ense it is commonly taken: for coactive power, and external
force are necessary correlates to each other, but we suppose no such thing as a
power of outward force to be given to the Church as such, for that properly
belongs to a Commonwealth. But the power which I suppose to be lodged in the
Church, is such a power as depends upon a Law of a Superior, giving right to
Govern, to particular persons over such a Society, and making it the Duty of
all Members of it to submit unto it, upon no other penalties, then the
exclusion of them from the privileges, which that Society enjoyes. So that
supposing such a Society as the Church is, to be of Divine Institution, and
that Christ has appointed Officers to rule it, it necessarily follows, that
those Officer^ must derive their power, i. e. their right of Governing this
Society, not merely from consent and confederation of parties, but from that
Divine Institution, on which the Society depends. The ^^ht of understanding the
right notion of power in the sense here ^^^ down, is certainly the (...) of
Erastianism, and that which has given occasion to so many to question any such
thing as Power in the Church, especially, when the more zealous then judicious
defenders of it have rather chosen to hang it upon some doubtful places of
Scripture, then on the very Nature and Constitution of the Christian Church, as
a Society instituted by Jesus Christ.. 7.


This being then the nature of power in general, it is I suppose clear, that an
outward coactive force is not necessary in order to it* for if some may have a
Right to Govern and others may be obliged to obedience to those persons
antecedently, to any Civil Constitution; then such persons have a just power to
inflict censures upon such as transgress the Rules of the Society, without any
outward force. It is here very impertinent to dispute, what effects such
censures can have upon wilful persons without a Coactive power; If I can prove,
that there is a right to inflict them in Church Officers, and an Obligation to
submit to them in all Offenders; I am not to trouble my self with the event of
such things as depend upon Divine Institutions. I know it is the great
Objection of the followers of Erastus, that Church*censures are inflicted upon
persons unwilling to receive them, and therefore must imply external and
coactive force, which is repugnant to the nature of a Church. But this admits
(according to the Principles here established) of a very easy solution; for I
deny not, that Church Power goes upon consent, but then it is very plain here
was an antecedent consent to submit to censures in the very entrance into this
Society, which is sufficient to denominate it a voluntary act of the persons
undergoing it; and my reason is this, every person entering into a Society,
parts with his own freedom and liberty, as to matters concerning the governing
of it, and professes submission to the Rules and Orders of it: now a man
having parted with his freedom already, cannot reassume it when he please, for,
then, he is under an Obligation to stand to the Covenants made at his entrance;
and cons^quently his undergoing what shall be laid upon him by the Laws of
this Society, must be supposed to be voluntary, as depending upon his consent
at first entrance, which in all Societies must be supposed to hold still, else
there would follow nothing but confusion in all Societies in the World, if
every man were at liberty to break his Covenants when any thing comes to lie
upon him according to the Rules of the Society, which he out of some private
design would be unwilling to undergo. Thus much may serve to settle aright the
Notion of Power; the want of understanding which, has caused all the confusion
of this Controversy.

The next thing is, In what Notion we are to consider the. 8.
Church, which is made the subject of this Power? As to which we are to
consider This Power; either as to its right, or in actu primo; or as to its
exercise, or in actu secundo: Now if we take this Power as to the fundamental
Right of it; then it belongs to that Universal Church of* Christ, which
subsists as a visible Society, by virtue of that Law of Christ, which makes an
owning the Profession of Christianity the Duty of all Church* members If we
consider this Power in the exercise of it, then (it being impossible that the
Universal Church should perform the executive part of this power relating to
offenses) I suppose it lodged in that particular Society of Christians, which
are united together in one body in the community of the some Government; but
yet, so, as that the administration of this Power, does not belong to the body
of the Society considered complexly, but to those Officers in it, whose care
and charge it is, to have a peculiar oversight and inspection over the Church,
and to redress all disorders in it. Thus the visive faculty is fundamentally
lodged in the Soul, yet all exterior acts of sight are performed by the Eyes,
which are the (...) Overseers of the Body, as the other are of the Church, so
that the exercise and administration of this power, belongs to the special
Officers and Governors of the Church; none else being capable of exercising
this Power of the Church as such but they on whom it is settled by the Founder
of the Church it is self.

This Society of the Church may be again considered* either. 9.
as subsisting without any influence from the Civil Power, or as it is owned
by, and incorporated into a Christian State. I therefore demand, Whether it be
absolutely necessary for the subsistence of this Christian Society, to be
upheld by the Civil Power, or no* And certainly none who consider the first and
purest Ages of the Christian Church, can give any entertainment to the
Affirmative, because then the Church flourished in it is greatest purity, not
only when not upheld, but when most violently opposed by the Civil Power; If
so then it is being united with the Civil State is only accidental as to the
constitution a Church; and if this be only accidental; then it must be
supposed furnished with every thing requisite to it is well ordering
accidentally to any such Union, and abstractly from it. For can we imagine our
Bl^ssed Savior should institute a Society, and leave it destitute of means to
uphold it is self, unless it fell into the hands of the civil Power? or that he
left every thing tending thereto, merely to Prudence, and the Arbitrary
constitutions of the persons joining together in this Society? Did our Savior
take care there should be a Society, and not provide for means to uphold it?
Nay, it is evident, he not only appointed a Society, but Officers to rule it.
Had those Officers then a Right to Govern it or no, by virtue of Christ's
institution of them? if not, they were rather Bibuli than Caesares, Ciphers
than Consuls in the Church of God. If they had a power to Govern, does not that
necessarily imply a Right to inflict censures on* Offenders, unless we will
suppose that either there can be no Offenders in a Christian Church, or that
those Offenders do not v^olate the Laws of the Society, or there be some
Prohibition for them to exercise their power over them (which is to give power
with one hand, and take it away with the other) or that this power cannot
extend so far as to exclude any from the Privileges of the Church: which is
the thing to be discussed.

Having thus cleared our way, I now come to the Resolution 10.
of the Question its self, in order to which I shall endeavor to demonstrate,
with what evidence the Subject is capable of, these following things. First,
that the Church is a peculiar Society in its own Nature, distinct from the
Commonwealth. Secondly, that the power of the Church over its members does not
arise from mere confederation or consent of Parties. Thirdly, That this Power
of the Church does extend to the exclusion of offenders from the Privileges of
it. Fourthly, That the Fundamental Rights of the Church do not escheat to the
Commonwealth upon* their being united in a Christian State. If these
Principles be established, the Churches Power will stand upon them, as on a
firm and unmovable Basis.

I begin with the first. That the Church is a peculiar Society 11.
in its own Nature, distinct from the Commonwealth, which I prove by these
Arguments.

1. Those Societies, which are capable of subsisting apart from each other, are
really, and in their own Nature distinct from one another: but so it is with
the Church and Common wealth. For there can be no greater Evidence of a Real
Distinction than Mutual Separation; and I think the proving the possibility of
the Souls existing, separate from the body, is one of the strongest Arguments
to prove it to be a substance really distinct from the body, to which it is
united; although we are often fain to go the other way to work, and to prove
possibility of separation from other Arguments evincing the Soul to be a
distinct substance; but the reason of that is for want of evidence as to the
state of separate Souls, and their visible existence, which is repugnant to the
immateriality of their natures. But now, as to the matter in hand, we have all
evidence desirable; for we are not put to prove possibility of separation,
merely from the different constitution of the things united, but we have
evidence to Sense of it, that the Church has subsisted when it has been not
only separated from, but persecuted by all civil power. It is with many men as
to the Union of Church and State, as it is with others, as to the Union of the
Soul and Body: when they observe how close the Union is, and how much the Soul
makes use of the Animal Spirits in most of its Operations, and how great a
sympathy there is between them, that, like Hippocrates his Twins, they laugh
and weep together, they are shrewdly put to it, how to fancy the Soul to be any
thing else than a more vigorous mode of matter; so these observing how close an
Union and Dependence there is between the Church and State in a Christian
Commonwealth, and how much the Church is beholding to the civil power in the
Administration of its functions, are apt to think that the Church is nothing
but a higher mode of a Commonwealth, considered as Christian. But when it is
so evident that the Church has, and may subsist, supposing it abstracted from
all Civil Power, it may be a sufficient demonstration that however near they
may be when united, yet they are really, and in their own nature, distinct from
each other. Which was the thing to be proved.

2. Those are distinct Societies, which have every thing distinct. 1
in their nature from each other, which belong to the Constitution or
Government of them; but this is evident, as to the Church and Commonwealth,
which will appear, because their Charter is distinct, or that which gives them
their being as a Society: Civil Societies are founded upon the necessity of
particular men's parting with their peculiar Rights, for the preservation of
themselves, which was the impulsive cause of their entering into societies, but
that which actually spe^ks them to be a society is the mutual consent of the
several parties joining together, whereby they make themselves to be one Body;
and to have one Common Interest. So Cicero de Repub. defines A^ud August de
Civit. de l. 2. c. 21.
Populus, to be coe'us multitudinis, juris consensu and utilitatis communione
sociatus. There is no doubt, but Gods general providence, is as evidently seen
in bringing the World into societies, and making them live under Government, as
in disposing all particular events which happen in those Societies; but yet the
way, which Providence uses in the constitution of these societies, is by
inclining men to consent to associate for their mutual benefit and advantage:
So that natural Reason consulting for the good of mankind, as to those Rights
which men enjoy in common with each other, was the main foundation upon which
all civil Societies were erected. We find no positive Law enacti^g the being
of Civil Societies, because Nature its self would prompt men for their own
conveniences to enter into them. But the ground and foundation of that
Society, which we call a Church, is a matter which Natural Reason and common
Notions can never reach to: and therefore an ^ssociating for the preserving of
such, may be a Philosophical Society, but a Christian it cannot be: And they
that would make a Christian Church to be nothing else but a Society of Essens,
or an (...) of Pythagoreans, do either not understand, or not consider whereon
this Christian Society is founded; for it is evident they look on it as a
merely voluntary thing, that is not at all settled by any Divine positive Law.

The truth is, there is no principle more consistent with the. 13.
opinion of those who deny any Church power in a Christian state, then this is,
and it is that, which every one, who will make good his ground must be driven
to; for it is evident, that in matters merely voluntary, and depending only on
confederation, such things being liable to a Magistrates power, there can be no
plea from mutual consent to justify any opposition to supreme authority in a
Common wealth. But, then how such persons can be Christians, when the
Magistrates would have them to be otherwise, I cannot understand; nor how the
primitive Martyrs were any other then a company of Fools or madmen, who would
hazard their lives, for that which was a mere arbitrary thing, and which they
had no necessary obligation upon them to profess. Mistake me not, I speak not
here of mere acts of discipline, but of the duty of outward professing
Christianity; if this be a duty, then a Christian society is settled by a
positive Law, if it be not a duty, then they are fools who suffer for it: So
that this question resolved into its principles, leads us higher than we think
for, and the main thing in debate must be, Whether there be an obligation upon
conscience for men to associa^e in the profession of Christianity or no? If
there be, then the Church, which is nothing else but such an association, is
established upon a positive Law of Christ; if there be not, then those
inconveniences follow, which are already mentioned.

We are told indeed by the Leviathan with confidence. 14.
enough, that no precepts of the Gospel are Law, till enacted by civil
authority; but it is little wonder, that he, who thinks an immaterial
substance implies a contradiction, should think as much of calling any thing a
Law, but what has a civil sanction. But I suppose all those who dare freely
own a supreme and infinite essence to have been the Creator, and to be the
Ruler of the World, will acknowledge his Power to oblige conscience, without
being beholding to his own creature to enact his Laws, that men might be bound
to obey them. Was the great God sain to be be holding to the civil authority
he had over the Jewish Common wealth (their government being a (...)) to make
his Laws obligatory to the consciences of the Jews? What, had not they their
beings from God? and can there be any greater ground of obligation to
obedience, than from thence? Whence comes civil power to have any Right to
oblige men more, than God, considered as Governor of the World, can have? Can
there be indeed no other Laws according to the Leviathans Hypothesis, but only
the Law of nature and civil Laws? But I pray whence comes the obligation to
either of these, that these are not as arbitrary, as all other agreements are?
And is it not as strong a dictate of nature as any can be (supposing that
there is a God) that a creature which receives its being from another, should
be bound to obey him, not only in the resultancies of his own nature, but with
the arbitrary constitutions of his will: Was Adam bound to obey God or no, as
to that positive precept of eating the forbidden fruit, if no civil Sanction
had been added to that Law? The truth is, such Hypotheses as these are, when
they are followed close home, will be sound to Kennel in that black Den, from
whence they are loath to be thought to have proceeded.. 15.


And now, supposing that every full Declaration of the will of Christ, as to
any positive Institution, has the force and power of a Law upon the
consciences of all, to whom it is sufficiently proposed: I proceed to make
appear, that such a divine positive Laew there is, for the existence of a
Church, as a visible body and society in the World; by which I am far from
meaning such a conspicuous society, that must continue in a perpetual
visibility in the same place; I find not the least intimation of any such thing
in Scripture; but that there shall always be somewhere or other, in the
world, a society owning and professing Christianity, may be easily deduced
from thence; and especially on this account, that our Savior has required
this, as one of the conditions in order to eternal felicity, that all those who
believe in their hearts, that Jesus is the Christ, must likewise confess him
with their mouths to the world: and therefore, as long at there are men to
believe in Christ, there must be men that will not be ashamed to associate, on
the account of the Doctrine he has promulged to the world. That one Phrase in
the New Testament, so frequently used by our blessed Savior, of the Kingdom
of Heaven (importing a Gospel-state) does evidently declare a society, which
was constituted by him, on the principles of the Gospel Covenant. Wherefore
should our Savior call Disciples, and make Apostles, and send them abroad with
full commission to gather and initiate Disciples by Baptism; did he not intend
a visible society for his Church? Had it not been enough for men to have
cordially believed the truth of the Gospel, but they must be entered in a
solemn visible way, and join in participation of visible Symbols of bread and
wine, but that our Savior required external profession and society in the
Gospel as a necessary duty, in order to obtaining the privileges conveyed by
his Magna Charta in the Gospel. I would fain know by what argument we can
prove, that any humane Legislator, did ever intend a Common wealth to be
governed according to his mode, by which we cannot prove that Christ by a
positive Law, did command such a society, as should be governed in a visible
manner, as other societies are? Did he not appoint officers himself in the
Church, and that of many ranks and degrees? Did he not invest those Officers
with authority to rule his Church? Is it not laid as a charge on them, to take
heed to that flock, over which God had made them Overseers? Are there not
Rules laid down for the peculiar exercise of their Government over the Church
in all the parts of it? Were not these Officers admitted into the^^ function by
a most solemn visible Rite of Imposition of Hands? And are all these solemn
transactions a mere piece of sacred Pageantry? And they will appear to be
little more, if the Society of the Church be a mere arbitrary thing, depending
only upon consent and confederation, and not subsisting by virtue of any
Charter from Christ, or some positive Law, requiring all Christians to join in
Church society together.

But if now from hence it appears (as certainly it cannot. 16.
but appear) that this Society of the Church does subsist by virtue of a Divine
positive Law, then it must of necessity be distinct from a civil Society, and
that on these accounts: First, because there is an antecedent obligation on
conscience to associate on the account of Christianity, whether Humane Laws
prohibit or command it. From whence, of necessity it follows, that the
constitution of the Church is really different from that of the Commonwealth;
because whether the Common wealth be for, or against this Society, all that own
it are bound to profess it openly, and declare themselves members of it.
Whereas, were the Church and Commonwealth really and formally the same, all
obligation to Church society would arise merely from the Legislative Power of
the Common wealth. But now there being a Divine Law, binding in conscience,
whose obligation cannot be superseded by any Humane Law, it is plain and
evident, where are such vastly different obligations, there are different
Powers; and in this sense I know no incongruity, in admitting imperium in
imperio, if by it we understand no external coactive power, but an internal
power laying obligation on conscience, distinct from the power lodged in a
Commonwealth considered as such. An outward coactive power was always disowned
by Christ, but certainly not an internal Power over conscience to oblige all
his Disciples to what Duties he thought fit.

Secondly. I argue from those Officers, whose rights to govern this Society are
founded on that Charter, whereby the Society it self subsists. Now I would
willingly know why, when our Savior disowned all outward power in the World,
yet he should constitute a Society, and appoint Officers in it, did he not
intend a peculiar distinct Society from the other Societies of the world. And
therefore the argument frequently used against Church Power, because it has no
outward force with it by the constitution of Christ, is a strong argument to me
of the peculiarity of a Christian society from a Commonwealth; because Christ
so instituted it, as not to have it ruled at first by any outward force or
power. When Christ says, his Kingdom was not of this world; he implies, that
he had a Society that was governed by his Laws in the world, yet distinct from
all mundane Societies: had not our Savior intended his Church to have been a
peculiar Society distinct from a Commonwealth, it is hard to conceive why our
Savior should interdict the Apostles the use of a civil coactive power: Or why
instead of sending abroad Apostles to preach the Gospel, he did not employ the
Governors of Commonwealths to have enforced Christianity by Laws and temporal
edicts, and the several Magistrates to have empowered several persons under them
to preach the Gospel in their several Territories? And can any thing be more
plain, by our Saviors taking a contrary course, than that he intended a
Church society to be distinct from civil, and the power belonging to it (as
well as the Officers) to be of a different nature from that which is settled
in a Commonwealth. I here suppose, that Christ has by a positive Law
established the Government of his Church upon Officers of his own appointment;
Iren. p. 2. c. 2.
which I have largely prove ^^sewhere, and therefore suppose it now. Thirdly, I
argu^ ^^om the peculiar rights belonging to these Societies: For if every one
born in the Commonwealth, have not thereby a right to the privileges of the
Church; nor every one by being of the Church, any right to the benefits of the
Commonwealth, it must necessarily follow, that these are distinct from one
another. If any one by being of the Commonwealth, has right to
Church Priviledges, then every one born in a Commonwealth may challenge a
right to the Lords Supper without Baptism, or open professing Christianity,
which I cannot think any will be very ready to grant. Now there being by Divine
appointment the several rights of Baptism and the Lords Supper, as peculiar
badges of the Church as a visible Society, it is evident, Christ did intend it
a Society distinct from the Common wealth.

Fourthly, I argue from the different ends of these societies. A Commonwealth
is constituted for civil ends, and the Church for spiritual: for ends are to be
judged by the primary constitution, but now it is plain, the end of civil
society is for preservation of men's rights as men (therefore Magistracy is
called by St. Peter (...)): but this Christian society does not respect men
under the connotation of men but as Christians. The answer given to this is
very short and insufficient, when it is said, that every man in a Commonwealth,
is to act upon spiritual accounts and ends: For there is a great deal of
difference between Christianities having an influence upon men's actings in a
Commonwealth, and making a society the same with a Commonwealth. To argue
therefore from one to another, is a shortness of discourse I cannot but wonder
at: unless it could be proved, that Christianity aimed at nothing else but
regulating men in the affairs of a Commonwealth, which is a task I suppose will
not be undertaken.

Lastly, I argue from the peculiar offenses against this society, which are, or
^ay be distinct from those against a Commonwealth. I deny not, but most times
they are the same; but frequently they differ, and when they are the same, yet
the consideration of them is different in the Church and Common wealth, for
which I shall suppose the six arguments produced in the last chapter of the
first part to stand good, which ^ Iren. p. 1. c. 8.
will strongly hold to ex^^^^unication in the Christian Church, though there
produce(...)ly for the Jewish. I would fain know what is to be done in many
offenses, known to be against the Laws of Christ, and which tend to the
dishonor of the Christian society, which the civil and Municipal Laws, either
do not, or may not take cognizance of? Thus much may serve, as I think to make
evident, that the Church in its own nature, is a peculiar society distinct from
a Commonwealth, which was the first proposition to be proved.. 17.


The second is, That the power of the Church over it is members in case of
offenses, does not arise merely from confederation and consent, though it does
suppose it. This Church power may be considered two ways. Either, first, as it
implies the right in some of inflicting censures. Or secondly, as it implies in
others, the duty of submitting to censures inflicted; now as to both these, I
shall prove that their original is higher than mere confederation.

1. As to the right of inflicting censures on these accounts. First, What ever
society does subsist by virtue of a divine constitution, does by virtue thereof
derive all power for it is preservation, in peace, unity, and purity; but it is
plain, that a power of censuring offenders, is necessary for the Churches
preservation in peace and purity; and it is already proved, that the Church
has its Charter from Christ, and therefore from him it has a power to inflict
punishments on Offenders, suitable to the Nature of the Society they are of. I
am very prone to think that the ground of all the mistakes on this subject have
risen from hence, that some, imprudently enough, have fixed the original of this
Power on some ambiguous places of Scripture, which may, and it may be, ought
to be taken in a different sense; and their adversaries, finding those places
weak and insufficient proofs of such a power, have from thence rejected any
such kind of power at all; But certainly, if we should reject every truth that
is weakly proved by some who have undertaken it, I know no opinion would bid so
sai^ for acceptance as Skepticism, and that in reference to many weighty and
important truth^; for how weakly have some proved the existence of a Deity, the
immortality of the soul, and the truth of the Scriptures, by such arguments,
that if it were enough to overthro^^ an opinion to be able to answer some
Arguments brought for it, Atheism it self would become plausible. It can be
then no evidence, that a thing is not true, because some Arguments will not
prove it; and truly, as to the matter in hand, I am fully of the opinion of the
excellent In Luke ^. ^2.
H. Grotius, speaking of Excommunication in the Christian Church: Neque ad^am
r^m peculiare praeceptum desideratur, eum Ecclestae coetu, a Christo semel
constituto, omnia illa imperata censeri debent, sine quibus ejus coeius,
puritas retineri non potest. And therefore men spend needless pains to prove an
institution of this power by some positive precept, when Christ's founding his
Church as a peculiar Society, is sufficient proof he has endowed it with this
fundamental Right, without which the Society, were arena sino calce, a company
of persons without any common tie of union among them; for if there be any
such union, it must depend on some conditions, to be performed by the members
of that Society, which how could they require from them, if they have not power
to exclude them upon non performance?

2. I prove the divine original of this power from the special appointment and
designation of particular Officers by Jesus Christ, for the ruling of this
Society. Now I say, that Law which provides there shall be Officers to Govern,
does give them power to govern, suitably to the Nature of their society: Either
then you must deny, that Christ has by an unalterable Institution appointed a
Gospel Ministry, or that this Ministry has no Power in the Church, or that
their Power extends not to excommunication. The first I have already proved,
the second follows from their appointment: for by all the titles given to
Church Officers in Scripture, it appears they had a Power over the Church, (as
(...).) All which as you well know, do import a right to Govern the Society
over which they are set. And that this power should not extend to a power to
exclude convict Offenders, seems very strange, when no other punishment can be
more suitable to the nature of the Society than this is; which is a debarring
him from the privileges of that Society, which the offender has so much
dishonored. Can there be any punishment less imagined toward contumacious
offenders then this is, or that carries in it less of outward and coactive
force, it implying nothing but what the offender himself freely yielded to at
his entrance into this Society.

All that I can find replied by any of the Adversaryes of the. 18.
opinion I here assert, to the argument drawn from the Institution and Titles
of the Officers of the Church, is, that all those titles which are given to the
Ministers of the Gospel in the New Testament, that do import Rule and
Government, are all to be taken in a Spiritual sense, as they are Christ's
Ministers and Ambassadors to preach his Word and declare his Will to his
Church. So that all power such persons conceive to lie in those Titles, is only
Doctrinal and declarative; but how true that is, let any one judge that
considers these things.

1. That there was certainly a power of Discipline then in the Churches
constituted by the Apostles, which is most evident not only from the passages
relating to Offenders in Saint Paul's Epistles, especially to the Corinthians
and Thessalonians, but from the continued Practice of succeeding Ages
manifested by Tertullian, Cyprian, and many others. There being then a power of
Discipline in Apostolical Churches, there was a necessity it should be
administered by some Persons who had the care of those Churches; and who were
they but the several Pastors of them? It being then evident that there was
such a Power, does it not stand to common sense it should be employed in such
Titles, which in their Natural Importance do signify a Right to Govern, as
the names of Pastors and Rulers do?

2. There is a diversity in Scripture made between Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians.
4. 11. Though this may not (as it does not) imply a necessity of two distinct
Offices in the Church, yet it does a different respect and connotation in the
same person, and so imports that Ruling carries in it somewhat more then mere
Teaching, and so the power employed in Pastors to be more then merely Doctrinal,
which is all I contend for, viz. A right to govern the flock committed to their
charge.

3. What possible difference can be assigned between the Elders that Rule well,
and those which labor in the Word and Doctrine, (1 Timothy 5. 17.) if all
their Ruling were merely laboring in the Word and Doctrine? and all their
Governing nothing but Teaching? I intend not to prove an Office of Rulers
distinct from Teachers from hence (which I know neither this place, nor any
other will do) but that the formal conception of Ruling, is different from that
of Teaching.

4. I argue from the Analogy between the Primitive Churches and the Synagogues,
that, as, many of the names were taken from thence where they carried a power
of Discipline with them, so they must do in some proportion in the Church; or
it were not easy understanding them. It is most certain the Presbyters of the
Synagogue had a power of Ruling, and can you conceive the Bishops and
Presbyters of the Church had none, when the Societies were much of the same
Constitution, and the Government of the one was transscribed from the other, as
has been already largely proved?

5. The acts attributed to Pastor in Scripture, imply a power of Governing,
distinct from mere Teaching; such are (...), used for a right to Govern* Matthew.
2. 6. Revel. 12. 5. -- 19. 15. which word is attributed to Pastors of Churches
in reference to their flocks, Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. and (...), is applied
to Ministers, when they are so frequently called (...), which notes
praesidentiam cum potestate; for Hesychius renders it by (...), and the (...)
at Athens had certainly a power of Government in them.

6. The very word (...), is attributed to those who have oversight of
Churches, 1 Cor. 12. 8. by which it is certainly evident, that a power more
than Doctrinal is understood, as that it could not then be understood of a
power merely civil. And this I suppose may suffice to vindicate this Argument
from the Titles of Church Officers, in the New Testament, that they are not
insignificant things, but the persons who enjoyed them had a right to govern
the Society over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

3. I argue that Church Power arises not merely from consent,. 19.
because the Church may exercise her Power on such, who have not actually
confederated with her; which is in admitting members into the Church: For if
the Church Officers have power to judge whether persons are fit to be admitted,
they have power to exclude from admission such whom they judge unfit, and so
their power is exercised on those who are not confederated. To this it may be
answered, That the consent to be judged, gives the Church power over the person
suing for admission. I grant it does, as to that particular person; but the
Right in general of judging concerning Admission, does argue an antecedent
power to an actual confederation. For I will suppose that Christ should now
appoint some Officers to found a Church, and gather a Society of Christians
together, where there has been none before: I now ask Whether these Officers
have power to admit any into the Church or no? This I suppose cannot be denied,
for to what end else were they appointed? If it be granted they have power to
admit persons, and thereby make a Church, then they had power antecedently to
any confederation; for the Confederation was subsequent to their Admission: and
therefore they who had power to admit, could not derive their power from
confederation. This Argument, to me, puts the case out of dispute, that all
Church Power cannot arise from mere confederation.

And that which further evidenceth that the Power of the Church does not arise
from mere consent, is that Deed of Gift whereby our Blessed Savior did confer
the Power of the Keys on the Apostle Peter, as the representative in that
action of the whole College of the Apostles and Governors of the Church, of
which power all the Apostles were actually infeoffed, John 20. 23. By which
Power of the Keys is certainly meant some Administration in the Church, which
does respect it as a visible Society, in which Sense the Church, is so
frequently called, as in that place, the Kingdom of Heaven; Mat. 16. 19.
and in all probability the Administration intended here by the Power of the
Keys, is that we are now discoursing of, viz. the Power of Admission into the
Church of Christ, in order to the pardon of the sins of all penitent Believers,
and the shutting out of such who were manifestly unworthy of so holy a
communion. So that the power of the Keys does not primarily respect exclusion
out of the Church, and receiving into it again upon Absolution, but it chiefly
respects the power of Admission into the Church, though by way of connotation
and Analogy of Reason it will carry the other along with it. For if the
Apostles as Governors of the Church were invested with a power of judging of
men's fitness for Admission into the Church as members of it, it stands to the
highest Reason that they should have thereby likewise a power conveyed to them,
of excluding such as are unworthy after their Admission, to maintain communion
with the Church. So that this interpr^tation of the Power of the Keys, is far
from invalidating the Power of the Church, as to its censuring Offenders; all
that it pretends to, is only giving a more natural and genuine Sense of the
Power of the Keys, which will appear so to be, if we consider these things. 1.
That this Power was given to Saint I^en. p. 2. ch 5. ^^. 5. p. 212.
Peter before any Christian Church, was actually formed, which (as I have
elsewhere made manifest) was not done till after Christ's Resurrection; when
Christ had given the Apos^les their commission to go to Preach and baptize,
etc. Matthew. 28. 19. Is it not therefore far more rational, that the Power of
the Keys here given, should respect the founding of a Church and admission
into it, than ejection out of it (before it was in being) and receiving into it
again? And this we find likewise remarkably fulfilled in the Person of the
Apostle Peter, who opened the door of admission into the Christian Church* both
to Jews and Gentiles. To the Jews by his Sermon at Pentecost, when Acts 2. 41.
about 3000. Souls were brought into the Church of Christ. To the Gentiles, as
is most evident in the story of Corneliu^, Acts 10. 28. who was the
first fruits of the Gentiles. So that if we should yield so far to the great
Inhancers of Saint Petes^ Power, that something was intended peculiar to his
person in the Keys given him by our Savior, we hereby see how rationally it
may be understood without the least advantage to the extravagant pretensions of
Saint Peter's pretended Successors. 2. The pardon of sin in Scripture is most
annexed to Baptism and Admission into the Church, and thence 1 Pet. 3. 21.
it seems evident, that the loosing of sin should be by admitting Tit. 3. 5.
into the Church by Baptism, in the same Sense by which Baptism is said to save
us, and it is called the washing of Regeneration; respecting the Spiritual
advantages which come by Admission into the Church of Christ; and so they are
said Acts 8. 33.
to have their sins bound upon them, who continue refractory in their sins, a^
Simon Magus is said to be in the bond of iniquity. 3. The Metaphor of the Keys
refers most to Admission into the House, and excluding out of it, rather than
ejecting any out of it, and re-admitting them. Thus when Isa. 22 20 Cypr. Ep.
73. sect 6.
Eliakim is said to have the Keys of the House of David, it was in regard of
his Power to open and shut upon whom he pleased. And thus Cyprian, as our
learned Mr. Thorndike observes, understands the power of binding and loosing in
this sense, in his Epistle to Iubaianus, where speaking of the Remission of
sins in Baptism, he brings these very words of our Savior to Peter as the
evidence of it; That what he should loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven:
and concludes with this Sentence, Unde intelligimus non nisi in Ecclesia
praeposit is and in Evangeli^a lege ac Dominica ordinatione fundatis, licere
baptizare, and remissam peccatorum dare; for is autem nec ligari aliquid posse
nec solvi, ubi non sit qui ligare possit aut solvere. That which I now infer
from this Discourse, is, that the power of the Church does not arise from mere
consent and confederation, both because this power does respect those who have
not actually consented to it, and because it is settled upon the Governors of
the Church by Divine Institution. Thus it appears that the right of inflicting
censures does not result merely ^^^ confoederatd Disciplind, which was the
thing to be proved.

The l^ke evidence may be given, for the duty of submitting 20. (2.)
to penalties or Church Censures in the members of the Church: which that it
arises, not from mere consent of parties, will appear on these accounts.

1. Every person who enters this Society is bound to consent, before he does
it, because of the Obligation lying upon Conscience to an open prof^ssion of
Christianity, presently upon conviction of the understanding of the truth and
certainty of Christian Religion. For when once the mind of any rational man is
so far wrought upon by the influence of the Divine Spirit, as to discover the
most rational and undoubted evidences, which there are of the truth of
Christianity, he is presently obliged to profess Christ openly, to worship him
solemnly, to assemble with others for instruction and participation of Gospel*
Ordinances; and thence it follows, that there is an antecedent Obligation upon
Conscience to associate with others, and consequently to consent to be governed
by the Rulers of the Society which he enters into. So that this submission to
the power of Church Officers in the exercise of Discipline upon Offenders, is
employed in the very conditions of Christianity, and the solemn professing and
undertaking of it. 2. It were impossible any Society should be upheld, if it be
not laid by the founder of the Society as the necessary Duty of all members to
undergo the penalties which shall be inflicted by those who have the care of
governing that Society, so they be not contrary to the Laws, Nature and
Constitution of it. Else there would be no provision made for preventing
divisions and confusions which will happen upon any breach made upon the Laws
of the Society. Now this Obligation to submission to censures, does speak
something antecedentaly to the confederation, although the expression of it
lies in the confederation its self. By this I hope we have made it evident that
it is nothing else but a mistake in those otherwise Learned persons, who make
the power of censures in the Christian Church to be nothing else but a Lex
confederata Disciplinae, whereas this power has been made appear to be de^ived
from a higher Original than the mere Arbitrary consent of the several members
of the Church associating together: And how far the examples of the
Synagogues under the Law, are from reaching that of Christian Churches in
reference to this, because in these the power is conveyed by the Founder of the
Society, and not left to any arbitrary constitutions, as it was among the Jews
in their Synagogues. It cannot be denied but consent is supposed, and
confederation necessary in order to Church power; but that is rather in regard
of the exercise, then the original of it; For although I affirm the original of
thi^ power to be of Divine Institution, yet in order to the exercise of it in
reference to particular persons (who are not mentioned in the Charter of the
power its self) it is necessary that the persons on whom it is exerted, should
declare their consent and submission either by words or actions, to the Rules
and Orders of this Society.

Having now proved that the Power of the Church does not. 21.
arise from mere consent of parties, the next grand Inquiry is concerning the
extent of this power, Whether it does reach so far as to Excommunication? For
some men who will not seem wholly to deny all power in the Church over
Offenders, nor that the Church does subsist by Divine Institution, yet do
wholly deny any such power as that of Excommunication, and seem rather to say
that Church Officers may far more congr^ously to their Office inflict any other
mulct upon Offenders, then exclude them from participation of Communion with
others in the Ordinances and Sacraments of the Gospel: In order therefore to
the clearing of this, I come to the third Proposition.

That the power which Christ has given to the Officers of his Church, does
extend to the exclusion of contumacious Offenders from the privileges which
this Society enjoyes. In these terms I rather choose to fix it, then in those
crude expressions, wherein Erastus and some of his followers would state the
question, and some of their imprudent adversaries have accepted it, viz.
Whether Church Officers have power to exclude any from the Eucharist, ob
moralem impuritatem? And the reasons why I wave those terms, are;

1. I must confess my self yet unsatisfied as to any convincing 1.
Argument, whereby it can be proved that any were denied admission to the Lords
Supper, who were admitted to all other parts of Church-Society, and owned as
members in them. I cannot yet see any particular Reason drawn from the Nature
of the Lord's Supper above all other parts of Divine worship, which should
confine the censures of the Church merely to that Ordinance; and so to make the
Eucharist bear the same Office in the Body of the Church, which our new
Anatomists tell us the parenchyme of the Liver does in the natural Body, viz.
to be col^^^ sanguinis, to serve as a kind of strainer to separate the more
gross and faeculent parts of the Blood from the more pure and spirituous; so
the Lord's Supper to strain out the more impure members of the Church from the
more Holy and Spiritual. My judgment then is, that Excommunication relates
immediately to the cutting a person off from Communion with the Churches
visible Society, constituted upon the ends it is; but because Communion i^ not
visibly discerned but in Administration and Participation of Gospel Ordinances,
therefore Exclusion does chiefly refer to these: and because the Lords Supper
is one of the highest privilledges which the Church enjoyes; therefore it
stands to reason that censures should begin there. And in that sense suspension
from the Lords Supper of persons apparently unworthy, may be embraced as a
prudent, lawful, and convenient abatement of the greater penalty of
Excommunication, and so to stand on the same general grounds that the other
does; for Qui p^test majus, potest etiam minus, which will hold as well in
moral as natural power, i^ there be no prohibition to the contrary, nor
peculiar Reason as to the one more then to the other.

2. I dislike the terms ob moralem impuritatem, on this 2.
account, Because I suppose they were taken up by Erastus, and from him by
others as the Controversy was managed concerning Excommunication among the
I^wes, viz. whether it were ^meerly because of Ceremonial, or else likewise
because of moral impurity. As to which I must ingenuously acknowledge Erastus
has very much the advantage of his adversaries, clearly proving that no
persons under the Law were excluded the Temple Worship because of moral
impurity. But then withal I think he has gained little advantage to his cause
by the great and successful pains he has taken in the proving of that; My
reason is, because the Temple-Worship or the sacrifices under the Law were in
some sense propitiatory, as they were the adumbrations of that grand Sacrifice
which was to be offered up for the appeasing of Gods wrath, viz. The Blood of
Christ; therefore to have excluded any from participation of them, had been to
exclude them from the visible way of obtaining pardon of sin (which was not to
be had without shedding of Blood, as the Apostle tells us) and from testifying
their Faith toward God and Repentance ^ Heb. 9. 23.
from dead works. But now under the Gospel those Ordinances, which suppose
admission into the Church by Baptism, do thereby suppose an all-sufficient
Sacrifice offered for the expiation of sin, and consequently* ^he subsequent
privileges, do not immediately Relate to the obtaining of that, but a
grateful commemoration of the Death of Christ, and a celebration of the
infinite mercy and goodness of God in the way of Redemption found out by the
death of his Son. And therefore it stands to great reason that such Persons,
who by their profane and unworthy lives dishonor so Holy a profession, should
not be owned to be as good and sound Members of the Society, ^ounded on so
Sacred a Foundation, as the most Christian and Religious Persons. To this I
know nothing can be objected, but that, first, The Passover was commemorative
among the Jews; and Secondly, That the privileges of that people were then
very great above other people, and therefore if God had intended any such thing
as Excommunication among his people, it would have been in use then. To these I
answer.

1. I grant, the Passover was commemorative as to the occasion of its
Institution: but then it was withal Typical and annunciative of that Lamb of
God who was to take away the sins* of the world; and therefore no person who
desired expiation of sins, was to be debarred from it, but the Lord's Supper
under the Gospel has nothing in it propitiatory, but is intended as a Feast
upon a Sacrifice and a Federal Rite, as has been fully cleared by a very
learned person in his discourse about the true notion of the Lords Supper.

2. I grant the Jews had very many privileges above other Nations: Nay so far,
that the whole body of the people were looked upon as Gods chosen, and peculiar
and holy people; and from thence I justly infer, that whatever exclusion was
among the people of the Jews from their society, will far better hold as an
argument for Excommunication under the Christian Church, than if it had been a
mere debarring from their Levitical Worship. And that I should far sooner
insist upon, from the reason assigned, as the ground of Excommunication, then
the other infirm and pro^ligated Argument; and so the Exclusion out of the Camp
of Israel and the Cerith among the Jews (whatever we understand by it) may a
pari hold to be a ground of exclusion from the Christian Society: In imitation
of which, I rather suppose that exclusion out of the Synagogues was after taken
up, rather then as a mere Out lawry, when they were deprived of Civil Power.

The Question then being thus clearly stated, it amounts to. 22.
this, Whether under the Gospel, there be any power in the Officers of the
Church by virtue of Divine Institution to exclude any Offenders out of the
Christian Society, for transgressing the Laws of it? And according to our
former Propositions, I suppose it will be sufficient to prove that power to be
of Divine Institution; if I prove it to be fundamentally and intrinsecally
resident in the Society its self. For whatever does immediately result from the
Society its self, must have the same Original which the subject has, because
this has the nature of an inseparable property resulting from its
constitution. For the clearing of which, I shall lay down my thoughts of it as
clearly and methodically as I can; and that in these following Hypotheses.

1. Where there is a power of declaring any person to be no true member of the
Society he is in, there is a formal power of Excommunication: For this is all
which I intend by it, viz. an authoritative pronouncing virtute officii, any
convict Offender to have forfeited his interest in the Church as a Christian
society: and to lose all the privileges of it: So that if this power be lodged
in any Church Officer, then he has power formally to Excommunicate.

2. Where the enjoyment of the privileges of a society is not absolute and
necessary, but depends upon conditions to be performed by every member, of
which the Society is Judge, there is a power in the Rulers of that Society to
debar any person from such privileges, upon nonperformance of the conditions.
As supposing the jus Civitatis to depend upon defending the Rights of the City;
upon a failing in reference to this, in any person admitted to Citizen-ship,
the Rulers of the City have the same power to take that Right away, which they
had at first to give i^; because that Right was never absolutely given, but
upon supposition that the person did not overthrow the ends for which it was
bestowed upon him.

3. The Church is such a Society in which Communion is not absolute and
necessary, but it does depend upon the performance of some Conditions, of which
the Governors of it are the competent Judges: And that appears,

1. Because the admission into the Church, depends upon conditions to be judged
by Pastors, as in case of adult persons requiring Baptism, and the children of
Infidels being Baptized: in both which cases it is evident that conditions are
pre-requisite, of which the Pastors are Judges.

2. Because the privileges of this Society do require a separation from other
Societies in the world, and call for greater Holiness and purity of life; and
those very privileges are pledges of greater benefits which belong only to
persons qualified with suitable conditions; it would therefore be a very great
dishonor to this Society, if it lay as common and open as other Societies in
the World do, and no more qualifications required from the members of it.

3. We have instances in the sacred Records of Apostolical times, of such
scandals which have been the ground of the exclusion of the persons guilty of
them from the privileges of the Christian society. And here I suppose we may
(notwithstanding all the little evasions which have been found out*) ^ix on the
incestuous person in the Church of Corinth. As to which, I lay not the force of
the argument upon the manner of execution of the censure then, viz. by
delegation from an Apostle, or the Apostolical Rod, or delivering to Satan; for
I freely grant that these did then import an extraordinary power in the
Apostles over offenders; But I say, the ground and reason of the exercise of
that power in such an extraordinary manner at that time, does still continue,
although not in that visible extraordinary effect which it then had. And
whatever practice is founded upon grounds perpetual and common, that practice
must continue as long as the grounds of it do, and the Churches capacity
w(...)dmit; (which hypothesis is the only rational foundation on which
Episcopal Government in the Church does stand firm and unshaken, and which in
the former Discourse I am far from undermining of, as an intelligent Reader may
perceive); now I say that it is evident, that the reasons of the Apostles
censure of that person, are not fetched from the want of Christian Magistrates,
but from such things which will hold as long as any Christian Church: which are
the dishonor of the Society, 1 Corinthians. 4. 1. the spreading of such
corruptions further, if they pass uncensured, 1 Corinthians. 5. 6. and amendment of
the person, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Upon these pillars the power of censures rests it self
in the Church of God, which are the main grounds of penalties in all Societies
whatsoever, viz. the preservation of the honor of them, and preventing of
further mischief, and doing good to the offending party. And that which seems
to add a great deal o^ weight to this instance, is, that the Apostle checks the
Corinthians, that before the exercise of the Apostolical Rod, they were not of
themselves sensible of so great a dishonor to the Church as that was, and had
not used some means for the removing such a person from their Society; And ye
are puffed up, and have not rather mourned that he that has done this deed,
may be taken away from among you, 1 Corinthians. 5. 2. Therein implying, that
whether there had been such a thing in the Church, or no, as the Apostolical
Rod, it had been the duty of a Christian Society to have done their endeavor
in order to the removing such a person from their number. But further, I cannot
understand how it should be a duty in Christians to withdraw from every
brother who walks disorderly, and Church Officers not to have power to
pronounce such a person to be withdrawn from, which amounts to excommunication.
It is not to me at 2 Cor. 5. 11.
all material, whether they did immediately relate to Civil or Sacred converse
(concerning which there is so much dispute) 2 Thessalonians 3. 14.
for in which soever we place it, if Church Officers have a power to pronounce
such a person to be withdrawn from, they have a power of excommunication; so we
consider this penalty as inflicted on the person in his relation to the Society
as a Christian* and wi^hall, how nearly conjoined their civil and spiritual
eating were together, 1 Corinthians. 11. 20, 21. and how strongly the argument will
hold from Civil to Sacred, viz. a remotione unius ad remotionem alterius, not
from any fancied pollution in Sacris from the company of wicked men, but from
the dishonor reflecting on the Society from such unworthy persons par^aking of
the h^ghest privileges of it. Thus from these three Hypotheses this Corollary
follows, that where any persons in a Church do by their open and contumacious
offenses, declare to the world that they are far from being the persons they
were supposed to be in their admission into the Church, there is a power
resident in the Pastors of the Church to debar such persons from the
privileges of it; and consequently from Communion in the Lords Supper. 1.
Because this expresses the nearest union, and closest confederation, as the
(...) among the Grecians Commonwealths did. 2. Because this has been always
looked on with greatest veneration in the Church of God; and therefore it is
least of all fit those persons should be admitted to the, highest privileges
of the Church, which are unworthy of the lowest of them.

There remain only some few Objections which are levelled. 23.
against this opinion concerning the power of excommunication, which from the
Question being thus stated and proved, will be soon removed. The first is, that
this excommunication is an outward punishment, and therefore belongs not to
Church officers, but to the Magistrate. 2. Because it neither is, nor ever was
in the power of any Church officer to debar any offending member from public
worship, because any Heathens may come to it. 3. It cannot lie as to exclusion
from the Lords Supper, because Christ is offered as spiritual food, as well in
the Word Preached as in the Sacrament. To these I answer* 1. I do not well
understand what the Objectors mean by an outward punishment; for there can be
no punishment belonging to a visible Society, (such as the Church is here
considered to be) but it must be visible, i. e. outward, or a thing to be taken
notice of in the World; and in this sense I deny that all visible punishment
belongs only to the Magistrate; but if by outward, be mean^ forcible
punishment, then I grant that all coactive power belongs to the Magistrate; but
I deny that excommunication formally considered, is a forcible punishment. 1.
Because every person at his entrance into this Society, is supposed to declare
his submission to the rules of the Society; and therefore whatever he after
undergoes by way of penalty in this Society, does depend upon that consent. 2.
A person stands excommunicate legally and de jure, who is declared
authoritatively to be no member of the Society, though he may be present at the
acts of it, as a defranchised person may be at those of a Corporation. 3. A
person falling into those offenses which merit excommunication, is supposed in
so doing, voluntarily to renounce his interest in those privileges, the
enjoyment of which does depend upon abstaining from those offenses which he
wilfully falls into, especially if contumacy be joined with them, a(...)is
before excommunication; for then nothing is done forcibly toward him; for he
first relinquisheth his right, before the Church-Governor declares him excluded
the Society. So that the offender does meritoriously excommunicate himself, the
Pastor does it formally, by declaring that he has made himself no member by
his offenses and contumacy joined with them. To the second I answer, That I do
not place the formality of excommunication in exclusion from hearing the Word,
but in debarring the person from hearing tanquam pars Ecclesiae, as a member of
the Church, and so his hearing may be well joined with that of Heathens and
Infidels, and not of members of the Church. To the third I answer, That
exclusion from the Lords Supper is not on the accounts mentioned in the
Objection, but because it is one of the chiefest privileges of the Church, as
it is a visible Society.

Having thus cleared and asserted the power of Excommunication in a Christian
church, there remains only one enquiry more, which is, Whether this power does
remain formally in the Church, after its being incorporated into the Common
wealth, or else does it then escheate wholly into the Civil Power? The
resolution of which question mainly depends on another spoken to already; viz.
Whether this power was only a kind of Widows estate, which belonged to it only
during its separation from the Civil Power, or was the Church absolutely
infeoffed of it as its perpetual Right, belonging to it in all conditions
whatsoever it should be in? Now that must appear by the Tenure of it, and the
grounds on which it was conveyed, which having been proved already to be
perpetual and universal, it from thence appears that no accession to the Church
can invalidate its former title. But then as in case of marriage, the right of
disposal and well management of the estate coming by the wife, belongs to the
husband; so after the Church is married into the Commonwealth, the right of
supreme management of this power in an external way does fall into the
Magistrates hands. Which may consist in these following things. 1. A right of
prescribing Laws for the due management of Churchcensures. 2. A right of
bounding the manner of proceeding in c^^^^^res, that in a se^^led
Christian-state* matters of so great weight be not left to the arbitrary
pleasure of any Church Officers, nor such censures inflicted but upon an
evident conviction of such great offenses which tend to the dishonor of the
Christian-church, and that in order to the amendment of the offenders life. 3.
The right of adding temporal and civil sanctions to Church Censures, and so
enforcing the spiritual weapons of the Church, with the more keen and sharp
ones of the Civil State. Thus I assert the force and efficacy of all Church
censures in foro humano to flow from the Civil power, and that there is no
proper effect following any of them as to Civil Rights, but from the
Magistrates sanction. 4, To the Magistrate belongs the right of appeals in case
of unjust censures, not that the Magistrate can repeal a just censure in the
Church, as to its spiritual effect^; but he may suspend the temporal effect of
it: in which case it is the duty of Pastors to discharge their office and
acquiesce* But this power of the Magistrate in the supreme ordering of
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Causes, I have fully asserted and cleared
already. From Iren. p 1. c. 2. sect. 7.
which it follows, That as to any outward effects of the power of
excommunication, the person of the Supreme Magistrate must be exempted, both
because the force of these censures does flow from him in a Christian State,
and that there otherwise would be a progress in infinitum, to know whether the
censure of the Magistrate were just or no. I conclude then, that though the
Magistrate has the main care of ordering things in the Church, yet (the
Magistrates power in the Church being cumulative, and not privative) the Church
and her Officers retain the fundamental right of inflicting censures on
offenders* Which was the thing to be proved.

Dedit Deus his quoque Finem.
Books sold by Henry Mortlocke at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard near the
little North*door.
A Rational Account of the grounds of Protestant Religion: being a Vindication
of the Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer, by T. C. By Edward Stilling fleet.

Origines Sacrae, or, A Rational account of the grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and the matters therein
contained, by the same Author, in 4o.

Bain^ upon the Ephesians.

Trapp on the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, with the Major Prophets, being
his third Volume of Annotations on the whole Bible.

Greenhill upon Ezekiel.

Hall upon Anos.

Brooks on the Necessity, Excellency, Rarity, and Beauty of Holiness.

Knowledge and Practice: or, A plain Discourse of the Chief things necessary to
be Known, Believed, and Practiced, in order to Salvation, by Samuel Cradock.

Scheci^ah: or, A Demonstration of the Divine Presence in Places of Religious
Worship. By John Stillingfleet.

A Treatise of Divine Meditation, by John Ball, published by Mr. Simeon Ash.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics, turned out of French into English, by
Charles Cotton Esquire

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the 9 Nau^icall Verses of the 107. Psalm.
Wherein, among other things, you have A full and delightful Description of all
those many, various and multitudinous Objects, which are beheld (through the
Lords Creation, both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land), viz. All sorts and kinds of
Fish, Fowl, and Beasts, whether Wild or T^me; all sorts of Trees, and Fruits:
all sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries, by Daniel Pell.

Baxters Call, etc.


