Imprimatur,

Tho. Grigg R. in Christo P. ac Dno Dno Humfr. Episc. Land. Sacellanus.
Jan. 22. 1668.
SIX SERMONS: WITH A DISCOURSE ANNEXED, Concerning the TRUE REASON OF THE
SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST. WHEREIN Crellius his Answer to Grotius Is Considered.

By Edward Stillingfleet D. D.

Rector of S. Andrews Holborn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1669.

TO THE READER.
THE design of this Preface, is only to give thee an Account of the occasion of
publishing both parts of the following Book: The first contains in it several
Sermons, Two whereof were made public before, which the Stationer intending to
re-print, I was not unwilling upon his desire, that some others should be
joined with them. The substance of those I have added, either respects the
Vindication of the Doctrine of Christianity in general; or that part of it
which relates to the Sufferings of Christ for us. The former I look upon as our
great concernment in this Age, viz. to vindicate our Religion not only from the
Assaults of Atheists, but of another sort of men who acknowledge a God and
Providence, but have very mean thoughts of the Christian Religion: Against whom
three Sermons are especially designed, wherein I have endeavored to prove,
that the three grand Attributes of God, his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, are as
clearly discovered in the contrivance and management of the Christian Religion,
as in the Works of Creation and Providence. The latter concerning the
Sufferings of Christ is handled in a Sermon preached in this City upon a Solemn
Occasion most suitable to the subject. The matter whereof, as it relates to the
Reason of Christ's Suffering for us, having met with some opposition from a
busy promoter of the contrary Doctrine; and that debate being with some heat
of late broken forth among us (not without unworthy reflections on the present
Rulers of our Church, as giving too much Countenance and encouragement to it) I
thought my self obliged, so just an occasion being given, to vindicate the
Honor of our Church, and the Truth of the Christian Doctrine in this important
Controversy. In the management of which I have passed by the slighter Attempts
of some meaner though later Adversaries; but I have carefully considered, the
utmost strength which has been given to that Cause by the great Champion for
it, I mean Crellius in his famous Answer to Grotius. Had I intended this at
first, as a full Defense of Grotius against him, it must have appeared in
another Language, and would have taken up more time, than I can at present
allow. But as it is, I hope it may be useful at this time to those of our own
Nation, who dispute fiercely in this Controversy, without understanding it
clearly on either side.

It may be some will be dissatisfied, that I give our Adversaries no harder
names; but I never found any men convinced by ill Language; and those we have
to deal with, are too subtle not to distinguish between loud clamours, and
demonstrations. I leave that method of confuting them to those who have greater
Abilities in that way. It is enough for me to prove they are mistaken, others
may call them what they please for being so. But I think it very incongruous
for us, while we magnify the patience and meekness of Christ in his Sufferings
to discover our passion in disputing about them.

I am not ignorant that there are two persons in the Roman Church, who have
written something, wherein they would think me to be more concerned, than as
yet I can think my self. Unless I had more leisure than merely to kill Flies,
viz. to run after them to make sport with them. When a just Answer shall be
given me, (which I have been long threatened withal) I may then probably to
give weight, throw in the small grains scattered in many leaves, which may
deserve any consideration. But for those who think that these need a present
Answer, they discover the weakness of their judgments too much for me ever to
hope to do good upon them: And if I have any store of Ammunition left, as it is
hard to want it in such a Cause, I am very loath to spend it upon Wooll-sacks.

Reader, except the common civility of not charging the errors of the Press
upon the Author, I have no other favor to request of thee, but that which thou will be sure to do without asking, viz. to believe me no farther, than thou
see reason for what I say.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Six SERMONS upon
Amos 4. 11. I Have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a Firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye not
returned unto me says the Lord, page 1 Proverbs 14. 9. Fools make a mock at
sin, 49 Luke 7. 35. But wisdom is justified of all her children, 89 Romans 1.
16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile, p. 131 Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation, 167 Heb. 12. 3. For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest y^ be weary and faint in your minds, 207
PART II. A Discourse concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ.
CHAP. I. OF the Socinian way of Interpreting Scripture. Of the uncertainty it
leaves us in as to the main Articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of
Genesis 1. suitable to that way. The state of the Controversy in general
concerning the Sufferings of Christ (...) us. He did not suffer the same we
should have done. The grand mistake in making Punishments of the nature of
Debts; the difference between them at large discovered, from the different
reason and ends of them. The right of punishment in God, proved against
Crellius, not to arise from mere Dominion. The end of Punishment not bare
Compensation, as it is in debts; what punishment d^^ to an injured person by
the right, of Nature; proper punishment a result of Laws. Crellius his great
mistake about the end of Punishments, Not designed for satisfaction of Anger as
it is a desire of Revenge, Seneca and Lactantius vindicated against Crellius.
The Magistrates interest in punishment distinct from that of private persons.
Of the nature of Anger in God, and the satisfaction to be made to it. Crellius
his great Arguments against Satisfaction depend on a false Notion of Gods
anger. Of the ends of Divine Punishments, and the different nature of them in
this and the future state. page 259 CHAP. II. The particular state of the
Controversy, concerning the Sufferings of Christ. The Concessions of our
Adversaries. The debate reduced to two heads: The first concerning Christ's
Sufferings, being a punishment for sin, entered upon. In what sense Crellius
acknowledges the sins of men, to have been the impulsive cause of the death of
Christ. The sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment, from Scripture. The
importance of the phrase of bearing sins. Of the Scape-Goats bearing the sins
of the people into the Wilderness. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2. 24.
vindicated against Crellius and himself. (...) never used for the taking away a
thing by the destruction of it. Crellius his sense examined. Isa. 53. 11.
vindicated. The Argument from Mat. 8. 17. answered. Grotius constant to himself
in his notes on that place. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7. cleared. Whether Christ's death be
a proper (...), and whether that does imply, that it was a punishment of sin?
How far the punishments of Children for their Fathers faults, are exemplary
among men. The distinction of calamities and punishments, holds not here. That
Gods hatred of sin could not be seen in the sufferings of Christ, unless they
were a punishment of sin, proved against Crellius. Grotius his Arguments from
Christ being made sin and a curse for us, defended. The liberty our Adversaries
take in changing the sense of words. The particles (...), being joined to sins,
and relating to sufferings, do imply those sufferings to be a punishment for
sin. According to their way of interpreting Scripture, it had been impossible
for our Doctrine to be clearly expressed therein. p. 314 CHAP. III. The words
of Scripture being at last acknowledged by our Adversaries to make for us, the
only pretense remaining is, that our Doctrine is repugnant to reason. The
debate managed upon point of reason. The grand difficulty enquired into, and
manifested by our Adversaries concessions, not to lie in the greatness of
Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of them, or that
it is impossible that one should be punished for another faults: or in all
cases unjust: the cases wherein Crellius allows it, instanced. From whence it
is proved that he yields the main cause. The Arguments propounded, whereby he
attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for our sins. Crellius
his principles of the justice of punishments examined. Of the relation between
desert and, punishment. That a person by his own consent may be punished beyond
the desert of his own actions. An answer to Crellius his Objections. What it is
to suffer undeservedly. Crellius his mistake in the state of the question. The
instances of Scripture considered. In what sense Children are punished for
their Parents sins. Ezekiel. 18. 20. explained at large. Whether the guilty being
freed by the sufferings of an innocent person makes that punishment unjust or
no? Crellins his shifts and evasions in this matter discovered. Why among men
the offenders are not freed in criminal matters, though the sureties be
punished. The release of the party depends on the terms of the Sureties
suffering, therefore deliverance not ipso facto. No necessity of such a
translation in criminal, as is in pecuniary matters. p. 378 CHAP. IV. The Death
of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. What the expiation of
sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law; twofold, Civil and Ritual. The
Promises made to the Jews under the Law of Moses, respected them as a People,
and therefore must be temporal. The typical nature of Sacrifices asserted. A
substitution in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved from Lev. 17.
11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of (...) joined with
(...). Levitic. 10. 17. explained. The expiation of uncertain murder proves a
substitution. A substitution of Christ in our room proved, from Christ's being
said to dye for us; the importance of that phrase considered. In what sense a
Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Our Redemption by Christ
proves a Substitution. Of the true notion of Redemption: that explained and
proved against Socinus and Crellius. No necessity of paying the price to him
that detains captive, where the captivity is not by force, but by sentence of
Law. Christ's death a proper (...): and therefore the (...) attributed to it,
cannot be taken for mere deliverance. p. 419 CHAP. V. The notion of a sacrifice
belongs to the death of Christ, because of the Oblation made therein to God.
Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed. Against him it is proved, that
the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to us.
Expiatory Sacrifices did divert the wrath of God. Christ not a bare
Metaphorical High Priest. Crellius destroys the Priesthood of Christ, by
confounding it with the exercise of his Regal power. No proper Expiation of sin
belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his Doctrine be true. Ephesians. 5. 2.
proves the death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice, and an Oblation to God. The
Phrase of A sweet smelling Savor, belongs to Expiatory Sacrifices; Crellius
his gross notion of it. His mistakes about the kinds of Sacrifices.
Burnt-offerings were Expiatory Sacrifices both before and under the Law. A new
distribution of Sacrifices proposed. What influence the mactation of the
Sacrifice had on Expiation. The High Priest only to slay the Sin-offering on
the day o^ Atonement; from whence it is proved, tha^ Christ's Priesthood did not
begin from his entrance into Heaven. The mactation in Expiatory Sacrifices, no
bare preparation to a sacrifice, proved by the Jewish Laws, and the Customs of
other Nations. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven
or on Earth? Of the proper notion of Oblations under the Levitical Law. Several
things observed from thence to our purpose. All things necessary to a Legal
Oblation, concur in the death of Christ. His entrance into Heaven has no
correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ were no Sacrifice for sin. In
Sin Offerings for the People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the
Sacrifices allowed the Priests, but in those for private Persons. Christ's
exercise of Power in Heaven, in no sense an Oblation to God. Crellius, his
sense repugnant to the circumstances of the places in dispute. Objections
answered. p. 450 CHAP. VI. That the effects of proper Expiatory Sacrifices
^elong to the death of Christ, which either ^espect the sin or the person. Of
the true ^otion of expiation of sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the
importance of (...), as applied to them. Socinus his proper sense of it
examined. Crellius his Objections answered. The Jews notion of (...). The
Sacrifices not bare conditions of pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part
of obedience. Gods expiating sin, destroys not expiation by Sacrifice. The
importance of (...) and (...), relating to Sacrifices. Expiation attributed to
the Sacrifice of Christ, in the same sense that it was to other Sacrifices: and
from thence, and the places of Scripture which mention it, proved not to be
merely declarative. If it had been so, it had more properly belonged to his
Resurrection than his death. The Death of Christ not taken Metonymically for
all the Consequents of it; because of the peculiar effects of the death of
Christ in Scripture, and because Expiation is attributed to him antecedently to
his entrance into Heaven. No distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's
entrance into He^ from his sitting at the right hand of G^ The effects of an
Expiatory Sacrifice, respe^ ing the person, belong to the death of Chri^ which
are Atonement and Reconciliation. Of (...) signification of (...) and (...).
The Reconc^ liation by Christ's death, does not merely r^ spect us, but God; why
the latter less us^ in the New Testament. A twofold Reconciliation with God
mentioned in Scripture Crellius his evasion answered. The Objectio^ from Gods
being reconciled in the sending (...) Son, and the inconsistency of the
Freeness (...) Grace with the Doctrine of Satisfaction a^ swered, and the whole
concluded. p. 50^
ERRATA.
PAge 13. marg. for (...) r. (...), p. 191 l. 4. blot out: af^ to, p. 260. l.
23. for. make: p. 295. l. 21. for intemperace r. inte^ p^^ance, p. 302. marg.
r. Cod. Leg. antiq. p. 303. l. 23. r. (...), p. 311. l. 11. r. respect, p. 313.
l. 5. r. future, p. 341. l. 13. for (...) sin r. of, p. 347. l. 3. for (...) r.
(...). p. 349. l. 19. for express^ r. oppression, p. 362. l. 15. for by r.
upon, p. 374. l. 22. blot out (...) p. 375. l. 3. after expressed insert in, p.
427. l. 19. after must insert b^ p. 469. l. 13. for appeal r. appease, p. 474.
l. 22, for (...) r. (...) p. 513. marg. for placendi r. placandi.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, At St. MARGARETS
WESTMINSTER October. 10. 1666. being the Fast Day appointed for the late dreadful
Fire in the City of LONDON.

By Edward Stillingfleet, B. D. Rector of St. Andrews Holborn, and one of his
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

Published by Order of the said House.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1669.

Amos 4. 11. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord.
IT is but a very little time since you met together in this place to lament
the remainders of a raging pestilence, which the last year destroyed so many
thousand ^nhabitants of the late great and famous City: and now God has given
us another ^^d occasion for our fasting and humiliation, by suffering a
devouring fire to break forth and consume so many of her habitations. As though
the infected air had been too kind and partial, and like Saul to the
Amalekites, had only destroyed the vile and refuse, and spared the greatest of
the people; as though the grave had surfeited with the bodies of the dead, and
were loath to go o^ in the execution of Gods displeasure; h^ has employed a
more furious Element which by its merciless and devouring flame might in a more
lively manner represe^ unto us the kindling of his wrath again^ us. And that by
a Fire, which began wit^ that violence, and spread with that ho^ rour, and
raged with that fury, and co^ tinued for so long a time with that irre^ stible
force; that it might justly fill the beholders with confusion, the hearers o^
it with amazement, and all of us with a dee^ and humble sense of those sins
which have brought down the judgments of God in s^ severe a manner in the
midst of us.

For whatever arguments or reasons w^ can imagine that should compose the mind
of men to a sense of their own or other calamities, or excite them to an appre^
hension of the wrath of God as the cause o^ them, or quicken them to an earnest
sup^ plication to him for mercy, they do a^ eminently concur in the sad
occasion o^ this days solemnity. For if either compassion would move, or fear
awaken, o^ interest engage us to any of these, it i^ hard to conceive there
should be an instance of a more efficacious nature, than that is which we this
day bewail; For who n behold the ruins of so great a City, and not have his
bowels of compassion ^oved toward it? Who can have any ^ense of the anger of
God discovered in it, and not have his fear awakened by it? Who can (as we
ought all) look upon it as a judgment of universal influence on ^he whole
Nation, and not think himself concerned to implore the mercy of Heaven toward
us? For certainly, howsoever we may vainly flatter and deceive our selves,
these are no common indications of the frowns of Heaven; nor are they merely
intended as the expressions of Gods severity toward that City which has
suffered so much by them; but the strokes which fall upon the head (though they
light upon that only) are designed for the punishment of the whole body.

Were there nothing else but a bare permission of Divine Providence as to these
things, we could not reasonably think, but that God must needs be very angry
with us, when he suffers two such dreadful calamities to tread almost upon each
others heels; that no sooner had death taken away such multitudes of our
inhabitants, but a Fire follows it to consume our habitations. A Fire, so
dreadful in its appearance, in its rage and fury, and in all the dismal
consequences of it (which we cannot yet be sufficiently apprehensive of) that
on that very account we may justly lie down in our shame, and our confusion
cover Jam. 2. 1.
us: because God has covered the daughter of Sion with a cloud in his anger,
and cast down from Heaven to earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his
footstool in the day of his anger. For such was the violence and fury of the
flames, that they have not only defaced the beauty of the City, and humbled the
pride and grandeur of it; not only stained its glory, and consumed its Palaces;
but have made the Houses of God themselves a heap of ruins, and a spectacle of
desolation.

And what then can we propose to our selves as arguments of Gods severe
displeasure against us, which we have not either already felt, or have just
cause to fear are coming upon us without a speedy and sincere amendment? If a
Sword abroad and Pestilence at home, if Fire in our Houses and Death in our
Streets, if Foreign Wars and Domestic Factions, if a languishing State and a
discontented People, if the ruins of the City and poverty of the Country, may
make us sensible how sad our condition at present is, how much worse it may be
(if God in his mercy prevent it not) we shall all surely think we have reason
enough this day to lay to heart the evil of our doings which have brought all
these things upon us, and abhor our selves, repenting in dust and ashes. That
would seem indeed to bear some analogy with the present ruins of the City, and
the calamities we lie under at this time; but God will more easily dispense
with the pompous shows, and solemn garbs of our humiliation; if our hearts
bleed within for our former impieties, and our repentance discovers its
sincerity, by bringing us to that temper; that, though we have done iniquity,
we will do so no more. That is the true and proper end, which Almighty God aims
at, in all his Judgments: he takes no delight in hurling the World into
confusions, and turning Cities into ruinous heaps, and making whole Countries a
desolation: but when he sees it necessary to vindicate the honor of his
Justice to the World, he does it with that severity that may make us apprehend
his displeasure, and yet with that mercy which may encourage us to repent and
return unto the Lord. Thus we find in the instances recorded in the Text, when
some Cities were consumed by him; so that as far as concerned them, they were
made like to Sodom and Gomorrah: yet he does it with that kindness to the
Inhabitants, that they are plucked as firebrands out of the burning: and
therefore he looks upon it as a frustrating the design both of his Justice, and
of his Mercy, when he is fain to conclude with that sad reflection on their
incorrigibleness; Yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Thus ye sec
what the design and scope of the words is, which I have read unto you, wherein
we may consider,

1. The severity of the Judgment which God was pleased to execute upon them. I
have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

2. The mixture of his mercy in the midst of his severity, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning.

3. The incorrigibleness of the people notwithstanding both. Yet have ye not,
etc. In the first we have Gods Rod lifted up to strike, in the second we have
Gods Hand stretched out to save, yet neither of these would make them sensible
of their disobedience; though their Cities were overthrown for their sakes,
though they themselves escaped not for their own sakes, but for his mercies
sake only whom they had so highly provoked; yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. I am sure I may say of the two former parts of the Text, as our
Savior does in another case, This day has this Scripture been fulfilled among
you: we have seen a sad instance of Gods severity, a City almost wholly
consumed as Sodom and Gomorrah, and a great expression of his kindness, the
Inhabitants saved, as firebrands plucked out of the burning: O let it never be
said that the last part of the words is fulfilled too, Yet have ye not returned
unto me, etc. which, that it may not be, I shall first consider the severity of
God in his judgment this day, and then discover the mixture of his kindness
with it, and the result of both will be the unreasonableness of obstinate
disobedience after them.

1. The severity of the Judgment here expressed: which, though we take it not
in reference to the persons of men, but to the Cities wherein they dwelt: as it
seems to be understood not only by the Original, wherein the words relating to
persons are left out: but by the following clause, expressing their
preservation: yet we shall find the Judgment to be severe enough, in regard
1. Of the nature and kind of it. 2. The series and order of it. 3. The causes
moving to it. 4. The Author of it. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew, etc.

1. The nature and kind of it: We can imagine nothing more severe when we
consider what it is set forth by, the most unparalleld Judgment we read of,
viz. the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a fire from Heaven. Although in
all circumstances the instance might not come up to the parallel, yet in
several respects there might be so sad a desolation, that any other example but
that might fall beneath the greatness and severity of it. And we may better
understand of how sad and dreadful a nature such a Judgment must be, if we
consider it with relation to the suddenness and unexpectedness of it, to the
force and violence of it, and to all that sad train of circumstances which
attend and follow it.

1. The suddenness and unexpectedness of it; as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, i. e. when they least of all looked for such a desolation. For thus
it was in the days Luke 17. 28, 29.
of Lot (as our Savior tells us) they did eat, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom,
it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. They were all
immersed either in their pleasures or in their business, they little thought of
destruction being so near them as it proved to be; Thus it was with the Jews in
their first and latter destruction both of their City and Country, they were
as high and as confident of the contrary as might be to the very last; nothing
could persuade them that their Temple or Hv (...) de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 14.
their City should be burnt with Fire, till they saw them flaming before their
eyes. Thus Josephus observes of his Countrymen, that in the midst of all their
miseries they had no kind of sense at all of their sins, but were as proud,
presumptuous and arrogant, as if all things went well with them; and were like
to do so. They thought God could not possibly punish such a people as they were
in such a manner; they could easily have believed it of any other people but
themselves: but that God should punish his own people in Covenant with him,
that Judgment should begin at the house of God, that they who had loved to be
called by his Name, should be made examples to all other Nations; this seemed
so harsh and incredible that by no means could they entertain it. But God and
Wise men too thought otherwise of them than they did of themselves: they could
not but see an outward show of Religion joined with a deep and subtle
hypocrisy; there being among them an heap of pride and luxury, of fraud and
injustice, of sedition and faction gilded over with a fair show of greater zeal
for God and his Glory: which that impartial Historian (as one who knew them
well) has described at large: and although they could not believe that such
heavy Judgments should befall them, yet others did not only believe, but
tremble at the apprehensions of them.

Who among all the Citizens of London could have been persuaded, but the day
before the Fire brake out, nay when they saw the Flames for near a day
together, that ever in four days time, not a fourth part of the City should be
left standing? For when were they ever more secure and inapprehensive of their
danger than at this time? they had not been long returned to their Houses,
which the Plague had driven them from, and now they hoped to make some amends
for the loss of their Trade before; but they returned home with the same sins
they carried away with them; like new Moons, they had a new face and
appearance, but the same spots remained still: or it may be, increased by that
scumm they had gathered in the Countries where they had been. Like Beasts of
prey that had been chained up so long till they were hunger-bitten, when they
once got loose they ran with that violence and greediness, to their ways of
gain, as though nothing could ever satisfy them. But that which betrayed them
to so much security, was their late deliverance from so sweeping a Judgment as
the Plague had been to the City and Suburbs of it: they could by no means
think, when they had all so lately escaped the Grave, that the City it self
should be so near being buried in its own ruins; that the Fire which had
missed their blood, should seize upon their houses; that there should be no
other way to purge the infected air, but by the Flames of the whole City. Thus
when the Mariners have newly escaped a wreck at Sea, the fears of which have a
long time deprived them of their wonted rest, they think they may securely lie
down and sleep, till it may be another storm overtake and sink them. We see
then there is neither piety nor wisdom in so much security when a great danger
is over, for we know not but that very security it self may provoke God to send
a greater. And no kind of Judgments are so dreadful and amazing, as those
which come most unexpectedly upon men; for these betray the succors which
reason offers, they infatuate men's councils, weaken their courage, and deprive
them of that presence of mind which is necessary at such a time for their own
and the public interest. And there needs no more to let us know how severe
such a Judgment must be, when it comes upon men in so sudden and unexpected a
manner; but that is not all, for the severity of it lies further,

2. In the force and violence of it: and surely that was very great which
consumed four Cities to nothing in so short a time, when God did pluere
Gehennam de coelo as one expresses it, rained down hellfire upon Sodom and
Gomorrah. And this is that which some think is called the vengeance of eternal
fire, which all those in Sodom and Jude 7.
Gomorrah are said to suffer; i. e. a Fire which consumed, till there was
nothing left to be consumed by it. Not but that those wicked persons did justly
suffer the vengeance of an eternal fire in another life, but the Apostle seems
to set out and paint forth to us that in the life to come, by the force and
violence of that fire which destroyed those Cities; and it would be harsh to
say, that all who were involved in that common calamity (who yet were innocent
as to the great abominations of those places, viz. the Infants there destroyed)
must be immediately sentenced to eternal misery. But although God since that
perpetual monument of his justice in the destruction of those Cities has not
by such ^n immediate fire from Heaven consumed and razed out the very
foundations of other Cities; yet at some times there are fires which break out
and rage with a more than ordinary violence, and will not yield to those
attempts for quenching them, which at other times may be attended with great
success. Such might that great fire in Rome be in Nero's time, which whether
begun casually, or by design (which was disputed then, as it has been about
others since) did presently spread it self with greater speed over the Cirque
(as the Historian tells us) than the Wind it self, Tacit. An. 15.
and never left burning, till of fourteen Regions in Rome, but four were left
entire. Such might that be in the Emperor Titus his time, which lasted three
days and nights, and was so irresistible in its fury, that the Historian tells
us, (...). Xiphil. in Epit. Dion. in Tito. p. 227.
it was certainly more than an ordinary fire. Such might that be in the same
City in the time of Commodus, which though all the art and industry imaginable
were used for the quenching it, yet it burnt, till it had consumed besides the
Temple of Peace, the fairest Houses and Palaces of the City, which on that
account, the Historians attribute to more than natural (...). Herodian. in
Com^od. hist. l. 1. p. 22. v. Xiphil. ad fin. Commodi.
causes. Such might that be (which comes the nearest of any I have met with, to
that Fire we this day lament the effects of) I mean that at Constantinople,
which happened A. D. 465. in the beginning of September; it brake Niceph. l.
15. c. 21.
forth by the water side, and raged with that horrible fury for four days
together, that it burnt down the greatest part of the City, and was so little
capable of resistance, that as Evagrius tells us, the strongest Evagr. l. 2.
cap. 13. (...)
Houses were but (...), like so much dried stubble before it; by which means
the whole City was, as he calls it, (...), a most miserable and doleful
spectacle; so that as Baronius expresses it, Baron. Tom. 5. A. 465. 1.
that City which before was accounted the wonder of the world, was made like to
Sodom and Gomorrah. Such likewise might those two great Fires have been which
have formerly burnt down great part of the then City of London; but neither of
them come near the dreadfulness of this, considering how much bigger the
habitations of the City were now, and how much greater the riches of it then
could be imagined at those times. How great must we conceive the force of this
Fire to have been, which having at first gotten a head where there was little
means of resisting it, and much fuel to increase it; from thence it spread it
self both with and against the wind; till it had gained so considerable a
force, that it despised all the resistance could be made by the strength of the
buildings which stood in its way; and when it had once subdued the strongest
and the tallest of them, it then roared like the waves of the Sea, and made its
way through all the lesser obstacles, and might have gone on so far, till it
had laid this City level with the ruins of the other, had not he who sets the
bounds to the Ocean, and says, thus far shall thou go and no farther, put a
stop to it in those places which were as ready to have yielded up themselves to
the rage of it, as any which had been consumed before.

3. The severity of it will yet more appear from all the dreadful circumstances
which attend and follow it. Could you suppose your selves in the midst of those
Cities which were consumed by Fire from heaven, when it had seized upon their
dwellings, O what cries and lamentations, what yellings and shriekings might ye
then have heard among them! We may well think how dreadful those were, when we
do but consider how sad the circumstances were of the Fire we mourn for this
day. When it began like Sampson to break in pieces all the means of resisting
it, and carried before it not only the Gates, but the Churches and most
magnificent structures of the City, what horror and confusion may we then
imagine had seized upon the spirits of the Citizens; what distraction in their
councils, what paleness in their countenances, what pantings at their hearts,
what an universal consternation might have been then seen upon the minds of
men? But O the sighs and tears, the frights and amazements, the miscarriages,
nay the deaths of some of the weaker Sex at the terror and apprehension of it!
O the hurry and useless pains, the alarms and tumults, the mutual hindrances
of each other that were among men at the beholding the rage and fury of it!
There we might have seen Women weeping for their children, for fear of their
being trod down in the press, or lost in the crowd of people, or exposed to the
violence of the flames; Husbands more solicitous for the safety of their Wives
and Children, than their own; the Soldiers running to their Swords, when there
was more need of Buckets; the Tradesmen loading their backs with that which had
gotten possession of their hearts before. Then we might have heard some
complaining thus of themselves: O that I had been as careful of laying up
treasures in Heaven, as I have been upon Earth, I had not been under such fears
of losing them as now I am! If I had served God as faithfully as I have done
the world, he would never have left me as now that is like to do. What a fool
have I been which have spent all my precious time for the gaining of that which
may be now lost in an hours time! If these flames be so dreadful, what are
those which are reserved for them who love the world more than God! If none can
come near the heat of this Fire, who can dwell with everlasting burnings! O
what madness then will it be to sin any more wilfully against that God who is a
consuming fire, infinitely more dreadful than this can be! Farewell then all ye
deceitful vanities: now I understand thee and my self better, O bewitching
world, then to fix my happiness in thee any more. I will henceforth learn so
much wisdom to lay up my treasures there where neither moths can corrupt them,
nor Thieves steal them, nor Fire consume them. O how happy would London be, if
this were the effect of her flames on the minds of all her inhabitants! She
might then rise with a greater glory, and her inward beauty would outshine her
outward splendor, let it be as great as we can wish or imagine.

But in the mean time who can behold her present ruins, without paying some
tears as due to the sadness of the spectacle, and more to the sins which caused
them? If that City were able to speak out of its ruins, what sad complaints
would it make of all those impieties which have made her so miserable. If it
had not been (might she say) for the pride and luxury, the ease and delicacy of
some of my inhabitants, the covetousness, the fraud, the injustice of others,
the debaucheries of the profane, the open factions and secret hypocrisy of
too many pretending to greater sanctity, my beauty had not been thus turned
into ashes, nor my glory into those ruins which make my enemies rejoice, my
friends to mourn, and all stand amazed at the beholding of them. Look now upon
me, you who so lately admired the greatness of my Trade, the riches of my
Merchants, the number of my people, the convenience of my Churches, the
multitude of my Streets, and see what desolations sin has made in the earth.
Look upon me, and then tell me whether it be nothing to dally with Heaven, to
make a mock at sin, to slight the judgments of God, and abuse his mercies, and
after all the attempts of Heaven to reclaim a people from their sins, to remain
still the same that ever they were? Was there no way to expiate your guilt but
by my misery? Had the Leprosy of your sins so fretted into my Walls, that
there was no cleansing them, but by the slames which consume them? Must I mourn
in my dust and ashes for your iniquities, while you are so ready to return to
the practice of them? Have I suffered so much by reason of them, and do you
think to escape your selves? Can you then look upon my ruins with hearts as
hard and unconcerned as the stones which lie in them? If you have any kindness
for me, or for your selves, if you ever hope to see my breaches repaired, my
beauty restored, my glory advanced, look on Londons ruins and repent. Thus
would she bid her inhabitants not weep for her miseries, but for their own
sins; for if never any sorrow were like to her sorrow, it is because never any
sins were like to their sins. Not as though they were only the sins of the
City, which have brought this evil upon her; no, but as far as the judgment
reaches, so great has the compass of the sins been, which have provoked God to
make her an example of his justice. And I fear the effects of Londons calamity
will be felt all the Nation over. For, considering the present languishing
condition of this Nation, it will be no easy matter to recover the blood and
spirits which have been lost by this Fire. So that whether we consider the
sadness of those circumstances which accompanied the rage of the fire, or those
which respect the present miseries of the City, or the general influence those
will have upon the Nation, we cannot easily conceive what judgment could in so
critical a time have befallen us, which had been more severe for the kind and
Nature of it, than this has been.

2. We consider it in the series and order of it. We see by the Text, this
comes in the last place, as a reserve, when nothing else would do any good upon
them: It is extrema medicina, as St. Hierom says, the last Hieron. in loc.
attempt that God uses to reclaim a people by, and if these Causticks will not
do, it is to be feared he looks on the wounds as incurable. He had sent a
famine before, v. 6. a drought, v. 7, 8. blasting and mildew, v. 9. the
Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, v. 10. the miseries of War in the same
verse. And when none of these would work that effect upon them, which they were
designed for, ^hen he comes to this last way of punishing before a final
destruction, he overthrew some of their Cities as he had overthrown Sodom and
Gomorrah. God forbid, we should be so near a final subversion, and utter
desolation, as the ten Tribes were, when none of these things would bring them
to repentance; but yet the method God has used with us seems to bode very ill
in case we do not at last return to the Lord. For it is not only agreeable to
what is here delivered as the course God used to reclaim the Israelites, but to
what is reported by the most faithful Historian of those times of the degrees
and steps that God made before the ruins of the British Nation. For Gildas
tells us the decay of it began by Civil Wars among Gildas de Excid. Brit.
themselves, and high discontents remaining as the consequents of them, after
this an universal decay and poverty among them; after that, nay during the
continuance of it, Wars with the Picts and Scots their inveterate enemies; but
no sooner had they a little breathing space, but they return to their luxury
and other sins again; then God sends among them a consuming Pestilence, which
destroyed an incredible number of people. When all this would not do, those
whom they trusted most to, betrayed them, and rebelled against them, by whose
means, not only the Cities were burnt with Fire, but the whole Island was
turned almost into one continued flame. The issue of all which at last was,
that their Country was turned to a desolation, the ancient Inhabitants driven
out, or destroyed, and their former servants, but now their bitter enemies,
possessing their habitations. May God avert the Omen from us at this day. We
have smarted by Civil Wars, and the dreadful effects of them; we yet complain
of great discontents and poverty as great as them, we have inveterate enemies
combined abroad against us, we have very lately suffered under a Pestilence as
great almost as any we read of, and now the great City of our Nation burnt down
by a dreadful Fire. And what do all these things mean? and what will the issue
of them be? though that be locked up in the Councils of Heaven, yet we have just
cause to fear, if it be not our speedy amendment, it may be our ruin. And they
who think that incredible, let them tell me whether two years since, they did
not think it altogether as improbable, that in the compass of the two
succeeding years, above a hundred thousand persons should be destroyed by the
Plague in London and other places, and the City it self should be burnt to the
Ground? And if our fears do not, I am sure our sins may tell us, that these are
but the forerunners of greater calamities, in case there be not a timely
reformation of our selves. And although God may give us some intermissions of
punishments, yet at last he may, as the Roman Consul expressed it, pay us
intercalatae poenae usuram, that which may make amends for all his abatements,
and give us full measure according to that of our sins, pressed down, shaken
together, and running over. Which leads to the third particular.

3. The Causes moving God to so much severity in his Judgments, which are the
greatness of the sins committed against him. So this Prophet tells us, that the
true account of all Gods punishments is to be fetched from the sins of the
people, Amos 1. 3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: so it is said of Gaza, v. 6. of Tyrus, v.
9. of Edom, v. 11. of Ammon, v. 13. Moab, chapter 2. 1. Judah, v. 4. and at last
Israel, v. 6. And it is observable of every one of these, that when God
threatens to punish them for the greatness of their iniquities, and the
multitude of their transgressions, (which is generally supposed to be meant by
the three transgressions and the four) he does particularly threaten to send a
fire among them to consume the Houses and the Palaces of their Cities. So to
Damascus, chap. 1. 4. to Gaza, v. 7. to Tyrus, v. 10. to Edom, v. 12. to Ammon,
v. 14. to Moab, chapter 2. v. 2. to Judah, v. 5. I will send a fire upon Judah, and
it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem: and Israel in the words of the text.
This is a judgment then, which when it comes in its fury, gives us notice to
how great a height our sins are risen; especially when it has so many
dreadful forerunners, as it had in Israel, and has had among our selves.
When the red horse has marched furiously before it all bloody with the effects
of a Civil War, and the pale horse has followed after the other with Death
upon his back, and the Grave at his heels, and after both these, those come,
out of whose mouth issues fire, andsmoak, and brimstone, it is then time for
the inhabitants of the earth, to repent of the work of their hands. But it is
our great unhappiness, that we are apt to impute these great calamities to any
thing rather than to our sins; and thereby we hinder our selves from the true
remedy, because we will not understand the cause of our distemper. Though God
has not sent Prophets among us, to tell us for such and such sins, I will send
such and such judgments upon you, yet where ^e observe the parallel between
the sins ^d the punishments agreeable with what ^e find recorded in Scripture,
we have rea^n to say, that those sins were not only the ^tecedents, but the
causes of those punish^ents which followed after them. And ^at because the
reason of punishment was ^ot built upon any particular relation be^ween God and
the people of Israel, but upon reasons common to all mankind; yet with this
difference, that the greater the mercies were which any people enjoyed, the
sooner was the measure of their iniquities filled up, and the severer were the
judgments when they came upon them. This our Prophet gives an account of,
Chap. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth, therefore
will I punish you for your iniquities. So did God punish Tire and Damascus, as
well as Israel and Judah; but his meaning is, he would punish them sooner, he
would punish them more severely. I wish we could be brought once to consider
what influence piety and virtue has upon the good of a Nation, if we did, we
should not only live better our selves, but our Kingdom and Nation might
flourish more than otherwise we are like to see it do. Which is a truth has
been so universally received among the wise Men of (...) ages, that one of the
Roman Historian, though of no very severe life himself, y^ imputes the decay of
the Roman State, n^ to Chance or Fortune, or some unhidd^ causes (which the
Atheism of our Ag^ would presently do) but to the gene^ looseness of men's lives,
and corruption (...) their manners. And it was the grave Observation of one of
the bravest Captain ever the Roman State had, that it was i^ Scipio apud Aug.
de Civ. D. l. 1. c. 33.
possible for any State to be happy, stantib^ moenibus, ruentibus moribus,
though their wal^ were firm, if their manners were decayed. Bu^ it is our
misery, that our walls and ou^ manners are fallen together, or rather the
latter undermined the former. They are our sins which have drawn so much of our
blood, and infected our air, and added the greatest fuel to our flames.

But it is not enough in general to declaim against our sins, but we must
search out particularly those predominant vices, which by their boldness and
frequency have provoked God thus to punish us; and as we have hitherto observed
a parallel between the Judgments of Israel in this Chapter, and our own: So I
am afraid we shall find too sad a parallel between their sins and ours too.
Three sorts of sins are here spoken of in a peculiar manner, as the causes ^f
their severe punishments, Their luxury and intemperance, their covetousness and
op^ression, and their contempt of God and his Laws, and I doubt we need not
make a ^ery exact scrutiny to find out these in a ^igh degree among our
selves: and I wish ^t were as easy to reform them, as to find them out.

1. Luxury and intemperance; that we meet with in the first verse, both in the
compellation, Ye Kine of Bashan, and in their behavior, which say to their
Masters, bring, and let us drink. Ye Kine of Bashan, Loquitur ad Principes
Israel and Optimates quosque december Tribuum, says St. Hierom, he speaks to the
Princes of Israel, and the chief of all the ten Tribes; Those which are fed in
the richest pastures, such as those of Bashan were. Who are more fully
described by the Prophet in this sixth chapter. They are the men who are at
ease in Sion, v. 1. they put far away from them the evil day, v. 3. they lie
upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, v. 4.
they chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of
Music like David, v. 5. they drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with
the chief ointments, but they are not grieved s^ the affliction of Joseph. The
meaning of a^ which is, they minded nothing but ease^ softness, and pleasure,
but could not endure to hear of the calamities which were so near them. Nothing
but mirth, an^ jollity, and riot, and feasting, and the evi^ consequences of
these were to be seen o^ heard among them. Their delicate soul^ were presently
rufled and disturbed at the discourse of any thing but matters of Courtship,
address and entertainment. Any thing that was grave and serious, though never
so necessary, and of the greatest importance, was put off, as Felix put off St.
Paul to a more convenient time: especially if it threatened miseries to them,
and appeared with a countenance sadder than their own. These were the Kine of
Bashan, who were full of ease and wantonness, and never thought of the day of
slaughter, which the other were the certain forerunners of. Symmachus renders
it, (...), which others apply to the rich Citizens of Samaria, I am afraid we
may take it in either sense without a Soloecism. Bring and let us drink, which
as St. Hierom goes on, Ebrietatem significat in vino and luxuria quae statum
mentis evertunt, it implies the height of their luxury and intemperance. It is
observed by some, that our Prophet retains still the language of his education
in the bluntness of his expressions, the great men that lived wholly at their
ease, in wantonness and luxury, he styles like the heardsman of Tekoa, the Kine
of Bashan. That he thought was title good enough for such who seemed to have
souls for no other end, than the other had. And has not that delicata insania,
as St. Austin calls it, that soft and effeminate kind of madness taken
possession of too many among us, whose birth and education designed them for
more manly employments? yea, what an age of Luxury do we live in, when instead
of those noble characters of men from their virtue, and wisdom, and courage, it
is looked on among some as a mighty character of a person, that he ea^s and
drinks well: a character that becomes none so much as the Kine of Bashan in the
literal sense, for surely they did so, or else they had never been in so much
esteem among the heardsmen of Tekoa. A character which those Philosophers would
have been ashamed of, who looked upon no other end of humane life but pleasure;
but in order to that, they thought nothing more necessary than temperance and
sobriety; but whatever esteem they had then, they have lost all their
reputation among our modern Epicures, who know of no such things a^ pleasures
of the mind, and would not mu^ value whether they had any faculties of the mind
or no, unless it were for the contrivance of new Oaths and debaucheries But if
this were only among some few persons, we hope the whole Nation would not
suffer for their madness: for scarce any Age has been so happy, but it has
ha^ some Monsters in Morality as well as Nature. But I am afraid these vices
are grown too Epidemical; not only in the City, but the Countries too; what
mean else those frequent complaints (and I hope more general than the causes of
them) that the houses of great men in too many places are so near being public
schools of debauchery, rather than of piety and virtue, where men shall not
want instructers to teach them to forget both God and themselves; wherein
sobriety is so far from being accounted a matter of honor, that the rules of
the Persian civility are quite forgotten, and men are forced to unman
themselves. I know nothing would tend more to the honor of our Nation, or the
advantage of it, then if once these public excesses were severely restrained,
I do not mean so much by making new Laws, (for those generally do but exercise
peoples Wits by finding out new evasions) but by executing old ones.

2. Covetousness and oppression. You see what these great men in Samaria did
when they had any respite from their excesses and intemperance, then woe be to
the poor who come in their way; Which oppress the poor, and crush the needy: v.
1. either by the hands of violence, or by those arts and devices which either
their honesty or poverty have kept them from the knowledge of. And if there be
not so much of open violence in our days, the thanks are due to the care of
our Magistrates, and the severity of our Laws, but it is hard to say whether
ever any Age produced more studious and skillful to pervert the design of Laws,
without breaking the letter of them, than this of ours has done. Fraud and
injustice is now managed with a great deal of artifice and cunning; and he
thinks himself no body in the understanding of the world, that cannot
overreach his Brother, and not be discovered: or however in the multiplicity
and obscurity of our Laws cannot find out something in pretense at least to
justify his actions by. But if appeal be made to the Courts of Judicature,
what arts are then used either for concealing or hiring witnesses, so that if
their Purses be not equal, the adverse party may overswear him by so much as
his Purse is weightier than the others. I heartily wish it may never be said of
us, what the Orator once said of the Greeks, Quibus jusjurandum Cicer. pro
Flacco.
jocus, testimonium ludus, they made it a matter of jest and drollery to
forswear themselves, and give false testimonies. But supposing men keep within
the bounds of justice and common honesty, yet how unsatiable are the desires of
men! they are for adding house to house, and land to land, never contented with
what either their Ancestors have left them, or the bountiful hand of Heaven
has bestowed upon them. Till at last it may be in the Prophets expression for
their covetousness, the stone cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber Hab. 2. 11.
answer it; i. e. provoke God to give a severe check to the exorbitant and
boundless desires of men, as he has done by this days calamity. Thus while
the City thought with Babylon to sit as a Lady Isa. 47. 7, 8. 11.
for ever, while she dwelt carelessly, and said I am, and there is none else
besides me; evil is come upon her, and she knows not from whence it comes, and
mischief is fallen upon her, and she has not been able to put it off, and
desolation is come upon her suddenly, which she did not foresee.

3. Contempt of God and his Laws. That we read of v. 4. where the Prophet
speaks by an Irony to them, Come to Bethel and transgress, etc. he knew well
enough they were resolved to do it, let God or the Prophet say what they
pleased. For these Kine of Bashan were all for the Calves of Dan and Bethel,
and some think that is the reason of the title that is given them. These great
men of Samaria thought it beneath them to own Religion any further than it was
subservient to their civil interests. They were all of Jeroboams Religion, who
looked on it as a mere politic thing, and fit to advance his own designs by. I
am afraid there are too many at this day who are secretly of his mind, and
think it a piece of wisdom to be so: Blessed God, that men should be so wise to
deceive themselves, and go down with so much discretion to Hell! These are the
Grave and retired Atheists, who, though they secretly love not Religion, yet
their caution hinders them from talking much against it. But there is a sort of
men much more common than the other; the faculties of whose minds are so thin
and aerie, that they will not bear the consideration of any thing, much less of
Religion; these throw out their bitter scoffs, and profane jests against it. A
thing never permitted that I know of in any civilized Nation in the world;
whatsoever their Religion was, the reputation of Religion was always preserved
sacred: God himself (says Josephus) would not suffer the Jews to speak evil of
other Gods, though they were to destroy all those who tempted them to the
worship of them. And shall we suffer the most excellent and reasonable Religion
in the world, viz. the Christian, to be profaned by the unhallowed mouths of
any who will venture to be damned, to be accounted witty? If their enquiries
were deeper, their reason stronger, or their arguments more persuasive, than of
those who have made it their utmost care and business to search into these
things, they ought to be allowed a fair hearing; but for men who pretend to
none of these things, yet still to make Religion the object of their scoffs and
raillery, does not become the gravity of a Nation professing wisdom to permit
it, much less the sobriety of a people professing Christianity. In the mean
time such persons may know, that wise men may be argued out of a Religion they
own, but none but Fools and mad men will be droll'd out of it. Let them first
try whether they can laugh men out of their Estates, before they attempt to do
it out of their hopes of an Eternal happiness. And I am sure it will be no
comfort to them in another world, that they were accounted Wits for deriding
those miseries which they then feel and smart under the severity of: it will be
no mitigation of their flames that they go laughing into them; nor will they
endure them the better because they would not believe them. But while this is
so prevailing a humor among the vain men of this Age and Nation, what can we
expect but that God should by remarkable and severe judgments, seek to make
men more serious in Religion, or else make their hearts to ache, and their
joints to tremble, as he did Belshazzars, when he could find nothing else to
carouse in but the Vessels of the Temple. And when men said in the Prophet
Zephany, chap. 1. 12. that God neither Zeph 1. 13, 14, 15.
did good nor evil, presently it follows, therefore their goods shall become a
booty, and their houses a desolation: the day of the Lord is near, a day of
wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation; as it
is with us at this time. Thus we see how sad the parallel has been not only in
the judgments of Israel, but in the sins likewise which have made those
judgments so severe.

4. The severity of the Judgment appears not only from the Causes, but from
the Author of it. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. God challenges the execution of his Justice to himself, not only in
the great day, but in his judgment here in the world. Shall there be evil in a
City, and the Amos 3. 6.
Lord has not done it? When God is pleased to punish men for their sins, the
execution of his justice is as agreeable to his nature now, as it will be at
the end of the world. We all know that he may do it if he please, and he has
told us, that he does and will do it; and we know withal, that without such
remarkable severities, the world will hardly be kept in any awe of him. We do
not find that Love does so much in the World as Fear does, there being so very
few persons of tractable and ingenuous spirits. It is true of too many, what
Lactantius Lact. l. 2. c. 11.
observes of the Romans, Nunquam Dei meminerunt, nisi dum in malis sunt, they
seldom think of God, but when they are afraid of him. And there is not only
this reason as to particular persons why God should punish them, but there is a
greater as to Communities, and Bodies of men; for although God suffers wicked
men to escape punishment here, as he often does; yet he is sure not to do it in
the life to come; but Communities of men can never be punished but in this
World; and therefore the Justice of God does often discover it self in these
common calamities, to keep the World in subjection to him, and to let men see
that neither the multitude of their Associates, nor the depth of their designs,
nor the subtilty of their Councils can secure them from the omnipotent arm of
Divine Justice, when he has determined to visit their transgressions with
rods, and their iniquities with stripes. But when he does all this, yet his
loving kindness does he not utterly take from them: for in the midst of all his
Judgments he is pleased to remember mercy; of which we have a remarkable
instance in the Text, for when God was overthrowing Cities, yet he plucked the
Inhabitants as firebrands out of the burning: and so I come from the severity
of God,

2. To the mixture of his mercy in it. And ye were as a firebrand plucked out
of the burning. That notes two things, the nearness they were in to the danger,
and the unexpectedness of their deliverance out of it.

1. The nearness they were in to the danger, quasi torris, cujus jam magna pars
absumpta est, as some Paraphrase it; like a brand, the greatest part of which
is already consumed by Fire; which shows the difficulty of their escaping. So
Joshua is said to be a brand plucked out of the fire, Zech. 3. 2. And to thi^
St. Hierom upon this place, applies tha^ difficult passage, 1 Cor. 3. 15. they
shall b^ saved, but so as by Fire, noting the greatnes^ of the danger they were
in, and how hardly they should escape. And are not all the Inhabitants of this
City, and all of us in the suburbs of the other, whose houses escaped so near
the flames, as Firebrands plucked out of the burning? When the fire came on in
its rage and fury, as though it would in a short time have devoured all before
it, that not only this whole City, but so great a part of the Suburbs of the
other should escape untouched, is (all circumstances considered) a wonderful
expression of the kindness of God to us in the midst of so much severity. If he
had suffered the Fire to go on to have consumed the remainder of our Churches
and Houses, and laid this City even with the other in one continued heap of
ruins, we must have said, Just art thou O Lord, and righteous in all thy
judgments. We ought rather to have admired his patience in sparing us so long;
than complain of this rigor of his Justice in punishing us at last; but
instead of that he has given us occasion this day with the three Children in
the fiery furnace to praise him in the midst of the flames. For even the
Inhabitants of London themselves who have suffered most in this calamity, have
cause to acknowledge the mercy of God toward them, that they are escaped
themselves; though it be (as the Jews report of Joshua, the High Priest, when
thrown into the fire by the Chaldaeans) with their clothes burnt about them.
Though their habitations be consumed, and their losses otherwise may be too
great, yet that in the midst of so much danger by the flames, and the press of
people, so very few should suffer the loss of their lives, ought to be owned by
them and us as a miraculous Providence of God toward them. And therefore not
unto us, not unto us, but to his holy Name be the praise of so great a
preservation in the midst of so heavy a Judgment.

2. The unexpectedness of such a deliverance; they are not saved by their own
skill and counsel, nor by their strength and industry, but by him who by his
mighty hand did pluck them as firebrands out of the burning. Though we own the
justice of God in the calamities of this day, let us not forget his mercy in
what he has unexpectedly rescued from the fury of the flames; that the Royal
Palaces of our Gracious Sovereign, the residence of the Nobility, the Houses of
Parliament, the Courts of Judicature, the place where we are now assembled and
several others of the same nature, with other places and habitations to receive
those who were burnt out of their own, stand at this day untouched with the
fire (and long may they continue so) ought chiefly to be ascribed to the power
and goodness of that God, who not only commands the raging of the Sea, and the
madness of the People, but whom the winds and the flames obey. Although enough
in a due subordination to Divine Providence can never be attributed to the
mighty care and industry of our most Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal
Highness, who by their presence and encouragement inspired a new life and
vigor into the sinking spirits of the Citizens, whereby God was pleased so far
to succeed their endeavors, that a stop was put to the fury of the fire in
such places where it was as likely to have prevailed, as in any parts of the
City consumed by it.

O let us not then frustrate the design of so much severity mixed with so great
mercy: let it never be said, that neither Judgments nor Kindness will work
upon us: that neither our deliverance from the Pestilence which walks in
darkness, nor from the flames which shine as the noonday, will waken us from
that Lethargy and security ^e are in by our sins: but let God take that course
he pleases with us, we are the ^ame incorrigible people still that ever we
^ere. For we have cause enough for our ^ourning and lamentation this day, (if
God ^ad not sent new calamities upon us) that we were no better for those we
had undergone before. We have surfetted with mercies, and grown sick of the
kindness of Heaven to us, and when God has made us smart for our fullness and
wantonness, then we grew sullen and murmured and disputed against Providence,
and were willing to do any thing but repent of our sins, and reform our lives.
It is not many years since God blessed us with great and undeserved blessings,
which we then thought our selves very thankful for; but if we had been really
so, we should never have provoked him who bestowed those favors upon us in so
great a degree as we have done since. Was this our requital to him for
restoring our Sovereign, to rebel the more against Heaven? Was this our
thankfulness, for removing the disorders of Church and State, to bring them
into our lives? Had we no other way of trying the continuance of Gods goodness
to us, but by exercising his pa^ ence by our greater provocations? (...) though
we had resolved to let the wor^ see, there could be a more unthankful an^
disobedient people than the Jews had bee^ Thus we sinned with as much security
an^ confidence, as though we had blinded the eyes, or bribed the justice, or
commande^ the power of Heaven. When God of (...) sudden like one highly
provoked dre^ forth the sword of his destroying Angel, and by it cut off so
many thousands in the midst of us: Then we fell upon our knees, and begged the
mercy of Heaven, that our Lives might be spared, that we might have time to
amend them: but no sooner did our fears abate, but our devotion did so too, we
had soon forgotten the promises we made in the day of our distress, and I am
afraid it is at this day too true of us which is said in the Revelations of
those who had escaped the several plagues which so many had been destroyed by.
And the Rev. 9. 20.
rest of the men which were not killed by these Plagues, yet repented not of
the work of their hands. For if we had not greedily sucked in again the poison
we had only laid down while we were begging for our lives, if we had not
returned with as great fury and violence as ever to our former lusts, the
removing of one judgment had not been as it were only to make way for the
coming on of another. For the grave seemed to close up her mouth, and death by
degrees to withdraw himself, that the Fire might come upon the Stage, to act
its part too in the Tragoedy our sins have made among us: and I pray God this
may be the last Act of it. Let us not then provoke God to find out new methods
of vengeance, and make experiments upon us of what other unheard of severities
may do for our cure. But let us rather meet God now by our repentance, and
returning to him, by our serious humiliation for our former sins, and our
steadfast resolutions to return no more to the practice of them. That, that much
more dangerous infection of our souls may be cured as well as that of our
bodies, that the impure flames which burn within may be extinguished, that all
our luxuries may be retrenched, our debaucheries punished, our vanities taken
away, our careless indifferency in Religion turned into a greater seriousness
both in the profession and the practice of it. So will God make us a happy and
prosperous, when he finds us a more righteous and holy Nation. So will God
succeed all your endeavors for the honor and interest of that people whom you
represent. So may he add that other Title to the rest of those you have
deserved for your Countries good, to make you Repairers of the breaches of the
City as well as of the Nation, and Restorers of paths to dwell in: So may that
City which now sits solitary like a Widow, have her tears wiped off, and her
beauty and comeliness restored unto her. Yea, so may her present ruins, in
which she now lies buried, be only the forerunners of a more joyful
resurrection. In which, though the body may remain the same, the qualities may
be so altered, that its present desolation may be only the putting off its
former inconveniences, weakness, and deformities, that it may rise with
greater glory, strength and proportion: and to all her other qualities, may
that of incorruption be added too, at least till the general Conflagration. And
I know your great Wisdom and Justice will take care, that those who have
suffered by the ruins, may not likewise suffer by the rising of it, that the
glory of the City may not be laid upon the tears of the Orphans and Widows, but
that its foundations may be settled upon Justice and Piety. That there be no
complaining in the Streets for want of Righteousness, nor in the City for want
of Churches, nor in the Churches for want of a settled maintenance. That those
who attend upon the service of God in them may never be tempted to betray their
Consciences to gain a livelihood, nor to comply with the factious humors of
men, that they may be able to live among them. And thus when the City through
the blessing of Heaven shall be built again, may it be a Habitation of Holiness
toward God, of Loyalty toward our Gracious King and his Successors, of
Justice and Righteousness toward Men, of Sobriety, and Peace, and Unity among
all the Inhabitants, till not Cities and Countries only, but the World and Time
it self shall be no more. Which God of his infinite mercy grant through the
merits and mediation of his Son, to whom with the Father and Eternal Spirit, be
all Honor and Glory for evermore.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached before the KING, MARCH 13. 1666/7.

By Edward Stillingfleet, B. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1669.

Proverbs 14. 9. Fools make a mock at Sin.
WHEN God by his infinite Wisdom had contrived, and by a power and goodness, as
infinite as his Wisdom, had perfected the creation of the visible world, there
seemed to be nothing wanting to the glory of it, but a creature endued with
reason and understanding, which might comprehend the design of his wisdom,
enjoy the benefits of his goodness, and employ it self in the celebration of
his power. The Beings purely intellectual were too highly raised by their own
order and creation, to be the Lords of this inferior world: and those whose
natures could reach no higher than the objects of sense, were not capable of
discovering the glorious perfections of the great Creator: and therefore could
not be the fit Instruments of his praise and service. But a conjunction of both
these together was thought necessary to make up such a sort of beings, which
might at once command this lower world, and be the servants of him who made it.
Not as though this great fabric of the world were merely raised for man to
please his fancy in the contemplation of it, or to exercise his dominion over
the creatures designed for his use and service: but that by frequent
reflections on the author of his being, and the effects of his power and
goodness he might be brought to the greatest love and admiration of him. So
that the most natural part of Religion lies in the grateful acknowledgments we
owe to that excellent and supreme Being, who has showed so particular a
kindness to man in the creation and Government of the world. Which was so great
and unexpressible, that some have thought, it was not so much pride and
affectation of a greater height, as envy at the felicity and power of mankind,
which was the occasion of the fall of the Apostate Spirits. But whether or no
the state of man were occasion enough for the envy of the Spirits above; we are
sure the kindness of Heaven was so great in it, as could not but lay an
indispensable obligation on all mankind to perpetual gratitude and obedience.
For it is as easy to suppose, that affronts and injuries are the most suitable
returns for the most obliging favors, that the first duty of a Child should be
to destroy his Parents; that to be thankful for kindnesses received, were to
commit the unpardonable sin; as that man should receive his being and all the
blessings which attend it from God, and not be bound to the most universal
obedience to him.

And as the reflection on the author of his being, leads him to the
acknowledgement of his duty toward God, so the consideration of the design of
it, will more easily acquaint him with the nature of that duty which is
expected from him. Had man been designed only to act a short part here in the
world, all that had been required of him, had been only to express his
thankfulness to God for his being, and the comforts of it: the using all means
for the due preservation of himself; the doing nothing beneath the dignity of
humane nature, nothing injurious to those who were of the same nature with
himself; but since he is designed for greater and nobler ends, and his present
state, is but a state of trial, in order to future happiness and misery; the
reason of good and evil is not to be taken merely from his present, but from
the respect, which things have to that eternal state he is designed for. From
whence it follows, that the differences of good and evil are rooted in the
nature of our beings, and are the necessary consequents of our relation to God,
and each other, and our expectations of a future life. And therefore according
to these measures, the estimation of men in the world has been while they did
preserve any veneration for God or themselves. Wisdom and folly was not
measured so much by the subtilty and curiosity of men's speculations, by the
fineness of their thoughts, or the depth of their designs, as by their
endeavors to uphold the dignity of mankind; by their piety and devotion
toward God; by their sobriety and due Government of their actions; by the
equality and justice, the charity and kindness of their dealings to one
another. Wisdom was but another name for goodness, and folly for sin; then it
was a man's glory to be religious; and to be profane and vicious, was to be
base and mean: then there were no Gods worshipped because they were bad, nor
any men disgraced because they were good. Then there were no Temples erected to
the meanest passions of humane nature, nor men became Idolaters to their own
infirmities. Then to be betrayed into sin, was accounted weakness; to contrive
it, dishonor and baseness; to justify and defend it, infamy and reproach; to
make a mock at it, a mark of the highest folly and incorrigibleness. So the
Wise man in the words of the Text assures us, that they are Fools, and those of
the highest rank and degree of folly, who make a mock at sin.

It is well for us in the Age we live in, that we have the judgment of former
ages to appeal to, and of those persons in them whose reputation for wisdom is
yet unquestionable. For otherwise we might be born down by that spightful enemy
to all virtue and goodness, the impudence of such, who it is hard to say
whether they show it more in committing sin, or in defending it. Men whose
manners are so bad, that scarce any thing can be imagined worse, unless it be
the wit they use to excuse them with. Such who take the measure of man's
perfections downwards, and the nearer they approach to beasts, the more they
think themselves to act like men. No wonder then, if among such as these the
differences of good and evil be laughed at, and no sin be thought so
unpardonable, as the thinking that there is any at all. Nay the utmost they
will allow in the description of Sin, is, that it is a thing that some live by
declaiming against, and others cannot live without the practice of.

But is the Chair of Scorners at last proved the only chair of Infallibility?
Must those be the standard of mankind, who seem to have little left of humane
nature, but laughter and the shape of men? Do they think that we are all become
such fools to take scoffs for arguments, and raillery for demonstrations? He
knows nothing at all of goodness, that knows not that it is much more easy to
laugh at it, than to practice it; and it were worth the while to make a mock at
sin, if the doing so would make nothing of it. But the nature of things does
not vary with the humors of men; sin becomes not at all the less dangerous
because men have so little Wit to think it so; nor Religion the less excellent
and advantageous to the world, because the greatest enemies of that are so much
to themselves too, that they have learnt to despise it. But although that
scorns to be defended by such weapons whereby her enemies assault her, (nothing
more unbecoming the Majesty of Religion, than to make it self cheap, by making
others laugh) yet if they can but obtain so much of themselves to attend with
patience to what is serious, there may be yet a possibility of persuading them,
that no fools are so great as those who laugh themselves into misery, and none
so certainly do so, as those who make a mock at sin.

But if our authority be too mean and contemptible to be relied on, in a matter
wherein they think us so much concerned (and so I hope we are to prevent the
ruin of men's souls) we dare with confidence appeal to the general sense of
mankind in the matter of our present debate. Let them name but any one person
in all the monuments of former ages, to whom but the bare suspicion of Vice was
not a diminution to an esteem that might otherwise have been great in the
world. And if the bare suspicion would do so much among even the more rude and
barbarous Nations, what would open and professed wickedness do among the more
knowing and civil? Humane nature retains an abhorrency of sin, so far that it
is impossible for men to have the same esteem of those who are given over to
all manner of wickedness, though otherwise of great sharpness of wit, and of
such whose natural abilities may not exceed the other, but yet do govern their
actions according to the strict rules of Religion and Virtue. And the general
sense o^ mankind cannot be by any thing better known, than by an universal
consent of men, as to the ways whereby they express their value and esteem of
others. What they all agree on as the best character of a person worthy to be
loved and honored, we may well think is the most agreeable to humane nature;
and what is universally thought a disparagement to the highest accomplishments,
ought to be looked on as the disgrace and imperfection of it. Did ever any yet,
though never so wicked and profane themselves, seriously commend another person
for his rudeness and debaucheries? Was any man's lust or intemperance ever
reckoned among the Titles of his honor? Who ever yet raised Trophies to his
vices, or thought to perpetuate his memory by the glory of them? Where was it
ever known, that sobriety and temperance, justice and charity were thought the
marks of reproach and infamy? Who ever suffered in their reputation by being
thought to be really good? Nay, it is so far from it, that the most wicked
persons do inwardly esteem them whether they will or no. By which we see, that
even in this lapsed and degenerate condition of mankind, it is only goodness
which gains true honor and esteem, and nothing does so effectually blast a
growing reputation, as wickedness and vice.

But if it be thus with the generality of men, who were never yet thought to
have too much partiality toward goodness, we may much more easily find it
among those, who have had a better ground for the reputation of their wisdom,
than the mere vogue of the people. He who was pronounced by the Heathen Oracle,
to be the wisest among the Greeks, was the person who brought down Philosophy
from the obscure and uncertain speculations of Nature, and in all his
discourses recommended Virtue as the truest wisdom. And he among the Jews,
whose soul was as large as the sand on the Sea shore, whose wisdom outwent 1
King. 4. 29, 30, 31.
that of all the persons of his own or future Ages, writes a Book on purpose to
persuade men, that there is no real wisdom, but to fear God and keep his
Commandments: that sin is the greatest folly, and the meaner apprehensions men
have of it, the more they are infatuated by the temptations to it. But as there
are degrees of sinning, so there are of folly in it. Some sin with a blushing
countenance, and a trembling Conscience; they sin, but yet they are afraid to
sin, but in the act of it they condemn themselves for what they do; they sin,
but with confusion in their faces, with horror in their minds, and an
earthquake in their Consciences: though the condition of such persons be
dangerous, and their unquietness shows the greatness of their folly, yet
because these twitches of Conscience argue there are some quick touches left of
the sense of good and evil, their case is not desperate, nor their condition
incurable: But there are others who despise these as the reproach of the School
of Wickedness, because they are not yet attained to those heights of impiety
which they glory in: such who have subdued their Consciences much easier than
others do their sins; who have almost worn out all the impressions of the work
of the Law written in their hearts; who not only make a practice, but a boast
of sin, and defend it with as much greediness as they commit it: these are the
men, whose folly is manifest to all men but themselves; and surely, since these
are the men, whom Solomon in the words of the Text describes,

(1.) By their character, as Fools, and,

(2.) By the instance of their folly, in making a mock at sin; We may have not
only the liberty to use, but (1.) To prove, that Name of reproach to be due
unto them; and (2.) To show the reasonableness of ^astning it upon them,
because they make a mock at sin.

But before I come more closely to pursue that, it will be necessary to
consider another sense of these words caused by the ambiguity of the Hebrew
Verb, which sometimes signifies to deride and scorn, sometimes to plead for,
and excuse a thing with all the arts of Rhetoric (thence the word for
Rhetoric is derived from the Verb here used) according to which sense, it
notes all the plausible pretenses and subtle extenuations which wicked men use
in defense of their evil actions. For as if men intended to make some
recompense for the folly they betray in the acts of sin, by the wit they employ
in the pleading for them, there is nothing they show more industry and care in,
than in endeavoring to baffle their own Consciences, and please themselves in
their folly, till death and eternal flames awaken them. That we may not
therefore seem to beg all wicked men for Fools, till we have heard what they
have to say for themselves, we shall first examine the reasonableness of their
fairest Pleas for their evil actions, before we make good the particular
impeachment of folly against them. There are thre^ ways especially whereby
they seek t^ justify themselves; by laying the bla^ of all their evil actions,
either upon the fatal necessity of all events, the unavoidable frailty of
humane nature, or the impossibility of keeping the Laws of Heaven. But that
none of these will serve to excuse them from the just imputation of folly, is
our present business to discover.

1. The fatal necessity of all humane actions. Those who upon any other terms
are unwilling enough to own either God or Providence, yet if they can but make
these serve their turn to justify their sins by, their quarrel against them
then cease, as being much more willing that God should bear the blame of
their sins, than themselves. But yet the very fears of a Deity suggest so many
dreadful thoughts of his Majesty, Justice, and Power, that they are very well
contented to have him wholly left out; and then to suppose Man to be a mere
Engine, that is necessarily moved by such a train and series of causes, that
there is no action how bad soever that is done by him, which it was any more
possible for him not to have done, than for the fire not to burn when it
pleases. If this be true, farewell all the differences of good and evil in men's
actions; farewell all ^xpectations of future rewards and punishments; Religion
becomes but a mere name, and righteousness but an art to live by. But it is
with this, as it is with the other arguments they use against Religion; there
^s something within, which checks and controlls them in what they say: and that
inward remorse of conscience, which such men sometimes feel in their evil
actions (when conscience is forced to recoil by the foulness of them) does
effectually confute their own hypothesis; and makes them not believe those
actions to be necessary, for which they suffer so much in themselves because
they knew they did them freely. Or is it as fatal for man to believe himself
free when he is not so, as it is for him to act when his choice is determined?
but what series of causes is there that does so necessarily impose upon the
common sense of all mankind; It seems very strange, that man should have so
little sense of his own interest to be still necessitated to the worst of
actions, and yet torment himself with the thoughts that he did them freely. Or
is it only the freedom of action, and not of choice, that men have an
experience of within themselves? But surely, however men may subtly dispute
of the difference between these two, no man would ever believe himself to be
free in what he does unless he first thought himself to be so, in what he
determines? And if we suppose man to have as great a freedom of choice i^ all
his evil actions (which is the liberty we are now speaking of) as any persons
assert or contend for, we cannot suppose that he should have a greater
experience of it, than now he has. So that either it is impossible for man to
know when his choice is free; or if it may be known, the constant experience of
all evil men in the world will testify, that it is so now. Is it possible for
the most intemperate person to believe, when the most pleasing temptations to
lust or gluttony are presented to him, that no consideration whatever could
restrain his appetite, or keep him from the satisfaction of his brutish
inclinations? Will not the sudden, though groundless apprehension of poison in
the Cup, make the Drunkards heart to ache, and hand to tremble, and to let fall
the supposed fatal mixture in the midst of all his jollity and excess? How
often have persons who have designed the greatest mischief to the lives and
fortunes of others, when all opportunities have fallen out beyond their
expectation for accomplishing their ends, through some sudden thoughts which
have surprised them, almost in the very act, been diverted from their intended
purposes? Did ever any yet imagine that the charms of beauty and allurements of
lust were so irresistible, that if men knew before hand they should surely dye
in the embraces of an adulterous bed, they could not yet withstand the
temptations to it? If then some considerations, which are quite of another
nature from all the objects which are presented to him, may quite hinder the
force and efficacy of them upon the mind of man (as we see in Joseph's resisting
the importunate Caresses of his Mistress) what reason can there be to imagine
that man is a mere machine moved only as outward objects determine him? And if
the considerations of present fear and danger may divert men from the practice
of evil actions, shall not the far more weighty considerations of eternity have
at least an equal, if not a far greater power and efficacy upon men's minds, to
keep them from everlasting misery? Is an immortal soul and the eternal
happiness of it so mean a thing in our esteem and value, that we will not deny
our selves those sensual pleasures for the sake of that which we would renounce
for some present danger? Are the flames of another world such painted fires,
that they deserve only to be laughed at, and not seriously considered by us?
Fond man! art thou only free to ruin and destroy thy self? a strange fatality
indeed, when nothing but what is mean and trivial shall determine thy choice!
when matters of the highest moment are therefore less regarded, because they
are such. Have thou no other plea for thy self, but that thy sins were fatal?
thou have no reason then to believe but that thy misery shall be so too. But if
thou ownest a God and Providence, assure thy self that justice and
righteousness are not mere Titles of his Honor, but the real properties of his
nature. And he who has appointed the rewards and punishments of the great day,
will then call the sinner to account, not only for all his other sins, but for
offering to lay the imputation of them upon himself. For if the greatest
abhorrency of men's evil ways, the rigor of his Laws, the severity of his
judgments, the exactness of his justice, the greatest care used to reclaim men
from their sins, and the highest assurance, that he is not the cause of their
ruin, may be any vindication of the holiness of God now, and his justice in
the life to come; we have the greatest reason to lay the blame of all our evil
actions upon our selves, as to attribute the glory of all our good unto himself
alone.

2. The frailty of humane Nature: those who find themselves to be free enough
to do their souls mischief, and yet continue still in the doing of it, find
nothing more ready to plead for themselves, than the unhappiness of man's
composition, and the degenerate state of the world. If God had designed (they
are ready to say) that man should lead a life free from sin, why did he confine
the soul of man to a body so apt to taint and pollute it? But who art thou O
man, that thus find fault with thy Maker? Was not his kindness the greater,
in not only giving thee a soul capable of enjoying himself, but such an
habitation for it here, which by the curiosity of its contrivance, the number
and usefulness of its parts, might be a perpetual and domestic testimony of
the wisdom of its Maker? Was not such a conjunction of soul and body necessary
for the exercise of that dominion which God designed man for, over the
creatures endued only with sense and motion? And if we suppose this life to be
a state of trial in order to a better, (as in all reason we ought to do) what
can be imagined more proper to such a state, than to have the soul constantly
employed in the government of those sensual inclinations which arise from the
body* In the doing of which, the proper exercise of that virtue consists, which
is made the condition of future happiness. Had it no^ been for such a
composition, the difference could never have been seen between goo^ and bad
men; i. e. between those who maintain the Empire of reason, assisted by the
motives of Religion, over all the inferior faculties, and such who dethrone
their souls and make them slaves to every lust that will, command them. And if
men willingly subject themselves to that which they were born to rule, they
have none to blame but themselves for it. Neither is it any excuse at all, that
this, through the degeneracy of mankind, is grown the common custom of the
world; unless that be in it self so great a Tyrant, that there is no resisting
the power of it. If God had commanded us to comply with all the customs of the
world, and at the same time to be sober, righteous, and good, we must have
lived in another age than we live in, to have excused these two commands from a
palpable contradiction. But instead of this, he has forewarned us of the
danger of being led aside by the soft and easy compliances of the world; and
if we are ^ensible of our own infirmities, (as we have ^ll reason to be) he
has offered us the ^ssistance of his Grace and of that Spirit of ^is, which is
greater than the Spirit that is 1 John 4. 4
^n the World. He has promised us those weapons whereby we may withstand the
^orrent of wickedness in the world, with far greater success than the old Gauls
were Nicol. Damascen. de moribus gent. p. 9. Ed. Cragii.
wont to do the inundations of their Country, whose custom was to be drowned
with their arms in their hands. But it will be the greater folly in us to be
so, because we have not only sufficient means of resistance, but we understand
the danger before hand. If we once forsake the strict rules of Religion and
goodness, and are ready to yield our selves to whatever has got retainers
enough to set up for a custom, we may know where we begin, but we cannot where
we shall make an end. For every fresh assault makes the breach wider, at which
more enemies may come in still; so that when we find our selves under their
power, we are contented for our own ease to call them Friends. Which is the
unhappy consequence of too easy yielding at first, till at last the greatest
slavery to sin be accounted but good humor, and a gentile compliance with the
fashions of the world. So that when men are pe^ swaded, either through fear, or
too gre^ easiness to disuse that strict eye which the^ had before to their
actions; it oft-time falls out with them, as it did with the Soul dier in the
Roman History, who blinded hi^ Geta in Appiano.
eye so long in the time of the Civil Wan^ that when he would have used it
again he could not. And when custom has b^ degrees taken away the sense of sin
from their Consciences, they grow as hard as H^ rodotus Herod. Thal. v. Synes.
de laud Calvitii, p. 77.
tells us the heads of the old Egypt^ ans were by the heat of the Sun, that
nothing would ever enter them. If men will with Nebuchadnezzar herd with the
beast^ of the field, no wonder if their reason departs from them, and by
degrees they grow as savage as the company they keep. So powerful a thing is
Custom to debauc^ Mankind, and so easily do the greatest vices by degrees
obtain admission into the souls of men, under pretense of being retainers to
the common infirmities of humane nature. Which is a phrase, through the power
of self-flattery, and men's ignorance in the nature of moral actions, made to be
of so large and comprehensive a sense that the most wilful violations of the
Laws of Heaven, and such which the Scripture tells us do exclude from the
Kingdom of it, do find (rather than make) friends enough to shelter themselves
under the protection of them. But such a protection it is, which is neither
allowed in the Court of Heaven, nor will ever secure the souls of men without a
hearty and sincere repentance, from the arrest of divine justice; which when it
comes to call the world to an account of their actions will make no
defalcations at all for the power of custom, or common practice of the world.

3. The Impossibility of the Command, or rather of obedience to it. When
neither of the former pleas will effect their design, but notwithstanding the
pretended necessity of humane actions, and the more than pretended common
practice of the World, their Consciences still fly in their faces, and rebuke
them sharply for their sins, then in a a mighty rage and fury they charge God
himself with Tyranny in laying impossible Laws upon the sons of men. But if we
either consider the nature of the command, or the promises which accompany it,
or the large experience of the world to the contrary, we shall easily discover
that this pretense is altogether as unreasonable as either of the foregoing.
For what is it that God requires of men as the condition of their future
happiness which in its own nature is judged impossible? Is it for men to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this Tit. 2. 12.
world? for that was the end of Christian Religion to persuade men to do so:
but who thinks it impossible to avoid the occasions of intemperance, not to
defraud, or injure his neighbors, or to pay that reverence and sincere
devotion to God which we owe unto him? Is it to do as we would be done by? yet
that has been judged by strangers to the Christian Religion a most exact
measure of humane conversation; Is it to maintain an universal kindness and
good will to men? that indeed is the great excellency of our Religion, that it
so strictly requires it; but if this be impossible, farewell all good nature in
the world; and I suppose few will own this charge, lest theirs be suspected. Is
it to be patient under sufferings, moderate in our desires, circumspect in our
actions, contented in all conditions? yet these are things which those have
pretended to who never owned Christianity, and therefore surely they never
thought them impossible. Is it to be charitable to the poor, compassionate to
those in misery? is it to be frequent in Prayer, to love God above all things,
to forgive our enemies as we hope God will forgive us, to believe the Gospel,
and be ready to suffer for the sake of Christ? There are very few among us but
will say they do all these things already, and therefore surely they do not
think them impossible. The like answer I might give to all the other precepts
of the Gospel till we come to the denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and as
to these too, if we charge men with them, they either deny their committing
them, and then say they have kept the command; or if they confess it, they
promise amendment for the future; but in neither respect can they be said to
think the command impossible. Thus we see their own mouths will condemn them
when they charge God with laying impossible Laws on mankind. But if we enquire
further then into the judgments of those (who it may be never concerned
themselves so much about the precepts of Christian Religion, as to try whether
they had any power to observe them or not); nay, if we yield them more (than,
it may be, they are willing to enquire after, though they ought to do it) viz.
that without the assistance of divine grace, they can never do it: yet such is
the unlimited nature of divine goodness and the exceeding riches of Gods Grace,
that (knowing the weakness and degeneracy of humane Nature when he gave these
commands to men) he makes a large and free offer of assistance to all those who
are so sensible of their own infirmity as to beg it of him. And can men then
say the command is impossible when he has promised an assistance suitable to
the nature of the duty and the infirmities of men? If it be acknowledged that
some of the duties of Christianity are very difficult to us now; let us
consider by what means he has sweetened the performance of them. Will not the
proposal of so excellent a reward, make us swallow some more than ordinary
hardships that we might enjoy it? Has he not made use of the most obliging
motives to persuade us to the practice of what he requires, by the infinite
discovery of his own love, the death of his Son, and the promise of his Spirit?
And what then is wanting, but only setting our selves to the serious obedience
of them, to make his commands not only not impossible, but easy to us? But our
grand fault is, we make impossibilities our selves where we find none, and
then we complain of them: we are first resolved not to practice the commands,
and then nothing more easy than to find fault with them: we first pass
sentence, and then examine evidences; first condemn, and then enquire into the
merits of the Cause. Yet surely none of these things can be accounted
impossible, which have been done by all those who have been sincere and hearty
Christians; and God forbid we should think all guilty of hypocrisy, who have
professed the Christian Religion from the beginning of it to this day. Nay more
than so, they have not only done them, but professed to have that joy and
satisfaction of mind in the doing of them, which they would not exchange for
all the pleasures and delights of the world. These were the men, who not only
were patient, but rejoiced in sufferings; who accounted it their honor and
glory to endure any thing for the sake of so excellent a Religion; who were so
assured of a future happiness by it, that they valued Martyrdoms above Crowns
and Scepters. But God be thanked, we may hope to come to Heaven on easier terms
than these, or else many others might never come thither, besides those who
think to make this a pretense for their sin, that now when with encouragement
and honor we may practice our Religion, the commands of it are thought
impossible by them. Thus we have made good the general Charge here employed
against wicked men, in that they are called Fools, by examining the most
plausible pretenses they bring for themselves.

I now come to the particular impeachment of their folly, because they make a
mock at sin. And that I shall prove especially by two things: 1. Because this
argues the highest degree of wickedness. 2. Because it betrays the greatest
weakness of judgment and want of consideration.

1. Because it argues the highest degree of wickedness. If to sin be tolly, to
make a mock at it is little short of madness. It is such a height of impiety,
that few but those who are of very profligate conscienences can attain to,
without a long custom in sinning. For Conscience is at first modest, and starts
and boggles at the appearance of a great wickedness, till it be used to it and
grown familiar with it. It is no such easy matter for a man to get the mastery
of his conscience; a great deal of force and violence must be used to ones self
before he does it. The natural impressions of good and evil, the fears of a
Deity, and the apprehensions of a future state are such curbs and checks in a
sinners way, that he must first sin himself beyond all feeling of these, before
he can attain to the seat of the scorners. And we may justly wonder how any
should ever come thither, when they must break through all that is ingenuous
and modest, all that is virtuous and good, all that is tender and apprehensive
in humane nature, before they can arrive at it. They must first deny a God, and
despise an immortal soul, they must conquer their own reason, and cancel the
Law written in their hearts, they must hate all that is serious, and yet
soberly believe themselves to be no better than the beasts that perish, before
men can come to make a scoff at religion, and a mock at sin.

And who now could ever imagine that in a Nation professing Christianity, among
a people whose genius enclines them to civility and religion, yea among those
who have the greatest advantages of behavior and education, and who are to
give the Laws of civility to the rest of the Nation, there should any be found
who should deride religion, make sport with their own profaneness, and make so
light of nothing, as being damned? I come not here to accuse any, and least of
all those who show so much regard of religion as to be present in the places
devoted to sacred purposes; but if there be any such here, whose consciences
accuse themselves, for any degrees of so great impiety; I beseech them by all
that is dear and precious to them, by all that is sacred and serious, by the
vows of their Baptism, and their Participation of the Holy Eucharist, by all
the kindness of Heaven which they either enjoy or hope for, by the death and
sufferings of the Son of God, that they would now consider how great folly and
wickedness they betray in it, and what the dreadful consequence of it will be,
if they do not timely repent of it. If it were a doubt (as I hope it is not
among any here) whether the matters of Religion be true or no, they are surely
things which ought to be seriously thought and spoken of. It is certainly no
jesting matter to affront a God of infinite Majesty and Power, (and he judges
every wilful sinner to do so) nor can any one in his wits think it a thing not
to be regarded, whether he be eternally happy or miserable. Methinks then among
persons of civility and honor, above all others, Religion might at least be
treated with the respect and reverence due to the concernments of it; that it
be not made the sport of Entertainments, nor the common subject of Plays and
Comedies. For is there nothing to trifle with, but God and his service? Is wit
grown so schismatical and sacrilegious, that it can please it self with nothing
but holy ground? Are profaneness and wit grown such inseparable companions,
that none shall be allowed to pretend to the one, but such as dare be highly
guilty of the other? Far be it from those who have but the name of Christians,
either to do these things themselves, or to be pleased with them that do them:
especially in such times as ours of late have been, when God has used so many
ways to make us serious if any thing would ever do it. If men had only
slighted God and Religion, and made a mock at sin, when they had grown wanton
through the abundance of peace and plenty, and saw no severities of Gods
justice used upon such who did it; yet the fault had been so great, as might
have done enough to have interrupted their peace and destroyed that plenty,
which made them out of the greatness of their pride and wantonness to kick
against Heaven: but to do it in despite of all Gods judgments, to laugh in
his face when his rod is upon our backs, when neither Pestilence nor Fire can
make us more afraid of him, exceedingly aggravates the impiety, and makes it
more unpardonable. When like the old Germans we dance among naked Tacit. de
moribus German.
swords, when men shall desie and reproach Heaven in the midst of a Cities
ruins, and over the graves of those whom the arrows of the Almighty have
heaped together, what can be thought of such, but that nothing will make them
serious, but eternal misery? And are they so sure there is n^ such thing to be
feared, that they never think of it, but when by their execrabl^ oaths they
call upon God to damn them, for fear he should not do it time enough for them?
Thus while men abuse his patience, and provoke his justice, while they trample
upon his kindness, and slight his severities, while they despise his Laws and
mock at the breaches of them, what can be added more to their impiety? or what
can be expected by such who are guilty of it, but that God should quickly
discover their mighty folly by letting them see how much they have deceived
themselves, since God will not be mocked, but because of these things the wrath
of God will most certainly Gal. 6. 7.
come upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6.
Which leads to the second thing wherein this folly is seen.

2. Which is in the weakness of judgment and want of consideration, which this
betrays in men. Folly is the great unsteadiness of the mind in the thoughts of
what is good and fitting to be done. It were happy for many in the world, if
none should suffer in their reputation for want of wisdom, but such whom nature
or some violent distemper have wholly deprived of the use of their reason and
understandings: But wisdom does not lie in the rambling imaginations of men's
minds (for fools may think of the same things which wise men practice) but in a
due consideration and choice of things which are most agreeable to the end they
design, supposing the end in the first place to be worthy a wise man's choice;
for I cannot yet see why the end may not be chosen as well as the means, when
there are many stand in competition for our choice, and men first deliberate,
and then determine which is the fittest to be pursued. But when the actions of
men discover, that either they understand or regard not the most excellent end
of their beings, or do those things which directly cross and thwart their own
designs, or else pursue those which are mean and ignoble in themselves, we need
not any further evidence of their folly, than these things discover.

Now that those who make a mock at sin are guilty of all these, will appear; if
we consider whom they provoke by doing so, whom they most injure, and upon what
reasonable consideration they are moved to what they do.

1. Whom they provoke by their making a mock at sin; Supposing that there is a
Governor of the world, who has established Laws for us to be guided by, we
may easily understand, whose honor and authority is reflected on, when the
violations of his Laws are made nothing of. For surely if they had a just
esteem of his power and Sovereignty, they never durst make so bold with him, as
all those do who not only commit sin themselves, but laugh at the scrupulosity
of those who dare not. When Dionysius changed Apollos Cloak, and took off the
Golden Beard of AEsculapius, with those solemn jeers of the unsuitableness of
the one to the Son of a beardless Father; and the much greater convenience of a
cheaper garment to the other; it was a sign he stood not much in awe of the
severity of their looks, nor had any dread at all of the greatness of their
power. But although there be so infinite a disproportion between the artificial
Deities of the Heathens, and the Majesty of him who made and governs the whole
world; yet as little reverence to his power and authority is showed by all such
who dare affront him with such a mighty confidence, and bid the greatest
defiance to his Laws by scoffing at them. What is there, the Sovereigns and
Princes of the earth do more justly resent, and express the highest indignation
against, than to have their Laws despised, their persons affronted, and their
authority contemned? And can we then imagine, that a God of infinite Power and
Majesty, the honor of whose Laws is as dear to him as his own is, should sit
still unconcerned, when so many indignities are continually offered them, and
never take any notice at all of them? It is true, his patience is not to be
measured by our fretfull and peevish natures, (and it is happy for us all that
it is not) he knows the sinner can never escape his power, and therefore bears
the longer with him: but yet his lenity is always joined with his wisdom and
justice, and the time is coming when patience it self shall be no more. Is it
not then the highest madness and folly to provoke one whose power is infinitely
greater than our own is, and from the severity of whose wrath we cannot secure
our selves one minute of an hour? How know thou, O vain man, but that in the
midst of all thy mirth and jollity, while thou art boasting of thy sins, and
think thou can never fill up fast enough the measure of thy iniquities, a
sudden fit of an Apoplexy, or the breaking of an Aposteme, or any of the
innumerable instruments of death, may dispatch thee hence, and consign thee
into the hands of divine Justice? And wherewithal then will thou be able to
dispute with God? Will thou then charge his Providence with folly, and his Laws
with unreasonableness? when his greatness shall affright thee, his Majesty
astonish thee, his Power disarm thee, and his Justice proceed against thee:
when notwithstanding all thy bravado's here, thy own Conscience shall be not
only thy accuser and witness, but thy judge and executioner too: when it shall
revenge it self upon thee for all the rapes and violences thou have committed
upon it here: when horror and confusion shall be thy portion, and the
unspeakable anguish of a racked and tormented mind shall too late convince
thee of thy folly in making a mock at that which stings with an everlasting
venom. Art thou then resolved to put all these things to the adventure, and
live as securely as if the terrors of the Almighty were but the dreams of men
awake, or the fancies of weak and distempered brains? But I had rather believe
that in the heat and fury of thy lusts thou would seem to others to think so,
than thou either do or can persuade thy self to such unreasonable folly.
Is it not then far better to consult the tranquillity of thy mind here, and the
eternal happiness of it hereafter, by a serious repentance and speedy amendment
of thy life, than to expose thy self for the sake of thy sensual pleasures to
the fury of that God whose justice is infinite, and power irresistible? Shall
not the apprehension of his excellency make thee now afraid of him? Never then
make any mock at sin more, unless thou art able to contend with the Almighty,
or to dwell with everlasting burnings.

2. The folly of it is seen in considering whom the injury redounds to by men's
making themselves so pleasant with their sins. Do they think by their rude
attempts to dethrone the Majesty of Heaven, or by standing at the greatest
defiance, to make him willing to come to terms of composition with them? Do
they hope to slip beyond the bounds of his power, by falling into nothing when
they dye, or to sue out prohibitions in the Court of Heaven, to hinder the
effects of Justice there? Do they design to out-wit infinite Wisdom, or to find
such flaws in Gods government of the World, that he shall be contented to let
them go unpunished? All which imaginations are alike vain and foolish, and only
show how easily wickedness baffles the reason of mankind, and makes them rather
hope or wish for the most impossibl^ things, than believe they shall ever be
punished for their impieties. If the Apostate Spirits can by reason of their
present restraint and expectation of future punishments be as pleasant in
beholding the folli^ of men as they are malicious to suggest them, it may be
one of the greatest diversions of their misery, to see how active and witty men
are in contriving their own ruin. To see with what greediness they catch at
every bait that is offered them, and when they are swallowing the most deadly
poison, what arts they use to persuade themselves that it is a healthful
potion. No doubt, nothing can more gratify them than to see men sport
themselves into their own destruction, and go down so pleasantly to Hell: when
eternal flames become their first awakeners, and then men begin to be wise,
when it is too late to be so: when nothing but insupportable torments can
convince them that God was in earnest with them, that he would not always bear
the affronts of evil men, and that those who derided the miseries of another
life, shall have leisure enough to repent their folly, when their repentance
shall only increase their sorrow without hopes of pardon by it.

3. But if there were any present felicity, or any considerable advantage to be
gained by this mocking at sin, and undervaluing Religion, there would seem to
be some kind of pretense, though nothing of true reason for it. Yet that which
heightens this folly to the highest degree in the last place is, that there can
be no imaginable consideration thought on which might look like a plausible
temptation to it. The covetous man, when he has defrauded his neighbor, and
used all kinds of arts to compass an Estate, has the fullness of his baggs to
answer for him; and whatever they may do in another world, he is sure they will
do much in this. The voluptuous man has the strong propensities of his Nature,
the force of temptation which lies in the charms of beauty, to excuse his
unlawful pleasures by. The ambitious man, has the greatness of his mind, the
advantage of authority, the examples of those who have been great before him,
and the envy of those who condemn him, to plead for the heights he aims at. But
what is it which the person who despises Religion, and laughs at every thing
that is serious, proposes to himself as the reason of what he does? But alas!
this were to suppose him to be much more serious than he is, if he did propound
any thing to himself as the ground of his actions. But it may be a great
kindness to others, though none to himself; I cannot imagine any, unless it may
be, to make them thankful they are not arrived to that height of folly; or out
of perfect good nature, lest they should take him to be wiser than he is. The
Psalmists fool despises him as much as he does Religion: for he only says it
in his heart, there is no God; but this though he dares not think there is
none, yet shows him not near so much outward respect and reverence as the other
does. Even the Atheist himself thinks him a Fool, and the greatest of all
other, who believes a God, and yet affronts him and trifles with him. And
although the Atheists Folly be unaccountable, in resisting the clearest
evidence of reason, yet so far he is to be commended for what he says, that if
there be such a thing as Religion, men ought to be serious in it. So that of
all hands the scoffer at Religion is looked on as one forsaken of that little
reason, which might serve to uphold a slender reputation of being above the
beasts that perish: nay, therein his condition is worse than theirs, that as
they understand not Religion, they shall never be punished for despising it:
which such a person can never secure himself from, considering the power, the
justice, the severity of that God, whom he has so highly provoked. God grant,
that the apprehension of this danger may make us so serious in the profession
and practice of our Religion, that we may not by slighting that, and mocking at
sin, provoke him to laugh at our calamities, and mock when our fear comes; but
that by beholding the sincerity of our repentance, and the heartiness of our
devotion to him, he may turn his anger away from us, and rejoice over us to do
us good.

FINIS.
Luke 7. 35. But Wisdom is justified of all her Children.
OF all the Circumstances of our Blessed Saviors appearance and preaching in
the World, there is none which, to our first view and apprehension of things,
seems more strange and unaccountable, than that those persons who were then
thought of all others to be most conversant in the Law and the Prophets, should
be the most obstinate opposers of him. For since he came to fulfill all the
Prophesies which had gone before concerning him, and was himself the great
Prophet foretold by all the rest, none might in humane probability have been
judged more likely to have received and honored him, than those to whom the
judgment of those things did peculiarly belong; and who were as much concerned
in the truth of them as any else could be. Thus indeed it might have been
reasonably expected; and doubtless it had been so, if interest and prejudice
had not had a far more absolute power and dominion over them, than they had
over the rest of the people. If Miracles, and Prophesies, if Reason and
Religion; nay, if the interest of another World could have prevailed over the
interest of this among them; the Jewish Sanhedrin might have been some of the
first Converts to Christianity, the Scribes and Pharisees had been all
Proselytes to Christ, and the Temple at Jerusalem had been the first Christian
Church. But to let us see with what a jealous eye Power and Interest looks on
every thing that seems to offer at any disturbance of it, how much greater sway
partiality and prejudice has upon the minds of men than true Reason and
Religion; and how hard a matter it is to convince those who have no mind to be
convinced; we find none more furious in their opposition to the person of
Christ, none more obstinate in their infidelity as to his Doctrine, than those
who were at that time in the greatest reputation among them for their
authority, wisdom, and knowledge. These are they, whom our Savior, as often as
he meets with, either checks for their ignorance, or rebukes for their pride,
or denounces woes against for their malice and hypocrisy: These are they who
instead of believing in Christ persecute him; instead of following him seek to
destroy him: and that they might the better compass it, they reproach and
defame him, as if he had been really as bad as themselves. And although the
people might not presently believe what they said concerning him, yet that they
might at least be kept in suspense by it, they endeavor to fasten the blackest
calumnies upon him; and suit them with all imaginable arts to the tempers of
those they had to deal with.

If any appeared zealous for the present peace and prosperity of the Nation;
and for paying the duty and obedience they owed to the Roman Power, which then
governed them: to them he is represented as a factious and seditious person, as
an enemy to Caesar, as one that intended to set up a Kingdom of his own, though
to the ruin of his Country: That it was nothing but ambition and vainglory,
which made him gather Disciples, and preach to multitudes; that none could
foretell what the dangerous consequences of such new Doctrines might be, if n^
timely suppressed, and the Author of the^ severely punished. Thus to the prude^
and cautious, reason of State is pretende^ as the ground of their enmity to
Christ But to those who were impatient of the Roman yoke, and watched for any
apportunity to cast it off; they suggest the mighty improbabilities of ever
obtainin^ any deliverance by a person so mean an^ inconsiderable as our Savior
appeare^ among them: and that surely God who^ delivered their Forefathers of
old from a bondage not greater than theirs, by a mighty hand and outstretched
arm, did never intend the redemption of his people by one of obscure Parentage,
mean Education, and of no interest in the world. To the great men, they need no
more than bid them, behold the train of his followers, who being generally
poor, the more numerous they were, the more mouths they might see open, and
ready to devour the Estates of those who were above them. The Priests and
Levites they bid consider what would become of them all, if the Law of Moses
was abrogated, by which their interest was upheld; for if the Temple fell, it
was impossible for them to stand. But the grand difficulty was among the
people, who began to be possessed with so high an opinion of him by the
greatness of his Miracles, the excellency of his Doctrine, and the innocence of
his Conversation, that unless they could insinuate into their minds some
effectual prejudices against these, all their other attempts were like to be
vain and unsuccessefull. If therefore they meet with any who were surprised by
his Miracles, as well as ravished by his Doctrine; when they saw him raise the
dead, restore sight to the blind, cure the deaf and the lame, and cast out
Devils out of possessed persons, they tell them presently that these were the
common arts of Impostors, and the practice of those who go about to deceive the
people; that such things were easily done by the power of Magic, and
assistance of the evil Spirits. If any were admirers of the Pharisaical rigours
and austerities (as the people generally were) when men's Religion was measured
by the sowerness of their countenances, the length of their Prayers, and the
distance they kept from other persons; these they bid especially beware of our
Saviors Doctrine; for he condemned all zeal and devotion, all mortification
and strictness of life, under the pretense of Pharisaical hypocrisy; that he
sunk all Religion into short Prayers and dull morality; the his conversation
was not among the persons of any reputation for piety, bu^ among Publicans and
Sinners; that nothing extraordinary appeared in his Life; that his actions were
like other men's, and his company none of the best, and his behavior among them
with too great a freedom for a person who pretended to so high a degree of
holiness.

Thus we see the most perfect innocence could not escape the venom of malicious
tongues; but the less it entered, the more they were enraged, and made up what
wanted in the truth of their calumnies, by their diligence in spreading them.
As though their mouths indeed had been open Sepulchers by the noysom vapors
which came out of them; and we may well think no less a poison than that of
Asps could be under their lips, which so secretly and yet so mischievously
conveyed it self into the hearts of the people. The only advantage which malice
has against the greatest Virtue, is, that the greater it is, the less it takes
notice of all the petty arts which are used against it; and will not bring its
own innocence so much into suspicion as to make any long Apologies for it self.
For, to a noble and generous spirit, assaulted rather by noise and clamor,
than any solid reason or force of argument, neglect and disdain are the most
proper weapons of defense: for where malice is only impertinent and troublesome,
a punctual answer seems next to a confession. But although innocence needs no
defense as to it self, yet it is necessary for all the advantages it has of
doing good to mankind, that it appear to be what it really is; which cannot be
done, unless its reputation be cleared from the malicious aspersions which are
cast upon it. And from hence it was that our blessed Savior, though he thought
it not worth the while to use the same diligence in the vindication of himself,
which his enemies did in the defamation of him; yet when he saw it necessary in
order to the reception of his Doctrine among the more ingenuous and tractable
part of his auditors, he sometimes by the quickness of his replies, sometimes
by the suddenness and sharpness of his questions, and sometimes by the plain
force of argument and reason, baffles his adversaries, so that though they were
resolved not to be convinced, they thought it best for the time to be quiet.
This was to let them see how easy it was for him to throw off their reproaches
as fast as their malice could invent them; and that it was as impossible for
them by such weak attempts to obscure the reputation of his innocence, as for
the spots which Astronomers discern near the body of the Sun, ever to eclipse
the light of it. So that all those thinner mists which envy and detraction
raised at his first appearance, and those grosser vapors which arose from their
open enmity when he came to a greater height, did but add a brighter luster to
his glory, when it was seen that notwithstanding all the machinations of his
enemies, his innocence brake forth like the light, which shines more and more
to the perfect day.

But it pleases God, for the trial of men's minds so to order the matters of
our Religion, that as they are never so clear, but men of obstinate and
perverse spirits will find something to cavil at; so they were never so dark
and obscure in the most difficult circumstances of them, but men of
unprejudiced and ingenuous minds might find enough to satisfy themselves about
them. Which is the main scope of our Savior in the words of the Text, (and
shall be of our present discourse upon them) but Wisdom is justified of all her
Children. Where without any further Explication, by Wisdom we understand the
method which God uses in order to the salvation of mankind; by the Children
of Wisdom, all those who were willing to attain the end by the means which God
affords, and by justifying, not only the bare approving it, but the declaring
of that approbation to the World by a just vindication of it from the cavils
and exceptions of men. Although the words are capable of various senses; yet
this is the most natural, and agreeable to the scope of what goes before. For
there our Savior speaks of the different ways wherein John Baptist and
himself appeared among the Jews, in order to the same end, v. 32. For John
Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and ye say, he has a
Devil. A very severe Devil surely, and one of the strictest orders among them,
that was so far from being cast out by fasting and prayer, that these were his
continual employment! But what could we have sooner thought than that those
persons who made the Devil the author of so much mortification and severity of
life, should presently have entertained Religion in a more free and pleasing
humor; but this would not take neither, for the Son of Man comes eating and
drinking; i. (...) was remarkable for none of those rigou^ and austerities
which they condemned i^ John, and applauded in the Pharisees; and then
presently they censure him, as a gluttonous man, and a Wine-bibber, a friend
(...) Publicans and sinners, v. 34. i. e. the utmos^ excess that any course of
life was capabl^ of they presently apply to those who had no other design in
all their actions, than to recommend true piety and goodness to them. So
impossible it was by any means which the wisdom of Heaven thought fit to use,
to persuade them into any good opinion of the persons who brought the glad
tidings of salvation to them: and therefore our Savior, when he sees how
refractory and perverse they were, in interpreting every thing to the worse,
and censuring the ways which infinite Wisdom thought fittest to reclaim them
by, he tells them that it was nothing but malice and obstinacy which was the
cause of it; but if they were men of teachable spirits (who by an usual
Hebraisme are called the Children of Wisdom) they would see reason enough to
admire, approve and justify all the methods of divine Providence for the good
of Mankind. For Wisdom is justified of all her Children.

That which I mainly design to speak to from hence is, That although the wisest
Contrivances of Heaven for the good of Mankind are liable to the unjust cavils
and exceptions of unreasonable men, yet there is enough to satisfy any
teachable and ingenuous Minds concerning the wisdom of them. Before I come more
particularly to examine those which concern our present subject, viz. the life
and appearance of our Lord and Savior, it will take very much off from the
force of them, if we consider, that thus it has always been, and supposing
humane nature to be as it is, it is scarce conceivable that it should be
otherwise. Not that it is necessary or reasonable it should be so at all, any
more than it is necessary that men should act foolishly or inconsiderately; but
as long as we must never expect to see all men either wise or pious, either to
have a true judgment of things, or a love of Religion; so long we shall
always find there will be some, who will be quarrelling with Religion when
they have no mind to practice it. I speak not now of those who make a mere
jest and scoff at Religion (of which our Age has so many Instances) but of a
sort of men who are of a degree above the other, though far enough short of
any true and solid wisdom; who yet are the more to be considered, because they
seem to make a slender offer at reason in what they say. Some pretend they are
not only unsatisfied with the particular ways of instituted Religion, any
further than they are subservient to their present interest (which is the only
God they worship) but to make all sure, the foundations even of Natural
Religion it self cannot escape their cavils and exceptions. They have found out
an Index Expurgatorius for those impressions of a Deity which are in the hearts
of men; and use their utmost arts to obscure, since they cannot extinguish
those lively characters of the power, wisdom and goodness of God, which are
every where to be seen in the large volume of the Creation. Religion is no more
to them but an unaccountable fear; and the very notion of a spiritual substance
(even of that without which we could never know what a contradiction meant) is
said to imply one. But if for quietness sake, and it may be to content their
own minds as well as the World, they are willing to admit of a Deity, (which is
a mighty concession from those who have so much cause to be afraid of him) then
to ease their minds of such troublesome companions as their fears are, they seek
by all means to dispossess him of his Government of the World, by denying his
Providence, and care of humane affairs. They are contented he should be called
an excellent Being, that should do nothing, and therefore signify nothing in
the World; or rather, then he might be styled an Almighty Sardanapalus, that is
so fond of ease and pleasure, that the least thought of business would quite
spoil his happiness. Or if the activity of their own spirits may make them
think that such an excellent Being may sometimes draw the Curtains and look
abroad into the World, then every advantage which another has got above them,
and every cross accident which befalls themselves (which by the power of
self-flattery most men have learnt to call the Prosperity of the wicked, and
the sufferings of good men) serve them for mighty charges against the justice
of divine Providence. Thus either God shall not govern the World at all, or if
he do, it must be upon such terms as they please and approve of, or else they
will erect an High Court of Justice upon him, and condemn the Sovereign of the
World, because he could not please his discontented subjects. And as if he were
indeed arraigned at such a bar, every weak, and peevish exception shall be
cried up for evidence; when the fullest and clearest vindications of him shall
be scorned and contemned. But this does not in the least argue the
obnoxiousness of him who is so accused, but the great injustice of those who
dare pass sentence; where it is neither in their power to understand the reason
of his actions, nor if it were, to call him in question for his proceedings
with men. But so great is the pride and arrogance of humane Nature, that it
loves to be condemning what it cannot comprehend; and there needs be no greater
reason given concerning the many disputes in the world about Divine Providence,
than that God is wise, and we are not, but would fain seem to be so. While men
are in the dark they will be always quarrelling; and those who contend the
most, do it that they might seem to others to see, when they know themselves
they do not. Nay, there is nothing so plain and evident, but the reason of some
men is more apt to be imposed upon in it, than their senses are; as it appeared
in him who could not otherwise confute the Philosophers argument against
motion, but by moving before him. So that we see the most certain things in the
world are liable to the cavils of men who employ their wits to do it; and
certainly those ought not to stagger men's faith in matters of the highest
nature and consequence, which would not at all move them in other things.

But at last it is acknowledged by the men who love to be called the men of wit
in this Age of ours, that there is a God and Providence, a future state, and
the differences of good and evil, but the Christian Religion they will see no
further reason to embrace than as it is the Religion of the State they live in.
But if we demand what mighty reasons they are able to bring forth against a
Religion so holy and innocent in its design, so agreeable to the Nature of God
and Man, so well contrived for the advantages of this and another life, so
fully attested to come from God by the Miracles wrought in confirmation of it,
by the death of the Son of God, and of such multitudes of Martyrs, so certainly
conveyed to us, by the unquestionable Tradition of all Ages since the first
delivery of it; the utmost they can pretend against it is, that it is built
upon such an appearance of the Son of God which was too mean and contemptible,
that the Doctrine of it is incosistent with the Civil Interests of men, and the
design ineffectual for the Reformation of the World. For the removal therefore
of these cavils against our Religion, I shall show,

1. That there were no circumstances in our Saviors appearance or course of
life, which were unbecoming the Son of God, and the design he came upon.

2. That the Doctrine delivered by him is so far from being contrary to the
Civil Interests of the World, that it tends highly to the preservation of them.

3. That the design he came upon was very agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom of
God, and most effectual for the reformation of Mankind.

For clearing the first of these, I shall consider, (1.) The Manner of our
Saviors appearance. (2.) The Course of his Life; and what it was which his
enemies did most object against him.

1. The Manner of our Saviors Appearance; which has been always the great
offense to the admirers of the pomp and greatness of the World. For when they
heard of the Son of God coming down from Heaven, and making his Progress into
this lower world, they could imagine nothing less, than that an innumerable
company of Angels must have been dispatched before, to have prepared a place
for his reception; that all the Sovereigns and Princes of the World must have
been summoned to give their attendance and pay their homage to him: that their
Scepters must have been immediately laid at his feet, and all the Kingdoms of
the earth been united into one universal Monarchy under the Empire of the Son
of God: That the Heavens should how down at his presence to show their
obeisance to him, the Earth tremble and shake for fear at the near approaches
of his Majesty; that all the Clouds should clap together into one universal
Thunder, to welcome his appearance, and tell the Inhabitants of the World what
cause they had to fear him whom the Powers of the Heavens obey: that the Sea
should run out of its wonted course with amazement and horror; and if it were
possible, hide it self in the hollow places of the earth: that the Mountains
should shrink in their heads, to fill up the vast places of the deep; so that
all that should be fulfilled in a literal sense, which was foretold of the
comeing of the Messiah, That every Valley should Luke 3. 5, 6.
be filled, and every Mountain and Hill brought low; the crooked made straight,
and the rough ways smooth, and all flesh see the salvation of God. Yea, that
the Sun for a time should be darkened, and the Moon withdraw her light, to let
the Nations of the Earth understand that a Glory infinitely greater than theirs
did now appear to the World. In a word, they could not imagine the Son of God
could be born without the pangs and throws of the whole Creation; that it was
as impossible for him to appear, as for the Sun in the Firmament to disappear,
without the notice of the whole World. But when instead of all this pomp and
grandeur he comes incognito into the World, instead of giving notice of his
appearance to the Potentates of the Earth, he is only discovered to a few silly
Shepherds and three wise men of the East; instead of choosing either Rome or
Jerusalem for the place of his Nativity, he is born at Bethleem a mean and
obscure Village: instead of the glorious and magnificent Palaces of the East or
West, which were at that time so famous; he is brought forth in a Stable, where
the Manger was his Cradle, and his Mother the only attendant about him: who was
her self none of the great persons of the Court, nor of any fame in the
Country; but was only rich in her Genealogy, and honorable in her Pedigree.
And according to the obscurity of his Birth was his Education too: his youth
was not spent in the Imperial Court at Rome, nor in the Schools of Philosophers
at Athens, nor at the feet of the great Rabbis at Jerusalem: but at Nazareth,
a place of mean esteem among the Jews, where he was remarkable for nothing so
much as the Virtues proper to his Age, Modesty, Humility and Obedience. All
which he exercises to so high a degree, that his greatest Kindred and
acquaintance were mightily surprised when at 30 years of age, he began to
discover himself by the Miracles which he wrought, and the Authority which he
spoke with. And although the rays of his Divinity began to break forth through
the Clouds he had hitherto disguised himself in, yet he persisted still in the
same course of humility and self-denial; taking care of others to the neglect
of himself; feeding others by a Miracle, and fasting himself, to one: showing
his power in working miraculous Cures, and his humility in concealing them:
Conversing with the meanest of the people, and choosing such for his Apostles,
who brought nothing to recommend them but innocence and simplicity. Who by
their heats and ignorance were continual exercises of his Patience in bearing
with them, and of his care and tenderness in instructing them. And after a life
thus led with such unparalled humility, when he could add nothing more to it
by his actions, he does it by his sufferings; and compleats the sad Tragedy of
his Life by a most shameful and ignominious Death. This is the short and true
account of all those things which the admirers of the greatness of this world
think mean and contemptible in our Saviors appearance here on earth. But we
are now to consider whether so great humility were not more agreeable with the
design of his coming into the World, than all that pomp and state would have
been which the Son of God might have more easily commanded than we can imagine.
He came not upon so mean an errand, as to dazzle the eyes of Mankind with the
brightness of his Glory, to amaze them by the terribleness of his Majesty, much
less to make a show of the riches and gallantry of the World to them: But he
came upon far more noble and excellent designs, to bring life and immortality
to light, to give men the highest assurance of an eternal happiness and misery
in the World to come, and the most certain directions for obtaining the one,
and avoiding the other: and in order to that, nothing was judged more necessary
by him, than to bring the vanities of this World out of that credit and
reputation they had gained among foolish men. Which he could never have done,
if he had declaimed never so much against the vanity of worldly greatness,
riches and honors, if in the mean time himself had lived in the greatest
splendor and bravery. For the enjoining then the contempt of this world to his
Disciples in hopes of a better, would have looked like the commendation of the
excellency of fasting at a full meal, and of the conveniences of Poverty by
one who makes the greatest haste to be rich. That he might not therefore seem
to offer so great a contradiction to his Doctrine by his own example; he makes
choice of a life so remote from all suspicion of designs upon this world, that
though the foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, yet the Son of
Man, who was the Lord and Heir of all things, had not whereon to lay his head.
And as he showed by his life how little he valued the great things of the
World, so he discovered by his death how little he feared the evil things of
it: all which he did with a purpose and i^tention to rectify the great
mistakes (...) men as to these things: That they mig^ no longer venture an
eternal happiness f^ the splendid and glorious vanities of t^ present life; nor
expose themselves to t^ utmost miseries of another world, to avo^ the frowns of
this. From hence procee^ed that generous contempt of the Worl^ which not only
our Savior himself, b^ all his true Disciples of the first Ages (...)
Christianity were so remarkable for; (...) let others see they had greater
things i^ their eye than any here, the hopes of whi^^ they would not part with
for all that the world thinks great or desirable. So the considering the great
danger most men ar^ in, by too passionate a love of these things and that
universal and infinite kindne^ which our Savior had to the Souls (...) men;
there was nothing he could discover it more in as to his appearance in the
world, than by putting such an affro^ upon the greatness and honor of it, as
he did by so open a neglect of it in his life, and despising it in his death
and sufferings. And who now upon any pretense of reason dare entertain the
meaner apprehensious of our Blessed Savior, because he appeared without the
pomp and greatness of the world, when the reason of his doing so was, that by
his own humility and self-denial he might show us the way to an eternal
happiness? Which he well knew how very hard it would be for men to attain to,
who measure things not according to their inward worth and excellency, but the
splendor and appearance which they make to the world: who think nothing great
but what makes them gazed upon; nothing desirable but what makes them
flattered. But if they could be once persuaded how incomparably valuable the
glories of the life to come are above all the gayeties and shows of this; they
would think no condition mean or contemptible, which led to so great an end;
none happy or honorable which must so soon end in the grave, or be changed to
eternal misery. And that we might entertain such thoughts as these are, not as
the melancholy effects of discontent and disappointments, but as the serious
result of our most deliberate enquiry into the value of things, was the design
of our Savior in the humility of his appearance, and of that excellent
Doctrine which he recommended to the World by it. Were I to argue the case with
Philosophers, I might then at large show from the free acknowledgements of the
best and most experienced of them, that nothing becomes so much one who designs
to recommend Virtue to the World, as a real and hearty contempt of all the
pomp of it, and that the meanest condition proceeding from such a principle is
truly and in it self more honorable, than living in the greatest splendor
imaginable. Were I to deal with the Jews, I might then prove, that as the
Prophecyes concerning the Messia^ speak of great and wonderful effects of his
coming, so that they should be accomplished in a way of suffering and humility.
But since I speak to Christians, and therefore to those who are persuaded of
the great kindness and love of our Savior in coming into the World, to reform
it, and that by convincing men of the truth and excellency of a future state,
no more need be said to vindicate the appearance of him from that meanness and
contempt, which the pride and ambition of vain men is apt to cast upon it.

2. But not only our Saviors manner of Appearance, but the manner of his
Conversation gave great offense to his enemies, viz. That it was too free and
familiar among persons who had the meanest reputation, the Publicans and
Sinners; and in the mean time declaimed against the strictest observers of the
greatest rigours and austerities of life. And this no doubt was one great cause
of the mortal hatred of the Pharisees against him, though least pretended, that
even thereby they might make good that charge of hypocrisy which our Savior
so often draws up against them. And no wonder, if such severe rebukes did
highly provoke them, since they found this so gainful and withal so easy a
trade among the people, when with a demure look and a sour countenance they
could cheat and defraud their Brethren; and under a specious show of devotion
could break their fasts by devouring Widows houses, and end their long Prayers
to God with acts of the highest injustice to their Neighbors. As though all
that while, they had been only begging leave of God to do all the mischief they
could to their Brethren. It is true, such as these were, our Savior upon all
occasions speaks against with the greatest sharpness, as being the most
dangerous enemies to true Religion: and that which made men whose passion was
too strong for their reason abhor the very name of Religion, when such
baseness was practiced under the profession of it. When they saw men offer to
compound with Heaven for all their injustice and oppression, with not a
twentieth part of what God challenged as his due; they either thought Religion
to be a mere device of men, or that these men's hypocrisy ought to be
discovered to the World. And therefore our Blessed Savior, who came with a
design to retrieve a true spirit of Religion among men, finds it first of all
necessary to unmask those notorious hypocrites, that their deformities being
discovered, their ways as well as their persons might be the better understood
and avoided. And when he saw by the mighty opinion they had of themselves, and
their uncharitableness toward all others, how little good was to be done upon
them, he seldom vouchsafes them his presence; but rather converses with those
who being more openly wicked were more easily convinced of their wickedness,
and persuaded to reform. For which end alone it was that he so freely conversed
with them, to let them see there were none so bad, but his kindness was so
great to them, that he was willing to do them all the good he could: And
therefore this could be no more just a reproach to Christ, that he kept company
sometimes with these, than it is to a Chyrurgeon to visit Hospitals, or to a
Physician to converse with the sick.

2. But when they saw that his Greatness did appear in another way, by the
authority of his Doctrine, and the power of his Miracles, then these wise and
subtle men apprehend a further reach and design in all his actions: Viz. That
his low condition was a piece of Popularity, and a mere disguise to ensnare the
people, the better to make them in love with his Doctrine, and so by degrees to
season them with Principles of Rebellion and disobedience: Hence came all the
clamors of his being an Enemy to Caesar, and calling himself, the King of the
Jews, and of his design to erect a Kingdom of his own, all which they
interpret in the most malicious though most unreasonable sense. For nothing is
so politic as malice and ill will is; for that finds designs in every thing;
and the more contrary they are to all the Protestations of the persons
concerned, the deeper that suggests presently they are laid, and that there is
the more cause to be afraid of them. Thus it was in our Blessed Saviors case;
it was not the greatest care used by him to show his obedience to the Authority
he lived under, it was not his most solemn disavowing having any thing to do
with their civil Interests, not the severe checks he gave his own Disciples for
any ambitious thoughts among them, not the recommending the doctrine of
Obedience to them, nor the rebuke he gave one of his most forward Disciples for
offering to draw his sword in the rescue of himself, could abate the fury and
rage of his enemies, but at last they condemn the greatest Teacher of the duty
of Obedience as a Traitor, and the most unparalled example of innocence as a
Malefactor. But though there could be nothing objected against the life and
actions of our Blessed Savior, as tending to sedition and disturbance of the
Civil Peace, yet that, these men (who were inspired by malice, and prophesied
according to their own interest) would say, was because he was taken away in
time, before his designs could be ripe for action, but if his doctrine tended
that way, it was enough to justify their proceedings against him. So then, it
was not what he did, but what he might have done: not Treason but Convenience
which made them take away the life of the most innocent person: but if there
had been any taint in his doctrine that way, there had been reason enough in
such an Age of faction and sedition to have used the utmost care to prevent the
spreading it. But so far is this from the least ground of probability that it
is not possible to imagine a Religion which aims less at the present particular
interests of the embracers of it, and more at the public interests of Princes
than Christianity does, as it was both preached and practiced by our Savior
and his Apostles.

And here we have cause to lament the unhappy fate of Religion when it falls
under the censure of such who think themselves the Masters of all the little
arts whereby this world is governed. If it teaches the duty of Subjects, and
the authority of Princes, if it requires obedience to Laws, and makes men's
happiness or misery in another life in any measure to depend upon it; then
Religion is suspected to be a mere trick of State, and an invention to keep the
world in awe, whereby men might the better be molded into Societies, and
preserved in them. But if it appear to enforce any thing indispensably on the
Consciences of men, though humane Laws require the contrary; if they must not
forswear their Religion, and deny him whom they hope to be saved by, when the
Magistrate calls them to it, then such half-witted men think that Religion is
nothing but a pretense to Rebellion, and Conscience only an obstinate plea for
Disobedience. But this is to take it for granted that there is no such thing as
Religion in the World; for if there be, there must be some inviolable Rights of
Divine Sovereignty acknowledged, which must not vary according to the diversity
of the Edicts and Laws of men. But supposing the profession and practice of the
Christian Religion to be allowed inviolable, there was never any Religion, nay,
never any inventions of the greatest Politicians, which might compare with that
for the preservation of civil Societies. For this in plain and express words
tells all the owners of it, that they must live in subjection and obedience;
not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake; that they who Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
do resist receive unto themselves damnation, and that because whosoever
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. Than which it is
impossible to conceive arguments of greater force to keep men in obedience to
Authority; for he that only obeys because it is his interest to do so, will
have the same reason to disobey when there is an apprehension that may make
more for his advantage. But when the reason of obedience is derived from the
concernments of another life, no hopes of interest in this world can be thought
to balance the loss which may come by such a breach of duty in that to come.
So that no persons do so dangerously undermine the foundations of civil
Government, as those who magnify that to the contempt of Religion; none so
effectually secure them as those who give to God the things that are Gods, and
by doing so, are obliged to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. This
was the Doctrine of Christianity as it was delivered by the first author of it;
and the practice was agreeable, as long as Christianity preserved its primitive
honor in the world. For, so far were men then from making their zeal for
Religion a pretense to rebellion, that though Christianity were directly
contrary to the Religions then in vogue in the world, yet they knew of no other
way of promoting it, but by patience, humility, meekness, prayers for their
persecutors, and tears when they saw them obstinate. So far were they then from
fomenting suspicions and jealousies concerning the Princes and Governors they
lived under, that though they were generally known to be some of the worst of
men as well as of Princes, yet they charge all Christians in the strictest
manner, as they loved their Religion and the honor of it, as they valued their
souls and the salvation of them, that they should be subject to them. So far
were they then from giving the least encouragement to the usurpations of the
rights of Princes under the pretense of any power given to a head of the
Church: that there is no way for any to think they meant it, unless we suppose
the Apostles such mighty Politicians, that it is because they say nothing at
all of it; but on the contrary, bid every soul be subject to the higher powers;
though an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, whatever he be, as the Fathers
interpret it. Yea so constant and uniform was the doctrine and practice of
Obedience in all the first and purest ages of the Christian Church, that no one
instance can be produced of any usurpation of the rights of Princes under the
pretense of any title from Christ, or any disobedience to their authority,
under the pretense of promoting Christianity, through all those times wherein
Christianity the most flourished, or the Christians were the most persecuted.
And happy had it been for us in these last ages of the World, if we had been
Christians on the same terms which they were in the Primitive times; then there
had been no such scandals raised by the degeneracy of men upon the most
excellent and peaceable Religion in the world, as though that were unquiet and
troublesome, because so many have been so who have made show of it. But let
their pretenses be never so great to infallibility on one side, and to the
Spirit on the other, so far as men encourage faction and disobedience, so far
they have not the Spirit of Christ and Christianity, and therefore are none of
his. For he showed his great wisdom in contriving such a method of saving men's
souls in another world, as tended most to the preservation of the peace and
quietness of this; and though this wisdom may be evil spoken of by men of
restless and unpeaceable minds, yet it will be still justified by all who have
heartily embraced the Wisdom which is from above, who are pure and peaceable as
that Wisdom is, and such, and only such are the Children of it.

3. I come to show, That the design of Christ's appearance was very agreeable to
the infinite Wisdom of God; and that the means were very suitable and effectual
for carrying on of that design for the reformation of Mankind.

1. That the design it self was very agreeable to the infinite Wisdom of God.
What could we imagine more becoming the Wisdom of God, than to contrive a way
for the recovery of lapsed and degenerate Mankind? who more fit to employ upon
such a message as this, than the Son of God? for his coming gives the greatest
assurance to the minds of men, that God was serious in the management of this
design, than which nothing could be of greater importance in order to the
success of it. And how was it possible he should give a greater testimony of
himself, and withal of the purpose he came about, than he did when he was in
the world? The accomplishment of Prophesies, and power of Miracles showed who
he was; the nature of his Doctrine, the manner of his Conversation, the
greatness of his Sufferings, showed what his design was in appearing among men:
for they were all managed with a peculiar respect to the convincing mankind,
that God was upon terms of mercy with them, and had therefore sent his Son into
the world, that he might not only obtain the pardon of sin for those who
repent, but eternal life for all them that obey him. And what is there now we
can imagine so great and desirable as this, for God to manifest hi^ wisdom in?
It is true, we see a great discovery of it in the works of Nature, and might do
in the methods of Divine Providence if partiality and interest did not blind
our eyes; but both these, though great in themselves, yet fall short of the
contrivance of bringing to an eternal happiness man who had fallen from his
Maker, and was perishing in his own folly. Yet this is that which men in the
pride and vanity of their own imaginations either think not worth considering;
or consider as little as if they thought so; and in the mean time think
themselves very wise too. The Jews had the wisdom of their Traditions which
they gloried in, and despised the Son of God himself when he came to alter
them. The Greeks had the wisdom of their Philosophy which they so passionately
admired, that whatever did not agree with that, though infinitely more certain
and useful, was on that account rejected by them. The Romans, after the
conquest of so great a part of the World, were grown all such Politicians and
Statesmen, that few of them could have leisure to think of another world, who
were so busy in the management of this. And some of all these sorts do yet
remain in the World, which ma^^ so many so little think of, or admire t^s
infinite discovery of divine Wisdom: nay, there are some who can mix all these
together, joining a Jewis^ obstinacy, with the pride and self-opinion of the
Greeks, to a Roman unconcernedness about the matters of another life. And yet
upon a true and just enquiry never any Religion could be found, which could
more fully satisfy the expectation of the Jews, the reason of the Greeks, or
the wisdom of the Romans, than that which was made known by Christ, who was the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God. Here the Jew might find his Messiah come,
and the Promises fulfilled which related to him, here the Greek might find his
long and vainly looked for certainty of a life to come, and the way which leads
to it, here the Roman might see a Religion serviceable to another world and
this together. Here are Precepts more holy, Promises more certain, Rewards more
desirable than ever the wit or invention of men could have attained to. Here
are Institutions far more pious, useful and serviceable to mankind; than the
most admired Laws of the famous Legislators of Greece or Rome. Here are no
popular designs carried on, no vices indulged for the public interest, which
Solon, Lyourgus and Plato are charged with. Here is no making Religion a mere
trick of State, and a thing only useful for governing the people, which Numa
and the great men at Rome are liable to the suspicion of. Here is no wrapping
up Religion in strange figures and mysterious nonsense, which the Egyptians
were so much given to. Here is no inhumanity and cruelty in the sacrifices
offered, no looseness and profaneness allowed in the most solemn mysteries, no
worshipping of such for Gods who had not been fit to live if they had been men,
which were all things so commonly practiced in the Idolatries of the Heathens.
But the nature of the Worship is such as the minds of those who come to it
ought to be, and as becomes that God whom we profess to serve, pure and holy,
grave and serious, solemn and devout, without the mixtures of superstition,
vanity or ostentation. The precepts of our Religion are plain and easy to be
known, very suitable to the nature of Mankind, and highly tending to the
advantage of those who practice them, both in this and a better life. The
arguments to persuade men are the most weighty and powerful, and of as great
importance as the love of God, the death of his Son, the hopes of happiness,
and the fears of eternal misery can be to men. And wherein is the contrivance
of our Religion defective, when the end is so desirable, the means so
effectual for the obtaining of it?

2. Which is the next thing to be considered. There are two things which in
this degenerate estate of man are necessary in order to the recovery of his
happiness; and those are Repentance for sins past, and sincere Obedience for
the future: now both these the Gospel gives men the greatest encouragements to,
and therefore is the most likely to effect the design it was intended for.

1. For Repentance for sins past. What more powerful motives can there be to
persuade men to repent, than for God to let men know that he is willing to
pardon their sins upon the sincerity of their Repentance, but without that,
there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery
indignation? that their sins are their follies, and therefore to repent is to
grow wise: that he requires no more from men, but what every considerative man
knows is fitting to be done whenever he reflects upon his actions: that there
can be no greater ingratitude or disingenuity toward the Son of God than to
stand at defiance with God when he has shed his blood to reconcile God and Man
to each other: that every step of his humiliation, every part of the Tragedy of
his life, every wound at his death, every groan and sigh which he uttered upon
the Cross, were designed by him as the most prevailing Rhetoric to persuade
men to forsake their sins, and be happy: that there cannot be a more
unaccountable folly, than by impenitency to lose the hopes of a certain and
eternal happiness for the sake of those pleasures which every wise man is
ashamed to think of: that to continue in sin with the hopes to repent, is to
stab a man's self with the hopes of a cure: that the sooner men do it, the
sooner they will find their minds at ease, and that the pleasures they enjoy
in forsaking their sins, are far more noble and manly than ever they had in
committing them: but if none of these arguments will prevail with them, perish
they must, and that unavoidably, insupportably, and irrecoverably: And if such
arguments as these will not prevail with men to leave their sins, it is
impossible that any should.

2. For Holiness of Life: For Christ did not come into the World, and dye for
us, merely that we should repent of what is past, by denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, but that we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world. And Titus 2. 12.
what he does expect, he has given the greatest encouragements to perform: by
the clearness of his precepts, the excellency of his own example, the promise
of his Grace, and the proposition of eternal rewards and punishments, whereby
he takes off all the objections men are apt to make against obedience to the
Commands of Christ: the pretense of ignorance, because his Laws are so clear;
the pretense of impossibility by his own example; the pretense of infirmity by
the assistance of his Grace; the pretense of the unnecessariness of so great
care of our actions by making eternal rewards and punishments to depend upon
it. Let us then reflect upon the whole design of the Gospel, and see how
admirably it is suited to the end it was intended for, to the condition of
those whose good was designed by it, and to the honor of the great contriver
and manager of it. And let not us by our impenitency and the unholiness of our
lives, dishonor God and our Savior, reproach our Religion, and condemn that
by our lives which we justify by our words. For when we have said all we can,
the best and most effectual vindication of Christian Religion is to live
according to it: But oh then how unhappy are we that live in such an Age
wherein it were hard to know that men were Christians, unless we are bound to
believe their words against the tenor and course of their actions! What is
become of the purity, the innocence, the candor, the peaceableness, the
sincerity and devotion of the Primitive Christians! What is become of their
zeal for the honor of Christ, and Christian Religion! If it were the design of
men, to make our Religion a dishonor and reproach to the Jews, Mahumetans,
and Heathens, could they do it by more effectual means than they have done? Who
is there that looks into the present state of the Christian World, could ever
think that the Christian Religion was so incomparably beyond all others in the
world? Is the now Christian Rome so much beyond what it was while it was
Heathen? Nay, was it not then remarkable in its first times for justice,
sincerity, contempt of riches, and a kind of generous honesty, and who does not
(though of the same Religion, if he has any ingenuity left) lament the want of
all those things there now? Will not the sobriety of the very Turks upbraid our
excesses and debaucheries? and the obstinacy of the Jews in defense and
practice of their Religion, condemn our coldness and indifferency in ours? If
we have then any tenderness for the honor of our Religion, or any kindness for
our own Souls, let us not only have the Name, but let us lead the Lives of
Christians; let us make amends for all the reproaches which our Religion has
suffered by the faction and disobedience of some, by the Oaths and Blasphemies,
the impieties and profaneness of others, by the too great negligence and
carelessness of all, that if it be possible, Christianity may appear in its true
glory, which will then only be, when those who name the Name of Christ depart
from iniquity, and live in all manner of holy conversation and godliness.

FINIS.
Romans 1. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the Power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek.
THese words are uttered by one who was himself a remarkable instance of the
truth of the Doctrine contained in them, Viz. of that Divine Power which did
accompany the Gospel of Christ. For what can we imagine else should make him
now not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, who not long before was not ashamed to
persecute all those who professed it? One, whose spirit was fermented with the
leaven of the Pharisees, and enraged with fury against all who owned the name
of Christ, is of a sudden turned quite into another temper, to the confusion of
those who employed him, and the amazement of them whom he designed to
persecute. Nay, so great was the change which was wrought in him, that from a
Bigot of the Jewish Religion he becomes an Apostle of the Christian, and from
breathing flames against the Christians, none more ready than he to undergo
them for Christ. If he had only given over his persecution, it might have been
thought, that he had merely run himself out of breath, and grown weary of his
former fury, (as greater persons than he did afterward) but to retain the same
fervor of spirit in preaching Christ, which he had before in opposing him, to
have as great zeal for making Christians, as he had for destroying them, must
needs proceed from some great and unusual cause. Whilst the Jews thought he
had too much learning and interest to become their enemy, and the Christians
found he had too much rage and fury to be their friend, even then when they
least expected it, instead of continuing an Instrument of the Sanhedrin for
punishing the Christians, he declared himself an Apostle and servant of Jesus
Christ. And that no ordinary one neither; for such was the efficacy of those
divine words, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, that they not only presently
allay his former heat, but quicken and animate him to a greater zeal for the
honor of him whom he had persecuted before. And the faster he had run when he
was out of his way, the greater diligence he used when he found it, there being
none of all the followers of Christ who out-stript him in his constant
endeavors to advance the Christian Religion in the World. And if an unwearied
diligence to promote it, an uncessant care for preserving it, an universal
concern for all who owned it, and an undaunted spirit in bearing the affronts
and injuries he underwent for it, be any persuasive arguments of the love a man
bears to his Religion, there was never any person who made a clearer
demonstration than S. Paul did of the truth of his Religion, and his sincerity
in embracing it. For his endeavors were suitable to the greatness of his
spirit, his care as large as the Horizon of the Sun of righteousness, his
courage as great as the malice of his enemies. For he was neither afraid of the
malice of the Jews, or of the Wisdom of the Greeks, or of the Power of the
Romans, but he goes up and down preaching the Gospel in a sphere as large as
his mind was, and with a zeal only parallel with his former fury. He
encountered the Jews in their Synagogues, he disputed with the Greeks in their
most famous Cities, at Athens, Corinth, Ephesus, and elsewhere, and everywhere
raising some Trophies to the honor of the Gospel; nothing now remained but
that he should do the same at Rome also. And for this he wants not spirit and
resolution, for he even longed to be there, verse. 11. nay, he had often
purposed to go thither, but waited for a convenient opportunity, v. 13. But
while God was pleased otherwise to dispose of him, he could not conceal the joy
which he had for the ready entertainment of the Christian Religion by those to
whom he writes, and that their faith was grown as famous as the City wherein
they dwelt. v. 8. First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ, for you all, that
your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World: and he further manifests
the greatness of his affection to them, that without ceasing he made mention of
them always in his Prayers, v. 9. And among the rest of the blessings he
prayed for, for himself and them; he was sure not to forget his coming to them,
v. 10. Not out of an ambitious and vainglorious humor that he might be taken
notice of in that great and Imperial City, but that he might be instrumental in
doing them service as he had done others, v. 11, 13. And to this end he tells
them, what an obligation lay upon him to spread the Doctrine of Christ in all
places and to all persons, v. 14. I am debtor both to the Greeks and to the
Barbarians, to the wise and to the unwise. So that neither the wisdom of the
Greeks, nor the ignorance of the Barbarians could hinder S. Paul from
discovering to them the contrivances of infinite wisdom; and the excellent
methods of divine Goodness in order to men's eternal welfare. And although Rome
now thought it self to be the seat of Wisdom, as well as Empire and Power, yet
our Apostle declares his readiness to preach the Gospel there too, v. 15. for
which he gives a sufficient reason in the words of the Text; for I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God to salvation, etc.
Wherein we have considerable these two things, 1. The Apostles boldness and
freeness in declaring the doctrine of Christ, For I am not ashamed, etc. 2. The
ground of it in the following words, for it is the Power of God to salvation,
etc.

1. The Apostles boldness and freeness in declaring the doctrine of Christ. It
was neither the gallantry of the Roman Court, nor the splendour of the City, not
the greatness of her Power, or wisdom of her Statesmen could make S. Paul
entertain the meaner opinion of the doctrine he hoped to preach among them. Had
Christ come (...), with a great deal of pomp and state into the World, subduing
Kingdoms and Nations under him; had S. Paul been a General for the Gospel
instead of being an Apostle of it, the great men of the World would then allow
he had no cause to be ashamed either of his Master, or of his employment. But
to preach a crucified Savior among the glories and triumphs of Rome, and a
Doctrine of so much simplicity and contempt of the world among those who were
the Masters of it, and managed it with so much art and cunning; to persuade
them to be followers of Christ in a holy life, who could not be like the gods
they worshipped, unless they were guilty of the greatest debaucheries, seems to
be an employment so liable to the greatest scorn and contempt, that none but a
great and resolved spirit would ever undertake it. For when we consider after
so many hundred years profession of Christianity, how apt the greatness of the
world is to make men ashamed of the practice of it; and that men aim at a
reputation for wit by being able to abuse the Religion they own; what
entertainment might we then think our Religion met with among the great men of
the Age it was first preached in, when it not only encountered those weaker
weapons of scoffs and raillery, but the strong holds of interest and education?
If our Religion now can hardly escape the bitter scoffs, and profane jefts of
men who pawn their souls to be accounted witty, what may we think it suffered
then, when it was accounted a part of their own Religion to despise and
reproach ours? If in the Age we live in, a man may be reproached for his piety
and virtue, that is, for being really a Christian, when all profess themselves
to be so, what contempt did they undergo in the first Ages of the Christian
World, when the very name of Christian was thought a sufficient brand of
infamy? And yet such was the courage and magnanimity of the Primitive
Christians, that what was accounted most mean and contemptible in their
Religion, viz. their believing in a crucified Savior, was by them accounted
the matter of their greatest honor and glory. For though S. Paul only says
here that he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, yet elsewhere he explains
that (...) which is contained in these words, when he says, God forbid that I
should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ, by whom the World is
crucified to me, and I unto the World. Gal. 6. 14. i. e. Although he could not
but be sensible how much the world despised him, and his Religion together, yet
that was the great satisfaction of his mind, that his Religion had enabled him
to despise the World as much. For neither the pomp and grandeur of the World,
nor the smiles and flatteries of it, no nor its frowns and severities could
abate any thing of that mighty esteem and value which he had for the Christian
Religion. For in his own expression, he accounted all things else but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil. 3. 8. Which
words are not spoken by one who was in despair of being taken notice of for any
thing else, and therefore magnifies the Profession he was engaged in; but by a
person as considerable as most of the time and Nation he lived in both for his
birth and education. So that his contempt of the World was no sullen and
affected severity, but the issue of a sober and impartial judgment; and the
high esteem he professed of Christianity was no fanatic whimsey, but the
effect of a diligent enquiry, and the most serious consideration. And that will
appear,

2. By the grounds and reasons which S. Paul here gives why he was not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, 1. From the excellent end it was designed for, and
that is no less than salvation. 2. From the effectualness of it in order to
that end, it is the Power of God to salvation. 3. From the necessity of
believing the Gospel by all who would attain that end; to every one that
believes, the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

1. From the excellent End it was designed for, the recovery and happiness of
the souls of men, both which are employed in the term salvation. For,
considering the present condition of humane Nature, as it is so far sunk
beneath it self, and kept under the power of unruly passions; whatever tends to
make it happy, must do it by delivering it from all those things which are the
occasions of its misery. So that whatever Religion should promise to make men
happy, without first making them virtuous and good, might on that very account
be justly suspected of imposture. For the same reasons which make the acts of
any Religion necessary, viz. that we may please that God who commands and
governs the World, must make it necessary for men to do it, in those things
which are far more acceptable to him than all our sacrifices of what kind
soever, which are the actions of true virtue and goodness. If then that
accusation had been true, which Celsus and Julian. charged Christianity with,
viz. That it indulged men in the practice of vice, with the promise of a future
happiness notwithstanding; I know nothing could have rendered it more
suspicious to be a design to deceive Mankind. But so far is it from having the
least foundation of truth in it, that as there never was any Religion which
gave men such certain hopes of a future felicity, and consequently more
encouragement to be good, so there was none ever required it on those strict
and severe terms which Christianity does. For there being two grand duties of
men in this world, either toward God in the holiness of their hearts and
lives, or toward their Brethren, in a peaceable carriage among men (which
cannot be without justice and sobriety) both these are enforced upon all
Christians, upon no meaner terms than the unavoidable loss of all the happiness
our Religion promises. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. This is then the grand design of
Christianity, to make men happy in another world, by making them good and
virtuous in this: It came to reform this world that it might people another; so
to purify the souls of men, as to make them meet to enjoy the happiness
designed for them. This is that great Salvation which the Gospel brings to the
world, Heb. 2. 3. and thence it is called the Word of salvation, Acts 13. 26.
the way of salvation, Acts 16. 17. the Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. So
that though Christianity be of unspeakable advantage to this world, there being
no Religion that tends so much to the peace of men's minds, and the preservation
of civil Societies as this does; yet all this it does by way of subordination
to the great end of it, which is the promoting men's eternal happiness. And the
more we consider the vast consequence and importance of this end to mankind,
the greater reason we shall find that S. Paul had why he should not be ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ. For can we imagine any end more noble that any
doctrine can aim at than this? Supposing the common principles of all Religion
to be true, viz. the Being of God, and Immortality of our Souls, there can be
nothing more becoming that God to discover, or those Souls to be employed
about, than the way to a blessed immortality. And if we admire those discourses
of the Heathen Philosophers, wherein they speak more darkly and obscurely
concerning those things, what admiration does the Gospel deserve, which has
brought life and immortality to light? If we commend the virtuous Heathens, who
according to those short and obscure notices which they had of God and
themselves, sought to make the world any thing the better for their being in
it, what infinitely greater esteem do those blessed Apostles deserve, who
accounted not their lives dear to them that they might make even their enemies
happy? If those men's memories be dear to us who sacrifice their lives and
fortunes for the sake of the Country they belong to, shall not those be much
more so who have done it for the good of the whole world? Such who cheerfully
suffered death while they were teaching men the way to an eternal life, and who
patiently endured the flames if they might but give the greater light to the
world by them. Such who did as far out-goe any of the admired Heroes of the
Heathens, as the purging the World from sin is of greater consequence than
cleansing an Augaean Stable from the filth of it, and rescuing men from eternal
flames is a more noble design than clearing a Country from pirates and robbers.
Nay, most of the Heathen Gods who were so solemnly worshipped in Greece and at
Rome, owed their (...) to such slender benefits to mankind; that sure the
world was very barbarous or hugely grateful when they could think them no less
than Gods who found out such things for men: If a Smiths forge, and a Woman's
distaffe, if teaching men the noble arts of fighting and cheating one another
were such rare inventions, that they only became some of the most celebrated
Deities which the grave and demure Romans thought fit to worship; sure S. Paul
had no cause to be ashamed of his Religion among them, who had so much reason
to be ashamed of their own; since his design was to persuade them out of all
the vanities and fooleries of their Idolatrous Worship, and to bring them to
the service of the true and ever living God, who had discovered so much
goodness to the world in making his Son a propitiation for the sins of it. And
was not this a discovery infinitely greater and more suitable to the nature of
God, than any which the subtilty of the Greeks, or wisdom of the Romans could
ever pretend to concerning any of their Deities? Thus we see the excellent end
of our Religion was that which made S. Paul so far from being ashamed of it;
and so it would do all us too, if we did understand and value it as S. Paul
did. But it is the great dishonor of too many among us, that they are more
ashamed of their Religion than they are of their sins. If to talk boldly
against Heaven, to affront God in calling him to witness their great impieties
by frequent oaths, to sin bravely and with the highest confidence, to mock at
such who are yet more modest in their debaucheries, were not to be ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, we might find S. Paul's enough in the Age we live in, and
it would be a piece of gallantry to be Apostles. But this is rather the utmost
endeavor to put Religion out of countenance, and make the Gospel it self blush
and be ashamed, that ever such boldfaced impieties should be committed by men
under the profession of it, as though they believed nothing so damnable as
Repentance and a Holy life, and no sin so unpardonable as Modesty in committing
it. But to use S. Paul's language when he had been describing such persons
h^mself, Heb. 6. 9. We are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany that salvation the Gospel was designed for, though we thus speak. For
certainly nothing can argue a greater meanness of spirit, than while wicked and
profane persons are not ashamed of that which unavoidably tends to their ruin,
any should be shye of the profession and practice of that which conduces to
their eternal happiness. What is become of all that magnanimity and generous
spirit which the Primitive Christians were so remarkable for, if while some are
impudent in sinning, others are ashamed of being or doing good? If we have that
value for our immortal souls, and a future life, which we ought to have, we
shall not trouble our selves much with the Atheistical scoffs and drollery of
prosane persons, who while they deride and despise Religion, do but laugh
themselves into eternal misery. And thus much for the first ground of S. Paul's
confidence, viz. The excellent end the Gospel was designed for.

2. The effectualness of it in order to that end. It is the Power of God to
salvation. Wherein two things are employed.

1. The inefficacy of any other doctrine for that end. 2. The effectualness of
the Gospel in order to it.
1. The inefficacy of any other Doctrine for this end of promoting the eternal
salvation of Mankind. If the world had been acquainted with any doctrine
before which had been sufficient for the purposes the Gospel was designed for,
there would have been no such necessity of propagating it among men; nor had
there been reason enough to have justified the Apostles in exposing themselves
to so great hazards for the preaching of it. If the notion of an eternal God
and Providence, without the knowledge of a Savior, had been sufficient to
reform the World, and make men happy; it had not been consistent with the
wisdom or goodness of God to have employed so many persons, with the loss of
their lives, to declare the Doctrine of Christ to the World. So that if
Christianity be true, it must be thought necessary to salvation, for the
necessity of it was declared by those who were the instruments of confirming
the truth of it. I meddle not with the case of those particular persons who had
no means or opportunity to know Gods revealed will, and yet from the Principles
of Natural Religion did reform their lives, in hopes of a future felicity (if
any such there were) but whether there were not a necessity of such a Doctrine
as the Gospel is to be discovered to the world, in order to the reformation of
it? For some very few persons either through the goodness of their natures, the
advantage of their education, or some cause of a higher nature, may have led
more virtuous lives than others did; but it is necessary, that what aims at the
general good of Mankind, must be suited to the capacities of all, and enforced
with arguments which may prevail on any but the most obstinate and wilful
persons. But when we consider the state of the World at that time when
Christianity was first made known to it, we may easily see how insufficient the
common Principles of Religion were, from working a reformation in it, when
notwithstanding them mankind was so generally lapsed into Idolatry and Vice,
that hardly any can be instanced in, in the Heathen World, who had escaped both
of them. And there was so near an affinity between both these, that they who
were engaged in the rites of their Idolatry, could hardly keep themselves free
from the intanglements of vice; not only because many of their villainies were
practiced as part of their Religion, (and there was little hopes certainly of
their being good, who could not be Religious without being bad) but because the
very Gods they worshipped were represented to be as bad as themselves. And could
they take any better measure of Virtue, than from the actions of those whom
they supposed to have so divine an excellency in them, as to deserve their
adoration? So that if there were a design of planting wickedness in the world
(which need not be, for it grows fast enough without it) it could not be done
more successefully than by worshipping those for Gods, who did such things
which good men would abhor to think of. And yet this was the state of the
world then, when the Gospel was preached, and not only of the more rude and
barbarous Nations, but of the most civilized and knowing people, as the Romans
themselves; as our Apostle at large proves in the remainder of this chapter,
wherein he shows, that though they had means enough of knowing the Eternal God
and Providence, yet they were so fallen into Idolatry, and the most vicious
practices, that there was no means of recovering them, but by a fuller
discovery both of the justice and goodness of God.

I know it will be here objected, that though the generality of men were bad
then (as when were they otherwise) yet the Heathens had a kind of Apostles
among them, viz. the Philosophers, who sought to amend the manners of men by
the moral instructions they gave them, so that if men were bad, it was not for
want of good counsel, but for not observing it, which is all (they say) we have
to say for our selves, when we are charged with the great debaucheries of the
Christian world.

To which I answer, That our business is not now to enquire whether there has
not been an incomparably greater advantage to the world by Christianity, in the
reforming men's lives, than ever was by any of the Heathen Morals; but whether
these, taking them in the fairest dress, were so sufficient for the bringing
men to eternal happiness, that there needed not any such Doctrine as
Christianity be published for that end? And there are two great things we may
charge the best of their discourses with an insufficiency in, for the
accomplishment of this end, which are Certainty, and Motives, or the want of
Arguments to believe, and Encouragements to practice.

1. They were destitute of sufficient Certainty; for what a man ventures his
eternal state upon, he ought to be well assured of the truth of it. But how was
it possible for the World to be reformed by such wise Apostles (if they must be
called so) who were perpetually disputing among themselves about those things
which were the most necessary foundations of all Virtue and Religion? As though
the best Arguments they had to prove their Souls immortal, was because their
disputes about them were so. And those seemed among them to gain the greatest
reputation for wit, who were best able to dispute against common Principles;
and they managed their business with greatest advantage, who only showed the
weakness of others principles, but established none of their own; which was an
unavoidable consequence of the way they proceeded in, for offering at no such
way of proof as Christianity does, they rather taught men to dispute, than to
live eternally. Besides, their discourses were too subtle and intricate for the
common capacities of men; how long might a man live before an Entelechia would
make him know the nature of his Soul the better, or an (...) persuade him to
believe its immortality? Insomuch that it is hard to determine, whether the
arguments used by them, did not rather hinder assent, than persuade to it; and
it seems probable that the honest minded, illiterate Heathens believed those
things more firmly than the greatest Philosophers. For plain truths lose much
of their weight, when they are ratified into subtilties, and their strength is
impaired when they are spun into too fine a thread. The arguments which must
prevail with Mankind, must be plain and evident, easy and yet powerful. The
natural sense of good and evil in men is oft-times dulled by disputes, and only
awakened by a powerful representation of an infinite Being, and a future
Judgment: and that by such a way of proof as all persons are equal Judges of
the truth and validity of it; such as the Resurrection of Christ is in the
Gospel.

2. But let us suppose the arguments certain and suitable, yet what sufficient
motives or encouragements could they give to lead a holy and virtuous life, who
after all their endeavors to persuade others, remained so uncertain themselves
as to a future happiness? So Tully tells us of Socrates himself when he was
just dying, That he told his friends, that only the Gods knew whether it was
fitter for men to live or die, but he thought no man did. And although some
would excuse this as his usual way of disputing, yet of all times one would
think it was fittest for him then to declare his mind in the most express
terms, not only for the full vindication of himself, but for the comfort and
encouragement of his friends. We are sure, Christianity proceeds on those
terms, that if a future happiness be supposed uncertain, it declares expressly
there can be no sufficient reason given for men to part with the conveniences
of this present life; nay, it supposes the best men to be the most miserable of
all others, if there be not a future reward, 1 Cor. 15. 19. -- 32. Again, what
probability was there they should ever persuade the World to virtue and
goodness, when the severest of the Philosophers, made it lie in things so
repugnant to humane nature, as goodness is agreeable to it. As when they made
it an equal fault for a man to be angry, and to murder his Sovereign; and that
all passions are to be destroyed, that pain and grief are nothing, that virtue
in all conditions is a sufficient reward to it self. Which are so contrary to
the common sense of mankind, that the only way to persuade men to believe them,
is first to persuade them they are not men. So that he was certainly the wisest
man among the Heathens, who concluded, that we ought to expect a higher Master
to teach us these things, and to acquaint us with the happiness of a future
life. And hereby an answer may be given to Porphyries grand objection against
Christian Religion, viz. If it were so necessary for the good of Mankind, why
was it so long before it was discovered? Because God would thereby discover the
insufficiency of all the means the wit of man could find out to reform the
world, without this. That not only the Jews might see the weakness of that
dispensation they were under, but the Gentile world might groan with an
expectation of some more powerful means to goodness than were yet among them.
For when Philosophy had been so long in its height, and had so little influence
upon Mankind, it was time for the Sun of righteousness to arise, and with the
softening and healing influence of his beams to bring the World to a more
virtuous temper.

And that leads to the Second thing employed, which is the peculiar efficacy of
the Gospel for promoting men's salvation, for it is the Power of God to
salvation, and that will appear, by considering how many ways the power of God
is engaged in it. These three especially. 1. In confirmation of the Truth of
it. 2. In the admirable Effects of it in the World. 3. In the divine Assistance
which is promised to those who embrace it.

1. In confirmation of the Truth of it. For the World was grown so uncertain,
as to the grand foundations of Religion, that the same power was requisite now
to settle the World, which was at first for the framing of it. For though the
Precepts of Christian Religion be pure and easy, holy and suitable to the
sense of mankind, though the Promises be great and excellent, proportionable to
our wants and the weight of our business, though the reward be such that it is
easier to desire than comprehend it, yet all these would but seem to baffle the
more the expectations of men, unless they were built on some extraordinary
evidence of divine power. And such we assert there was in the confirmation of
these things to us, not only in the miraculous birth of our Savior, and that
continual series of unparalled miracles in his life, not only in the most
obliging circumstances of his death; nor only in the large effusion of divine
gifts upon his Apostles, and the strange propagation of Christian Religion by
them against all humane power; but that which I shall particularly instance in,
as the great effect of divine power, and confirmation of our Religion, was his
Resurrection from the dead. For, as our Apostle says, Romans 1. 4. Christ was
declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead. No way of evidence could be more suitable to
the capacities of all, than this, it being a plain matter of fact; none ever
better attested than this was, not only by the unanimous consent of all the
witnesses, but by their constant adhering to the truth of it, though it cost
almost all of them their lives; and no greater evidence could be given to the
World of a divine power, since both Jews and Gentiles agreed in this, that such
a thing could not be effected but by an immediate hand of God. So far were they
then from thinking a resurrection possible by the juice of herbs, or an
infusion of warm blood into the veins, or by the breath of living Creatures, as
the great martyr for Atheism would seem from Pliny to persuade us; when yet
certainly nothing can be of higher concernment to those who believe not another
life, than to have tried this experiment long ere now; and since nothing of
that nature has ever happened since our Saviors resurrection, it only lets us
know what credulous men in other things the greatest Infidels as to Religion
are. But so far were they at that time from so fond an imagination, that they
readily yielded, that none but God could do it, though they seemed to question
whether God himself could do it or no. As appears by the Apostles
Interrogation, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead? Acts 26. 8. This was therefore judged on both sides to
be a matter of so great importance, that all the disputes concerning Christian
Religion were resolved into this, Whether Christ were risen from the dead? And
this the Apostles urge and insist on, upon all occasions, as the great evidence
of the truth of his Doctrine, and this was the main part of their Commission,
for they were sent abroad to be witnesses of his Resurrection. Which was not
designed by God as a thing strange and incredible to puzzle mankind with, but
to give the highest assurance imaginable to the World of the truth and
importance of Christianity. Since God was pleased to employ his power in so
high a manner to confirm the certainty of it.

2. Gods power was seen in the admirable effects of Christian Religion upon the
minds of men: which was most discernable by the strange alteration it soon made
in the state of the world. In Judea soon after the death of Christ, some of his
Crucifyers become Christians, 3000 Converts made at one Sermon of S. Peter's,
and great accessions made afterward both in Jerusalem and other places. Yea
in all parts of the Roman Empire, where the Christians came, they so increased
and multiplied, that thereby it appeared that God had given a Benediction to
his new Creation suitable to what he gave to the first. So that within the
compass of not a hundred years after our Saviors death, the World might admire
to see it self so strangely changed from what it was. The Temple at Jerusalem
destroyed, and the Jews under a sadder dispersion than ever, and rendered
incapable of continuing their former Worship of God there: The Heathen Temples
unfrequented, the Gods derided, the Oracles ceased, the Philosophers puzzled,
the Magistrates disheartened by their fruitless cruelties, and all this done by
a few Christians who came and preached to the World Righteousness, Temperance,
and a Judgment to come, whereof God had given assurance to the World, by
raising one Jesus from the dead. And all this effected not by the power of Wit
and Eloquence, not by the force and violence of rebellious subjects, not by men
of hot and giddy brains, but by men sober, just, humble and meek in all their
carriages, but withal such as might never have been heard of in the world, had
not this Doctrine made them famous. What could this then be imputed to less
than a Divine Power, which by effectual and secret ways carries on its own
design against all the force and wit of men. So that the wise Gamaliel, at
whose feet S. Paul was bred, seemed to have the truest apprehensions of these
things at that time, when he told the Sanhedrin, If this counsel, or this work
be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it,
least happily ye be found to fight against God. Acts 5. 38, 39.

3. In the Divine Assistance which is promised to those who embrace it: in
which respect it is properly the power of God to salvation; and therein far
beyond what the Philosophers could promise to any who embraced their opinions.
For, the Gospel does not only discover the necessity of a Principle superior
to Nature, which we call Grace, in order to the fitting our Souls for their
future happiness, but likewise shows on what terms God is pleased to bestow it
on men, viz. on the consideration of the death and passion of our Lord and
Savior. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Christ our Savior, Titus 3. 5.
There being nothing in humane nature which could oblige God, to give to
Mankind that assistance of his grace whereby they are enabled to work out this
salvation the Gospel is designed for, with fear and trembling. The whole tenor
of the Gospel importing a divine power which does accompany the preaching of
it, which is designed on purpose to heal the wounds, and help the weakness of
our depraved and degenerate nature. Through which we may be kept to salvation:
but it must be through Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

3. Which is the last particular of the words; the necessity of believing the
Gospel in order to the partaking of the salvation promised in it; it is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek. An easy way of salvation, if no more were required to men's
happiness but a fancy and strong opinion which they will easily call Believing.
So there were some in S. Augustin's time, I could wish there were none in ours,
who thought nothing necessary to salvation but a strong Faith, let their lives
be what they pleased. But this is so repugnant to the main design of Christian
Religion, that they who think themselves the strongest Believers, are certainly
the weakest, and most ungrounded. For they believe scarce any other proposition
in the New Testament, but that Whosoever believes shall be saved. If they did
believe that Christ came into the world to reform it, and make it better, that
the wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness, as
well as that the just by Faith shall live, that the design of all that love of
Christ, which is shown to the World, is to deliver them from the hand of their
enemies, that they might serve him in righteousness and holiness all the days
of their lives, they could never imagine, that salvation is entailed by the
Gospel on a mighty confidence or vehement persuasion of what Christ has done
and suffered for them. And so far is S. Paul from asserting this, that as far
as I can see, he never meddles with a matter of that nicety, whether a single
act of Faith be the condition of our justification as it is distinguished from
Evangelical obedience, but his discourse runs upon this subject; whether God
will pardon the sins of men upon any other terms than those which are declared
in the Christian Religion, the former he calls Works, and the latter Faith.

I know, the subtilty of later times has made S. Paul dispute in the matter of
justification, not as one bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, but of the Master of
the Sentences; but men did not then understand their Religion at all the worse
because it was plain and easy; and, it may be, if others since had understood
their Religion better, there would never have needed so much subtilty to
explain it, nor so many distinctions to defend it. The Apostle makes the same
terms of justification and of falvation, for as he says elsewhere, We are Rom
5. 1.
justified by Faith, he says here, the Gospel is the power of God to salvation
to every one that believes; if therefore a single act of Faith be sufficient
for one, why not for the other also? But if believing here be taken in a more
large and comprehensive sense, as a complex act relating to our undertaking the
conditions of the Gospel; why should it not be taken so in the subsequent
discourse of the Apostle? For we are to observe, that S. Paul in this Epistle
is not disputing against any sort of Christians that thought to be saved by
their obedience to the Gospel from the assistance of divine grace; but against
those who thought the Grace and indulgence of the Gospel by no means necessary
in order to the pardon of their sins, and their eternal happiness. Two things
therefore the Apostle mainly designs to prove in the beginning of it: First,
the insufficiency of any other way of salvation besides that offered by the
Gospel; whether it were the light of Nature which the Gentiles contended for,
but were far from living according to it; or that imaginary Covenant of Works,
which the Jews fancyed to themselves (for it will be a very hard matter to
prove that ever God entered into a Covenant of Works with fallen Man, which he
knew it was impossible for him to observe) but they were so highly opinionated
of themselves, and of those legal observations which were among them, that they
thought by virtue of them they could merit so much favor at Gods hands, that
there was no need of any other sacrifice, but what was among themselves to
expiate the guilt of all their sins. And on that account they rejected the
Gospel, as the Apostle tells us, that they being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their Romans 10. 3.
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.
Against these therefore the Apostle proves, that if they hoped for happiness
upon such strict terms, they laid only a foundation of boasting if they did all
which God required, Romans 3. 27.
but of misery if they did not; for then, Cursed is every one that continues
not Gal. 3. 10.
in every thing written in the Law to do it. i. e. if they failed in any one
thing, then they must fail of all their hopes; but such a state of perfection
being impossible to humane Nature; he shows, that either all mankind must
unavoidably perish, or they must be saved by the Grace and Favor of God, which
he proves to be discovered by the Gospel: and that God will now accept of a
hearty and sincere obedience to his will declared by his Son; so that all those
who perform that, though they live not in the nice observance of the Law of
Moses, shall not need to fear the penalty of their sins in another life. Which
is the second thing he designs to prove, viz. That those who obeyed the Gospel,
whether Jew or Greek, were equally capable of salvation by it. For, says he,
is God the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, Romans 3.
29.
of the Gentiles also: because both Jew and Gentile were to be justified upon
the same terms, as he proves afterward. So that, Gods justifying of us by the
Gospel, is the solemn declaration of himself upon what terms he will pardon the
sins of men; that is, deliver them from the penalties they have deserved by
them. For the actual discharge of the person is reserved to the great day; all
the justification we have here is only declarative from God, but so as to give
a right to us, by virtue whereof we are assured, that God will not only not
exercise his utmost rigor, but show all favor and kindness to those who by
belief of the Gospel do repent and obey. God does now remit sin as he forbears
to punish it; he remits the sinner as he assures him by the death of Christ he
will not punish upon his repentance; but he fully remits both, when he delivers
the person upon the trial of the great day, from all the penalties which he
has deserved by his sins. So that our complete justification and salvation go
both upon the same terms, and the same Faith which is sufficient for one, must
be sufficient for the other also.

What care then ought men to take, lest by misunderstanding the notion of
Believing, so much spoken of as the condition of our salvation, they live in a
neglect of that holy obedience which the Gospel requires, and so believe
themselves into eternal misery. But as long as men make their obedience
necessary, though but as the fruit and effect of Faith, it shall not want its
reward: for those, whose hearts are purified by Faith shall never be condemned
for mistaking the notion of it; and they who live as those that are to be
judged according to their works, shall not miss their reward, though they do
not think they shall receive it for them. But such who make no other condition
of the Gospel but Believing, and will scarce allow that to be called a
Condition, ought to have a great care to keep their hearts sounder than their
heads, for their only security will lie in this, that they are good though they
see no necessity of being so. And such of all others I grant have reason to
acknowledge the irresistible power of Divine Grace, which enables them to obey
the will of God against the dictates of their own judgments. But thanks be to
God, who has so abundantly provided for all the infirmities of humane Nature,
by the large offers of his Grace, and assistance of his Spirit, that though we
meet with so much opposition without, and so much weakness within, and so many
discouragements on every side of us; yet if we sincerely apply our selves to do
the will of God, we have as great assurance as may be, that we shall be kept by
the power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

FINIS.
Hebr. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
WHen the wise and eternal Counsels of Heaven concerning the salvation of
Mankind by the death of the Son of God, were first declared to the World by
his own appearance and preaching in it; nothing could be more reasonably
expected, than that the dignity of his Person, the authority of his Doctrine,
and the excellency of his Life, should have persuaded those whom he appeared
among, to such an admiration of his Person, and belief of his Doctrine, as
might have led them to an imitation of him in the holiness of his life and
conversation. For if either the worth of the Person, or the importance of the
Message might prevail any thing toward a kind and honorable reception among
men; there was never any person appeared in any degree comparable to him, never
any Message declared which might challenge so welcome an entertainment from
men, as that was which he came upon. If to give Mankind the highest assurance
of a state of life and immortality, if to offer the pardon of sin, and
reconciliation with God upon the most easy and reasonable terms, if to purge
the degenerate World from all its impurities by a Doctrine as holy as the
Author of it; were things as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the Sons of
men to receive: nothing can be more unaccountable than that his Person should
be despised, his Authority slighted, and his Doctrine contemned. And that by
those whose interest was more concerned in the consequence of these things,
than himself could be in all the affronts and injuries he underwent from men:
For the more the indignities, the greater the shame, the sharper the sufferings
which he did undergo, the higher was the honor and glory which he was advanced
to: but the more obliging the instances of his kindness were, the greater the
salvation that was tendered by him, the more prevailing the motives were for
the entertainment of his Doctrine, the more exemplary and severe will the
punishment be of all those who reject it. For it is very agreeable to those
eternal Laws of Justice by which God governs the world, that the punishment
should arise proportionably to the greatness of the mercies despised: and
therefore although the Scripture be very sparing in telling us what the state
of those persons shall be in another life who never heard of the Gospel; yet
for those who do, and despise it, it tells us plainly, that an eternal misery
is the just desert of those to whom an eternal happiness was offered, and yet
neglected by them. And we are the rather told of it, that men may not think it
a surprise in the life to come; or that if they had known the danger, they
would have escaped it; and therefore our Blessed Savior, who never mentioned
punishment but with a design to keep men from it, declares it frequently, that
the punishment of those persons and places would be most intolerable, who have
received, but not improved the light of the Gospel: and that it would be more
tolerable for the persons who had offered violence to Nature, and had Hellfire
Mat. 11. 23.
burning in their hearts by their horrid impurities, than for those who heard
the Doctrine, and saw the Miracles of Christ, and were much the worse, rather
than any thing the better for it. But lest we should think that all this black
scene of misery was only designed for those who were the Actors in that
doleful Tragedy of our Saviors sufferings: we are told by those who were best
able to assure us of it, that the same dismal consequences will attend all the
affronts of his Doctrine, as if they had been offered to his own person. For it
is nothing but the common flattery and self-deceit of humane nature, which
makes any imagine, that though they do not now either believe or obey the
Gospel; they should have done both, if they had heard our Savior speak as
never man spoke, and seen him do what never man did: For the same disposition
of mind which makes them now slight that Doctrine which is delivered to them
by them that heard him, would have made them slight the Person as well as the
Doctrine, if they had heard it from himself. And therefore it is but reasonable
that the same punishment should belong to both; especially since God has
provided so abundantly for the assurance of our Faith, by the miraculous and
powerful demonstration of that divine spirit which did accompany those who
were the first publishers of this Doctrine to the world. And therefore the
Author of this Epistle, after he has in the words of the Text declared, that
it is impossible to escape, if we neglect the great salvation offered us by the
Gospel; in the following words he gives us that account of it, that at first it
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him:
God also bearing them witness both with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles,
and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. So that the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost, falling upon the Apostles, and the many signs and
wonders which were wrought by them, were the great testimony of God to the
world, that these were the persons employed by himself to declare that Doctrine
whereon the eternal salvation of Mankind did depend. And since we have so
lately acknowledged the truth of this testimony which God gave to the Apostles,
by the solemn celebration of that glorious descent of the Holy Ghost upon them
on the day of Pentecost, that which naturally follows from it is, the great
care we ought to take lest we be found guilty of neglecting that great
salvation which is offered to us in that Doctrine which was attested in so
eminent a manner by God himself; and that from the consideration of our own
danger; for how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? wherein are
three things considerable:

1. The care God has taken to make us happy, by offering so great salvation to
us. 2. The care we ought to take in order to our own happiness, not to neglect
the offers which God has made us. 3. The unavoidable punishment which those do
incur who are guilty of this neglect. How shall we escape?
I need not tell this Auditory how forcible the Negative is, which is expressed
by such an interrogation which appeals to the judgment of all who hear it, and
so relyes not upon the bare authority of the speaker, but upon the plain
evidence of the thing, which others were judges of as well as himself. As
though he had said, if you slight and disesteem the Gospel of Christ, upon
whatever grounds ye do it, if either through too great an opinion of the wisdom
of this world you despise it as vain and useless, if through too mean an
opinion of the excellency of Christianity, you reject it either as uncertain in
its Theory, or impossible in its practice; or if through too great a love of
the pleasures of sin, or a secure and careless temper of mind, you regard not
the doing what Christianity requires to make you happy; think with your selves,
what way you can find to escape the wrath of God; for my part, I know of none;
for if God were so severe against the violation of a far meaner institution,
viz. of the Law of Moses, insomuch that every contempt and disobedience did
receive a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape who neglect so great
salvation? or as the Apostle elsewhere argues to the same purpose. He that
despised Moses Heb. 10. 28, 29.
Law died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace?
This is a sad subject, but I am afraid too necessary to be spoken to in the Age
we live in; wherein men seem to be inapprehensive of the danger of inwardly
despising the Religion they profess to own, and the neglecting of that which
they hope to be saved by. It is strange that it should be so; but much more
strange that men should think to do so, and not be called to an account for it.
It is not only the gross and open sinner that desies Heaven, and by his oaths
and blasphemies dares God to show his Power and Justice upon him, but the slye
and self-deceiving hypocrite that hates Religion while he thinks he loves it;
that in his heart contemns it, but is afraid to know that he does so, that
ought to be possessed with a truer sense of Religion, and a greater dread of
the issue of the contempt or neglect of it. There is some appearance of
ingenuity in an open enmity; but none so dangerous as that which hides it self
under the disguise of friendship. In our Saviors time there were several sorts
of those who showed their disesteem of him, some that were so enraged against
him, that they contrive all ways for his disgrace and punishment, others could
hear him with patience, but the cares of this World, the deceitfulness of Mark
4. 19.
Riches, and the lust of other things choked and stifled all good
apprehensions of him, that they became weak and ineffectual. And those were
guilty of making light of the marriage feast because of other business which
they had to mind, Matthew. 22. 5. as well as those who offered all the injuries
and affronts to his servants that invited them, v. 6. And as it was in the
days of our Savior, so it is now; some were eating and drinking, minding
nothing but the vain and sensual pleasures of the world; some were buying and
selling, so busy in this world, that they had no leisure to think of being
happy in another, some were deriding and blaspheming; but all these too wise,
or too vain, or too profane to mind the offers of eternal salvation. I wish we
could say it were otherwise now, that a sensual and voluptuous, an easy and a
careless life in some, that ambition and the restless pursuit after the honor
and riches of the world in others, that a profane wit, and a contempt of all
that is serious in those that think themselves too great to be Religious, did
not enervate the force of Christianity upon their minds, and make them all
though upon different grounds agree in the neglect of their own salvation. But
is the case of such men grown so desperate that no remedy can work upon them?
has the love of sin and the world so far intoxicated them, that no reason or
consideration whatever can awaken them? have they hardened themselves against
all the power of divine Truths with a resolution as strong as death, and as
cruel as the grave whither they are going? Will neither the love of happiness,
nor the fear of misery, their own interest, and the wisdom of avoiding so great
a danger, the dread of the Majesty and Power of God, and the horror of the
great day, prevail at least so far on men to consider, whether these things be
true or no; and if they be, what unspeakable solly it is to neglect them? And
the better to make that appear, I shall prove these following things:

1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's happiness, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable.

2. That nothing can be more unreasonable, than when God has taken so much
care of it, men should neglect it themselves.

3. That it is very just for God to vindicate himself against so gross a
neglect, by the severe punishments of the life to come.

1. That God by the Gospel has taken so great care of men's salvation, that
nothing but a gross neglect can make them miserable. For, whatever the mind of
man can imagine necessary in order to its own happiness, in its present fallen
and degenerate condition, is abundantly provided for by the Gospel of Christ.
For, man was so wholly lost as to his own felicity, that among the ruins and
decays of his Nature, he could not pick up so much as the perfect image and
Idea of his own happiness; when he reflects upon himself, he finds himself such
a confused mass of folly and weakness, that he can never imagine that so noble
a design should have its groundwork laid upon so course a Being. And rather
than believe the foundation of his happiness to be within himself, there is
nothing so vain and trifling without him, but he is ready to fall down before
it, and cry out, Here I place my felicity. Sometimes he admires the brave
shows, and the Pomp and Gallantry of the World, and thinks nothing comparable
to a glorious outside, and a great train of attendants: sometimes he raises
himself, and flutters upon the wings of a popular Air, till a cross blast comes
and leaves him in the common rout: sometimes his eyes are dazzled with the
glory of the more refined and solid pieces of that Earth out of which he was
framed, and thinks it reasonable, that the softness of flesh and blood, should
yield to the impressions of silver and gold; sometimes he even envyes the
pleasures of the Brutes, and if it were possible would outdoe them in their
grossest sensualities: sometimes again he flatters himself, and then adores his
own imperfections, and thinks his Passions, Honor; and his Profaneness, Wit.
So far is vain man from making himself happy, that the first step to it, is to
make him understand what it is to be so. But supposing that the true image of
his happiness should drop down from Heaven; and by the place from whence it
fell, should conclude where the thing it self is to be found; yet this were
only to make him more miserable, unless he withal knew how to come thither. He
is sure not to climb up to it by the tops of the highest mountains, nor to be
carried thither upon the wings of a mighty wind, he has no fiery Chariots at
his command to ascend with to the Glories above: but only he that makes his
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, is able to preserve the
souls of men from vanishing into the soft air, and to conduct them to the
Mansions of eternal Bliss. It is he only that can make them capable of the
Joys of another life, by purging them from the stains and the pollutions of
this. And therefore without his grace and favor ever to hope for the happiness
of Heaven, must be by fancying a Heaven to be there, where there is no God. So
that it is necessary, that the Proposals of this salvation must come from the
Author of it, and that with such arguments as may persuade men of the truth of
it, and with such motives as may encourage men to accept of them. Now the
Gospel of Christ affords us all these things which are necessary to our
happiness, there we have the most agreeable and settled notion and Idea of it,
the most large and free offers of divine goodness in order to it, the greatest
assurance that these things did immediately proceed from God, and the most
encouraging motives to accept of these offers in order to that great salvation
which is tendered to us.

1. We have the most agreeable and settled notion of true happiness: not such a
mean and uncertain thing which lies at the mercy of the continual vicissitudes
and contingencies of this present state, but that which is able to bear up the
mind of man against all the troubles of this life, and to carry him to a
Region beyond them all, where there is a fullness of joy without an allay of
sadness after it, and ever-flowing rivers of pleasures that need no dams to
make them rise higher, nor falls to make their motion perceived. Our Blessed
Savior never flatters his followers with the expectation of a felicity in this
life; Contentment is the most he has promised them, and that they may enjoy,
if they follow his directions, let this world be be what it will, and do what
it pleases with them. He never tells his Disciples they may have satisfaction
here if they lie upon their beds of down with their heads full of tormenting
cares, that the pleasure of humane life lies in the gratifications of the
senses, and in making what use they can of the world; he never deceives them
with the promise of so poor a happiness as that which depends upon health,
friends, prosperity, and having our own wills. No, but he tells them of a more
noble and generous felicity; that will preserve its own stae and grandeur in
spite of the world; a happiness consistent with loss of Estate, loss of
Friends, with affronts and injuries, with persecutions, and death it self. For,
when our Savior begins to discourse of happiness, what another kind of strain
does he speak of it in, than any of those Philosophers who have so much
obstructed the happiness of man's life by their voluminous writings and
contentions about it. Here we meet with no Epicurean softness, which the sense
of true Virtue carried the minds of the more noble Heathens above; no rigid and
incredible Stoical Paradoxes, that make men only happy by the change of names;
no Aristotelean supposition of a prosperous life for Virtue to show its power
in; but here the only supposition made, is that which lies in a man's own
breast, viz. true goodness, and then let his condition be what it will, his
happiness is consistent with it. For those above all other persons whom our
Savior calls Blessed, in the beginning of that excellent Abstract of
Christianity, his Sermon on the Mount, are, not the rich and great men of the
world, but those who, to the poverty of their condition add that of their
spirits too, Matthew. 5. 3.
by being contented with the state they are in; not those, who are full of
mirth and jollity, that laugh away one half of their time, and sleep the rest;
but they who are in a mournful condition, either by reason V. 4.
of their own sorrows, or out of compassion to others, or out of a general
sense of their own imperfections, or the inconstancy of our present state: Not
those, who are ready enough to give, but unable to bear affronts, that think
the lives of men a sacrifice small enough for any words of disgrace which they
have given them; but the meek and patient spirit, that is neither V. 5.
apt to provoke, nor in a rage and madness when it is; that values the rules of
Christianity above all the barbarous Punctilio's of Honor. Not those, who are
as impetuous in the pursuit of their designs, and as eager of tasting the
fruits of them, as the thirsty Traveller in the sands of Arabia is of drinking
the waters of a pleasant Spring: but such who make righteousness and goodness
their meat and drink, that which they V. 6.
hunger and thirst after, and take as much pleasure in as the most voluptuous
Epicure in his greatest dainties: Not those, whose malice goes beyond their
power, and want only enough of that to make the whole World a Slaughterhouse,
and account racks and torments among the necessary instruments of governing the
World; but such, who when their enemies are in their power, V. 7.
will not torment themselves by cruelty to them, but have such a sense of
common humanity, as not only to commend pity and good nature to those above
them, but to use it to those who are under them. Not those, whose hearts are as
full of dissimulation and hypocrisy, as the others hands are of blood and
violence, that care not what they are, so they may but seem to be good: but
such whose inward integrity and purity of heart, far exceeds the V. 8.
outward show and profession of it: who honor Goodness for it self, and not
for the Glory which is about the head of it. Not those, who never think the
breaches of the world wide enough, till there be a door large enough for their
own interests to go in at by them; that would rather see the world burning,
than one peg be taken out of their Chariot-wheels: but such who would sacrifice
themselves, like the brave Roman, to fill up the wide V. 9.
gulf which men's contentions have made in the world; and think no Legacy ought
to be preserved more inviolable than that of Peace, which our Savior left to
his Disciples. Lastly, not those, who will do any thing rather than suffer, or
if they suffer it shall be for any thing rather than righteousness, to uphold a
party, or maintain V. 10, 11, 12.
a discontented faction; but such, who never complain of the hardness of their
way, as long as they are sure it is that of Righteousness; but if they meet
with reproaches and persecutions in it, they welcome them, as the harbingers of
their future reward, the expectation of which makes the worst condition not
only tolerable but easy to them. Thus we see what kind of happiness it is,
which the Gospel promises; not such a one as rises out of the dust, or is tossed
up and down with the motion of it; but such whose never-failing fountain is
above, and whither those small rivulets return, which fall down upon Earth to
refresh the minds of men in their passage thither; but while they continue
here, as the Jews say of the water that came out of the rock, it follows them
while they travel through this wilderness below. So that the foundation of a
Christians happiness is the expectation of a life to come, which expectation
having so firm a bottom, as the assurance which Christ has given us by his
death and sufferings, it has power and influence sufficient to bear up the
minds of men, against all the vicissitudes of this present state.

2. We have the most large and free offers of divine Goodness in order to it.
Were it as easy for Man to govern his own passions, as to know that he ought
to do it; were the impressions of Reason and Religion as powerful with
Mankind as those of Folly and Wickedness are, we should never need complain
much of the misery of our present state, or have any cause to fear a worse to
come. There would then be no condition here but what might be born with
satisfaction to ones own mind; and the life of one day led according to the
principles of virtue and goodness, would be preferred before a sinning
Immortality. But we have lost the command of our selves, and therefore our
passions govern us; and as long as such furies drive us, no wonder if our ease
be little. When men began first to leave the uncertain speculations of Nature,
and found themselves so out of order, that they thought the great care ought to
be to regulate their own actions; how soon did their passions discover
themselves about the way to govern them! And they all agreed in this, that
there was great need to do it, and that it was impossible to do it without the
principles of Virtue; for never was there any Philosopher so bad, V. Lud. Viv.
ad S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 1.
as to think any man could be happy without Virtue; even the Epicureans
themselves acknowledged it for one of their established Man that no man could
live a pleasant life w^t being good: and supposing the multiplication of Sects
of Philosophers about these things as far as Varro thought it possible to 288.
(although there never were so many, nor really could be upon his own grounds)
yet not one of all these but made it necessary to be virtuous, in order to
being happy, and those who did not think virtue to be desired for it self, yet
made it a necessary means for the true pleasure and happiness of our lives. But
when they were agreed in this, that it was impossible for a vicious man to
enjoy any true contentment of mind: they fell into nice and subtle disputes
about the names and order of things to be chosen, and so lost the great effect
of all their common principles. They pretended great cures for the disorders of
men's lives, and excellent remedies against the common distempers of humane
nature, but still the disease grew under the remedy, and their applications
were too weak to allay the fury of their passions. It was neither the order and
good of the Universe, nor the necessity of events, nor the things being out of
our power, nor the common condition of humanity, no nor that comfort of ill
natured men, as Carneades called it, the many companions ^ave in misery, that
could keep their ^ons from breaking out when a great occasion was presented
them. For he who had read all their discourses carefully, and was a great man
himself, I mean Cicero, upon the death of his beloved daughter, was so far from
being comforted by them, that he was fain to write a consolation for himself,
in which the greatest cure (it may be) was the diversion he found in writing
it. But supposing these things had gone much farther, and that all wise men
could have governed their passions as to the troubles of this life (and
certainly the truest wisdom lies in that). Yet what had all this been to a
preparation for an eternal state, which they knew little of, and minded less?
All their discourses about a happy life here, were vain, and contradicted by
themselves; when, after all their rants about their wise man being happy in the
bull of Phalaris, etc. they yet allowed him to dispatch himself if he saw
cause, which a wise man would never do, if he thought himself happy when he did
it. So that unless God himself had given assurance of a life to come, by the
greatest demonstrations of it in the death and resurrection of his Son; all the
considerations whatever could never have made mankind happy. But by the Gospel
he has taken away all suspicions and doubts concerning another state, and has
declared his own readiness to be reconciled to us upon our repentance, to
pardon what has been done amiss, and to give that divine assistance whereby
our wills may be governed, and our passions subdued, and upon a submission of
our selves to his wise Providence, and a sincere obedience to his Laws, he has
promised eternal salvation in the life to come.

3. God has given us the greatest assurance that these offers came from
himself; which the Apostle gives an account of here, saying, that this
salvation began at first to be spoken by our Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him; God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders, etc.
Wherein we have all the satisfaction which the minds of reasonable men could
desire as to these things: It might be justly expected, that the messenger of
so great news to the World should be no mean and ordinary person; neither was
he, for the honor was as great in the person who brought it, as the importance
was in the thing it self: No less than the Eternal Son of God came down from
the Bosom of his Father, to rectify the mistakes of Mankind, and not only to
show them the way to be happy, but by the most powerful arguments to persuade
them to be so. Nay, we find all the three persons of the Trinity here engaged
in the great work of man's salvation; it was first spoken by our Lord, God also
bearing them witness, and that with diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost. So that not only the first revelation was from God, but the testimony to
confirm that it was so, was from him too; there being never so clear an
attestation of any divine truths as was of the Doctrine of the Gospel. From
whence it follows, that the foundation whereon our Faith stands, is nothing
short of a divine testimony, which God gave to the truth of that revelation of
his will; so vain are the cavils of those who say, we have nothing but mere
probabilities for our Faith, and do interpret that manner of proof which
matters of fact are capable of, in a sense derogatory to the firmness of our
Christian Faith. As though we made the Spirit of God a Paraclete or Advocate in
the worst sense, which might as well plead a bad as a good cause. No, we
acknowledge, that God himself did bear witness to that doctrine delivered by
our Lord, and that in a most signal and effectual manner, for the conviction of
the world, by those demonstrations of a divine power which accompanied the
first Preachers of salvation by the Gospel of Christ. So that here the Apostle
briefly and clearly resolves our Faith; if you ask, Why we believe that great
salvation which the Gospel offers? the answer is, Because it was declared by
our Lord, who neither could nor would deceive us: If it be asked, How we know
that this was delivered by our Lord? he answers, because this was the constant
Doctrine of all his Disciples, of those who constantly heard him, and conversed
with him. But if you ask again, how can we know, that their testimony was
infallible, since they were but men, he then resolves all into that, that God
bare witness to them by signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost. And those persons whom these arguments will not convince, none
other will. Who are we, that should not think that sufficient which God himself
thought so! who are we, that dare question the certainty of that which has had
the Broad Seal of Heaven to attest it! Can any thing make it surer than God
himself has done? and can there be any other way more effectual for that end,
than those demonstrations of a divine power and presence which the Apostles
were acted by? Those that cavil at this way of proof, would have done so at any
other, if God had made choice of it: and those who will cavil at any thing, are
resolved to be convinced by nothing; and such are not fit to be discoursed with.

4. Here are the most prevailing motives to persuade them to accept of these
offers of salvation. There are two passions, which are the great hinges of
Government, viz. men's Hopes and Fears, and therefore all Laws have had their
sanctions suitable to these two in Rewards and Punishments: now there was never
any reward which gave greater encouragement to hope, never any punishment which
made fear more reasonable than those are which the Gospel proposes. Will ever
that man be good, whom the hopes of Heaven will not make so? or will ever that
man leave his sins whom the fears of Hell will not make to do it? What other
arguments can we imagine should ever have that power and influence on mankind,
which these may be reasonably supposed to have? Would you have God alter the
methods of his Providence, and give his rewards and punishments in this life?
but if so, what exercise would there be of the patience, forbearance and
goodness of God toward wicked men? must he do it as soon as ever men sin? then
he would never try whether they would repent and grow better? or must he stay
till they have come to such a height of sin? then no persons would have cause
to fear him, but such who are arrived at that pitch of wickedness: but how then
should he punish them? must it be by continuing their lives, and making them
miserable? but let them live, and they will sin yet further: must it be by
utterly destroying them? that to persons, who might have time to sin the mean
while, (supposing annihilation were all to be feared) would never have power
enough to deterr men from the height of their wickedness. So that nothing but
the misery of a life to come, can be of force enough to make men fear God, and
regard themselves; and this is that which the Gospel threatens to those that
neglect their salvation, which it sometimes calls everlasting fire, sometimes
the Worm that never dies, Mat. 25. 41. Mark 9 44. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
sometimes the wrath to come, sometimes everlasting destruction, all enough to
fill the minds of men with horror at the apprehension; and what then will the
undergoing it do? Thence our Savior, reasonably bids men, not fear them that
can only kill the body, but are not able to kill the Matthew. 10. 28.
soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.
Thus the Gospel suggests the most proper object of fear, to keep men from sin,
and as it does that, so it presents likewise the most desirable object of hope
to encourage men to be good; which is no less than a happiness that is easier
to hope to enjoy than to comprehend; a happiness infinitely above the most
ambitious hopes and glories of this world; wherein greatness is added to glory,
weight to greatness, and eternity to them all; therefore called a far 2 Cor. 4.
17.
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Wherein the Joys shall be full
and constant, the perception clear and undisturbed, the fruition with continual
delight and continual desire. Where there shall be no fears to disquiet, no
enemies to allarm, no dangers to conquer; nothing shall then be, but an
uninterrupted peace, an unexpressible Joy, and pleasures for evermore. And what
could be ever imagined more satisfactory to minds tired out with the vanities
of this world, than such a repose as that is? What more agreeable to the minds
and desires of good men, than to be eased of this clog of flesh, and to spend
eternity with the fountain of all goodness, and the spirits of just men made
perfect? What more ravishing delight to the souls that are purged, and made
glorious by the blood of the Rev. 7. 14.
Lamb, than to be singing Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for ever and ever? How poor and low things are those which men hope
for in this world, compared with that great salvation, which the Gospel makes
to free a tender of? What a mean thing is it to be great in this world, to be
honorable and rich, i. e. to be made the object of the envy of some, the
malice of others, and at last it may be, an instance of this worlds vanity; and
after all this to be for ever miserable? But O the wisdom of a well-chosen
happiness, that carries a man with contentment and peace through this life, and
at last rewards him with a Crown of everlasting felicity. Thus we see the
Gospel proposes the most excellent means to make men happy, if they be not
guilty of a gross neglect of it; and if they be, that is their own act, and
they must thank none but themselves if they be miserable.

2. But I pray, what reason can be given, since God is so tender of our
happiness, that we should neglect it our selves? which is the next thing to be
spoken to. There are three sorts of things we think we have reason to neglect:
Such as are too mean, and unworthy our care, such as are so uncertain, that
they will not recompense it, such as our own Interest is not at all concerned
in; but I hope there are none who have an immortal soul, and the use of their
understandings, can ever reckon their salvation under one of these.

1. Is it too mean an employment for you to mind the matters of your eternal
welfare? Is Religion a beggarly and contemptible thing, that it does not become
the greatness of your minds to stoop to take any notice of it? Has God lost
his honor so much with you, that his service should be the object of men's
scorn and contempt? But what is it which these brave spirits think a fit
employment for themselves, while they despise God and his Worship? Is it to be
curiously dressed, and make a fine show, to think the time better spent at the
Glass than at their Devotions? These indeed are weighty employments, and fit in
the first place to be minded, if we were made only to be gazed upon. Is it
merely to see Plays, and read Romances, and to be great admirers of that vain
and frothy discourse which all persons account wit but those which have it?
This is such an end of man's life which no Philosopher ever thought of. Or is it
to spend time in excesses and debaucheries, and to be slaves to as many lusts
as will command them? This were something indeed, if we had any other name
given us but that of Men. Or lastly, is it to have their minds taken up with
the great affairs of the World, to be wise in considering, careful in managing
the public interest of a Nation? This is an employment, I grant, fit for the
greatest minds, but not such which need at all to take them off from minding
their eternal salvation. For the greatest wisdom is consistent with that, else
Religion would be accounted folly, and I take it for granted, that it is never
the truly wise man but the pretender that entertains any mean thoughts of
Religion. And such a one uses the public Interest no better than he does
Religion, only for a show to the world, that he may carry on his own designs
the better. And is this really such a valuable thing for a man to be contented
to cheat himself of his eternal happiness, that he may be able to cheat the
world, and abuse his trust? I appeal then to the Consciences of all such who
have any sense of humanity, and the common interest of mankind, setting aside
the considerations of a life to come, whether to be just and sober, virtuous
and good, be not more suitable to the design of humane Nature, than all the
vanities and excesses, all the little arts and designs which men are apt to
please themselves with? And if so, shall the eternal happiness which follows
upon being good, make it less desirable to be so? No surely, but if God had
required any thing to make us happy, which had been as contrary to our present
Interest as the Precepts of Christianity are agreeable to it; yet the end would
have made the severest commands easy, and those things pleasant which tend to
make us happy.

2. Are these things so uncertain, that they are not fit for a wise man to be
solicitous about them? if they will come with a little care, they will say,
they are desirable, but too much will unfit them for greater business? But do
men believe these things to be true or not, when they say thus? if they be
true, why need they fear their uncertainty? if they be certain, what pains and
care can be too great about them? since a little will never serve to obtain
them. Let but the care and diligence be proportionable to the greatness of the
end, and the weight of the things, and you never need fear the want of a
recompense for all your labor. But suppose you say, if you were fully
convinced of their certainty, you would look more after them. What hinders you
from being so convinced? Is it not a bad disposition of mind which makes you
unwilling to enquire into them? examine things with a mind as free as you
would have it, judge seriously according to the reason of things, and you will
easily find the interests of a life to come are far more certain, as well as
more desirable than those of this present life. And yet the great uncertainty
of all the honors and riches of this world, never hinder the covetous or
ambitious person from their great earnestness in pursuit of them. And shall not
then all the mighty arguments which God himself has made use of to confirm to
us, the certainty of a life to come, prevail upon us to look more seriously
after it? Shall the unexpressible love of the Father, the unconceivable
sufferings of the Son of God, and the miraculous descent and powerful
assistance of the Holy Ghost have no more impression on our minds, than to
leave us uncertain of a future state? What mighty doubts and suspicions of God,
what distrusts of humane Nature, what unspeakable ingratitude, and
unaccountable folly lies at the bottom of all this uncertainty? O fools, and
slow of heart to believe, not only what the Prophets have spoken, but what our
Lord has declared, God himself has given testimony to, and the Holy Ghost
has confirmed!

3. But is not your Interest concerned in these things? Is it all one to you
whether your souls, be immortal or no? whether they live in eternal felicity,
or unchangeable misery? Is it no more to you, than to know what kind of Bables
are in request at the Indies, or whether the customs of China or Japan are the
wiser, i. e. than the most trifling things, and the remotest from our
knowledge. But this is so absurd and unreasonable to suppose, that men should
not think themselves concerned in their own eternal happiness and misery, that
I shall not show so much distrust of their understandings to speak any longer
to it.

3. But if notwithstanding all these things our neglect still continues, then
there remains nothing but a fearful looking Heb. 10. 27.
for of judgment, and the fiery indignation of God. For there is no
possibility of escaping if we continue to neglect so great salvation. All hopes
of escaping are taken away, which are only in that, which men neglect; and
those who neglect their only way to salvation, must needs be miserable. How can
that man ever hope to be saved by him whose blood he despises and tramples
under foot? What grace and favor can he expect from God, who has done
despite unto the Spirit of Grace? That has cast away with reproach and
contempt the greatest kindness and offers of Heaven. What can save him that
resolves to be damned, and every one does so, who knows he shall be damned, if
he lives in his sins, and yet continues to do so? God himself, in whose only
pity our hopes are, has irreversibly decreed that he will have no pity upon
those, who despise his goodness, slight his threatenings, abuse his patience,
and sin the more because he offers to pardon. It is not any delight that God
takes in the miseries of his Creatures, which makes him punish them; but shall
not God vindicate his own honor against obstinate and impenitent sinners? He
declares beforehand, that he is far from delighting in their ruin, and that
is the reason he has made such large offers, and used so many means to make
them happy; but if men resolve to despise his offers, and slight the means of
their salvation, shall not God be just without being thought to be cruel? And
we may assure our selves, none shall ever suffer, beyond the just desert of
their sins, for punishment as the Apostle tells us in the words before the
Text, is nothing but a just recompense of reward. And if there were such a one
proportionable to the violation of the Law delivered by Angels; how shall we
think to escape who neglect a more excellent means of happiness, which was
delivered by our Lord himself? If God did not hate sin, and there were not a
punishment belonging to it, why did the Son of God die for the expiation of it?
and if his death were the only means of expiation, how is it possible that
those who neglect that, should escape the punishment not only of their other
sins, but of that great contempt of the means of our salvation by him? Let us
not then think to trifle with God, as though it were impossible a Being so
merciful and kind, should ever punish his Creatures with the miseries of
another life: For, however we may deceive our selves, God will not be mocked,
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he Gal. 6. 7, 8.
reap; for he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but
he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

I shall only propound some few Considerations, to prevent so great a neglect
as that of your salvation is.

1. Consider, what it is you neglect, the offer of Eternal Happiness, the
greatest kindness that ever was expressed to the World, the foundation of your
present peace, the end of your beings, the stay of your minds, the great
desire of your Souls, the utmost felicity that humane Nature is capable of. Is
it nothing to neglect the favor of a Prince, the kindness of Great Men, the
offers of a large and plentiful Estate? but these are nothing to the neglect
of the favor of God, the love of his Son, and that salvation which he has
purchased for you. Nay, it is not a bare neglect, but it implies in it a mighty
contempt not only of the things offered, but of the kindness of him who offers
them. If men had any due regard for God or themselves, if they had any esteem
for his love, or their own welfare, they would be much more serious in Religion
than they are. When I see a person wholly immersed in affairs of the World, or
spending his time in luxury and vanity, can I possibly think that man has any
esteem of God or of his own Soul? when I find one very serious in the pursuit
of his Designs in the World, thoughtfull and busy, subtle in contriving them,
careful in managing them; but very formal, remiss and negligent in all affairs
of Religion, neither inquisitive about them, nor serious in minding them; what
can we otherwise think, but that such a one does really think the things of the
World better worth looking after, than those which concern his eternal
salvation. But consider, before it be too late, and repent of so great folly.
Value an immortal Soul as you ought to do, think what Reconciliation with God,
and the Pardon of sin is worth, slight not the dear Purchase which was bought
at no meaner a rate than the Blood of the Son of God, and then you cannot but
mind the great salvation which God has tendered you.

2. Consider, on what terms you neglect it, or what the things are for whose
sake you are so great enemies to your own salvation. Have you ever found that
contentment in sin or the vanities of the World, that for the sake of them, you
are willing to be for ever miserable? What will you think of all your
debaucheries, and your neglects of God and your selves, when you come to dye?
what would you give then (if it were in your power to redeem your lost time)
that you had spent your time less to the satisfaction of your sensual desires,
and more in seeking to please God? How uncomfortable will the remembrance be of
all your excesses, oaths, injustice and profaneness, when death approaches, and
judgment follows it? What peace of mind will there then be to those who have
served God with faithfulness, and have endeavored to work out their salvation,
though it has been with fear and trembling? But what would it then profit a
man to have gained the whole World, and to lose his own soul? Nay, what
unspeakable losers must they then be, that lose their Souls for that which has
no value at all, if compared with the World.

3. Consider, what follows upon this neglect, not only the loss of great
salvation; but the incurring as great damnation for it. The Scripture describes
the miseries of the life to come, not merely by negatives, but by the most
sensible and painful things. If destruction be dreadful, that is everlasting
destruction; if the anguish of the soul, and the pains of the body be so
troublesome, what will the destruction be both of Body and Soul in Hell? If a
Serpent gnawing in our bowels be a representation of an insupportable misery
here, what will that be of the Worm that never dies? if a raging and devouring
fire; which can last but till it has consumed a fading substance, be in its
appearance so amazing, and in its pain so violent, what then will the enduring
be of that wrath of God, which shall burn like fire, and yet be everlasting?
Consider then of these things, while God gives you time to consider of them;
and think it an inestimable mercy that you have yet time to repent of your
sins, to beg mercy at the hands of God, to redeem your time, to depart from
iniquity, to be frequent in Prayer, careful of your Actions, and in all things
obedient to the will of God, and so God will pardon your former neglects, and
grant you this great salvation.

FINIS.
Hebr. 12. 3. For, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.
IT has never yet been so well with the World, and we have no great reason to
hope it ever will be so; that the best of things, or of men, should meet with
entertainment in it, suitable to their own worth and excellency. If it were
once to be hoped, that all Mankind would be wise and sober, that their
judgments would be according to the truth of things, and their actions
suitable to their judgments; we might then reasonably expect that nothing
would be valued so much as true goodness, nothing so much in contempt and
disgrace as impiety and profaneness. But if we find it much otherwise in the
Age we live in; we have so much the less cause to wonder at it; because it has
been thus, in those times we might have thought would have been far better than
our own. I mean those times and ages, wherein there were not only great things
first spoken and delivered to Mankind, but examples as great as the things
themselves; but these did so little prevail on the stupid and unthankful
world, that they among whom the Son of God did first manifest himself, seemed
only solicitous to make good one Prophecy concerning him, viz. That he should
be despised and rejected of men. And they who suffered their malice to live as
long as he did, were not contented to let it dye with him; but their fury
increases as the Gospel does: and wherever it had spread it self, they pursue
it with all the rude clamors, and violent persecutions which themselves or
their factors could raise against it. This we have a large testimony of, in
those Jewish Christians to whom this Epistle was written; who had no sooner
embraced the Christian Religion, but they were set upon by a whole army of
persecutions. Heb. 10. 32. But call to remembrance the former days, in which
after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. As though
the great enemy of souls, and therefore of Christians, had watched the first
opportunity to make the strongest impression upon them, while they were yet
young and unexperienced; and therefore less able to resist so sharp an
encounter. He had found how unsuccessfull the offer of the good things of this
World had been with their Lord and Master; and therefore was resolved to try
what a severer course would do with all his followers. But the same spirit by
which he despised all the Glories of the World, which the Tempter would have
made him believe he was the disposer of; enabled them with a mighty courage,
and strange transports of joy, not only to bear their own share of reproaches
and afflictions, but a part of theirs who suffered with them, v. 33, 34. But
least through continual duty, occasioned by the hatred of their persecutors,
and the multitude of their afflictions; their courage should abate, and their
spirits saint; the Apostle finds it necessary, not only to put them in mind of
their former magnanimity; but to make use of all arguments that might be
powerful with them, to keep up the same vigor and constancy of mind in
bearing their sufferings, which they had at first. For he well knew, how much
it would tend to the dishonor of the Gospel, as well as to their own
discomfort; if after such an early proof of a great and undaunted spirit, it
should be said of them, as was once of a great Roman Captain, Ultima Primis
cedebant; that they should decline in their reputation as they did in their
years; and at last sink under that weight of duty which they had born with so
much honor before. Therefore, as a General in the Field, after a sharp and
fierce encounter at first, with a mighty resolution by his Soldiers; when he
finds by the number and fresh recruits of the enemy, that his smaller forces
are like to be born down before them; and through mere weariness of fighting
are ready to turn their backs, or yield themselves up to the enemies mercy; he
conjures them by the honor they have gained, and the courage they had already
expressed, by their own interest, and the example of their Leaders, by the
hopes of glory, and the fears of punishment, that they would bear the last
shock of their enemies force, and rather be the Trophies of their Courage than
of their Triumphs: so does our Apostle, when he finds some among them begin to
debate, whether they had best to stand it out or no; he conjures them, 1. By
the remembrance of their own former courage, whereby they did bear as sharp
trials as these could be, with the greatest cheerfulness and constancy; and
what could they gain by yielding at last, but great dishonor to themselves,
that they had suffered so long to no purpose, unless it were to discover their
own weakness and inconstancy. 2. By the hopes of a reward which would surely
follow their faithfulness; v. 35, 36. Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which has great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise: and the time will
not be long ere ye come to enjoy it, v. 37. but if ye draw back, you lose all
your former labors, for he who alone is able to recompense you, has said,
that if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, v. 38. and
then from the example of himself, and all the genuine followers of Christ, but
we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul, v. 39. But least these examples should not be enough to
persuade them; he conjures them by the name of all those who were as eminent
for the greatness of their minds as the strength of their Faith; who have
despised the frowns as well as the smiles of the world; and were not
discouraged by the severest trials from placing their confidence in God, and
their hopes in a life to come; and all this done by persons who had not
received the Promise: Heb. 11. 39. and could there be a greater disparagement
to the clearness of that light we enjoy above them, if we only grew fainter by
it? And therefore in the beginning of this Chapter he encourages them by that
army of Martyrs which had gone before them, by that Cloud of witnesses which
did both direct and refresh them, that they would lay aside every thing which
was apt to oppress or dishearten them, but especially their sinful fears,
which they were so easily betrayed by, and so run with patience the race that
was set before them, v. 1. But, says he, if none of these will prevail with
you, there is an example yet behind, which ought above all others to heighten
your courage, and that is, of the Captain of your salvation, the author and
finisher of your faith, under whom you serve, and from whom you expect your
reward; and as Caesar once said to his Soldiers, when he saw them ready to
retreat out of the field, Videte quem, and quo loco Imperatorem deserturi
estis, Remember what kind of General you forsake, and in what place you leave
him: one whom you have vowed your lives and your service to, one who has
thought nothing too dear, which was to be done for your good, one that will be
ready to reward the least service you can do for him, one that is ready to
assist you to the utmost in what you undertake, one that has already undergone
far more for your sakes, than ever you can do for his; therefore, Consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be weary,
and faint in your minds.

In which words we have represented to us, the unparalled example of courage
and patience under sufferings, in our Lord and Savior; and the great influence
that it ought to have on all those who are called by his Name, that they would
not dishonor so excellent a pattern of enduring sufferings, by weakness or
dejection of mind. Christianity is a Religion which above all others does arm
men against all the contingencies and miseries of the life of man: yea, it
makes them serviceable to the most advantageous purposes that the greatest
blessings can be designed for. It raises the minds of men higher than barely to
consider, the common condition of humane nature, the unavoidableness of such
things which are out of our own power, and the unreasonableness of tormenting
our selves about the things which are so, and that most men's conditions in the
world as to their contentment, depends more upon their minds, than their
outward circumstances; though these are things very fit for us as men to
consider and make use of; yet they do not reach to that height, which the
consideration of a life to come, and the tendency of all our sufferings here to
the inhancement of our future glory may raise us to. Especially considering not
only the weight of the arguments in themselves, but the force they receive from
the example of him, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
By which mighty instance we find, that the sufferings of this life are so far
from being inconsistent with the joys of another, that he who is the Captain
of salvation, was made perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10.
and therefore none of his followers have cause to be dejected under them. But
that we may the better understand the force of this argument, we shall consider,

1. What those things were which he endured.

2. From whom he suffered them, it was the contradiction of sinners against
himself.

3. In that Way and manner he underwent them.

4. For what ends he did it. And when we have considered these, we shall see
the influence this example of Christ's sufferings ought to have upon our
constancy and patience: which will be the most useful improvement of it to us.

1. What those things were which Christ endured; which are here comprehended
under those words, the contradiction of sinners. It is agreed by the best
Expositors, both Greek and Latin, that under this phrase of the contradiction
of sinners, the whole history of our Saviors sufferings is comprehended. All
the injuries, reproaches, false accusations, all the cruelties, indignities,
and violence, which were offered him, from the time of his public appearance
to his expiring upon the Cross, being undergone by him, by the malice of
unreasonable men, may be called the contradiction of sinners. For the sense of
this word extends as well to actions as words; and the sum of all that which
our Savior suffered from them, may be reduced under these heads. 1. The ill
entertainment of his Doctrine. 2. The disparagement of his Miracles. 3. The
violence offered to his Person.

1. The ill entertainment of his Doctrine; which must needs seem very strange
to these who do not consider what a difficult acc^s the clearest reason has to
the minds of such who are governed by interest and prejudice. Though all the
Prophesies concerning the Messiah were fulfilled in him; though the
expectations of the people were great at that time concerning the appearance of
him that was to redeem his people; though all the characters of time, place,
and person, did fully agree to what was foretold by the Prophets; though his
Doctrine were as becoming the Son of God to reveal, as the sons of men to
receive; though the unspotted innocence of his life were so great, as made him
weary of his own that betrayed him: yet because he came not with the pomp and
splendour which they expected, they despise his Person, revile his Doctrine,
persecute his followers, and contrive his ruin. What could have been imagined
more probable, than that the Jewish Nation, which had waited long in
expectation of the Messiah coming, should have welcomed his approach with the
greatest joy, and received the Message he brought with a kindness only short of
that which he showed in coming among them? Was it nothing to be eased of that
heavy burden of the Ceremonial Law, which neither they nor their Fathers were
able to bear? and that God was willing to exchange the chargeable and
troublesome service of the Temple, for the more reasonable and spiritual
Worship of himself? Was it nothing to have the Promises of a Land which now
groaned under the weight of its oppressions, turned into those of an eternal
state of bliss and immortality? and to change the Lamps of the Temple, for the
glorious appearance of the Sun of Righteousness? Was it nothing to have an
offer of Peace and Reconciliation with God made them, after they had suffered
so much under the fury of his displeasure? Was a mere temporal deliverance by
some mighty Conqueror from the subjection they were in to the Roman Power, so
much more valuable a thing, than an eternal redemption from the powers of Hell
and the Grave? Are the pomps and vanities of this present life, such great
things in Gods account, that it was not possible for his Son to appear without
them? Nay, how unsuitable had it been for one who came to preach humility,
patience, self-denial, and contempt of the world, to have made an ostentation
of the State and Grandeur of it? So that either he must have changed his
Doctrine, or rendered himself liable to the suspicion of seeking to get this
world by the preaching of another. And if his Doctrine had been of another
kind, he might have been esteemed a great person among the Jews, but not the
Son of God, or the promised Messiah, in whom all Nations of the Earth should be
blessed. Which surely they would never have thought themselves to have been, in
one, who must have subdued the neighbor Nations to advance the honor of his
own. But since the Son of God thought fit to appear in another manner than they
expected him, they thought themselves too great to be saved by so mean a
Savior. If he had made all the Kingdoms of the Earth to have bowed under him,
and the Nations about them to have been all tributaries to them; if Jerusalem
had been made the Seat of an Empire as great as the World it self, they would
then have gloried in his Name, and entertained whatever he had said, whether
true or false, with a wonderful Veneration. But Truth in an humble dress meets
with few admirers; they could not imagine so much Power and Majesty could ever
shroud it self under so plain a disguise. Thus Christ came to his own, and 1
John 11.
his own received him not. Yea, those that should have known him the best of
all others; those who frequently conversed with him, and heard him speak as
never man spoke, and saw him do what never man did, were yet so blinded by the
meanness of his Parentage and Education, that they baffle their own Reason, and
persist in their Infidelity, because they knew the place and manner of his
breeding; the names of his Mother and his Brethren and Sisters; are they not
all with us? whence Matthew. 13. 55, 56.
then has this man all these things? As though, Is not this the Carpenters
Son, had been sufficient answer to all he could say or do.

2. The disparagement of his Miracles. Since the bare proposal of his Doctrine,
though never so reasonable, could not prevail with them to believe him to be
the Son of God, he offers them a further proof of it by the mighty works which
were wrought by him. And though the more ingenuous among them were ready to
acknowledge, that no man could do the things which he did, unless God were with
him: John 3. 2.
yet they who were resolved to hear and see, and not understand; when they
found it not for their credit, to deny matters of fact so universally known and
attested, they seek all the means to blast the reputation of them that may be.
Sometimes raising popular insinuations against him, that he was a man of no
austere life, a friend of Publicans and sinners, one that could choose no other
day to do his works on, but that very day wherein God himself did rest from
his; and therefore no great regard was to be had to what such a one did. When
these arts would not take, but the people found the benefit of his Miracles, in
healing the sick, curing the blind and the lame, feeding the hungry; then they
undervalue all these in comparison with the wonders that were wrought by Moses
in the Wilderness. If he would have made the Earth to open her mouth, and
swallow up the City and the power of Rome; if he would have fed a mighty Army
with bread from Heaven, in stead of feeding some few thousands with very small
Provisions; if in stead of raising one Lazarus from the Grave, he would have
raised up their Sampsons, and their David's, their men of spirit and conduct,
whose very presence would have put a new life, into the hearts of the people;
if in stead of casting out Devils, he would have cast out the Romans, whom they
hated the worse of the two: if he would have set himself to the cure of a
distempered State, instead of healing the maladies of some few inconsiderable
persons: if instead of being at the expense of a Miracle to pay tribute, he
would have hindered them from paying any at all; then a Second Moses would have
been too mean a title for him, he could have been no less than the promised
Messiah, the Son of God. But while he employed his power another way, the
demonstration of it made them hate him the more; since they thought with
themselves what strange things they would have done with it for the benefit of
their Country; and therefore express the greatest malice against him, because
he would not employ it as they would have him. From thence, they condemn his
Miracles as only some effects of a Magical skill; and say, he dispossessed the
lesser Devils by the power of him that was the Prince among them. So unworthy a
requital did they make for all the mighty works which had been done among them;
Which, as our Savior says, if they had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would Mat. 11. 21.
have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.

3. But although all this argued a strange spirit of contradiction in them to
all the designs for their own good; yet the malice from whence that rose, would
not stop here; for as they had long contrived his ruin, so they watched only
an opportunity to effect it. Which his frequent presence at Jerusalem seemed to
put into their hands, but his reputation with the people made them fearful of
embracing it. Therefore they employ their Agents to deal privately with one of
his Disciples who might be fittest for their design; and to work upon his
covetous humor by the promise of a reward, to bring him to betray his Master
with the greatest privacy into their hands. This Judas undertakes, knowing the
place and season of his Masters retirements, not far from the City, where they
might with the greatest secrecy and safety seize upon his person. Which
contrivance of theirs our Savior was not at all ignorant of; but prepares
himself and his Disciples for this great encounter. He institutes his solemn
Supper, to be perpetually observed in remembrance of his death and sufferings;
after which he discourses admirably with his Disciples, to arm them against
their future sufferings; and prays that most divine Prayer, S. John 17. which
he had no sooner finished, but he goes with his Disciples to the usual place of
his retirement in a Garden at the foot of the Mount of Olives. And now begins
the blackest Scene of sufferings that ever was acted upon humane Nature. Which
was so great, that the Son of God himself expresses a more than usual
apprehension of it; which he discovered by the Agony he was in, in which he
sweat drops of blood; by the earnestness of his Luke 22. 44.
Prayer, falling upon his knees, and praying thrice, saying, O my Father, if it
be Mat. 26. 39.
possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. Surely, this Cup must needs have a great deal of bitterness in it, which
the Son of God was so earnest to be freed from. If there had been nothing in it
but what is commonly incident to humane Nature, as to the apprehensions of
death or pain, it seems strange, that he who had the greatest innocence, the
most perfect charity, the freest resignation of himself, the fullest assurance
of the reward to come, should express a greater sense of the horror of his
sufferings, than thousands did, who suffered for his sake. But now was the hour
come wherein the Son of God was to be made a Sacrifice for the sins of Men;
wherein he was to bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows; when he was to be
wounded Isa. 53. 4. 5.
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; now his soul was
exceeding sorrowful Mat. 26. 38.
even unto death; for now the hour of his enemies was come, and the power of
Luke 22, 53.
darkness. And accordingly they improve it; they come out against him as a
Malefactor, with swords and staves, and having seized his Person, being
betrayed into their hands by one of his Disciples, they carry him to the High
Priests house, where his professed enemies presently condemn him of Blasphemy,
and not content Mat. 26. 66, 67.
with this, they express the greatest contempt of him, for they spit in his
face, they buffet him, and smite him with the Palms of their hands, they mock
him, and bid him prophecy who it was that smote him; so insolent was their
malice grown, and so spightfull was their indignation against him. And so
fearful were they, lest he should escape their hands, that the very next
morning early, they send him bound to the Roman Governor, to have the sentence
pronounced against him, to whom they accuse him of Sedition and Treason; but
Pilate upon examination of him declares, he found no fault in Luke 23. 4.
him; which made them heap more unreasonable calumnies upon him, being resolved
by what means soever to take away his life. Nay, the price of the blood of the
Son of God was fallen so low with them, that they preferred the life of a known
seditious person, and a Murderer before him. And when Pilate being
unsatisfied, asked still, what evil he had aone? Mat. 27. 23.
they continue their importunity without any other answer but Crucify him, and
making up what wanted in Justice and Reason in the loudness of their clamors.
And at last seeing the fury and madness of the people, with the protestation of
his own innocence as to his blood, he delivers him up to the people; and now he
is stripped, and scourged, and mocked, with a Crown of Thorns, a Scarlet Robe,
and a Reed in his hand: all the indignities they could think of, they put upon
him. But though it pleased them, to have him exposed to all the ignominies
imaginable, yet nothing would satisfy them but his blood; and therefore he is
led forth to be crucified, and though so lately scourged and weakened by his
sorrows, yet he is made to carry his own Cross (at least through the City) for
no other death could satisfy them, but the most ignominious, and painful. And
when he was brought to the place of Crucifixion, they nail his hands and feet
to the Cross, and while he was hanging there, they deride and mock him still,
they divide his garments before his face, give him Gall and Vinegar to drink,
and the last act of violence committed upon him, was the piercing of his side,
so that out of his Pericardium issued both water and blood. Thus did the Son of
John 19. 34.
God suffer at the hands of unreasonable men; thus was the blood of that
immaculate Lamb spilt by the hands of violence; and he who left the bosom of
his Father, to bring us to glory, was here treated as if he had been unworthy
to live upon the Earth.

2. But that which yet heightens these sufferings of Christ, is to consider,
from whom he suffered these things, it was from sinners; which is as much as to
say, from men, if the word were taken in the largest sense of it; for all have
sinned; but being taken by us in opposition to other men, so it implies a
greater height of wickedness in these than in other persons. But this is not
here to be considered absolutely, as denoting what kind of persons he suffered
from, but with a particular respect to the nature of their proceedings with
him, and the obligations that lay upon them to the contrary. So that the first
shows the injustice and unreasonableness of them; the second, their great
ingratitude, considering the kindness and good will which he expressed toward
them.

1. The Injustice and unreasonableness of their proceedings against him. It is
true indeed, (what Socrates said to his wife, when she complained that he
suffered unjustly, What, says he, and would you have me suffer justly?) it is
much greater comfort to the person who does suffer, when he does it unjustly,
but it is a far greater reflection on those who were the causes of it. And that
our Blessed Savior did suffer with the greatest injustice from these men, is
apparent from the falseness and weakness of all the accusations which were
brought against him. To accuse the Son of God for Blasphemy, in saying, he was
so, is as unjust as to condemn a King for treason, because he says he is a
King: they ought to have examined the grounds on which he called himself so;
and if he had not given pregnant evidences of it, than to have passed sentence
upon him as an Impostor and Blasphemer. If the thing were true, that he was
what he said, the Son of God, what horrible guilt was it in them, to imbrue
their hands in his blood? and they found he always attested it, and now was
willing to lay down his life to confirm the truth of what he said. This surely
ought at least to have made them more inquisitive into what he had affirmed;
but they allow him not the liberty of a fair trial; they hasten and
precipitate the sentence, that they might do so the execution. If he were
condemned as a false Prophet; (for that seems to be the occasion of the
Sanhedrim meeting to do it, to whom the cognizance of that did particularly
belong) why do they not mention what it was he had foretold, which had not come
to pass; or what reason do they give why he had usurped such an Office to
himself? If no liberty were allowed under pain of death for any to say, that
they were sent from God, how was it possible for the Messiah ever to appear,
and not be condemned? for the expectation of him was, that he should be a great
person immediately sent from God, for the delivery of his people. And should he
be sent from God, and not say that he was so? for how then could men know that
he was? So that their way of proceeding with him, discovers it self to be
manifestly unjust, and contrary to their own avowed expectations. Neither were
they more successful in the accusation of him before Pilate; why did not the
witnesses appear to make good the charge of sedition and treason against him?
where were the proofs of any thing tending that way? Nay, that which abundantly
testified the innocence of our Savior, as to all the matters he was accused
of, was that the Roman Governor, after a full examination of the cause,
declares him innocent, and that not only once but several times, and was fully
satisfied in the Vindication he made of himself; so that nothing but the fear
of what the Jews threatened, viz. accusing him to Caesar (a thing he had cause
enough otherwise to be afraid of) which made him at last yield to their
importunity. But there was one circumstance more which did highly discover the
innocence of Christ, and the injustice of his sufferings, which was Judas's
confession and end; the man who had betrayed his Lord, and had received the
wages of his iniquity; but was so unquiet with it, that in the time when his
other Disciples durst not own him, he with a great impetus returns to them with
his Money, throws it among them with that sad farewell to them all, I have
sinned, in that I have betrayed the Mat. 27. 4.
innocent blood. What could have been said more for his Vindication at this
time than this was, by such a person as Judas, one who had known our Savior
long, and had been the fittest instrument, if any guilt could have been
fastened upon him, to have managed the accusation against him; but the anxiety
of his mind was too great for what he had done already, to live to do them any
longer service; for either his grief suffocated him, or his guilt made him hang
himself; for the words will signify either. Neither can it be said by any
modern Jews, that all the testimony we have of these things is from his own
Disciples; but that certainly they had some greater matter to accuse him of;
which we now have lost. For how is it possible to conceive, that a matter so
important as that was, should be lost by those of their own Nation, who were so
highly concerned to vindicate themselves in all places, as soon as the Gospel
was spread abroad in the World? For the guilt of this blood was every where by
the Chri^^ans charged upon them; and their pro^ sufferings afterward were
imputed wholly by them to the shedding of that blood of Christ, which by a most
solemn imprecation they had said, should be upon them and their Children.
Besides, how comes Celsus, who personates a Jew opposing Christianity, to
mention no other accusations against him but those recorded in the Gospel; and
Origin challenges him Orig. c. Cells. l. 3. p. 123.
or any other person to charge him with any action which might deserve
punishment. And which is very observable, Porphyrie, one of the most inveterate
enemies of Christianity, and that took as much pains to write against it as
any, and had more learning to do it with; yet in his Book of the Philosophy of
Oracles, as S. Augustine tells us, quotes an Oracle wherein August. de Civit.
Dei, l. 19. c. 23.
were these words concerning Christ, And what became of him after his death? it
says, that his Soul was immortal, Viri pietate praestantissimi est illa anima,
and that Cur ergo damnatus est? respondit Dea: corpus quidem debilitantibus
tormentis s^mper oppositum est, anima aut^ piorum coelesti sedi insidet.
it was the soul of a most excellent person for piety; and being then asked,
Why he was condemned? the answer only is, that the body (of the best) is
exposed to weakening torments, but the Soul rests in heavenly habitations. So
that on no account can this contradiction appear to be otherwise than an act of
great injustice and cruelty, and therefore must needs be the contradiction of
sinners.

2. This contradiction of theirs to Christ was an act of high Ingratitude. It
was a sharp but very just rebuke which the Jews received from our Savior, when
they were once ready to stone him; Many good works have I showed you from my
Father, for which of those works do you stone me? The John 10. 32
very same might have been applied to his Judges and accusers, when they were
about to crucify him. For what was his whole Life after he appeared publicly,
but a constant design of doing good? His presence had far more virtue for the
curing all bodily distempers, than the Pool of Bethesda among the Jews, or the
Temples of AEsculapius among the Gentiles. What wonders were made of very small
things done by other persons, as the cure of a blind Man by Vespasian! when
such multitudes of far more certain and considerable cures, can hardly keep up
the reputation of any thing extraordinary in him. But though his kindness was
great to the bodies of men, where they were fit objects of pity and compassion;
yet it was far greater to their souls, that being more agreeable to the design
of his coming into the World; for the other tended to raise such an esteem of
him as might man him the more successful in the cure of their Souls. And to
show, that this was his great business, wherever he comes, he discourses about
these things, takes every opportunity that might be improved for that end,
refuses no company he might do good upon, and converses not with them with the
pride and arrogance of either the Pharisees or Philosophers, but with the
greatest meekness, humility and patience. How admirable are his more solemn
discourses, especially that upon the Mount, and that wherein he takes leave of
his Disciples! How dry and insipid are the most sublime discourses of the
Philosophers compared with these! how clearly does he state our Duties, and
what mighty encouragements does he give to practice them! how forcibly does he
persuade men to self-denial and contempt of the world! how excellent and holy
are all his Precepts! how serviceable to the best interest of men in this life
and that to come! how suitable and desirable to the souls of good men are the
rewards he promises! what exact rule of Righteousness has he prescribed to
men, in doing as they would be done by! with what vehemence does he rebuke all
hypocrisy and Pharisaism! with what tenderness and kindness does he treat
those that have any real inclinations to true goodness! with what earnestness
does he invite, and with what love does he embrace all repenting sinners! with
what care does he instruct, with what mildness does he reprove, with what
patience does he bear with his own disciples! Lastly, with what authority did
he both speak and live, such as commanded a reverence, where it did not beget a
love! And yet after a life thus spent, all the requital he met with, was to be
reproached, despised, and at last crucified. O the dreadful effects of malice
and hypocrisy! for these were the two great enemies which he always
proclaimed open war with; and these at first contrived, and at last effected
his cruel death. What baseness, ingratitude, cruelty, injustice, (and what
not?) will those two sins betray men to, when they have once taken possession
of the hearts of men! for we can find nothing else at the bottom of all that
wretched conspiracy against our Savior; but that his doctrine and design was
too pure and holy for them; and therefore they study to take him away who was
the author of them.

3. We consider, in what way and manner, our Savior underwent all these
sufferings; and this as much as any thing is here propounded to our
consideration. For it is not only who, or what, but in what manner he endured
the contradiction of sinners, that we ought to consider, to prevent fainting
and dejection of mind. So another Apostle tells us, that Christ suffered 1
Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps; who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not
again: when he suffered, be threatened not, but committed himself to him that
judged righteously. He uses none of those ranting expressions which none of the
patientest persons in the world were accustomed to; of bidding them laugh in
Phalaris his Bull; and when they were racked with pains, to cry out, Nil agis
dolor: he tells them not, that it is their duty to have no sense of torments,
and to be jocund and pleasant when their flesh is torn from them, or nailed to
a Cross; if this be any kind of fortitude, it is rather that of a Gladiator
than of a wise man or a Christian. The worst of men either through a natural
temper of body, or having hardened themselves by custom, have born the greatest
torments with the least expression of grief under them. And Panaetius, one of
the wisest of the Stoics, is so far from making insensibleness of pain the
property of a wise man, that he makes it not the property of a man. The
inferior Creatures are called Brutes from their dullness and insensibleness,
and not merely from want of reason, any further than that one follows from the
other: bruta existimantur animalium quibus cor durum riget, Plin. Not. Hist. l.
11. 37.
says Pliny, those animals are called Brutes which have the hardest hearts:
and the nearer any of them approach to the nature of man, the more apprehensive
they are of danger, and the more sensible of pain; thence Scaliger says of the
Elephant, that it is maxima bellua, sed non maxim Scalig. hist. anim. l. 2..
133.
bruta, though it be the greatest beast, it is the least a Brute. Stupidity
then under sufferings can be no part of the excellency of a man; which in its
greatest height is in the Beings the most beneath him. But when danger is
understood, and pain felt, and Nature groans under it, then with patience and
submission to undergo it, and to conquer all the strugglings of Nature against
it, that is the duty and excellency of a Christian. If to express the least
sense of grief and pain, be the highest excellency of suffering, the Macedonian
boy that suffered his flesh to be burnt by a Coal, till it grew offensive to
all about him, without altering the posture of his arm, lest he should disturb
Alexanders sacrifice, out-did the greatest Philosophers of them all.
Possidonius his pitiful rant over a fit of the Gout, so highly commended by
Pompey and Tully; O pain, it Tull. Tusculan. l. 2.
is to no purpose; though thou be troublesome, I will never confess thou art
evil; falls extremely short of the resolution of the Macedonian boy, or any of
the Spartan Youths, who would not in the midst of torments so much as confess
them troublesome. And what a mighty revenge was that, that he would not confess
it to be evil, when his complaint that it was troublesome, was a plain argument
that he thought it so. It is not then the example of Zeno or Cleanthes, or the
rules of Stoicisme, which Dionysius Heracleotes, in a fit of the Stone
complained of the folly of, that are to be the measures of patience, and
courage in bearing sufferings; but the example and Precepts of our Lord and
Savior, who expressed a great sense of his sufferings, but withal the
greatest submission under them. When Lipsius lay Aub. Miraeus in vita Lipsii p.
60.
a dying, and one of the bystanders knowing how conversant he had been in the
Stoics writings, began to suggest some of their Precepts to him, Vana sunt
ista, said he, I find all those but vain things; and beholding the Picture of
our Savior near his bed, he pointed to that, and cried, haec vera est
patientia: there is the true pattern of Patience. For, notwithstanding that
Agony he was in, immediately before his being betrayed, when he sees the
Officers coming toward him, he asks them whom they seek for? and tells them, I
am he; which words so astonished them, that they went back, and fell upon the
ground: John 18. 6.
thereby letting them understand how easy a matter it was for him to have
escaped their hands; and that it was his own free consent, that he went to
suffer, for he knew certainly before hand, the utmost that he was to undergo,
and therefore it was no unreasonable impetus, but a settled resolution of his
mind to endure all the contradictions of sinners. When he was spi^ upon,
mocked, reproached and scourged, none of all these could draw one impatient
expression from him. The malice and rage of his enemies did not at all provoke
him; unless it were to pity and pray for them. And that he did, with great
earnestness in the midst of all his pains: and though he would not plead for
himself to them, yet he pleads for them to God; Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. How much more divine was this, than the admired
Theramenes among the Greeks, who being condemned to dye by the thirty Tyrants,
when he was drinking off his cup of Poison, said, he drank that to Critias, one
of his most bitter enemies, and hoped he would pledge it shortly. Socrates
seemed not to express seriousness enough at least, when he bid one of his
friends, when he was dying, offer up a Cock to AEsculapius for his deliverance.
Aristides and Phocion among the Greeks came the nearest to our Saviors temper,
when one prayed, that his Country might have no cause to remember him when he
was gone, and the other charged his Son, to forget the injuries they had done
him; but yet by how much the greater the person and office was of our Blessed
Savior, than of either of them, by how much the cruelty and ignominy, as well
as pain was greater which they exposed him to, by how much greater concernment
there is to have such an offense pardoned by one that can punish it with
eternal misery, than not revenged by those, who though they may have will, have
not always power to execute; so much greater was the kindness of our Savior
to his enemies, in his Prayer upon the Cross, than of either of the other, in
their concernment for that ungrateful City, that had so ill requited their
services to it. Thus when the Son of God was oppressed, and afflicted, he
opened not his mouth, but only in Prayer for them, Isa. 53. 7.
who were his bitter enemies; and though nothing had been more easy than for
him to have cleared himself from all their accusations, who had so often
baffled them before; yet he would not now give them that suspicion of his
innocence, as to make any Apology for himself; but committed himself to God
that judges righteously, and was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep before her shearers was dumb, so he opened not his mouth. And the reason
thereof was, he knew what further design for the good of mankind was carrying
on by the bitterness of his passion, and that all the cruel usage he underwent,
was that he might be a sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the World. Which
leads to the last thing propounded to our consideration.

4. Which is, the causes why God was pleased to suffer his Son to endure such
contradiction of sinners against himself. I know it is an easy answer to say,
that God had determined it should be so, and that we ought to enquire no
further: but sure such an answer can satisfy none who consider, how much our
salvation depends upon the knowledge of it, and how clear and express the
Scripture is in assigning the causes of the sufferings of Christ. Which though
as far as the instruments were concerned in it, we have given an account of
already, yet considering the particular management of this grand affair by the
care of divine Providence, a higher account must be given of it, why so divine
and excellent a person should be exposed to all the contempt and reproach
imaginable, and after being made a sacrifice to the tongues and rods of the
people, than to dye a painful and ignominious death? So that allowing but that
common care of divine Providence, which all sober Heathens acknowledged, so
transcendent sufferings as these were, of so holy and innocent a person, ought
to be accounted for, in a more than ordinary manner; when they thought
themselves concerned to vindicate the Justice of Gods Providence in the common
calamities of those who are reputed to be better than the generality of
Mankind. But the reasons assigned in that common case will not hold here, since
this was a person immediately sent from God upon a particular message to the
World, and therefore might plead an exemption by virtue of his Embassage from
the common Arrests and troubles of humane nature. But it was so far otherwise,
as though God had designed him on purpose to let us see how much misery humane
nature can undergo. Some think themselves to go as far as their reason will
permit them; when they tell us, that he suffered all these things to confirm
the truth of what he had said, and particularly the Promise of Remission of
sins, and that he might be an example to others, who should go to Heaven by
suffering afterward, and that he might, being touched with the feeling of our
infirmities here, have the greater pity upon us now he is in Heaven. All these
I grant to have been true and weighty reasons of the sufferings of Christ, in
subordination ^o greater ends, but if there had been nothing beyond all this, I
can neither understand why he should suffer so deeply as he did, nor why the
Scripture should insist upon a far greater reason more than upon any of these?
I grant, the death of Christ did confirm the truth of his Doctrine, as far as
it is unreasonable to believe that any one who knew his Doctrine to be false,
would make himself miserable to make others believe it; but if this had been
all intended, why would not an easier and less ignominious death have served?
since he who would be willing to die to confirm a falsehood, would not be
thought to confirm a truth by his death, because it was painful and shameful.
Why, if all his sufferings were designed as a testimony to others, of the truth
of what he spoke, were the greatest of his sufferings, such as none could know
the anguish of them but himself, I mean his Agony in the Garden, and that which
made him cry out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why
were not his Miracles enough to confirm the truth of his Doctrine? since the
Law of Moses was received without his death, by the evidence his Miracles gave
that he was sent from God; since the Doctrine of remission of sins had been
already delivered by the Prophets, and received by the People of the Jews;
since those who would not believe for his Miracles sake, neither would they
believe though they should have seen him rise from the Grave, and therefore not
surely because they saw him put into it. But of all things, the manner of our
Saviors sufferings seems least designed to bring the World to the belief of
his Doctrine, which was the main obstacle to the entertainment of it among the
men of greatest reputation for wisdom and knowledge. For it was Christ
crucified, which was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks 1 Cor. 1.
23.
foolishness. Had the Apostles only preached that the Son of God had appeared
from Heaven, and discovered the only way to bring men thither, that he assumed
our Nature for a time to render himself capable of conversing with us, and
therein had wrought many strange and stupendous miracles, but after he had
sufficiently acquainted the World with the nature of his doctrine, he was again
assumed up into Heaven; in all probability, the doctrine might have been so
easily received by the world, as might have saved the lives of many thousand
persons, who dyed as Martyrs for it. And if it had been necessary that some
must have dyed to confirm it, why must the Son of God himself do it? when he
had so many Disciples who willingly sacrificed their lives for him, and Quod
caetera etiam foedera caeso animali aliquo sa^ciri, and sanguin^ ejus
confirmari solerent. Cr^ll. c. Grot. ad cap. 1. p. 29.
whose death would on that account have been as great a confirmation of the
truth of it as his own. But if it be alleged further, that God now entering
into a Covenant with man for the pardon of sin, the sheding of the blood of
Christ was necessary as a federal rite to confirm it. I answer, if only as a
federal rite, why no cheaper blood would serve to confirm it but that of the
Son of God? We never read that any Covenant was confirmed by the death of one
of the contracting parties; and we cannot think that God was so prodigal of the
blood of his Son, to have it shed only in allusion to some ancient customs. But
if there were such a necessity of alluding to them, why might not the blood of
any other person have done it? when yet all that custom was no more, but that a
sacrifice should be offered, and upon the parts of the sacrifice divided, they
did solemnly swear and ratify their Covenant. And if this be yielded them, it
then follows from V. Heins. not. ad Sil. p. 9, 10.
this custom, that Christ must be considered as a sacrifice in his death; and
so the ratification of the Covenant must be consequent to that oblation which
he made of himself upon the Cross. Besides, how incongruous must this needs be,
that the death of Christ the most innocent person in the World, without any
respect to the guilt of sin, should suffer so much on purpose to assure us,
that God will pardon those who are guilty of it? May we not much rather infer
the contrary, considering the holiness and justice of Gods nature; if he dealt
so severely with the green tree, how much more will he with the dry? If one so
innocent suffered so much, what then may the guilty expect? If a Prince should
suffer the best subject he has, to be severely punished, could ever any
imagine that it was with a design to assure them that he would pardon the most
rebellious? No; but would it not rather make men afraid of being too innocent,
for fear of suffering too much for it? And those who seem very careful to
preserve the honor of Gods Justice, in not punishing one for another faults,
ought likewise to maintain it in the punishing of one who had no fault at all
to answer for. And to think to escape this by saying, that to such a person
such things are calamities, but no punishments, is to revive the ancient
exploded Stoicism, which thought to reform the diseases of Mankind by mere
changeing the names of things, though never so contrary to the common sense of
humane nature: which judges of the nature of punishments by the evils men
undergo, and the ends they are designed for. And by the very same reason that
God might exercise his dominion on so innocent a person as our Savior was,
without any respect to sin as the moving cause to it, he might lay eternal
torments on a most innocent Creature (for degrees and continuance do not alter
the reason of things) and then escape with the same evasion, that this was no
act of injustice in God, because it was a mere exercise of Dominion. And when
once a sinner comes to be persuaded by this that God will pardon him, it must
be by the hopes that God will show kindness to the guilty, because he shows so
little to the innocent; and if this be agreeable to the Justice and Holiness of
Gods nature, it is hard to say what is repugnant to it. If to this it be said,
that Christ's consent made it no unjust exercise of dominion in God toward him:
it is easily answered, that the same consent will make it less injustice in God
to lay the punishment of our sins upon Christ, upon his undertaking to satisfy
for us; for then the consent supposes a meritorious cause of punishment; but in
this case the consent implies none at all. And we are now enquiring into the
reasons of such sufferings, and consequently of such a consent; which cannot be
imagined but upon very weighty motives, such as might make it just in him to
consent, as well as in God to inflict.

Neither can it be thought that all the design of the sufferings of Christ, was
to give us an example and an encouragement to suffer our selves; though it does
so in a very great measure, as appears by the Text it self. For the hopes of an
eternal reward for these short and light afflictions, ought to be encouragement
enough, to go through the miseries of this life in expectation of a better to
come. And the Cloud of Witnesses, both under the Law and the Gospel, of those
who have suffered for righteousness sake, ought to make no one think it
strange, if he must endure that, which so many have done before him, and been
crowned for it. And lastly, to question whether Christ could have pity enough
upon us in our sufferings, unless he had suffered so deeply himself; will lead
men to distrust the pity and compassion of Almighty God, because he was never
capable of suffering, as we do. But the Scripture is very plain and full (to
all those who rack not their minds to pervert it) in assigning a higher reason
than all these of the sufferings of Christ, viz. That Christ suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust; that 1 Pet. 3. 18.
his soul was made an offering for sin, and that the Lord therefore as on a
sacrifice of atonement, Isa. 53. 10.
laid on him the iniquities of us all: that, V. 6.
through the eternal Spirit, he offered himself without spot to God, and did
appear to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; that he was Heb. 9. 14. V.
27.
made a propitiation for our sins; that, he laid down his life as a price of
Redemption for 1 John 2. 2. 4. 10. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ephesians. 1. 7.
Mankind; that, through his blood we obtain Redemption, even the forgiveness
of sins, which in a more particular manner is attributed to the blood of
Christ, as the procuring cause Col. 1. 14.
of it. That he dyed to reconcile God and us Romans 3. 24, 25. Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor.
5. 19, 21.
together; and that the Ministry of Reconciliation, is founded on Gods making
him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him: and that we may not think that all this Reconciliation respects
us and not God; he is said to offer up himself to God; and for this Heb. 9. 14,
15.
cause to be a Mediator of the New Testament, and to be a faithful High Priest
in things pertaining Heb. 2. 17.
to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: and every
High Priest, taken from among men is ordained for men in 5. 1.
things pertaining to God; not appointed by God in things merely tending to the
good of men; which is rather the Office of a Prophet than a Priest. So that
from all these places it may easily appear, that the blood of Christ is to be
looked on as a sacrifice of Atonement for the sins of the World. Not as though
Christ did suffer the very same which we should have suffered, for that was
eternal death as the consequent of guilt in the person of the Offender, and
then the discharge must have been immediately consequent upon the payment, and
no room had been left for the freeness of remission, or for the conditions
required on our parts; But that God was pleased to accept of the death of his
Son, as a full, perfect, sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for
the sins of the World; as our Church expresses it; and in consideration of the
sufferings of his Son, is pleased to offer pardon of sin upon sincere
repentance, and eternal life upon a holy obedience to his will. Thus much for
the things we are to consider concerning the contradiction of sinners which
Christ endured against himself.

Nothing now remains, but the influence that ought to have upon us, lest we be
weary and faint in our minds. For which end I shall suggest two things.

1. The vast disproportion between Christ's sufferings and ours. 2. The great
encouragement we have from his sufferings, to bear our own the better.
1. The vast Disproportion between Christ's sufferings and our own. Our lot is
fallen into suffering times; and we are apt enough to complain of it. I will
not say it is wholly true of us, what the Moralist says generally of the
complaints of men, Non quia dura sed quia molles patimur; that it is not the
hardness of our conditions so much as the softness of our spirits which makes
us complain of them. For I must needs say, this City has smarted by such a
series and succession of judgments which few Cities in the world could
parallel in so short a time. The Plague has emptied its houses, and the fire
consumed them; the War exhausted our spirits, and it were well if Peace
recovered them. But still these are but the common calamities of humane nature,
things that we ought to make account of in the World; and to grow the better by
them. And it were happy for this City; if our thankfulness and obedience were
but answerable to the mercies we yet enjoy: let us not make our condition worse
by our fears; nor our fears greater than they need to be: for no enemy can be
so bad as they. Thanks be to God our condition is much better at present than
it has been; let us not make it worse by fearing it may be so. Complaints will
never end till the World does; and we may imagine that will not last much
longer; when the City thinks it has trade enough, and the Country riches
enough. But I will not go about to persuade you that your condition is better
than it is, for I know it is to no purpose to do so; all men will believe as
they feel. But suppose our condition were much worse than it is; yet what were
all our sufferings compared with those of our Savior for us? the sins that
make us smart, wounded him much deeper; they pierced his side, which only touch
our skin; we have no cause to complain of the bitterness of that Cup which he
has drunk off the dreggs of already. We lament over the ruins of a City, and
are revived with any hopes of seeing it rise out of the dust; but Christ saw
the ruins that sin caused in all mankind, he undertook the repairing them, and
putting men into a better condition than before: And we may easily think what a
difficult task he had of it; when he came to restore them who were delighted in
their ruins, and thought themselves too good to be mended. It is the comfort of
our miseries, (if they be only in this life) that we know they cannot last
long; but that is the great aggravation of our Saviors sufferings, that the
contradiction of sinners continues against him still. Witness, the Atheism, I
cannot so properly call it, as the Antichristianism of this present Age;
wherein so many profane persons act over again the part of the Scribes and
Pharisees; they slight his Doctrine, despise his Person, disparage his
Miracles, contemn his Precepts, and undervalue his Sufferings. Men live as if
it were in defiance to his holy Laws; as though they feared not what God can
do, so much as to need a Mediator between him and them. If ever men tread under
foot the Son of God, it is when they think themselves to be above the need of
him; if ever they count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, it is not
only when they do not value it as they ought, but when they exercise their
profane wits upon it. Blessed Savior! was it not enough for thee to bear the
contradiction of sinners upon Earth; but thou must still suffer so much at the
hands of those whom thou dyedst for, that thou might bring them to Heaven?
was it not enough for thee to be betrayed on Earth, but thou must be defied in
Heaven? Was it not enough for thee to stoop so low for our sakes, but that thou
should be trampled on because thou did it? was the ignominious death upon
the Cross too small a thing for thee to suffer in thy Person, unless thy
Religion be contemned, and exposed to as much shame and mockery as thy self
was? Unhappy we, that live to hear of such things! but much more unhappy if any
of our sins have been the occasion of them: If our unsuitable lives to the
Gospel have opened the mouths of any against so excellent a Religion. If any
malice and revenge, any humor and peevishness, any pride or hypocrisy, any
sensuality and voluptuousness, any injustice, or too much love of gain, have
made others despise that Religion which so many pretend to, and so few
practice. If we have been in any measure guilty of this, as we love our
Religion, and the honor of our Savior, let us endeavor by the holiness and
meekness of our spirits, the temperance and justice of our actions, the
patience and contentedness of our minds, to recover the honor of that Religion
which only can make us happy, and our Posterity after us.

2. What Encouragement we have from the sufferings of Christ, to bear our own
the better; because we see by his example that God deals no more hardly with
us, than he did with his own Son, if he lays heavy things upon us. Why should
we think to escape, when his own Son underwent so much? if we meet with
reproaches, and ill usage, with hard measure, and a mean condition, with
injuries and violence, with mockings and affronts, nay with a shameful and a
painful death, what cause have we to complain, for did not the Son of God
undergo all these things before us? If any of your Habitations have been
consumed, that you have been put to your shifts where to lodge your selves, or
your Families; consider, that though the Foxes Mat. 8. 20.
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, yet the Son of Man had not
whereon to lay his head. If your condition be mean and low, think of him, who
being in the form Phil. 2. 6, 7.
of God, took upon him the form of a servant; and though he was rich, yet for
your sakes he 2 Cor. 8, 9.
became poor, that through his poverty ye might be made rich. If you are
unjustly defamed and reproached, consider what contumelies and disgraces the
Son of God underwent for you. If you are in pain and trouble, think of his
Agony and bloody sweat, the nailing of his hands and feet to the Cross, to be a
sacrifice for the expiation of your sins. Never think much of undergoing any
thing, whereby you may Romans 8. 29.
be conformable to the Image of the Son of God, knowing this, that if ye suffer
with him, ye V. 17.
shall also be glorified together. And you have never yet set a true estimate
and value upon things, if you reckon the sufferings of this present life worthy
to be compared with V. 18.
the glory which shall be revealed. Which Glory ought always to bear up our
minds under our greatest afflictions here; and the thoughts of that, will
easily bring us to the thoughts of his sufferings, who by his own blood
purchased an eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9. 12.
Therefore, consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the TRUE REASON OF THE Sufferings OF CHRIST.

By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1669.

A DISCOURSE concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ.
CHAP. I.
Of the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture. Of the uncertainty it leaves us
in as to the main articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of Genesis 1.
suitable to that way. The state of the Controversy in general concerning the
sufferings of Christ for us. He did not suffer the same we should have done.
The grand mistake in making Punishments of the nature of Debts; the difference
between them at large discovered, from the different reason and ends of them.
The right of punishment in God, proved against Crellius, not to arise from mere
dominion. The end of Punishment not bare Compensation, as it is in debts; what
punishment due to an injured person by the right of Nature; proper punishment a
result of Laws. Crellius his great mistake about the end of Punishments. Not
designed for satisfaction of Anger as it is a desire of Revenge. Seneca and
Lactantius vindicated against Crellius. The Magistrates interest in Punishment
distinct from that of private persons. Of the nature of Anger in God, and the
satisfaction to be made to it. Crellius his great arguments against
satisfaction depend on a false N^tion of Gods anger. Of the ends of divine
Punishments, and the different nature of them in this and the future. 1. The
Introduction, concerning the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture.
state.

SIR,
ALthough the Letter I received from your hands contained in it so many
mistakes of my meaning and design, that it seemed to be the greatest civility
to the Writer of it, to give no answer at all to it; because that could not be
done, without the discovery of far more weaknesses in him, than he pretends to
find in my discourse: Yet the weight and importance of the matter may require
a further account from me, concerning the true reason of the sufferings of
Christ. Wherein my design was so far from representing old Errors to the best
advantage, or to rack my wits to defend them, as that person seems to suggest;
that I aimed at nothing more than to give a true account of what upon a serious
enquiry, I judged to be the most natural and genuine meaning of the Christian
Doctrine contained in the Writings of the New Testament.

For finding therein such multitudes of expressions which to an unprejudiced
mind attribute all the mighty effects of the Love of God to us, to the
obedience and sufferings of Christ. I began to consider what reason there was
why the plain and easy sense of those places must be forsaken, and a remote
and Metaphorical meaning put upon them. Which I thought my self the more
obliged to do, because I could not conceive if it had been the design of the
Scripture, to have delivered the received Doctrine of the Christian Church,
concerning the reason of the sufferings of Christ, that it could have been more
clearly and fully expressed than it is already. So that supposing that to have
been the true meaning of the several places of Scripture which we contend for;
yet the same arts and subtilties might have been used to pervert it, which are
employed to persuade men that is not the true meaning of them. And what is
equally serviceable to truth and falsehood, can of it self, have no power on the
minds of men to convince them it must be one, and not the other. Nay, if every
unusual and improper acception of words in the Scripture, shall be thought
sufficient to take away the natural and genuine sense, where the matter is
capable of it; I know scarce any article of Faith can be long secure; and by
these arts men may declare that they believe the Scriptures, and yet believe
nothing of the Christian Faith. For if the improper, though unusual acception
of those expressions of Christ's dying for us, of redemption, propitiation,
reconciliation by his blood, of his bearing our iniquities, and being made sin
and a curse for us, shall be enough to invalidate all the arguments taken from
them to prove that which the proper sense of them does imply; why may not the
improper use of the terms of Creation and Resurrection, as well take away the
natural sense of them in the great Articles of the Creation of the World, and
Resurrection after death. For if it be enough to prove that Christ's dying for
us, does not imply dying in our stead; because sometimes dying for others
imports no more than dying for some advantage to come to them; if redemption
being sometimes used for mere deliverance, shall make our redemption by Christ,
wholly Metaphorical; if the terms of propitiation, reconciliation, etc. shall
lose their force because they are sometimes used where all things cannot be
supposed parallel with the sense we contend for: why shall I be bound to
believe that the World was ever created in a proper sense, since those persons
against whom I argue, so earnestly contend that in those places in which it
seems as proper as any, it is to be understood only in a metaphorical. If when
the World and all things are said to be made by Christ, Joh. 1. 3. 10.
we are not to understand the production but the reformation of the World and
all things in it, although the natural sense of the Words be quite otherwise;
what argument can make it necessary for me not to understand the Creation of
the World in a metaphorical sense, when Moses delivers to us the history of it?
Why may not I understand in the beginning, Genesis 1. for the beginning of the
Mosaical Dispensation, as well as Socinus does in the beginning, John 1. for
the beginning of the Evangelical? and that from the very same argument used by
him, viz. that in the beginning is to be understood of the main subject
concerning which the author intends to write, and that I am as sure it was in
Moses concerning the Law given by him, as it was in S. John, concerning the
Gospel delivered by Christ. Why may not the Creation of the Heavens and the
Earth, be no more than the erection of the Jewish Polity? since it is
acknowledged, that by New Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells righteousness,
no more is understood than a new state of things under the Gospel? Why may not
the confused Chaos import no more than the state of Ignorance and darkness
under which the World was before the Law of Moses? since it is confessed that
it signifies in the New Testament such a state of the World before the Gospel
appeared? and consequently, why may not the light which made the first day be
the first tendencies to the Doctrine of Moses, which being at first divided and
scattered, was united afterward in one great Body of Laws, which was called
the Sun, because it was the great Director of the Jewish Nation, and therefore
said to rule the day; as the less considerable Laws of other Nations are called
the Moon, because they were to govern those who were yet under the night of
Ignorance? Why may not the Firmament being in the midst of the Waters, imply
the erection of the Jewish State in the midst of a great deal of trouble, since
it is confessed, that Waters are often taken in Scripture in a Metaphorical
sense for troubles and afflictions? and the Earth appearing out of the Waters,
be no more but the settlement of that State after its troubles; and
particularly with great elegancy after their passage through the Red Sea? And
the production of Herbs and living Creatures, be the great increase of the
People of all sorts, as well those of a meaner rank (and therefore called
herbs) as those of a higher, that were to live upon the other, and sometimes
trample upon them, and therefore by way of excellency called the living
Creatures? And when these were multiplied and brought into order, (which being
done by steps and degrees, is said to be finished in several days) then the
State and the Church flourished, and enjoyed a great deal of pleasure, which
was the production of Man and Woman, and their being placed in Paradise (for a
perfect Man, notes a high degree of perfection, and a Woman is taken for the
Church in the Revelations): But when they followed the Customs of other Nations
which were as a forbidden tree to them, than they lost all their happiness and
pleasure, and were expelled out of their own Country, and lived in great
slavery and misery, which was the Curse pronounced against them, for violating
the rules of Policy established among them. Thus you see how small a measure of
wit, by the advantage of those ways of interpreting Scripture, which the
subtilest of our adversaries make use of, will serve to pervert the clearest
expressions of Scripture to quite another sense than was ever intended by the
Writer of them. And I assure you, if that rule of interpreting Scripture be
once allowed, that where words are ever used in a Metaphorical sense, there can
be no necessity of understanding them in a proper; there is scarce any thing
which you look on as the most necessary to be believed in Scripture, but it may
be made appear not to be so upon those terms: for by reason of the paucity and
therefore the ambiguity of the Original words of the Hebrew language, the
strange Idioms of it, the different senses of the same word in several
Conjugations, the want of several modes of expression which are used in other
Languages, and above all the lofty and Metaphorical way of speaking used in all
Eastern Countries, and the imitation of the Hebrew Idioms in the Greek
translation of the Old Testament, and Original of the New, you can hardly affix
a sense upon any words used therein, but a man who will be at the pains to
search all possible significations and uses of those words, will put you hard
to it, to make good that which you took to be the proper meaning of them.
Wherefore although I will not deny to our adversaries the praise of subtilty
and diligence, I cannot give them that, (which is much more praise worthy) viz.
of discretion and sound judgment. For while they use their utmost industry to
search all the most remote and Metaphorical senses of words, with a design to
take off the genuine and proper meaning of them, they do not attend to the ill
consequence that may be made of this to the overthrowing those things, the
belief of which themselves make necessary to salvation. For by this way the
whole Gospel may be made an Allegory, and the Resurrection of Christ be thought
as metaphorical as the Redemption by his Death, and the force of all the
Precepts of the Gospel avoided by some unusual signification of the words
wherein they are delivered. So that nothing can be more unreasonable than such
a method of proceeding, unless it be first sufficiently proved that the matter
is not capable of the proper sense, and therefore of necessity the improper
only is to be allowed. And this is that which Socinus seems after all his pains
to pervert the meaning of the places in controversy, to rely on most; viz.
That the Doctrine of satisfaction Socin. de Servat. Part 2. Cap. 4
does imply an impossibility in the thing it self, and therefore must needs be
false; nay, he says the infallibility of the Revealer had not been enough in
this Case, supposing that Christ had said it, and risen from the dead, to
declare his own Veracity; unless he had declared it by its proper causes and
effects, and so showed the possibility of the thing it self. And the reason, he
says, why they believe their Doctrine true, is not barely because God has
said it, but they believe certainly that God has said it, because they know it
to be true; by knowing the contrary Doctrine to be impossible. The controversy
then, concerning the meaning of the places in dispute is to be resolved from
the nature and reasonableness of the matter contained in them: for if Socinus
his reason were answerable to his confidence, if the account we give of the
sufferings of Christ, were repugnant not only to the Justice, Goodness and
Grace of God, but to the nature of the thing; if it appear impossible, that
mankind should be redeemed in a proper sense, or that God should be
propitiated by the Death of his Son as a Sacrifice for sin; if it enervate all
the Precepts of Obedience, and tends rather to justify sins than those who do
repent of them, I shall then agree, that no industry can be too great in
searching Authors, comparing places, examining Versions, to find out such a
sense as may be agreeable to the nature of things, the Attributes of God, and
the design of Christian Religion. But if on the contrary, the Scripture does
plainly assert those things from whence our Doctrine follows, and without which
no reasonable account can be given either of the expressions used therein, or
of the sufferings of Christ; if Christ's death did immediately respect God as a
sacrifice, and were paid as a price for our Redemption; if such a design of his
death be so far from being repugnant to the nature of God, that it highly
manifests his Wisdom, Justice and Mercy; if it assert nothing but what is so
far from being impossible, that it is very reconcilable to the common
principles of Reason, as well as the Free Grace of God in the pardon of sin;
if, being truly understood, it is so far from enervating, that it advances
highly all the purposes of Christian Religion, then it can be no less than a
betraying one of the grand Truths of the Christian Doctrine, not to believe
ours to be the true sense of the places in controversy. And this is that which
I now take upon me to maintain.

For our clearer proceeding herein, nothing. 2. The state of the Controversy
in general.
will be more necessary, than to understand the true state of the Controversy;
which has been rendered more obscure by the mistakes of some, who have managed
it with greater zeal than judgment; who have asserted more than they needed to
have done, and made our Adversaries assert much less than they do: And by this
means have shot over their Adversaries heads, and laid their own more open to
assaults. It is easy to observe, that most of Socinus his Arguments are
levelled against an opinion, which few who have considered these things do
maintain, and none need to think themselves obliged to do it; which is, That
Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the sins of men, considered
under the notion of debts, and that he paid the very same, which we ought to
have done; which in the sense of the Law, is never called Satisfaction, but
strict payment. Against this, Socinus disputes from the impossibility of
Christ's paying the very same that we were to have paid; because our penalty was
Eternal death, and that as the consequent of inherent guilt, which Christ
neither did nor could undergo. Neither is it enough to say, That Christ had
undergone Eternal death, unless he had been able to free himself from it; for
the admission of one to pay for another, who could discharge the debt in much
less time than the offenders could, was not the same which the Law required.
For that takes no notice of any other than the persons who had sinned; and if a
Mediator could have paid the same, the Original Law must have been disjunctive;
viz. That either the Offender must suffer, or another for him; but then the
Gospel had not been the bringing in of a better Covenant, but a performance of
the old. But if there be a relaxation or dispensation of the first Law, then it
necessarily follows, that what Christ paid, was not the very same which the
first Law required; for what need of that, when the very same was paid that was
in the obligation? But if it be said, That the Dignity of the person makes up,
what wanted in the kind or degree of punishment: This is a plain confession
that it is not the same, but some thing equivalent, which answers the ends of
the Sanction, as much as the same would have done, which is the thing we
contend for. Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict sense, there
would have followed a deliverance ipso facto; for the release immediately
follows the payment of the same: and it had been injustice to have required any
thing further, in order to the discharge of the Offender, when strict and full
payment had been made of what was in the obligation. But we see that Faith and
Repentance, and the consequences of those two, are made conditions on our
parts, in order to the enjoying the benefit of what Christ has procured: So
that the release is not immediate upon the payment, but depends on a new
contract, made in consideration of what Christ has done and suffered for us.
If it be said, That by Christ's payment we become his, and he requires these
conditions of us; besides the contrariety of it to the Scriptures, which make
the conditions to be required by him to whom the payment was made; we are to
consider, that these very persons assert, that Christ paid all for us, and in
our name and stead; so that the payment by Christ, was by a substitution in our
room; and if he paid the same which the Law required, the benefit must
immediately accrue to those in whose name the debt was paid: For what was done
in the name of another, is all one to the Creditor, as if it had been done by
the Debtor himself. But above all things, it is impossible to reconcile the
freeness of remission, with the full payment of the very same which was in the
obligation. Neither will it serve to say, That though it was not free to
Christ, yet it was to us: For the satisfaction and remission must respect the
same person; for Christ did not pay for himself, but for us, neither could the
remission be to him: Christ therefore is not considered in his own name, but as
acting in our stead; so that what was free to him, must be to us; what was
exactly paid by him, it is all one as if it had been done by us, so that it is
impossible the same debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven. Much less
will it avoid the difficulty in this case to say, That it was a refusable
payment; for it being supposed to be the very same, it was not in justice
refusable; and however not in equity, if it answer the intention of the Law, as
much as the suffering of the offenders had done; and the more it does that, the
less refusable it is. And although God himself found out the way, that does not
make the pardon free, but the designation of the person who was to pay the
debt. Thus when our Adversaries dispute against this opinion, no wonder if they
do it successfully; but this whole opinion is built upon a mistake, that
satisfaction must be the payment of the very same; which while they contend
for, they give our Adversaries too great an advantage, and make them think they
triumph over the Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the mistake of
some particular persons. But the foundation of this mistake, lies in the
consideration of punishment, under the notion of debts, and that satisfaction
therefore must be by strict payment in rigor of Law; but how great that mistake
is, will appear in the subsequent discourse: but it cannot but be wondered at,
that the very same persons who consider sins, as debts which must be strictly
satisfied for, do withal contend for the absolute necessity of this
satisfaction; whereas Socinus his Arguments would hold good, if sins were only
considered as debts, and God as the mere Creditor of punishment, he might as
freely part with his own right without satisfaction, as any Creditor may
forgive what sum he pleases, to a person indebted to him; and no reason can be
brought to the contrary, from that notion of sins, why he may not do it. But if
they be considered with a respect to Gods Government of the world, and the
honor of his Laws, then some further account may be given, why it may not be
consistent with that, to pass by the sins of men, without satisfaction made to
them.

And because the mistake in this matter, has been the foundation of most of
the subsequent. 3. Of the difference of debts and punishments.
mistakes on both sides, and the discovery of the cause of errors, does far
more to the cure of them, than any Arguments brought against them; and withal,
the true understanding of the whole Doctrine of satisfaction depends upon it, I
shall endeavor to make clear the notion under which our sins are considered;
for upon that, depends the nature of the satisfaction which is to be made for
them. For while our Adversaries suppose, that sins are to be looked on under
the notion of debts in this debate, they assert it to be wholly free for God to
remit them, without any satisfaction. They make the right of punishment merely
to depend on Gods absolute Dominion; and that all satisfaction must be
considered under the notion of compensation, for the injuries done to him, to
whom it is to be made. But if we can clearly show a considerable difference
between the notion of debts and punishments, if the right of punishment does
not depend upon mere Dominion, and that satisfaction by way of punishment, is
not primarily intended for compensation, but for other ends, we shall make not
only the state of the Controversy much clearer, but offer something
considerable toward the resolution of it. The way I shall take for the proof
of the difference between debts and punishments, shall be using the other for
the Arguments for it. For besides, that those things are just in matter of
debts, which are not so in the case of punishments; as, that it is lawful for a
man to forgive all the debts which are owing him by all persons, though they
never so contumaciously refuse payment, but our Adversaries will not say so in
the case of sins; for although they assert, That the justice of God does never
require punishment in case of Repentance, but withal they assert, That in case
of Impenitency, it is not only agreeable, but due to the nature and decrees;
and therefore to the rectitude and equity of Non resipiscentibus veniam non
concedere, id d^mum naturae divinae, and dec^etis ejus and propterea
rectitudini and aequitati debitum est ac consentaneum. Socin. de Servat. l. 1.
c. 1.

Non resipiscentes poena non liberare tum per se aequitati est admodum,
consentaneum and positis quibusdam finibus quos Deus sibi in regendis hominibus
praefixit, facto necessarium. Crell. c. Grot. c. 2.. 29.


God not to give pardon. But if this be true, then there is an apparent
difference between the notion of debts and punishments; for the Impenitency
does but add to the greatness of the debt: And will they say, it is only in
Gods power to remit small debts, but he must punish the greatest? what becomes
then of Gods absolute liberty to part with his own right? will not this show
more of his kindness to pardon the greater, rather than lesser offenders? But
if there be something in the nature of the thing, which makes it not only
just, but necessary for impenitent sinners to be punished, as Crellius after
Socinus frequently acknowledges; then it is plain, that sins are not to be
considered merely as debts; for that obstinacy and impenitency is only
punished as a greater degree of sin, and therefore as a greater debt. And
withal, those things are lawful in the remission of debts, which are unjust in
the matter of punishments; as it is lawful for a Creditor, when two persons are
considered in equal circumstances, to remit one, and not the other; nay, to
remit the greater debt, without any satisfaction, and to exact the lesser to
the greatest extremity; but it is unjust in matter of punishments, where the
reason and circumstances are the same, for a person who has committed a crime
of very dangerous consequence, to escape unpunished, and another who has been
guilty of far less to be severely executed. Besides these considerations, I say
I shall now prove the difference of debts and punishments, from those two
things whereby things are best differenced from each other; viz. The different
Reason, and the different End of them.

The different Reason of debts and punishments: The reason of debts is
dominion. 4. The reason of humane punishment is the public interest.
and property, and the obligation of of them, depends upon voluntary contracts
between parties; but the reason of punishments is Justice and Government, and
depends not upon mere contracts, but the relation the person stands in to that
Authority he is accountable for his actions to. For if the obligation to
punishment, did depend upon mere contract, than none could justly be punished,
but such who have consented to it by an antecedent contract: If it be said,
That a contract is implied, by their being in society with others; that is as
much as I desire to make the difference appear, for in case of debts, the
obligation depends upon the voluntary contract of the person; but in case of
punishments, the very relation to Government, and living under Laws does imply
it. And the right of punishment depends upon the obligation of Laws, where the
reason of them holds, without any express contract, or superiority of one over
another; as in the case of violation of the Law of Nations, that gives right to
another Nation to punish the infringers of it. Otherwise Wars could never be
lawful between two Nations, and none could be warrantable, but those of a
Prince against his rebellious subjects, who have broken the Laws themselves
consented expressly to. Besides, in case of debts, every man is bound to pay,
whether he be called upon or no; but in case of punishments, no man is bound to
betray or accuse himself. For the obligation to payment in case of debt,
arises from the injury sustained by that particular person, if another detains
what is his own from him; but the obligation to punishment, arises from the
injury the Public sustains by the impunity of crimes, of which the Magistrates
are to take care; who by the dispensing of punishments, do show that to be true
which Grotius asserts, that if there be any Creditor to be assigned in
punishment, it is the public good: Which appears by this, that all punishments
are proportioned, according to the influence the offenses have upon the public
interest; for the reason of punishment is not because a Law is broken, but
because the breach of a Law tends to dissolve the community, by infringing the
Authority of the Laws, and the honor of those who are to take care of them.
For if we consider it, the measure of punishments is in a well ordered State,
taken from the influence which crimes have upon the peace and interest of the
community. No man questions', but that Malice, Pride and Avarice, are things
really as bad as many faults, that are severely punished by humane Laws; but
the reason these are not punished is, because they do not so much injury to the
public interest, as Theft and Robbery do. Besides, in those things wherein the
Laws of a Nation are concerned, the utmost rigor is not used in the preventing
of crimes, or the execution of them when committed, if such an execution may
endanger the public more, than the impunity of the offenders may do. And there
are some things which are thought fit to be forbidden, where the utmost means
are not used to prevent them; as Merchants are forbidden to steal customs, but
they are not put under an Oath not to do it. And when penalties have been
deserved, the execution of them has been deferred, till it may be most for the
advantage of the public: as Joabs punishment till Solomon's Reign, though he
deserved it as much in David's. So that the rule commonly talked of, Fiat
justitia and pereat mundus, is a piece of Pedantry, rather than true Wisdom;
for whatever penalty inflicted, brings a far greater detriment to the public,
than the forbearance of it, is no piece of Justice to the State, but the
contrary; the greatest Law, being the safety and preservation of the whole
body. By which it appears, that in humane Laws, the reason of punishment is
not, that such an action is done, but because the impunity in doing it, may
have a bad influence on the public interest; but in debts, the right of
Restitution depends upon the injury received by a particular person, who looks
at no more than the reparation of his loss by it.

We are now to consider, how far these things will hold in Divine Laws, and. 5.
The right of Divine punishment not mere Dominion. Crell. Respons. ad Grot. cap.
2 sect. 1. etc.
what the right of punishment does result from there. For Crellius, the
subtillest of our Adversaries, knowing how great consequence the resolution of
this is, in the whole Controversy of Satisfaction, vehemently contends, That
the right of punishment does result from Gods absolute Dominion, and therefore
he is to be considered as the offended party, and not as Governor in the right
of inflicting punishment; for which his first Argument is, That our obedience
is due to Gods p. 144.
Law, on the account of his Dominion; but when that is not performed, the
penalty succeeds in its room, and therefore that does belong to God on the same
account: His other Arguments are, from the compensation of injuries due to the
offended party, and from Gods anger against sin, in which he is to be
considered as the offended party: These two latter will be answered under the
next head; the first I am to examine here. He therefore tells us, that the
right of punishment belongs to Gods Dominion, because the reason of his
Government of mankind is, because he is the Lord of them. But, for our better
understanding this, we are to consider, although the original right of
Government does result from Gods Dominion; for therefore our obedience is due,
because of his Sovereignty over us; yet when God takes upon him the notion of a
Governor, he enters into a new relation with his creatures, distinct from the
first as mere Lord. For he is equally Lord of all to whom he gives a being, but
he does not require obedience upon equal terms, nor governs them by the same
Laws: Dominion is properly showed in the exercise of power; but when God gives
Laws according to which he will reward and punish, he so far restrains the
exercise of his Dominion to a subserviency to the ends of Government. If we
should suppose, that God governs the world merely by his Dominion, we must take
away all rewards and punishments; for then the actions of men, would be the
mere effects of irresistible power, and so not capable of rewards and
punishments; for there could be neither of these, where men's actions are not
capable of the differences of good and evil, and that they cannot be, if they
be the acts of Gods Dominion, and not of their own. But if God does not
exercise his full Dominion over rational creatures, it is apparent that he does
govern them under another notion than as mere Lord, and the reason of
punishment is not to be taken from an absolute right which God does not make
use of, but from the ends and designs of Government, which are his own Honor,
the Authority of his Laws, and the good of those whom he does govern. And
Crellius is greatly mistaken, when he makes punishment to succeed in the place
of the right of obedience; for it is only the desert of punishment, which
follows upon the violation of that right; and as we assert, that the right of
obedience is derived from Gods Sovereignty, so we deny not, but the desert of
punishment is from the violation of it; but withal we say, that the obligation
to punishment depends upon the Laws, and Gods right to inflict punishment (Laws
being supposed) is immediately from that Government which he has over
mankind: For otherwise, if the whole right of punishment did still depend upon
Gods Dominion, and the first right of Sovereignty, then all sins must have
equal punishments, because they are all equal violations of the fundamental
right of obedience; then it were at liberty for God to punish a greater sin,
with a less punishment; and a lesser sin, with a greater: And lastly, this
would make the punishment of sin, a mere Arbitrary thing in God; for there
would be no reason of punishment, but what depended upon Gods mere will;
whereas the reason of punishment in Scripture is drawn from a repugnancy of sin
to the divine purity and holiness, and not merely from Gods power or will to
punish; but if that were all the reason of it, there would be no repugnancy in
the nature of the thing for the most vicious person to be rewarded, and the
most pious to be made everlastingly miserable. But who ever yet durst say or
think so? From whence it appears that the relation between sin and punishment
is no result of Gods arbitrary will; but it is founded in the nature of the
things, so that as it is just for God to punish offenders, so it would be
unjust to punish the most innocent person without any respect to sin. But if
the right of punishment depends merely on Gods dominion, I cannot understand
why God may not punish when, and whom, and in what manner he pleases; without
any impeachment of his Justice, and therefore it is to be wondered at, that the
same persons who assert the right of punishment to be merely in Gods dominion,
should yet cry out of the unjustice of one person being punished for another
faults; for why may not God exercise his dominion in this case? yes say they,
he may his dominion, but he cannot punish, because punishment supposes guilt,
and cannot be just without it; how far that reaches, will be examined
afterward; at present, we take notice of the contradiction to themselves which
our Adversaries are guilty of, that they may serve their own hypothesis, for
when we dispute with them, against absolute remission without satisfaction,
then they contend that the right of punishment is a mere act of dominion, and
God may part with his right, if he please; but when they dispute with us
against the translation of punishment from one to another, then they no longer
say that the right of punishment is an act of dominion, but that it is a
necessary consequent of inherent guilt, and cannot be removed from one to
another. And then they utterly deny that punishment is of the nature of debts;
for one man's money, they say, may become another, but one man's punishment Soc.
de Servat. l. 3. c. 3. Praelect. c. 18.. 6. 2. The end of punishments not bare
compensation as it is in debts.
cannot become another: Thus they give and take, deny and grant, as it serves
for their present purposes.

The different end of debts and punishments, make it appear that there is a
difference in the nature of them; for the intention of the obligation to
payment in case of debt, is the compensation of the damage which the Creditor
sustains; but the intention of punishment, is not bare compensation, but it is
designed for greater and further ends. For which we are to consider the
different nature of punishments, as they are inflicted by way of reparation of
some injury done to private persons, and as they do respect the public good. I
grant, that private persons in case of injuries, seek for compensation of the
damage they sustain, and so far they bear the nature of debts; but if we
consider them as inflicted by those who have a care of the public, though they
are to see that no private person suffers injury by another, yet the reason of
that is not merely that he might enjoy his own, but because the doing injuries
to others tends to the subversion of the ends of Government. Therefore, I can
by no means admit that Position of Crellius, that a Magistrate only punishes as
he assumes the Crell. c. Grot. cap. 2. Sect. 2. p. 147. Sect. 17. p. 162.
person of the particular men who have received injuries from others; for he
aims at other ends than merely the compensation of those injured persons. Their
great end is according to the old Roman Formula, ne quid Resp. detrimenti
capiat: the reason of exacting penalties upon private men is still with a
regard to the public safety. Supposing men in a. state of nature no punishment
is due to the injured person, but restitution of damage, and compensation of
the loss that accrues to him by the injury sustained; and whatever goes beyond
this, is the effect of Government, which constitutes penalties for preservation
of the Society which is under Laws. But herein Crellius is our adversary, but
with no advantage at all to his Cause; for he offers to prove against Grotius,
that something more is due by an injury beyond bare compensation for what the
other is supposed to lose by the right of nature; for says he, in every injury
there is not only the real damage which the person sustains, but there is a
contempt of the person employed in it, for which as well as the former, he ought
to have compensation. To which I answer, 1. That this does not prove what he
designs, viz. that punishment does belong to the injured person in a state of
Nature, beyond bare restitution, but that it is necessary, that men should not
continue in such a state, that so they may be vindicated from that contempt,
and others compelled to restitution. Both which, as they are punishments, are
not in the power of the offended party as such, but show that it is very
reasonable there should be Laws and Governors, that private persons may be
preserved in their just rights, and offenders punished for the vindication not
only of their honor, but of the Laws too. And Laws being established, the
injured person has right to no more, than the compensation of his loss; for
that being forced upon the offending party, is a sufficient vindication of his
honor. 2. If the contempt of a private person makes a compensation necessary,
how much more will this hold in a public Magistrate; whose contempt by
disobedience is of far worse consequence than that of a private person. And by
this argument Crellius overthrows his main hypothesis, viz. that God may pardon
sin without satisfaction; for if it be not only necessary, that the loss be
compensated but the dishonor too; then so much greater as the dishonor is; so
much higher as the person is; so much more beneficial to the world as his Laws
are; so much more necessary is it that in order to pardon there must be a
satisfaction made to him, for the affronts he has received from men. And if
the greatness of the injury be to be measured as Crellius asserts, Crell. c.
Grot. cap. 2. p. 174.
from the worth and value of the thing, from the dignity and honor of the
person, from the displicency of the fact to him, which he makes the measure of
punishment; this makes it still far more reasonable, that God should have
satisfaction for the sins of men, than that men should have for the injuries
done them by one another; especially considering what the same Author does
assert afterward, that it is sometime repugnant to Sect. 29. p. 198.
justice, for one to part with his own right in case of injuries, and that
either from the nature and circumstances of the things themselves, or a decree
or determination to the contrary, for the first he instanceth in case of
notorious defamation; in which he says, it is a dishonest and unlawful thing
for a man, not to make use of his own right for his vindication, and for the
other, in case of great obstinacy and malice. By both which, it is most
apparent, that Crellius puts a mighty difference between the nature of debts;
and punishments, since in all cases he allows it lawful for a person free, to
remit his debts; but in some cases he makes it utterly unlawful for a person
not to make use of his right for punishment. And withal if a private person
may not part with his own right in such cases, how unreasonable is it not to
assert the same of the great Governor of the world? and that there may be a
necessity for him upon supposition of the contempt of himself and his Laws, to
vindicate himself and his honor to the world, by some remarkable testimony of
his severity against sin.

But Crellius yet urges another end of. 7. Of C^^llius his great m^stake about
the end of punishments.
punishment, which though the most unreasonable of all others, yet sufficiently
proves from himself the difference of debts and punishments, which is, the
delight which the injured person takes in seeing the offender punished. This he
so much insists Crell. cap 2. sect. 2. sect. 28.
upon, as though he made it the most natural end of punishment, for, says he,
among the Punishments which a Prince or any other free Person can inflict,
revenge is in the first place, and the more there is of that in any thing, the
more properly it is called a punishment; and he tells what he means by this
ultio; viz. solatium ex alieno dolor, the contentment P. 191.
taken in another pain. But says he, no man must object, that this is a thing
evil in it self; for although it be forbidden us under the New Testament, yet
in it self it is not unlawful for one that has suffered pain from another to
seek for the ease of his own pain, by the miseries of him that injured him: and
for this purpose, says he, we have the Passion of Anger in us, which being a
desire of returning injuries, is then satisfied when it apprehends it done. But
how absurd and unreasonable this doctrine is, will be easily discovered, for
this would make the primary intendment of punishment to be the evil of him that
suffers it. Whereas the right of punishment is derived from an injury received,
and therefore that which gives that right, is some damage sustained, the
reparation of which is the first thing designed by the offended party: Though
it take not up the whole nature of punishment. And on this account no man can
justly propose any end to himself in another evil, but what comes under the
notion of restitution. For the evil of another is only intended in punishment
as it respects the good of him for whose sake that evil is undergone. When that
good may be obtained without another evil, the desire of it is unjust and
unreasonable: and therefore all that contentment that any one takes in the evil
another undergoes, as it is evil to him, is a thing repugnant to humane nature,
and which all persons condemn in others when they allow themselves in it. It
will be hard for Crellius to make any difference between this end of punishment
which he assigns, and the greatest cruelty; for what can that be worse than
taking delight in making others miserable, and seeing them so when he has made
them. If it be replied, that cruelty is without any cause, but here a just
cause is supposed, I answer, a just cause is only supposed for the punishment,
but there can be no just cause for any to delight in the miseries of others,
and to comfort themselves by inflicting or beholding them. For the evil of
another is never intended, but when it is the only means left for compensation;
and he must be guilty of great inhumanity, who desires another evil any
further than that tends to his own good, i. e. the reparation of the damage
sustained; which if it may be had without another evil, then that comes not by
the right of nature within the reason of punishment; and consequently where it
does not serve for that end, the comfort that men take in it is no part of
justice, but cruelty. For there can be no reason at all assigned for it; for
that lenimentum doloris which Crellius insists on is merely imaginary, and no
other than the Dog has in gnawing the stone that is thrown at him; and for all
that I know, that propension in nature to the retribution of evil for evil any
further than it tends to our security, and preservation for the future, is one
of the most unreasonable Passions in humane Nature.

And if we examine the nature of Anger,. 8. Of the nature of anger and revenge
in men, and whether punishments are designed to satisfy them.
either considered Naturally or Morally, the intention of it is, not the
returning evil to another, for the evil received, but the security and
preservation of our selves, which we should not have so great a care of, unless
we had a quick sense of injuries, and our blood were apt to be heated at the
apprehension of them. But when this passion vents it self, in doing others
injury to alleviate its own grief, it is a violent and unreasonable
perturbation; but being governed by reason, it aims at no more, than the great
end of our beings; viz. Self-Preservation. But when that cannot be obtained
without another evil, so far the intendment of it is lawful, but no further.
And I cannot therefore think those Philosophers, who have defined Anger to be
(...), by whose Authority Crellius defends himself, when he makes anger to be a
desire of revenge, did thoroughly Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177.
consider what was just and reasonable in it, but barely what was natural, and
would be the effect of that passion, if not governed by reason. For otherwise
Jul. Scaligers definition is much more true and justifiable, that it is
appetitus depulsionis; viz. that Exerc. 313.
whereby we are stirred up to drive away from us, any thing that is injurious
to us. But because Crellius alleges a saying of Seneca, that would make
vindicta of the nature of punishment, duabus de causis punire princeps solet,
si aut se vindicet Seneca de Clem. l 1. c. 20.
aut alium: We shall oppose to this the sense of the same Author in this
matter, which may sufficiently clear the other passage: For, says he,
Inhumanum verbum est, De Ira. l. 2. c 32.
and quidem pro justo receptum, ultio, and a contumelia non differt nisi
ordine: qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusatius peccat. And no man speaks with
greater vehemence against the delight in others punishments than he does; for
he always asserts, the only reason of punishment, to be some advantage which
is to come by it, and not merely to satisfy anger, or to allay their own
griefs, by seeing another: For, says he, the punishment is inflicted, Non
quia delectetur ullius poena (procul est enim a sapiente tam inhumana feritas)
sed ut documentum De Ira. l. 1. c. 6.
omnium sint: So that it is only the usefulness of punishment according to
him, which makes it become any wise man; and so far from a satisfaction of his
grief by another punishment, that he makes that a piece of inhumanity, not
incident to any who pretend to wisdom. Nay, he denies, that a just punishment
does flow from anger; for he that inflicts that, does it, non ipsius poenae
avidus sed quia oportet, not as desiring De Ira. l. 1. c. 9.
the punishment, but because there are great reasons for it: And elsewhere,
Exsequar quia oportet, non quia dolet: he is Cap. 12.
far enough then from approving, that imaginary compensation of one man's grief
by another. And he shows at large, that the weakest natures, and the least
guided by reason, are the most subject to this anger and revenge. And although
other things be pretended, the general cause of it is, a great infirmity of
humane nature; and Cap. 13.
thence it is, that children, and old men, and sick persons, are the most
subject to it; and the better any are, the more they are freed from it: --
quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Ultio --


He makes Cruelty to be nothing else, but the intemperace of the mind in
exacting punishment; De Clem. l. 2. c. 4.
and the difference between a Prince and a Tyrant to lie in this, That one
delights in punishing, the other never does it but De Clem. l. 1. c. 11, 12.
in case of necessity, when the public good requires it. And this throughout
his discourse, he makes the measure of punishment; who then could imagine, that
he should speak so contradictory to himself, as to allow punishment for mere
revenge, or the easing ones own griefs, by the pains of another? In the places
cited by Crellius, (if taken in his sense) he speaks what commonly is, not what
ought to be in the world; for he disputes against it in that very place,
therefore that cannot be the meaning which he contends for. The common design
of punishments by a Prince, says he, is either to vindicate himself or others.
I so render his words, because vindicare, when it is joined with the person
injured, as here, vindicare se aut alium, does properly relate to the end of
punishment, which is asserting the right of the injured person; but when it is
joined with the persons who have done the injury, or the crimes whereby they
did it, then it properly signifies to punish. Thus Salust uses, Vindicatum in
eos; and Cicero, In milites nostros vehementer vindicatum, and for Salust. in
Catilin. Cicero 7. v.
the fact very frequently in him, maleficia vindicare: but when it relates to
the injured person, as here it does, it cannot signify merely to punish; for
then se vindicare would be to punish ones self, but to assert his own right in
case of injury, though it be with the punishment of another: For Vindicatio, as
Cicero defines it, est per quam vis and injuris and omnino quod obfuturum est
defendendo aut Cicero de Invent. 2.
ulciscendo propulsatur. So that the security of our selves in case of force or
injury, is that which is called Vindication; which ^ometimes may be done by
defense, and ^thertimes by punishment. And that Se^eca does mean no more here,
is apparent ^y what follows; for in case of private in^uries, he says,
poenamsi tuto poterit donet, ^he would have the Prince forgive the punishment,
if it may be done with safety; so that he would not have any one punished, to
satisfy another desire of revenge, but to preserve his own safety: And
afterward he says, It is much beneath a Princes condition, to need that
satisfaction which arises De Ira. l. 1. c. 21.
from another sufferings: But for the punishments of others, he says, The Law
has established three ends, the amendment of the persons, or making others
better by their punishments, or the public security, by taking away such evil
members out of the body: So that in public punishments, he never so much as
supposes, that contentment which revenge fancies in others punishments, but
makes them wholly designed for the public advantage. For the Laws in
punishment do not look backward, but forward; for as Plato says, No wise man
ever punished, merely Non praeterita sed futura intuebitur; nam ut Plato ait,
nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. Sen. de Ira. l. 1. c. 16.
because men had offended, but least they should: For past things cannot be
recalled, but futu^ are, therefore forbidden, that they may be prevented. So to
the same purpose is the saying of Lactantius, produced by Grotius, Lact. de ira
Dei, c. 17.
Surgimus ad vindictam non quia laesi sumus sed ut disciplina servetur, mores
corrigantur, licentia comprimatur: haec est ira justa. To which Crellius
answers, That this signifies nothing, unless it can be proved, that no man may
justly punish another, merely because he is Cap. 2. sect. ^3.
wronged. If he means of the right to punish, we deny not that to be, because
the person is wronged; but if he understands it of the design and end of
punishment, then we deny, that it is an allowable end of punishments, any
further than it can come under the notion of restitution, of which we have
spoken already. When a Master (which is the instance he produces) punishes
his servants, because they have disobeyed him: The reason of that punishment,
is not the bare disobedience, but the injury which comes to him by it; the
reparation of which he seeks by punishment, either as to his authority,
security or profit. But he adds, That where punishment is designed, for
preservation of discipline, and amendment of manners, and keeping persons in
order, which are the ends mentioned by Lactantius) it is where the interest of
the person lies, in the preservation of these, and is therefore offended at the
neglect of them. To which I answer, That the interest of such a one, is not
barely the interest of an offended party, as such, but the interest of a
Governor; and no body denies, but such a one may be an offended party: but the
question is, Whether the design of punishment be merely to satisfy him as the
offended party, or to answer the ends of Government? For Crellius has already
told us, what it is to satisfy one as an offended party, that is, to ease
himself by the punishment of others; but what ever is designed for the great
ends of Government, is not to be considered under that notion, although the
Governor may be justly offended at the neglect of them. And there is this
considerable difference between the punishment made to an offended party, as
such, and that which is for the ends of Government, that the former is a
satisfaction to Anger, and the latter to Laws and the public interest. For
Crellius disputes much for the right of Anger in exacting punishments; Cap. 2.
sect. 1. p. 143. Sect. 13. p. 161.
the satisfaction of which, in case of real injury, he never makes unlawful,
but in case that it be prohibited us by one, whose power is above our own: nay
he makes it otherwise the primary end of punishment. So that anger is the main
thing upon these terms to be respected in punishment: but where it is designed
for the ends before mentioned, there is no necessity of any such passion a^
anger to be satisfied, the ends of punishment may be attained wholly without
it: And public punishment, according to Seneca, non ira sed ratio est, is no
effect of anger, but reason; for, says he, nihil Sen. de ira, l. 1. c. 14. and
15.
minus quam irasci punientem decet: nothing less becomes one that punishes,
than anger does; for all punishments being considered as Medicines, no man
ought to give Physic in anger, or to let himself blood in a fury: A
Magistrate, says he, when he goes to punish, ought to appear only Cap. 16.
vultu legis quae non irascitur, sed constituit, with the countenance of the
Law, which appoints punishments without passion: The reason of which is,
because the Law aims not primarily at the evil of the man that suffers
punishment, but at the good which comes to the public by such sufferings. For
the first design of the Law was to prevent any evil being done, and punishment
coming in by way of Sanction to the force of the Law, must have the same
primary end which the Law it self had; which is not to satisfy barely the
offended party for the breach, any further than that satisfaction tends to the
security of the Law, and preventing the violation of it for the future. The
substance of what I have said upon this subject, may be thus briefly comprised,
That antecedently to Laws, the offended party has right to no more than bare
reparation of the damage sustained by the injury; that the proper notion of
punishment is consequent to Laws, and the inflicting of it is an act of
Government, which is not designed for mere satisfaction of the anger of the
injured person, but for the public good, which lies in preserving the
authority of the Laws, the preventing all injuries by the security of men's just
rights, and the vindication of the dignity and honor of him, who is to take
care of the public good. For these Crellius himself acknowledges, to be the
just ends of punishments, only he would have the satisfaction a Quibus (sc.
solatio and securitati) addi possunt honoris ac dignitatis, per injuriam
violatae, and aliqua ratione imminutae vindiciae, ass^rtioque juris nostri.
Crell. cap. 2. sect. 28. p. 191.
man takes in another evil, to come in the first place; wherein how much he is
mistaken, I hope we have already manifested. Because the proper nature of
punishment depending upon Laws, the Laws do not primarily design the benefit of
private persons (supposing that were so) but the advantage of that community
which they are made for.

And in those cases wherein the Magistrate. 9. The Interest of the Magistrate
in punishment distinct from that of private persons.
does right to particular persons in the punishment of those who have injured
them, he does it not as taking their person upon him, for he aims at other
things than they do; they look at a bare compensation for the injury received;
but the Magistrate at the ill consequence the impunity of injuries may be of to
the public: they, it may be at the satisfaction of their displeasure; but he
at the satisfaction of the Laws; they at their own private damage; he at the
violation of the public peace. And from hence among those Nations who valued
all crimes at a certain rate, in matters of injury between De morib. German. c.
12. Grot. de leg. Goth. in Proleg. ad hist. Goth. p. 67. Lindenbrog. Gloss. ad
Cod. Leo Antiq. v. Freda. Spelman. Gloss. v. Freda.
man and man, the injured person was not only to receive compensation for his
wrong; but a considerable fine was to be paid to the Exchequer for the
violation of the public peace. This Tacitus observes among the old Germans,
Grotius of the old Gothic Laws, and from them (as most of our modern Laws and
Customs are derived) Lindenbrogius of the Salick, Alemannick, Lombardick,
Spelman of the Saxon, who tells us in case of murder there were three payments,
one to the Kindred, which was called Megbote; the second to the Lord, called
Manbote, the third to the King, called Freda from the German Frid, which
signifies peace, it being the consideration paid to the King for the breach of
the public peace. And this, says he, in all actions, was ^neiciently paid to
the King, because the peace was supposed to be broken, not by mere force, but
by any injuries; and if the action was unjust, the Plaintiff paid it; if just,
the defendant. And the measure of it, says Bignonius, was the tenth part of
the value of the Bignon. not. in Marculphi form. cap. 20. (...)
thing as estimated by Law; which by the Customs of the ancient Romans was
deposited at the commencing of a suit by both, and only taken up again by him
who overcame; and was by them called Sacramentum, Varro de L. L. lib. 4.
as Varro tells us. And the same custom was observed among the Greeks too, as
appears by Julius Pollux, who tells Jal. Pollux. l. 8.
us it was called (...) among them, and in public actions was the fifth part,
in private the tenth. But that which was paid to the public in case of murder,
was among the Greeks called (...), the same with poena, for Hesychius tells us
that is (...), and to the same purpose the Scholiast on Homer on those words
Iliad. 1. (...), by which the Original of the name poena, comes from a payment
made to the public, according to that known rule, interest reip. delicta
puniri, that persons may see how much the public safety is concerned, that
crimes be punished. From which and many other things which might be insisted
on, Crellius his Hypothesis will appear to be false, viz. that when the
Magistrate does judge in the affairs of particular men, he does it only as
assuming the person of those men; whereas it appears from the reason of the
thing, and the Custom of Nations, that the interest of the Magistrate is
considered as distinct from that of private persons, when he does most appear
in vindication of injuries. But all this is managed with a respect to the grand
hypothesis, viz. that the right of punishing does belong only to the offended
party as such, that the punishment is of the nature of debts, and the
satisfaction by compensation to the anger of him who is offended. The falsity
of which this discourse was designed to discover.

Having thus considered the nature of punishments among men, we come more
closely to our matter, by examining how far this will hold in the punishments
which God inflicts on the account of sin. For which two things must be inquired
into, 1. In what sense we attribute anger to God. 2. What are the great ends of
those punishments God inflicts on men on the account of sin.

For the first, though our Adversaries. 10. Of the nature of Anger in God; the
satisfaction to be made to it.
are very unwilling to allow the term of punitive justice, yet they contend for
a punitive anger in God, and that in the worst sense as it is appetitus
vindictae: for after Crellius has contended that this is the proper notion of
anger in general; neither ought any one to say, he adds, that anger as C^ ll.
cap. 2. (...). 1. p. 145. (...). 177.
other passions is attributed improperly to God; for setting aside the
imperfections, which those passions are subject to in us, all the rest is to be
attributed to him; taking away then that perturbation, and pain, and grief we
find in our selves in anger, to which the abhorrency of sin answers in God, all
the rest does agree to him. I would he had a little more plainly told us what
he means by all the rest, but we are to guess at his meaning by what went
before, where he allows of Cicero, and Aristotle's definition of Anger, whereof
the one is, that it is libido, or (as Crellius would rather have it,) cupiditas
puniendi, Ci^r. Tasc^ l. 4. Arist. K^ (...). l. 2. c. 2.
the other, (...), etc. and himself calls it poenae appetitio, and in another
place, that it may be as properly defined cupiditas vindictae as cupiditas
Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177.
poenae, or affectus vindicandi, as well as puniendi: in all which places, he
does assert such an anger in God as supposes such a motion, or desire, or
inclination to punish sin when it is committed, as there is in us when an
injury is done us, only the perturbation and pain excluded. But he has not
thought fit to explain how such new motions or inclinations in the divine
nature every time sin is committed, are consistent with the immutability and
perfection of it; nor what such a kind of desire to punish in God imports,
whether a mere inclination without the effect, or an inclination with the
effect following: if without the effect, than either because the sin was not
great enough, or Gods honor was not concerned to do it, and in this case the
same reasons which make the effect not to follow, make the desire of it
inconsistent with the divine wisdom and perfection: or else because the effect
is hindered by the repentance of the person, or some other way which may make it
not necessary to do it; than upon the same reason the effect is suspended, the
inclination to do it should be so too; for that must be supposed to be governed
by an eternal reason and counsel as well as his actions; unless some natural
passions in God be supposed antecedent to his own wisdom and counsel, which is
derogatory to the infinite perfection of God, since those are judged
imperfections in our selves: If it be taken only with the effect following it,
than God can never be said to be angry but when he does punish, whereas his
wrath is said to be kindled in Scripture, where the effect has not followed;
which if it implies any more than the high provocation of God to punish (as I
suppose it does not) then this inclination to punish is to be conceived
distinct from the effect following it. But that conception of anger in God
seems most agreeable to the divine nature, as well as to the Scriptures, which
makes it either Crell. de (...) Relig. l. 1. c. 30.
the punishment it self, as Crellius elsewhere acknowledges it is often taken
so; or Gods declaration of his will to punish, which is called the revelation
of the wrath of God against all unrighteousness of men, God thereby discovering
the just displeasure he has against sin; or the great provocation of God to
punish, by the sins of men; as when his wrath is said, to be kindled, etc. By
this sense we may easily reconcile all that the Scripture says concerning the
wrath of God; we make it agreeable to infinite perfection, we make no such
alterations in God, as the appeasing of his anger must imply, if that imply any
kind of commotion in him. And thus the grand difficulty of Crellius appears to
be none at all, against all those passages of Scripture (...). cap. ^l. 3. p.
350.
which speak of appeasing God, of atonement, and reconciliation, viz. that if
they prove satisfaction, they must prove that God being actually angry with
mankind before the sufferings of his Son, he must be presently appeased upon
his undergoing them. For no more need to be said, than that God being justly
provoked to punish the sins of mankind, was pleased to accept of the
sufferings of his Son, as a sufficient sacrifice of Atonement for the sins of
the world, on consideration of which he was pleased to offer those terms of
pardon, which upon men's performance of the conditions required on their part,
shall be sufficient to discharge them from that obligation to punishment which
they were under by their sins. And what absurdity, or incongruity there is in
this to any principle of reason, I cannot imagine. But our Adversaries first
make opinions for us, and then show they are unreasonable. They first suppose
that anger in God is to be considered as a passion, and that passion a desire
of revenge for satisfaction of it; and then tell us, that if we do not prove,
that this desire of revenge can be satisfied by the sufferings of Christ, then
we can never prove the doctrine of satisfaction to be true; whereas we do not
mean by Gods anger any such passion, but the just declaration of Gods will to
punish upon our provocation of him by our sins; we do not make the design of
satisfaction to be, that God may please himself in the revenging the sins of
the guilty upon the most innocent person; because we make the design of
punishment, not to be the satisfaction of anger as a desire of revenge, but to
be the vindication of the honor and rights of the injured person, by such a
way as himself shall judge most satisfactory to the ends of his Government.

2. Which is the next thing we are to. 11. Of the ends of divine punishments.
Crell. c. 2. sect. 29. p. 129.
clear: For which end we shall make use of the Concession of Crellius, That God
has prefixed some ends to himself in the Government of mankind; which being
supposed, it is necessary, that impenitent sinners should be punished. What
these ends of God are, he before tells us, when he enquires into the ends of
Divine punishments, which he makes to be, security for the future, by men's P.
195.
avoding sins, and a kind of (...), or pleasure which God takes in the
destruction of his implacable enemies, and the asserting and vindicating his
own right by punishing, and showing men thereby, with what care and fear they
ought to serve him; and so attains the ends of punishment proposed by
Lactantius, and manifestation of the Divine Honor and Majesty, which has been
violated by the sins of men. All these we accept of, with this caution, That
the delight which God takes in the punishing his implacable enemies, be not
understood of any pleasure in their misery, as such, by way of mere revenge;
but as it tends to the vindication of his Right, and Honor, and Majesty; which
is an end suitable to the Divine Nature: but the other cannot in it self, have
the notion of an end; for an end does suppose something desirable for it self;
which surely the miseries of others cannot have to us, much less to the Divine
Nature. And that place which Crellius insists on to prove the contrary, Deuteronomy.
28. 63. The Lord will rejoice over you, to destroy you; imports no more, than
the satisfaction God takes in the execution of his Justice, when it makes most
for his honor, as certainly it does in the punishment of his greatest enemies.
And this is to be understood in a sense agreeable to those other places, where
God is said not to delight in the death of sinners; Ezekiel. 18. v. 23. 32. c. 33.
11.
which does not (as Crellius would have it) merely express Gods benignity and
mercy, but such an agreeableness of the exercise of those attributes to Gods
nature, that he neither does nor can delight in the miseries of his creatures
in themselves, but as they are subservient to the ends of his Government; and
yet such is his kindness in that rspect too, that he uses all means agreeable
thereto, to make them avoid being miserable, to advanee his own glory. And I
cannot but wonder that Grotius, who Grot. de satisfact. c. 2. p. 43. Ed. 1617.
Grot. de ^ur^ belli, etc. l. 2. c. 20. sect. 4.
had asserted the contrary in his book of Satisfaction, should in his books De
Jure belli ac pacis, assert, That when God punishes wicked men, he does it for
no other end, but that he might punish them: For which he makes use of no other
arguments, than those which Crellius had objected against him; viz. The delight
God takes in punishing, and the judgments of the life to come, when no
amendment can be expected; the former has been already answered, the latter is
objected by Crellius against him, when he makes the ends of punishment, merely
to respect the community, which cannot be asserted of the punishments of
another life, which must chiefly respect the vindication of Gods glory, in the
punishment of unreclaimable sinners. And this we do not deny to be a just
punishment, since our Adversaries themselves, as well as we, make it necessary.
But we are not so to understand, that the end of Divine punishments does so
respect the community, as though God himself were to be excluded out of it; for
we are so to understand it, as made up of God as the Governor, and mankind as
the persons governed; whatever then tends to the vindication of the rights of
Gods Honor and Sovereignty, tends to the good of the whole, because the
manifestation of that end is so great an end of the whole.

But withal, though we assert in the life to come, the ends of punishment not.
12. The ends of Divine punishments different in this and the future state.
to be the reclaiming of sinners, who had never undergone them, unless they had
been unreclaimable; yet a vast difference must be made between the ends of
punishments in that, and in this present state. For the other is the Reserve,
when nothing else will do, and therefore was not primarily intended; but the
proper ends of punishment, as a part of Government, are to be taken from the
design of them in this life. And here we assert, that Gods end in punishing, is
the advancing his honor, not by the mere miseries of his creatures, but that
men by beholding his severity against sin, should break off the practice of it,
that they may escape the punishments of the furture state. So that the ends of
punishment here, are quite of another kind, from those of another life; for
those are inflicted, because persons have been unreclaimable by either the
mercies or punishments of this life; but these are intended, that men should so
far take notice of this severity of God, as to avoid the sins which will expose
them to the wrath to come. And from hence it follows, That whatsoever
sufferings, do answer all these ends of Divine punishments, and are inflicted
on the account of sin, have the proper notion of punishments in them, and God
may accept of the undergoing them as a full satisfaction to his Law, if they be
such as tend to break men off from sin, and assert Gods right, and vindicate
his honor to the world; which are the ends assigned by Crellius, and will be of
great consequence to us in the following Discourse.

CHAP. II.
The particular state of the Controversy, concerning the sufferings of Christ.
The Concessions of our Adversaries. The debate reduced to two heads: The first
concerning Christ's sufferings, being a punishment for sin, entered upon. In what
sense Crellius acknowledges the sins of men, to have been the impulsive cause
of the death of Christ. The sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment,
from Scripture. The importance of the phrase of bearing sins. Of the
Scape-Goats bearing the sins of the people into the Wilderness. Grotius his
sense of 1 Pet. 2. 24. vindicated against Crellius and himself. (...) never
used for the taking away a thing by the destruction of it. Crellius his sense
examined. Isa. 53. 11. vindicated. The Argument from Mat. 8. 17. answered.
Grotius constant to himself in his notes on that place. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7.
cleared. Whether Christ's death be a proper (...), and whether that does imply,
that it was a punishment of sin? How far the punishments of Children for their
Fathers faults, are exemplary among men. The distinction of calamities and
punishments, holds not here. That Gods hatred of sin could not be seen in the
sufferings of Christ, unless they were a punishment of sin, proved against
Crellius. Grotius his Arguments from Christ being made sin and a curse for us,
defended. The liberty our Adversaries take in changing the sense of words. The
particles (...), being joined to sins and relating to sufferings do imply those
sufferings to be a punishment for sin. According to their way of interpreting
Scripture, it had been impossible for our doctrine to be clearly expressed
therein.

THese things being thus far cleared. 1. The particular state of the
controversy concerning the sufferings of Christ for us.
concerning the nature and ends of punishments, and how far they are of the
nature of debts, and consequently what kind of satisfaction is due for them,
the resolution of the grand Question concerning the sufferings of Christ will
appear much more easy; but that we may proceed with all possible cleerness in
a debate of this consequence, we must yet a little more narrowly examine the
difference between our Adversaries and us in this matter; for their concessions
are in terms sometimes so fair, as though the difference were merely about
words without any considerable difference in the thing it self. If we charge
them with denying satisfaction, Crellius answers in the name of them, that we
do it unjustly; for Crell. praes. p. 7.
they do acknowledge a satisfaction worthy of God, and agreeable to the
Scriptures. If we charge them with denying that our salvation is obtained by
the death of Christ, they assert the contrary, as appears by the same Author.
Nay, Ruarus attributes Rua^us in Epistol.
merit to the death of Christ too. They acknowledge, that Christ dyed for us,
nay, that there was a commutation between Christ Crell. cap. 9. sect. 2.
and us, both of one person for another, and of a price for a person; and that
the death of Christ may be said to move God to redeem Cap. 10. sect. 10.
us; they acknowledge reconciliation, and expiation of sins to be by the death
of Christ. Cap. 7, 8, etc.
Nay, they assert, that Christ's death was by reason of our sins, and that God
designed by that to show his severity against sin. And Cap. 1. sect. 57.
what could we desire more, if they meant the same thing by these words, which
we do? They assert a satisfaction, but it is such a one as is merely fulfilling
the desire of another; in which sense all that obey God may be said to satisfy
him. They attribute our salvation to the death of Christ, but only as a
condition intervening, upon the performance of which the Covenant was
confirmed, and himself taken into Glory, that he might free men from the
punishment of their sins. They attribute merit to Christ's death but in the same
sense that we may merit too, when we do what is pleasing to God. They
acknowledge, that Christ dyed for us, but not in our stead, but for our
advantage; that there was a commutation; but not such a one, as that the Son of
God did lay down his blood as a proper price in order to our redemption as the
purchase of it; when they speak of a moving cause, they tell us, they mean no
more than the performance of any condition may be said to move, or as our
prayers and repentance do. The reconciliation they speak of, does not at all
respect God but us; they assert an expiation of sins consequent upon the death
of Christ, but not depending upon it any otherwise than as a condition
necessary for his admission to the office of a High Priest in Heaven there to
expiate our sins by his power, and not by his blood; but they utterly deny,
that the death of Christ is to be considered as a proper expiatory sacrifice
for sin; or that it has any further influence upon it, than as it is
considered as a means of the confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine, and
particularly the promise of remission of sins, on which, and not on the death
of Christ they say our remission depends; but so far as the death of Christ may
be an argument to us to believe his Doctrine, and that faith may incline us to
obedience, and that obedience being the condition in order to pardon, at so
many removes they make the death of Christ to have influence on the remission
of our sins. They assert that God took occasion by the sins of men to exercise
an act of dominion upon Christ in his sufferings, and that the sufferings of
Christ were intended for the taking away the sins of men; but they utterly
deny, that the sufferings of Christ were to be considered as a punishment for
sin, or that Christ did suffer in our place and stead; nay, they contend with
great vehemence, that it is wholly inconsistent with the justice of God to make
one man's sins the meritorious cause of another punishment; especially one
wholly innocent, and so that the guilty shall be free^^ on the account of his
sufferings. Thus I have endeavored to give the true state of the controversy
with all clearness and brevity. And the substance of it will be reduced to
these two debates.

1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a
punishment of sin, or as a mere act of dominion?

2. Whether the death of Christ in particular were a proper expiatory sacrifice
for sin, or only an antecedent condition to his exercise of the Office of
Priesthood in Heaven?

1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in. 2. Whether the sufferings of Christ
are to be considered as a punishment of sin.
general are to be considered as a punishment of sin, or as a mere act of
dominion? for that it must be one or the other of these two, cannot be denied
by our Adversaries; for the inflicting those sufferings upon Christ, must
either proceed from an antecedent meritorious cause, or not. If they do, they
are then punishments; if not, they are mere exercises of power and dominion;
whatever ends they are intended for, and whatever recom^ce be made for them. So
Crellius asserts, Crell. cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 142.
that God as absolute Lord of all, had a right of absolute dominion upon the
life and body of Christ, and therefore might justly deliver him up to death,
and give his body to the Cross; and although Christ by the ordinary force of
the Law of Moses, had a right to escape so painful and accursed death, yet God
by the right of dominion had the power of disposal of him, because he intended
to compensate his torments with a reward infinitely greater than they were: but
because he says, for great ends the consent of Christ was necessary, therefore
God did not use his utmost dominion in delivering him up by force as he might
have done, but he dealt with him by way of command, and rewards proposed for
obedience, and in this sense he did act as a righteous Governor, and indulgent
Father, who encouraged his Son to undergo hard, but great things. In which we
see, that he makes the sufferings of Christ an act of mere dominion in God,
without any antecedent cause as the reason of them; only he qualifies this act
of dominion with the proposal of a reward for it. But we must yet fu^ther
enquire into their meaning, for though here Crellius attributes the sufferings
of Christ merely to Gods dominion, without any respect to sin, yet elsewhere he
will allow a respect that was had to (...) antecedently to the sufferings of
Christ, and that the sins of men were the impulsive Crell. cap. 1. sect. 7. etc.
cause of them. And although Socinus in one place utterly denies any lawful
Socin. de Christo servat. l. 3. (...). 10.
antecedent cause of the death of Christ, besides the will of God and Christ,
yet Crellius in his Vindication says, by lawful cause, he meant meritorious,
or such upon supposition Crell. cap. 1. sect. 16.
of which he ought to dye; for elsewhere he makes Christ to dye for the cause,
Socin. l. 2. (...). 7.
or by the occasion of our sins; which is the same that Crellius means by an
impulsive, or procatartick cause. Which he thus explains, We are now to suppose
a decree of God Crell. c. 1.. 11.
not only to give salvation to Mankind, but to give us a firm hope of it in
this present state, now our sins by deserving eternal punishment, do hinder the
effect of that decree upon us, and therefore they were an impulsive cause of
the death of Christ, by which it was effected, that this decree should obtain
notwithstanding our sins. But we are not to understand as though this were done
by any expiation of the guilt of sin by the death of Christ; but this effect is
hindered by three things, by taking away their sins, by assuring men that their
former sins, and present infirmities upon their sincere obedience shall not be
imputed to them, and that the effect of that decree shall obtain, all which,
says he, is effected morte Christi interveniente, the death of Christ
interventing, but not as the procuring cause. So that after all these words he
means no more by making our sins an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, but
that the death of Christ was an argument to confirm to us the truth of his
Doctrine, which doctrine of his does give us assurance of these things: and
that our sins when they are said to be the impulsive cause, are not to be
considered with a respect to their guilt, but to that distrust of God which our
sins do raise in us; which distrust is in truth according to this sense of
Crellius the impulsive cause, and not the sins which were the cause or occasion
of it. For that was it which the doctrine was designed to remove, and our sins
only as the causes of that. But if it be said, that he speaks not only of the
distrust, but of the punishment of sin as an impediment which must be removed
too, and therefore may be called an impulsive cause, we are to consider that
the removal of this is not attributed to the death of Christ, but to the
leaving of our sins by the belief of his Doctrine; therefore the punishment of
our sins cannot unless in a very remote sense be said to be an impulsive cause
of that, which for all that we can observe by Crellius, might as well have been
done without it; if any other way could be thought sufficient to confirm his
doctrine, and Christ, without dying, might have had power to save all them that
obey him. But we understand not an impulsive cause in so remote a sense, as
though our sins were a mere occasion of Christ's dying, because the death of
Christ was one argument among many others to believe his Doctrine, the belief
of which would make men leave their sins; but we contend for a nearer and more
proper sense, viz. that the death of Christ was primarily intended for the
expiation of our sins, with a respect to God and not to us, and therefore our
sins as an impulsive cause are to be considered as they are so displeasing to
God; that it was necessary for the Vindication of Gods Honor, and the
deterring the world from sin, that no less a Sacrifice of Atonement should be
offered, than the blood of the Son of God. So that we understand an impulsive
cause here in the same sense, that the sins of the people were, under the Law,
the cause of the offering up those Sacrifices, which were appointed for the
expiation of them. And as in those Sacrifices there were two things to be
considered, viz. the mactation, and the oblation of them, the former as a
punishment by a substitution of them in place of the persons who had offended;
the latter as the proper Sacrifice of atonement, although the mactation it
self, considered with the design of it, was a Sacrificial act too: So we
consider the sufferings of Christ with a twofold respect, either as to our
sins, as the impulsive cause of them, so they are to be considered as a
punishment, or as to God, with a design to expiate the guilt of them, so they
are a Sacrifice of Atonement. The first consideration is, that we are now
upon, and upon which the present debate depends, for if the sufferings of
Christ be to be taken under the notion of punishment, then our Adversaries
grant, that our sins must be an impulsive cause of them in another sense than
they understand it. For the clearing of this, I shall prove these two things.

1. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture which
speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to sin, but this.

2. That this Account of the sufferings of Christ, is no ways repugnant to the
Justice of God.

That no other sense ought to be admitted. 3. The sufferings of Christ proved
to be a punishment from Scripture. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. 2
Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 4. 25.
of the places of Scripture, which speak of the sufferings of Christ with a
respect to our sins, but that they are to be considered as a punishment for
them. Such are those which speak of Christ's bearing our sins, of our iniquities
being laid upon him, of his making himself an offering for sin, and being made
sin and a curse for us, and of his dying for our sins. All which I shall so far
consider, as to vindicate them from all the exceptions which Socinus and
Crellius have offered against them.

1. Those which speak of Christ's bearing our sins. As to which we shall
consider, First,. The importance of the phrase in general of bearing sin, and
then the circumstances of the particular places in dispute. For the importance
of the phrase, Socinus acknowledges, that it generally signifies Soc. de
servat. l. 2. cap. 4.
bearing the punishment of sin in Scripture: but that sometimes it signifies
taking away. The same is confessed by Crellius, Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 32.
but he says, it does not always signify bearing proper punishment, but it
is enough (he says) that one bears something burdensome on the occasion of
others sins: and so Christ by undergoing his sufferings by occasion of sins,
may be said to bear our sins. And for this sense he quotes Numb. 14. 33. And
your Children shall wander in the Wilderness forty years, and bear your
whoredoms, until your carcasses be wasted in the Wilderness. Whereby, says
he, it is not meant that God would punish the Children of the Israelites, but
that by the occasion of their parents sins, they should undergo that trouble,
in wandering in the Wilderness, and being deprived of the possession of the
promised Land. But could Crellius think that any thing else could have been
imagined, (setting aside a total destruction) a greater instance of Gods
severity, than that was to the Children of Israel all their circumstances being
considered? Is it not said, that God did swear in his wrath, they should not
enter into his Psalm. 95. 11. Heb. 3. 11.
rest? Surely then the debarring them so long of that rest, was an instance of
Gods wrath, and so according to his own principles must have something of
Vindicta in it, and therefore be a proper punishment. The truth is, our
Adversaries allow themselves in speaking things most repugnant to Humane Nature
in this matter of punishments, that they may justify their own hypothesis. For
a whole Nation to be for forty years debarred from the greatest blessings were
ever promised them; and instead of enjoying them, to endure the miseries and
hardships of forty years travells in a barren wilderness, must not be thought a
punishment, and only because occasioned by their Parents sins. But whatever is
inflicted on the account of sin, and with a design to show Gods severity
against it, and thereby to deterr others from the practice of it, has the
proper notion of punishment in it; and all these things did concur in this
instance, besides the general sense of mankind in the matter of their
punishment, which was such, that supposing them preserved in their liberty,
could not have been imagined greater. And therefore Vatablus, whom Socinus and
Crellius highly commend, thus renders those words, dabunt poenas pro
fornicationibus Doctissime and elegantissi^^ Vatablus ut f^re soi^t. So^.
deserv. l. 1. c. 8. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 31.
vestris quibus defecistis a Deo vestro: they shall suffer the punishment of
your fornications. And that bearing the sins of Parents does imply properly
bearing the punishment of them, methinks they should not so earnestly deny, who
contend that to be the meaning of the words in Ezekiel, The Son shall not bear
the iniquity of the Ezekiel 18. 20.
Father; viz. that he shall not bear the punishment of his Fathers sins. Where
in bearing iniquity with a respect to their Parents sins, by their own
confession must be taken for the proper punishment; for otherwise Crell. cap.
4. Sect. 15.
they do not deny, but Children notwithstanding that sentence, may undergo much
affliction on the occasion of their Parents sins.

But Socinus further objects, that bearing. 4. Of the Scape-Goats bearing away
the sins of the people. Soc. l. 2. c. 4.
sins does not imply the punishment of them, because the Scapegoat under the
Law, is said to bear upon him the iniquities of the people, and yet could not
be said to be punished for them. To which Grotius answers, that Socinus takes
it for granted without reason, Lev. 16. 22.
that the Scapegoat could not be said to be punished for the sins of the
people; for punishment Grot. de sat. c. 1.
in general, may fall upon beasts for the sins of men, Genesis 9. 5. Exodus 21. 28.
Lev. 20. 15. Genesis 8. 21. and Socinus has no cause to say, that the Scapegoat
was not slain; for the Jewish Interpreters do all agree that he was, and
however the sending him into the Wilderness was intended as a punishment, and
most probably by an unnatural death. To which Crellius replies, That i^ the
general, he denies not but punishment may Crell. c. 1. Sect. 56.
fall upon beasts as well as men; but (that he might show himself true to his
principle, that one cannot be punished for another faults,) he falls into a
very pleasant discourse, That the Beasts are not said to be punished for men's
sins, but for their own, and therefore when it is said, before the flood, that
all flesh had corrupted his way; he will by n^ Genesis 6. 12.
means have it understood only of men, b^ that the sins of the beasts at that
time, were greater than ordinary, as well as men's. But he has not told us what
they were, whether by eating some forbidden herbs, or entering into conspiracies
against mankind their lawful Sovereigns, or unlawful mixtures; and therefore we
have yet reason to believe that when God says, the ground was cursed for man's
sake, that the Genesis 8. 21.
beasts were punished for man's sin. And if all flesh, must comprehend beasts in
this place, why shall not all flesh seeing the glory of the Lord, take in the
beasts there too: Isa. 40. 5.
for Vatablus parallels this place with the ^ther. But if, says Crellius any
shall contend that some beasts at least were innocent, then ^e says, that
those though they were destroy^d by the flood, yet did not suffer punishment,
^ut only a calamity by occasion of the sins of ^en. I wonder he did not rather
say, that the innocent beasts were taken into the Ark, for the propagation of a
better kind afterward. But by this solemn distiuction of calamities and
punishments, there is nothing so miserable, that either men or beasts can
undergo, but when it serves their turn, it shall be only a calamity and no
punishment, though it be said to be on purpose to show Gods severity against
the sins of the world. And this excellent notion of the beasts being punished
for their own sins, is improved by him to the vindication of the Scapegoat
from being punished; because then, says he, the most wicked and corrupt Goat
should have been made choice off. As though all the design of that great day of
expiation had been only to call the Children of Israel together with great
solemnity, to let them see, how a poor Goat must be punished for breaking the
Laws which we do not know were ever made for them. I had thought our
Adversaries had maintained that the Sacrifices (on the day of expiation (...)
least) had represented and typified the Sacrifice which was to be offered up b^
Christ; and so Socinus and Crellius else where contend: he need not therefore
have troubled himself concerning the si^ of the Goat, when it is expressly said,
The Lev. 16 21.
the sins of the people were put on the he^ of the Goat; Whatever then the
punishment were, it was on the account of the sins of the people, and not his
own. Bu^ Crellius urges against Grotius, that if the Scapegoat had been
punished for the expiation of the sins of the people, that should have bee^
particularly expressed in Scripture, where^ nothing is said there at all of it,
and that the throwing down the Scapegoat from the top (...) the rock, was no
part of the Primitive Institution, but one of the superstitions taken up by the
Jews in aftertimes, because of the ominousness of the return of it; and
although we should suppose (which is not probable) that it should dye by famine
in the Wilderness, yet this was not the death for expiation, which was to be by
the shedding of blood. To this therefore I answer. 1. I do not insist on the
customs of the later Jews to prove from thence any punishment designed by the
primitive institution. For I shall easily yield, that many superstitions
obtained among them afterward about the Scapegoat; as the stories of the red
list turning white upon the head of it, the booths and he causey made on
purpose, and several other things mentioned in the Rabbinical Cod. Joma. tit. 6.
Writers do manifest. But yet it seems very probable from the Text it self,
that the Scapegoat was not carried into the Wilderness at large, but to a
steep mountain there. For although we have commonly rendered Azazel by the
Scapegoat, yet according to the best of the Jewish Writers, as P. Fagius tells
us, (...) does not come from (...) a Goat, and (...) abiit; but is the name of
a Mountain very steep and rocky near Mount Sinai, and therefore probably called
by the later Jews, (...) the name of a Rock: and to this purpose, it is
observable that where we render it, and let him go for a Scapegoat into the
Wilderness Lev. 16. 10.
in the Hebrew it is, (...) to send him to Azazel in the Wilderness: as the
joining the preposition (...) does import, and the Arabic Version wherever
Azazel is mentioned, renders it by Mount Azaz: and the Chaldee and Syriack to
Azazel; so that from hence, a carrying the Scapegoat to a certain place may be
inferred; but I see no foundation in the Text for the throwing it down from the
rock when it was there; and therefore I cannot think, but that (...) the
punishment intended did lie in tha^ it would have been expressly mention^ in the
solemnities of that day, which h^ so great an influence on the expiation (...)
the sins of the people. 2. I answer, the the Scapegoat was to denote rather t^
effect of the expiation, than the mann^ of obtaining it. For the proper
expiatio^ was by the shedding of blood, as the Apos^ tells us; and thence the
live Goat was no^ Heb. 9. 22.
to have the sins of the people to bear aw^ into the desert, till the High
Priest had made (...) Lev. 16. 20.
end of reconciling the Holy Place, and the T^ bernacle of the Congregation,
and the Altar; an^ by the sprinkling of the blood of the other God which was
the sin-offering for the people; which being done, he was to bring the live
Goat, and to lay his hands upon the head of it, and confess V. 15.
over it all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in (...) their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and
shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wilderness; and so the
Go^ V. 21.
shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited, and he
shall let go the Goat in the Wilderness. So that V. 22.
the former Goat noted the way of expiation by the shedding of blood, and the
latter the effect of it, viz. that the sins of the people were declared to be
expiated by the sending the Goat charged with their sins into a desert place;
and that their sins would not appear in the presence of God against them, any
more than they expected, that the Goat which was sent into the Wilderness
should return among them. Which was the reason that afterward they took so
much care that it should not, by causing it to be thrown off from a steep rock;
which was no sooner done, but notice was given of it very suddenly by the
sounding of horns all over the Land. But the force of Socinus his argument from
the Scape-Goats bearing the sins of the people, that therefore that phrase does
not always imply the bearing of punishment, is taken off by Crellius himself,
who tells us that the Scapegoat is not said to bear the sins of the people in
the Crell. c. 1. Sect. 56.
Wilderness; but only that it carried the sins of the people into the
Wilderness, which is a phrase of another importance from that we are now
discoursing off. As will now further appear from the places where it is spoken
of concerning our Savior, which we now come particularly to examine.

The first place insisted on by Grotius. 5. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2. 24.
vindicated.
with a respect to Christ, is 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree, which, says Crellius, is so far from proving that
Christ did bear the punishment Crell. c. 1.. 35.
of our sins, that it does not imply any sufferings that he underwent on the
occasion of them. He grants that (...) does signify to carry up, but withal
(he says) it signifies to take away; because that which is taken up, is taken
away from the place where it was. Besides, he observes, that (...) does answer
to the Hebrew (...) he has made to ascend, which is frequently rendered by it
in the LXX. and sometimes by (...); but that Hebrew word does often signify to
take away, where it is rendered in the Greek by one of those two words, 2 Samuel
21. 13. Josh. 24. 32. Psalm. 102. 25. Ezra 1. 11. To which I answer, 1. That the
signification of (...) in this place, must not be taken from every sense the
word is ever used for, but in that which the words out of which these are taken
do imply; and in Isa. 53. 11. it does not answer (...) but to (...) a word
which by the confession of all is never properly used for taking away, but for
bearing of a burden, and is used with a respect to the punishment of sin,
Lament. 5. 7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their
iniquities, where the same word is used; so that the signification of the word
(...) here, must depend upon that in Isaiah, of which more afterward. 2.
Granting that (...) does answer sometimes to the Hebr. (...) yet it makes
nothing to Crellius his purpose, unless he can prove that (...) does ever
signify the taking away a thing by the destruction of it; for where it answers
to that word, it is either for the offering up of a Sacrifice, in which sense
(...) is very frequently used, as is confessed by Crellius; and in that sense
it is no prejudice at all to our cause; for then it must be granted, that
Christ upon the Cross is to be considered as a sacrifice for the sins of men;
and so our sins were laid upon him as they were supposed to be on the
Sacrifices under the Law, in order to the expiation of them, by the shedding
their blood; and if our Adversaries would acknowledge this, the difference
would not be so great between us; or else it is used for the removal of a thing
from one place to another, the thing it self still remaining in being, as 2 Samuel 21. 13. And he made Saul's bones to ascend, (...), he took them away, says
Crellius; true, but it is such a taking away, as is a bare removal; the thing
still remaining; the same is to be said of Joseph's bones, Josh. 24. 32. which
are all the places where (...) is used; and although (...) may be sometimes
taken in another sense, as Psalm. 102. 25. yet nothing can be more unreasonable
than such a way of arguing as this is; (...) says Crellius signifies taking
away; we demand his proof of it; is it that the word signifies so much of it
self? No; that he grants it does not. Is it that it is frequently used in the
Greek Version to render a word that properly does signify so? No; nor that
neither. But how is it then? Crellius tells us, that it sometimes answers to a
word that signifies to make to ascend: well, but does that word signify taking
away? No; not constantly, for it is frequently used for a sacrifice: but does
it at any time signify so? Yes; it signifies the removal of a thing from one
place to another. Is that the sense then he contends for here? No, but how
then? why (...) is used to render the same word that (...) does, and (...)
though it signifies too a bare removal, as Ezra 1. 11. yet Psalm. 102. 25. it is
used for cutting off, (...), the Hebr. is, make me not to ascend in the midst
of my days. But does it here signify utter destruction? I suppose not; but
grant it, what is this to (...), when the LXX. uses not that word here, which
for all that we know was purposely altered; so that at last (...) is far enough
from any such signification as Crellius would fix upon it, unless he will
assert, that Christ's taking away our sins, was only a removal of them from
Earth to Heaven. But here Grotius comes in to the relief of Crellius against
himself; for in his Notes upon this place, though he had before said, that the
word was never used in the New Testament in that sense, yet he there says,
(...) is abstulit, for which he referrs us to Heb. 9. 28. where he proceeds
altogether as subtly as Crellius had done before him, for he tells us (...)
is put for (...) Numb. 14. 33. Deuteronomy. 14. 24. Isa. 53. 12. but (...), i. e.
(...) is put for (...), Lev. 10. 17. Numb. 14. 18. A most excellent way of
interpreting Scripture! considering the various significations of the Hebrew
words; and above all of that (...) which is here mentioned. For according to
this way of arguing, (...) shall signify the same with (...), and (...), for
(...) signifies all these, and is rendered by them in the Greek Version, so that
by the same way that Grotius proves that (...) signifies (...), we can prove
that (...) does not signify to take away, but to bear punishment; nay, (...)
signifies the bearing punishment in the strictest sense, Ezekiel. 16. 52, 54. and
bearing sin in that sense, Ezekiel. 16. 58. Thou have born thy lewdness, and thy
abominations, (...) So that when (...) is more frequently used in this than in
the other sense, why shall its signifying (...) at any time make (...) be taken
in the same sense with that? Nay, I do not remember in any place where (...) is
joined with sin, but it signifies the punishment of it, so (...), Levit. 19. 8.
to bear his iniquity, Levit. 20. 17. (...), bearing their iniquity in one verse
is explained by being cut off from among their people, in the next. And in the
places cited by Grotius, that Numb. 14. 33. has been already showed to
signify bearing the punishment of sin, and that Deuteronomy. 14. 24. is plainly
understood of a Sacrifice, the other, Isa. 53. 12. will be afterward made
appear by other places in the same Chapter, to signify nothing to this
purpose. So that for all we can yet see, (...) must be taken either for bearing
our sins as a sacrifice did under the Law, or the punishment of them; in either
sense it serves our purpose, but is far enough from our Adversaries meaning.

But supposing we should grant them, that (...) may signify to take away, let
us see. 6. Crellius his se^ exam^n^d.
what excellent sense they make of these words of S. Peter. Do they then say,
that Christ did take away our sins upon the Cross? No, they have a great care
of that, for that would make the expiation of sins to have been performed
there; which they utterly deny, and say, that Christ only took the Cross in his
way to his Ascension to Heaven, that there he might expiate sins. But does not
S. Peter say, that what was done by him here, was in his body on the tree: and
they will not say, he carried that with him to Heaven too. Well, but what then
was the taking away of sin which belonged to Christ upon the Cross? is it only
to persuade men to live virtuously, and leave off their sins? This Socinus
would have, and Crellius is contented Soc. deserv l. 2. c. 6. Crell. c. 1.. 39.
that it should be understood barely of taking away sins, and not of the
punishment of them, but only by way of accession and consequence: but if it be
taken (which he inclines more to) for the punishment, then (he says) it is to
be understood not of the virtue and efficacy of the death of Christ, but of the
effect: and yet a little after he says, Sect. ^4.
those words of Christ's bearing our sins, are to be understood of the force and
efficacy of Christ's death to do it, not including the effect of it in us; not
as though Christ did deliver us from sins by his death, but that he did that by
dying, upon which the taking away of sin would follow, or which had a great
power for the doing it. So uncertain are our Adversaries, in affixing any sense
upon these words, which may attribute any effect at all, to the death of Christ
upon the Cross. For if they be understood of taking away sins, then they are
only to be meant of the power that was in the death of Christ, to persuade men
to leave their sins; which we must have a care of understanding so, as to
attribute any effect to the death of Christ in order to it; but only that the
death of Christ was an argument for us to believe what he said, and the
believing what he said would incline us to obey him, and if we obey him, we
shall leave off our sins, whether Christ had dyed or no: supposing his miracles
had the same effect on us, which those of Moses had upon the Jews, which were
sufficient to persuade them to believe and obey without his death. But if this
be all that was meant by Christ's bearing our sins in his body on the tree; why
might not S. Peter himself be said to bear them upon his cross too? for his
death was an excellent example of patience, and a great argument to persuade
men he spoke truth, and that doctrine which he preached, was repentance and
remission of sins: So that by this sense, there is nothing peculiar attributed
to the death of Christ. But taking the other sense for the taking away the
punishment of sins, we must see how this belongs to the death of Christ: Do
they then attribute our delivery from the punishment to sin, to the death of
Christ on the Cross? yes, just as we may attribute Caesar's subduing Rome, to
his passing over Rubicon, because he took that in his way to the doing of it:
so they make the death of Christ only as a passage, in order to expiation of
sins, by taking away the punishment of them. For that shall not be actually
perfected, they say, till his full deliverance of all those that obey him, from
hell and the grave, which will not be till his second coming. So that if we
only take the body of Christ for his second coming, and the cross of Christ,
or the tree, for his Throne of Glory, then they will acknowledge, that Christ
may very well be said, to take away sins in his own body on the tree: but if
you take it in any sense that does imply any peculiar efficacy to the death of
Christ, for all the plainness of S. Peter's words, they by no means will admit
of it.

But because Crellius urges Grotius with. 7. Isa. 53. 11. vindicated. Crell.
c. 1. sect. 35.
the sense of that place, Isa. 53. 11. out of which he contends these words are
taken, and Crellius conceives he can prove there, that bearing is the same with
taking away sin: We now come to consider, what force he can find from thence,
for the justifying his assertion, That the bearing of sins, when attributed to
Christ, does not imply the punishment of them, but the taking them away. The
words are, for he shall bear their iniquities. As to which Grotius observes,
that the word (...) which signifies iniquity, is sometimes taken for the
punishment of sin, 2 Kings 7. 9. and the verb (...) is to bear, and when ever
it is joined with sin or iniquity, in all Languages, and especially the Hebrew,
it signifies to suffer punishment; for although (...) may sometimes signify to
take away, (...) never does: so that this phrase can receive no other
interpretation. Notwithstanding all which, Crellius attempts to prove, that
(...) here, must be taken in a Crell. c. 1. sect. 44.
sense contrary to the natural and perpetual use of the word; for which his
first argument is very infirm, viz. because it is mentioned after the death of
Christ, and is therefore to be considered as the reward of the other. Whereas
it appears: 1. By the Prophets discourse, that he does not insist on an exact
methodical order, but dilates and amplifies things as he sees occasion: for
Verse. 9. he says, He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death; and Verse. 10. he says, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has
put him to grief: Will Crellius therefore say, that this must be consequent to
his death and burial? 2. The particle, may be here taken causally, as we render
it, very agreeably to the sense; and so it gives an account of the foregoing
clause, By his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities. And that this is no unusual acception of that
particle, might be easily cleared from many places of Scripture if it were
necessary; and from this very Prophet, as Isa. 39. 1. where (...) is the same
with (...) 2 King. 20. 12. and Isa. 64. 5. Thou art wroth, for we have sinned
(...) where the same particle is made the causal of what went before. But we
need not insist upon this to answer Crellius, who elsewhere makes use of it
himself, and says, They must be very ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, who do not
know, that the Crell. c. 9.. 7. p. 463. Soc. Prael. c. 14. sect. 6.
conjunction copulative is often taken causally; and so much is confessed by
Socinus also, where he explains, that particle in one sens^ in the beginning,
and causally in the middl^ of the verse: And the Lords anger was kindle^
against Israel, (...) for he moved, etc. But i^ 2 Samuel 24. 1.
this will not do, he attempts to prove^ That (...) in this very Chapter, has
the signification of taking away, v. 4. For he has bor^ our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, which i^ applied by S. Matthew. 8. 17. to bodily diseases,
which our Savior did not bear, but took away, as it is said in the foregoing
verse, he healed all that were sick on which those words come in, That it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias, etc. To which I answer: 1. It is
granted by our Adversaries, that S. Matthew in those words, does not give the
full sense of the Prophet, but only applies that by way of accommodation, to
bodily diseases, which was chiefly intended for the sins of men. And in a way
of accommodation it is not unusual to strain words beyond their genuine and
natural signification, or what was intended primarily by the person who spoke
them. Would it be reasonable for any to say that (...) signifies to give,
because that place Psalm. 68. 18. where the word by all is acknowledged to
signify to receive, is rendered to give, Ephesians. 4. 8. so that admitting another
sense of the word here, as applied to the cure of bodily diseases, it does not
from thence follow, that this should be ^he meaning of the word in the primary
^ense intended by the Prophet. 2. The word as used by S. Matthew, is very
capable of the primary and natural sense; for S. Matthew retains words of the
same signification, with that which we contend for, (...) and (...), neither of
which does signify taking away, by causing a thing not to be. So that all that
is implied hereby, is the pains and trouble which our Savior took in the
healing of the sick. For to that end, as Grotius well observes upon that place,
the circumstances are mentioned, That it was at even, and multitudes were
brought to him in S. Matthew, that after Sunset Mat. 8. 16.
all that were diseased were brought, and all the City was gathered together at
the door; in Mark 1. 32, 33. Luke 4. 42.
S. Mark, That he departed not till it was day, in S. Luke; that we might the
better understand how our Savior did bear our griefs, because the pains he
took in healing them were so great. And here I cannot but observe, that Grotius
in his notes on that place, continued still in the same mind he was in, when
he writ against Socinus; for he says, Those words may either refer to the
diseases of the body, and so they note the pains he took in the cure of them;
or to our sins, and so they were fulfilled when Christ by suffering upon t^
cross, did obtain remission of sins for (...) as S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
But upon what reason the Annotations on that pla^ come to be so different from
his sense e^ pressed here, long after Crellius his answe^ I do not understand.
But we are sure (...) declared his mind, as to the main of the Controversy, to
be the same, that it w^ when he writ his Book which Crellius answered; as
appears by two Letters of h^ to Vossius, not long since published; an^ he
utterly disowns the charge of Socinianisa, Epist. Eccl^. p. 747, 748 Discuss.
p. 16. 17.
as a calumny in his discussion, the last book he ever writ.

But we are no further obliged to vindicate. 8. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 7. vindicated.
Grotius, than he did the truth; which we are sure he did in the vindication of
the 53 of Isaiah, from Socinus his interpretations, notwithstanding what
Crellius has objected against him. We therefore proceed to other Verses in the
same Chapter insisted on by Grotius, to prove That Christ did bear the
punishment of our sins, v. 6, 7. The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us
all: It is required, and he was afflicted, as Grotius renders those words.
Socinus makes D^ Servat. l. 2. c. 5.
a twofold sense of the former clause; the first is, That God by or with Christ
did meet with our iniquities; the latter, That God did make our iniquities to
meet with Christ. The ^ords says Grotius, will not bear the for^er
interpretation; for the verb (...) be^g in Hiphil, must import a double action,
and so it must not be, That God by him did ^eet with our sins, but that God did
make our ^s to meet upon him. To which Crellius ^eplies, That words in Hiphil
are sometimes Crell. c. 1. sect. 52.
^sed intransitively; but can he produce any ^nstance in Scripture, where this
word ^oyned with (...) and (...) is so taken? for in the last verse of the
Chapter, the construction is different: And what an uncertain way of
interpreting Scripture will this be, if every Anomalous signification, and rare
use of a word, shall be made use of to take away such a sense as is most
agreeable to the design of the place. For that sense we contend for, is not
only enforced upon the most natural importance of these words, but upon the
agreeableness of them with so many other expressions of this Chapter, that
Christ did bear our iniquities, and was wounded for our transgressions, and
that his soul was made an offering for sin: to which it is very suitable, that
as the iniquities of the people were (as it were) laid upon the head of the
Sacrifice; so it should be said of Christ, who was to offer up himself for the
sins of the world. And the Jews themselves by this phrase do understand the
punishme^ either for the sins of the people, wh^ Josias underwent, or which the
people the^ selves suffered, by those who interpret (...) prophecy of them. To
which purpos^ Aben Ezra observes, that iniquity is here (...) for the
punishment of it, as 1 Samuel 28. 10. Lam. 4. 6. But Socinus mistrusting the i^
congruity of this Interpretation, flies (...) another; viz. That God did make
our i^ quities to meet with Christ: and this we (...) willing to admit of, if
by that they me^ That Christ underwent the punishment (...) them; as that
phrase must naturally i^ port, for what otherwise can our iniqui^ meeting with
him signify? For the word (...) taken properly (as Socinus acknowledg^ it
ought to be, when he rejects Pagni^ Interpretation of making Christ to into
cede for our iniquities) signifies eith^ to meet with one by chance, or out
(...) kindeness, or else for an encounter, wi^ an intention to destroy that
which it me^ with. So Judge. 8. 21. Rise thou (...) LXX irrue in nos, fall upon
(...) i. e. run upon us with thy sword, and ki^ us, Judge. 15. 12. Swear unto
me, that (...) will not fall upon me your selves; where the same word is used,
and they explain the meaning of it in the next words, v. 1^ we will not kill
thee, Amos 5. 19. as if a man ^dia flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, (...)
i. e. with a design to kill him. Now I suppose they will not say that our sins
met with Christ by chance, since it is said, that God laid on him, etc. nor out
of kindness; it must be therefore out of enmity, and with a design to destroy
him, and so our sins cannot be understood as Socinus and Crellius would have
them, as the mere occasions of Christ's death: but as the proper impulsive cause
of it. Whether the following word (...) be taken with a respect to sin, and so
it properly signifies It is required, or with a respect to the person, and so
it may signify he was oppressed, is not a matter of that consequence, which we
ought to contend about; if it be proved that Christ's expression had only a
respect to sin, as the punishment of it. Which will yet further appear from
another expression in the same Chapter, ver. 5. The chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. In which Grotius says the word
(...) does not signify any kind of affliction, but such as has the nature of
punishment, either for example or instruction; but since the latter cannot be
intended in Christ, the former must. Crellius thinks to escape from this, by
acknowledging Crell. c. 1. Sect. 57.
that the sufferings of Christ have some respect to sin; but if it be such a
respect to sin, which makes what Christ underwent a punishment (which is only
proper in this case) it is as much as we contend for. This therefore he is loath
to abide by; and says, that chastisement imports no more than bare affliction
without any respect to sin, which he thinks to prove from St. Paul's words, 2
Cor. 6. 9. We are chastised, but not given over to death; but how far this is
from proving his purpose will easily appear, 1. Because those by whom they were
said to be chastened, did not think they did it without any respect to a fault;
but they supposed them to be justly punished; and this is that we plead for,
that the chastisement considered with a respect to him that inflicts it, does
suppose some fault as the reason of inflicting it. 2. This is far from the
present purpose, for the chastisement there mentioned is opposed to death, as
chastened, but not killed; whereas Grotius expressly speaks of such
chastisements as include death, that these cannot be supposed to be merely
designed for instruction, and therefore must be conceived under the notion of
punishment. The other place Psalm. 73. 14. is yet more remote from the business;
for though the Psalmist accounts himself innocent in respect of the great
enormities of others; yet he could not account himself so innocent with a
respect to God, as not to deserve chastisement from him.

But Crellius offers further to prove that. 9. Whether Christ's death be a
proper (...), and whether that does imply that it was a punishment of sin?
Christ's death must be considered as a bare affliction, and not as a (...), or
exemplary punishment, because in such a punishment the guilty themselves are to
be punished, and the benefit comes to those who were not guilty, but in Christ's
sufferings it was quite contrary, for the innocent was punished, and the guilty
have the benefit of it: and yet (he says) if we should grant that Christ's
sufferings were a (...), that will not prove that his death was a proper
punishment. To which I answer, That whatever answers to the ends of an
exemplary punishment, may properly be called so: but supposing that Christ
suffered the punishment of our sins, those sufferings will answer to all the
ends of an exemplary punishment. For the ends of such a punishment assigned by
Crellius himself, are, That others observing such a punishment, may abstain
from those sins which have brought it upon the person who suffers. Now the
question is, whether supposing Christ did suffer on the account of our sins,
these sufferings of his may deterr us from the practice of sin or no? And
therefore in opposition to Crellius, I shall prove these two things: 1. That
supposing Christ suffered for our sins, there was a sufficient argument to
deterr us from the practice of sin. 2. Supposing that his sufferings had no
respect to our sins, they could not have that force to deterr men from the
practice of it: for he after asserts, That Christ's sufferings might be a (...)
to us, though they were no punishment of sin. 1. That the death of Christ
considered as a punishment of sin, is a proper (...) or has a great force to
deterr men from the practice of sin: and that because the same reason of
punishment is supposed in Christ and in our selves, and because the example is
much more considerable, than if we had suffered our selves. 1. The same reason
of punishment is supposed. For why are men deterred from sin, by seeing others
punished; but because they look upon the sin as the reason of the punishment;
and therefore where the same reason holds, the same ends may be as properly
obtained. If we said that Christ suffered death merely as an innocent person
out of Gods dominion over his life; what imaginable force could this have to
deterr men from sin, which is asserted to have no relation to it as the cause
of it? But when we say, that God laid our iniquities upon him, that he suffered
not upon his own account but ours, that the sins we commit against God were the
cause of all those bitter Agonies which the Son of God underwent, what argument
can be more proper to deter men from sin than this is? For hereby they see the
great abhorrency of sin which is in God, that he will not pardon the sins of
men without a compensation made to his Honor, and a demonstration to the world
of his hatred of it. Hereby they see what a value God has for his Laws, which
he will not relax as to the punishment of offenders, without so valuable a
consideration as the blood of his own Son. Hereby they see, that the punishment
of sin is no mere arbitrary thing depending barely upon the will of God; but
that there is such a connection between sin and punishment as to the ends of
Government, that unless the Honor and Majesty of God, as to his Laws and
Government may be preserved, the violation of his Laws must expect a just
recompense of reward. Hereby they see what those are to expect who neglect or
despise these sufferings of the Son of God for them; for nothing can then
remain, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation
which shall devour the Adversaries. So that, here all the weighty arguments
concur which may be most apt to prevail upon men to deterr them from their
sins. For if God did thus by the green tree, what will he do by the dry? If he
who was so innocent in himself, so perfectly holy, suffered so much on the
account of our sins; what then may those expect to suffer, who have no
innocence at all to plead, and add wilfulness and impenitency to their sins?
But if it be replied by Crellius, that it is otherwise among men: I answer,
that we do not pretend in all things to parallel the sufferings of Christ for
us, with any sufferings of men for one another. But yet we add, that even among
men the punishments inflicted on those who were themselves innocent as to the
cause of them, may be as exemplary as any other. And the greater appearance of
severity there is in them, the greater terror they strike into all offenders.
As Childrens losing their estates and honors, or being banished for their
Parents treasons in which they had no part themselves. Which is a proper
punishment on them of their Fathers faults, whether they be guilty or no; and
if this may be just in men, why not in God? If any say, that the Parents are
only punished in the Children, he speaks that which is contradictory to the
common sense of mankind; for punishment does suppose sense or feeling of it;
and in this case the Parents are said to be punished, who are supposed to be
dead and past feeling of it, and the Children who undergo the smart of it must
not be said to be punished; though all things are so like it, that no person
can imagine himself in that condition, but would think himself punished, and
severely too. If it be said, that these are calamities indeed, but they are no
proper punishments, it may easily be showed that distinction will not hold
here. Because these punishments were within the design of the Law, and were
intended for all the ends of punishments, and therefore must have the nature of
them. For therefore the Children are involved in the Fathers punishment on
purpose to deterr others from the like actions. There are some things indeed
that Children may fall into by occasion of their Fathers guilt, which may be
only calamities to them, because they are necessary consequents in the nature
of the thing, and not purposely designed as a punishment to them. Thus, being
deprived of the comfort and assistance of their Parents, when the Law has
taken them off by the hand of justice: this was designed by the Law as a
punishment to the Parents, and as to the Children it is only a necessary
consequent of their punishment. For otherwise the Parents would have been
punished for the Childrens faults, and not the Children only involved in that
which unavoidably follows upon the Parents punishment. So that Crellius is very
much mistaken either in the present case of our Saviors punishment, or in the
general reason of exemplary punishments, as among men. But the case of our
Savior is more exemplary, when we consider the excellency of his person,
though appearing in our nature, when no meaner sufferings would satisfy, than
of so transcendent a nature as he underwent, though he were the Eternal Son of
God, this must make the punishment much more exemplary, than if he were
considered only as our Adversaries do, as a mere man. So that the dignity of
his person under all his sufferings may justly add a greater consideration to
deterr us from the practice of sin, which was so severely punished in him, when
he was pleased to be a Sacrifice for our sins. From whence we see that the ends
of a (...) are very agreeable with the sufferings of Christ considered as a
punishment for sin.

We now consider whether as Crellius. 10. Gods hatred of sin could not be seen
in the sufferings of Christ, if they were no punishment of sin. Crell. c. 1. p.
69.
asserts, supposing Christ's death were no punishment, it could have these
effects upon men's minds or no? Yes, he says, it might, because by his
sufferings we might see how severely God would punish wicked and obstinate
persons. Which being a strange riddle at the first hearing it, viz. that by the
sufferings of an innocent person without any respect to sin as the cause of
them: we should discern Gods severity against those who are obstinate in sin;
we ought the more diligently to attend to what is said for the clearing of it.
First, says he, If God spared not his own most innocent and holy and only Son,
than whom nothing was more dear to him in Heaven or Earth, but exposed him to
so cruel and ignominious a death; how great and severe sufferings may we think
God will inflict on wicked men, who are at open defiance with him? I confess my
self not subtle enough to apprehend the force of this argument, viz. If God
dealt so severely with him who had no sin either of his own or others to answer
for (...) therefore he will deal much more severely with those that have. For
Gods severity considered without any respect t^ sin, gives rather encouragement
to sinners, than any argument to deter them from it. For the natural
consequence of it is, that God does act arbitrarily, without any regard to the
good or evi^ of men's actions; and therefore it is to no purpose to be
sollicitous about them. For upon the same account that the most innocent person
suffers most severely from him, for all that we know, the more we strive to be
innocent, the more severely we may be dealt with, and let men sin, they can be
but dealt severely with, all the difference then is, one shall be called
punishments, and the other calamities, but the severity may be the same in
both. And who would leave off his sins merely to change the name of punishments
into that of calamities? And from hence it will follow, that the differences of
good and evil, and the respects of them to punishment and reward, are but aerie
and empty things; but that God really in the dispensation of things to men,
has no regard to what men are or do, but acts therein according to his own
Dominion, whereby he may dispose of men how or which way he pleases. If a
Prince had many of his Subjects in open rebellion against him, and he should at
that time make his most obedient and beloved Son to be publicly exposed to all
manner of indignities, and be dishonored and put to death by the hands of
those rebels; could any one imagine that this was designed as an exemplary
punishment to all rebels, to let them see the danger of rebellion? No, but
would it not rather make them think him a cruel Prince, one that would punish
innocence as much as rebellion; and that it was rather better to stand at
defiance, and become desperate, for it was more dangerous to be beloved than
hated by him, to be his Son than his declared Enemy? So that insisting on the
death of Christ as it is considered as a (...), (for of that we speak now)
there is no comparison between our Adversaries hypothesis and ours; but, says
Crellius, the consequence is not good on our side, if Christ suffered the
punishment of our sins, therefore they shall suffer much more who continue in
sin, for Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world; but they suffer only
for their own, and what they have deserved themselves. To which I answer, that
the argument is of very good force upon our hypothesis, though it would not be
upon theirs. For if we suppose him to be a mere man that suffered, then there
could be no argument drawn from his sufferings to ours, but according to the
exact proportion of sins and punishments: but supposing that he had a divine as
well as humane nature, there may not be so great a proportion of the sins of
the world to the sufferings of Christ, as of the sins of a particular person to
his own sufferings; and therefore the argument from one to the other does still
hold. For the measure of punishments must be taken with a proportion to the
dignity of the person who suffers them. And Crellius himself confesses
elsewhere, that the dignity of the person is to be considered in exemplary
punishment, Crell. c. 8. Sect. 43.
and that a lesser punishment of one that is very great, may do much more to
deter men from sin, than a greater punishment of one much less. But he yet
further urges, that the severity of God against sinners may be discovered in
the sufferings of Christ, because Crell. c. 1. sect. 57, 70.
Gods hatred against sin is discovered therein. But if we ask how Gods hatred
against sin, is seen in the sufferings of one perfectly innocent and free from
sin, and not rather his hatred of innocence, if no respect to sin were had
therein? he answers, that Gods hatred against sin was manifested, in that he
would not spare his only Son to draw men off from sin. For answer to which, we
are to consider the sufferings of Christ as an innocent person, designed as an
exemplary cause to draw men off from sin; and let any one tell me, what hatred
of sin can possibly be discovered, in proposing the sufferings of a most
innocent person to them without any consideration of sin as the cause of those
sufferings? If it be said, that the doctrine of Christ was designed to draw men
off from sin; and that God suffered his Son to dye to confirm this doctrine,
and thereby showed his hatred to sin. I answer, 1. This is carrying the dispute
off from the present business, for we are not now arguing about the design of
Christ's doctrine, nor the death of Christ as a means to confirm that, but as a
(...), and what power that has without respect to our sins as the cause of
them, to draw us from sin, by discovering Gods hatred to it. 2. The doctrine of
Christ according to their hypothesis, discovers much less of Gods hatred to sin
than ours does. For if God may pardon sin without any compensation made to his
Laws or Honor, if repentance be in its own nature a sufficient satisfaction
for all the sins past of our Lives; if there be no such thing as such a Justice
in God which requires punishment of sin committed; if the punishment of sin
depend barely upon Gods will; and the most innocent person may suffer as much
from God without respect to sin as the cause of suffering, as the most guilty;
let any rational man judge whether this Doctrine discovers as much Gods
abhorrency of sin, as asserting the necessity of vindicating Gods honor to the
World, by the breach of his Laws, if not by the suffering of the offenders
themselves, yet of the Son of God as a Sacrifice for the expiation of sin, by
undergoing the punishment of our iniquities, so as upon consideration of his
sufferings, he is pleased to accept of repentance and sincere obedience, as the
conditions upon which he will grant remission of sins, and eternal life. So
that if the discovery of Gods hatred to sin be the means to reclaim men from
it, we assert upon the former reasons, that much more is done upon our Doctrine
concerning the sufferings of Christ, than can be upon theirs. So much shall
suffice to manifest in what sense Christ's death may be a (...), and that this
does imply, that his sufferings are to be considered as a punishment of sin.

The next Series of places which makes. 11. Grotius his arguments from Christ's
being made sin and a curse for us defined against Crellius.
Christ's sufferings to be a punishment for sin, are those which assert Christ
to be made sin and a curse for us: which we now design to make clear, ought to
be understood in no other sense; for as Grotius says, As the Jews sometimes
use sin, for the punishment of sin; as appears, besides other places, by Zach.
14. 19. Genesis 4. 13. so they call him that suffers the punishment of sin, by the
name of sin; as the Latins use the word Piaculum, both for the fault, and for
him that suffers for it. Thence under the Law, an expiatory Sacrifice for sin,
was called sin, Levit. 4. 3, 29 -- 5. 6. Psalm. 40. 7. Which way of speaking
Esaias followed, speaking of Christ, Esai. 53. 10. (...) he made his soul sin,
i. e. liable to the punishment of it. To the same purpose S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.
21. He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. To which Crellius Crel. c. 1.. 60.
replies, That as there is no necessity, that by the name of sin, when applied
to sufferings, any more should be implied, than that those sufferings were
occasioned by sin, no more is there when it is applied to the person; nay, much
less, for he says, No more is required to this, but that he should be handled
as sinners use to be, and undergo the matter of punishment, without any respect
to sin, either as the cause or occasion of it. So he says, The name Sinner is
used, 1 King. 1. 21. and in S. Paul, the name of sin in the first clause is to
be understood, as of righteousness in the latter; and as we are said to be
righteousness in him, when God deals with us as with righteous persons, so
Christ was said to be sin for us, when he was dealt with as a sinner. And the
Sacrifices for sin under the Law were so called, not with a respect to the
punishment of sin, but because they were offered upon the account of sin, and
were used for taking away the guilt of it; or because men were bound to offer
them, so that they sinned if they neglected it. So that all that is meant by
Esaias and S. Paul is, That Christ was made an expiatory Sacrifice, or that he
exposed himself for those afflictions which sinners only by right undergo. But
let Crellius or any others of them tell me, if the Scripture had intended to
express, that the sufferings of Christ were a punishment of our sins, how was
it possible to do it more Emphatically than it is done by these expressions
(the custom of the Hebrew Language being considered) not only by saying, that
Christ did bear our sins, but, that himself was made sin for us? those phrases
being so commonly used for the punishment of sin. Let them produce any one
instance in Scripture, where those expressions are applied to any without the
consideration of sin? that place 1 King. 1. 21. is very far from it; for in all
probability, the design of Bathsheba in making Solomon King was already
discovered, which was the reason that Adonijah his elder Brother declaring
himself King, invited not him with the rest of the Kings sons: All that she had
for Solomon's succession, was a secret promise and oath of David; and therefore
she urges him now to declare the succession, v. ^0. Otherwise, she says, when
David should dye, I and my son Solomon shall be accounted offenders; i. e.
says Crel^. We shall be handled as offenders, we shall be destroyed: But
surely not without the supposition of a fault, by them which should inflict
that punishment upon them: The plain meaning is, they should be accused of Tr^a
^n, and then punished accordingly. But we are to consider, that still with a
respect to them, who were the inflicters, a fault or sin is supposed as the
reason of their punishment, either of their own or others. But of our Savior
it is not said, That he should be counted as an offender by the Jews; for
although that does not take away his innocence, yet it supposes an accusation
of something, which in it self deserves punishment. But in Esai. 53. 10. it is
said, He made his soul sin; and 2 Cor. 5. 21. That God made him sin for us,
which must therefore imply, not being dealt with by men only as a sinner, but
that with a respect to him who inflicted the punishment, there was a
consideration of sin as the reason of it. We do not deny but Gods suffering him
to be dealt with as a sinner by men, is implied in it, for that was the method
of his punishment designed; but we say further, that the reason of that
permission in God, does suppose some antecedent cause of it: For God would
never have suffered his only Son, to be so dealt with by the hands of cruel
men, unless he had made himself an offering for sin; being willing to undergo
those sufferings, that he might be an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the
world. And although Socinus will not yield, That by being made sin for us,
should be understood Soc. l. 1. c. 8.
Christ's being an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin; yet Crellius is contented it
should be so taken in both places: Which if he will grant, so as by virtue of
that Sacrifice, the guilt of sin is expiated, we shall not contend with him
about the reasons, why those Sacrifices were called sins, although the most
proper and genuine must needs be that, which is assigned by the Law, that the
sins of the people were supposed to be laid upon them, and therefore they were
intended for the expiation of them: But it is very unreasonable to say, That
Expiatory Sacrifices were called sins, because it would have been a sin to
neglect them: For on the same account, all the other Sacrifices must have been
called so too; for it was a sin to neglect any where God required them, and so
there had been no difference between Sacrifices for sin and others. To that
reason of Crellius, from our being made righteous, because dealt with as such,
to Christ's being made sin only, because dealt with as a sinner, we need no
more than what this parallel will afford us; For as Crellius would never say,
that any are dealt with as righteous persons, who are not antecedently supposed
to be so; so by his own Argument, Christ's being dealt with as a sinner, must
suppose guilt antecedent to it; and since the Apostle declares it was not his
own, in those words, Who knew no sin, it follows that it must be the
consideration of ours, which must make him be dealt with as a sinner by him,
who made him to be sin for us. But to suppose that Christ should be said to be
made sin, without any respect to sin, is as much as if the Latins should call
any one Scelus, and mean thereby a very honest man; or a Piaculum, without any
supposition of his own or others guilt. But we are to consider, that the
sufferings of Christ, seeming at first so inconsistent with that relation to
God as his only Son, which the Apostles assert concerning him, they were
obliged to vindicate his innocence as to men, and yet withal to show, that with
a respect to God, there was sufficient reason for his permission of his
undergoing these sufferings. That he knew no sin, was enough to clear his
innocence as to men; but then the question will be asked, If he were so
innocent, why did God suffer all those things to come upon him? Did not Abraham
plead of old with God, That he would not slay the righteous with the wicked,
because Genesis 18. 25.
it was repugnant to the righteousness of his nature to do so; That be far from
thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, and that
the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee; shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right? How then comes God to suffer the most perfect
innocence to be dealt with so, as the greatest sins could not have deserved
worse from men? Was not his righteousness the same still? And Abraham did not
think the distinction of calamities and punishments, enough to vindicate Gods
proceedings, if the righteous should have been dealt withal as the wicked. And
if that would hold for such a measure of righteousness as might be supposed in
such who were not guilty of the great abominations of those places, that it
should be enough, not only to deliver themselves, but the wicked too; how
comes it that the most perfect obedience of the Son of God, is not sufficient
to excuse him from the greatest sufferings of Malefactors? But if his
sufferings had been merely from men, God been accountable only for the bare
permission; but it is said, that he foreordained and determined these things
to be, that Christ himself complained, that God had forsaken him; and here,
that he made him sin for us: and can we imagine all this to be without any
respect to the guilt of sin, as the cause of it? Why should such an expression
be used of being made sin? might not many others have served sufficiently to
declare the indignities and sufferings he underwent, without such a phrase as
seems to reflect upon Christ's innocence? If there had been no more in these
expressions than our Adversaries imagine, the Apostles were so careful of
Christ's honor, they would have avoided such ill-sounding expressions as these
were; and not have affected Hebraisms, and uncouth forms of speech, to the
disparagement of their Religion. But this is all which our Adversaries have to
say, where words are used by them out of their proper sense, that the Prophets
and Apostles affected tricks of wit, playing with words, using them sometimes
in one sense, and presently quite in another. So Crellius says of Esaiah, That
he affects little elegancies of words and verbal allusions, which makes him use
Crel. c. 1.. 57.
words sometimes out of their proper and natural sense; thence he tells us, The
sufferings of Christ are called chastisement, though they have nothing of the
nature of chastisements in them: And from this liberty of interpreting, they
make words (without any other reason, than that they serve for their purpose)
be taken in several senses in the same verse: For Socinus in one verse of
Socin. explicat. 1. cap. Joh. v. 10.
S. John's Gospel, makes the World be taken in three several senses: He was in
the world, there it is taken, says he, for the men of the world in general:
The world was made by him, there it must be understood only of the reformation
of things by the Gospel; and, the world knew him not, there it must be taken in
neither of the former senses, but for the wicked of the world: What may not one
make of the Scripture, by such a way of interpreting it? But by this we have
the less reason to wonder, that Socinus should put such an Interpretation upon
Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: In
which he does acknowledge by the curse, in the first clause to be meant, the
punishment of sin, but not in the second: And the reason he gives for it is,
amavit enim Paulus in execrationis verbo argutus esse. S. Paul affected playing
with the Socin. de Christo servat. l. 2. c. 1.
word curse, understanding it first in a proper, and then a Metaphorical sense.
But it is plain, that the design of S. Paul and Socinus are very different in
these words: Socinus thinks he speaks only Metaphorically, when he says, that
Christ was made a curse for us; i. e. by a bare allusion of the name, without a
correspondency in the thing it self; and so that the death of Christ might be
called a curse, but was not so: but S. Paul speaks of this not by way of
extenuation, but to set forth the greatness and weight of the punishment he
underwent for us. He therefore tells us, what it was which Christ did redeem us
from, The curse of the Law; and how he did it, by being not only made a curse,
but a curse for us; i. e. not by being hateful to God, or undergoing the very
same curse, which we should have done; which are the two things objected by
Crellius against our sense; but that the death of Christ was to be considered,
not as a bare separation of soul and body, but as properly poenal, being such a
kind of death, which none but Malefactors by the Law were to suffer; by the
undergoing of which punishment in our stead, he redeemed us from that curse
which we were liable to by the violation of the Law of God. And there can be no
reason to appropriate this only to the Jews, unless the death of Christ did
extend only to the deliverance of them from the punishment of their sins; or
because the curse of the Law did make that death poenal, therefore the
intention of the punishment, could reach no further than the Law did; but the
Apostle in the very next words speaks of the farther extension of the great
blessing promised to Abraham, That it should come upon the Gentiles also; and
withal those whom the Apostle speaks to, were not Jews, but such as thought
they ought to join the Law and Gospel together: that St. Paul does not mean as
Crellius Cr^l. Annot in loc.
would have it, that Christ by his death did confirm the New Covenant, and so
take away the obligation of the Law; (for to what end was the curse mentioned
for that? What did the accursedness of his death add to the confirmation of the
truth of his Doctrine? and when was ever the curse taken for the continuance of
the Law of Moses?) but that Christ by the efficacy of his death as a punishment
for sin hat redeemed all that believe and obey him from the curse deserved by
their sins, whether enforced by the Law of Moses, or the Law written in their
hearts, which tells the consciences of sinners, that such who violate the Laws
of God are worthy of death, and therefore under the curse of the Law.

We come now to the force of the particles which being joined with our sins as
referring. 12.
to the death of Christ, do imply that The particles (...) being joined to
sins, and relating to susterings, do imply those sufferings to be the
punishment of sin.
his death is to be considered as a punishment of sin. Not that we insist on
the force of those particles (...) and (...), as though of themselves they did
imply this (for we know they are of various significations according to the
nature of the matter they are joined with) but that these being joined with
sins and sufferings together, do signify that those sufferings are the
punishment of those sins. Thus it is said of Christ, that he dyed, (...) for
our sins, (...) Romans 4. 25.
(...), that he suffered once (...) 1 Cor. 15. 3.
that he gave himself, (...), that he offered 1 Pet. 3. 18.
a Sacrifice (...). To which Crellius He. 10. 12. Crell. c. 1. Sect. 6.
replies, That if the force of these particles not being joined with
sufferings, may be taken for the final and not for the impulsive cause, they
may retain the same sense when joined with sufferings, if those sufferings may
be designed in order to an end; but if it should be granted, that those phrases
being Sect. 1^. p. 17.
joined with sufferings, do always imply a meritorious cause, yet it does not
follow, it should not be here so understood because the matter will not bear
it. To this a short answer will at present serve: for, It is not possible a
meritorious cause can be expressed more emphatically than by these words being
joined to sufferings: so that we have as clear a testimony from these
expressions as words can give; and by the same arts by which these may be
avoided any other might; so that it had not been possible for our Doctrine to
have been expressed such a manner, but such kind of answers might have been
given as our Adversaries now give. If it had been said in the plainest terms,
that Christ's death was a punishment for our sins, they would as easily have
avoided the force of them as they do of these; they would have told us the
Apostles delighted in an Antanaclasis, and had expressed things different from
the natural use of the words by them; and though punishment were sometimes used
properly, yet here it must be used only metaphorically because the matter would
bear no other sense. And therefore I commend the ingenuity of Socinus after all
the pains he had taken to enervate the force of those places which are brought
against his Doctrine; he tells us plainly, That if our Doctrine were not only
once, but frequently Socin. de servat. l. 3. c. 6.
mentioned in Scripture; yet he would not therefore believe the thing to be so
as we suppose. For, says he, seeing the thing it self cannot be, I take the
least inconvenient interpretation of the words; and draw forth such a sense
from them, as is most consistent with it self and the tenor of the Scripture.
But for all his talking of the tenor of the Scripture, by the same reason he
interprets one place upon these terms, he will do many, and so the tenor of
the Scripture shall be never against him: and by this we find, that the main
strength of our Adversaries is not pretended to lie in the Scriptures; all the
care they have of them is only to reconcile them if possible with their
hypothesis; for they do not deny but that the natural force of the words does
imply what we contend for; but because they say the Doctrine we assert is
inconsistent with reason, therefore all their design is to find out any other
possible meaning, which they therefore assert to be true, because more
agreeable to the common reason of mankind. This therefore is enough for our
present purpose, that if it had been the design of Scripture to have expressed
our sense, it could not have done it in plainer expressions than it has done,
that no expressions could have been used, but the same arts of our Adversaries
might have been used to take off their force, which they have used to those we
now urge against them, and that setting aside the possibility of the thing, the
Scripture does very fairly deliver the Doctrine we contend for; or, supposing
in point of reason there may be arguments enough to make it appear possible,
there are Scriptures enough to make it appear true.

CHAP. III.
The words of Scripture being at last acknowledged by our Adversaries to make
for us, the only pretense remaining is that our Doctrine is repugnant to
reason. The debate managed upon point of reason. The grand difficulty enquired
into, and manifested by our Adversaries concessions, not to lie in the
greatness of Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of
them, or that it is impossible that one ^uld be punished for another faults:
or in all cases unjust: the cases wherein Crellius allows it, instanced. From
whence it it proved that he yields the main cause. The arguments propounded
whereby he attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for our sins.
Crellius his principles of the justice of punishments examined. Of the relation
between desert and punishment. That a person by his own consent may be punished
beyond the desert of his own actions. An answer to Crellius his Objections.
What it is to suffer undeservedly. Crellius his mistake in the state of the
question. The instances of Scripture considered. In what sense Children are
punished for their Parents sins. Ezekiel. 18. 20. explained at large. Whether the
guilty being freed by the sufferings of an innocent person makes that
punishment unjust or no? Crellius his shifts and evasions in this matter
discovered. Why among men the offenders are not freed in criminal matters
though the sureties be punished. The release of the party depends on the terms
of the sureties suffering, therefore deliverance not ipso facto. No necessity
of such a translation in criminal, as is in pecuniary matters.

HAving gained so considerable concessions. 1. The matter debated in point of
reason.
from our Adversaries concerning the places of Scripture, we come now to debate
the matter in point of reason. And if there appear to be nothing repugnant in
the Nature of the thing, or to the justice of God, then all their loud clamours
will come to nothing; for on that they fix, when they talk the most of our
Doctrine being contrary to reason. This therefore we now come more closely to
examine, in order to which we must carefully enquire what it is, they lay the
charge of injustice in God upon, according to our belief of Christ's sufferings
being a punishment for our sins.

1. It is not, That the offenders themselves do not undergo the full punishment
of the^ sins. For they assert, that there is no necessity at all that the
offenders should be punished from any punitive justice in God: for they eagerly
contend that God may freely pardon the sins of men: if so, then it can be no
injustice in God not to punish the offenders according to the full desert of
their sins.

2. It is not, that God upon the sufferings of Christ does pardon the sins of
men: for they yield that God may do this without any charge of injustice, and
with the greatest demonstration of his kindness. For they acknowledge, that the
sufferings of Christ are not to be considered as a bare antecedent condition to
pardon, but that they were a moving cause as far as the obedience of Christ in
suffering was very acceptable to God.

3. It is not, in the greatness or matter of Certum est Christum
innocentissimum a Deo gravissimis cruciatibus, ipsaque morte fuisse affectum;
cum non in materia poenae absolute and per se considera^, ad^oque etiam in ea
afflictione a qua poenae forma a^est, injuria residere a no^^ dicatur. Crel. c.
4. Sect. 3. Potuit autem id Deus facere, atque adeo fecit, jure dominii, quod
in Christi vitam ac corpus habebat; a^^^dente praeserti^ ipsius Christi
consensu. Id. Ib. Sect. 4.
the sufferings of Christ. For they assert the same which we do. And therefore
I cannot but wonder to meet sometimes with those strange outcries of our
making God cruel in the punishing of his Son for us: for what do we assert that
Christ suffered, which they do not assert too? Nay does it not look much more
like cruelty in God to lay those sufferings upon him without any consideration
of sin? as upon their hypothesis he does; than to do it supposing he bears the
punishment of our iniquities, which is the thing we plead for. They assert all
those sufferings to be lawful on the account of Gods dominion, which according
to them must cease to be so on the supposition of a meritorious cause. But
however from this it appears, that it was not unjust that Christ should suffer
those things which he did for us: the question then is, whether it were unjust
that he should suffer the same things, which he might lawfully do on the
account of dominion with a respect to our sins as the cause of them?

4. As to this, they acknowledge, that it is not, that the sufferings of Christ
were occasioned by our sins, or that our sins were the bare impulsive cause of
those sufferings. For they both confess in general, that one man's sins may be
the occasion of another punishment, so far that he might have escaped
punishment, if the others sins had not been the impulsive cause of it. And
therefore Crellius in t^ general state of this question, would no^ have it,
whether it be unjust to punish o^ for another sins; for that he acknowledge^
Quod si ex thesi speciali facere velis generalem, ^a haec erit, injustum esse
punire i^ocentem, quacunque tandem de causa id fiat; non vero simplicit^r,
punire quempiam ob ali^na d^lict^; id enim concedi potest non semper esse
injustum. Crell. c. 4. Sect. 3.
it is not, but whether, for any cause whatsoever it be just to punish an
innocent person? And likewise in particular of Christ, they confess, that our
sins were the impulsive cause, and the occasion of his sufferings.

5. It is not, that there is so necessary (...) relation, between guilt and
punishment, that i^ cannot be called a punishment which is inflicted on an
innocent person. For Crellius, after a long discourse of the difference of
afflictions and punishments, does acknowledge, That it is not of the nature of
Cum ne illud quidem ad naturam poenae requiratur, ut is ipse, qui puniendus
est, poenam revera fuerit commeritus. Id. Sect. 5.
punishment, that the person who is to be punished, should really deserve the
punishment; and afterward when Grotius urges, that though it be essential to
punishment, that it be inflicted for sin, yet it is not, that it be inflicted
upon him who has himself sinned, which he shows, by the similitude of rewards,
which though necessary to be given in consideration of service, may yet be
given to others besides the person himself upon his account. All this Crellius
acknowledges; who says, They do not make it necessary to the nature, but to
the justice of punishment, that it be inflicted upon none but the person who
has offended. So by his own Confession, it is not against the nature of
punishment, Poena quidem simpliciter in innocentem cadit, justae non cadit.
Crell. c. 4. Sect. 28.
that one man suffer for another faults. From whence it follows, that all
Socinus his arguments signify nothing, which are drawn from the impossibility
of the thing, that one man should be punished for another faults; for Crellius
grants the thing to be possible, but denies it to be just; yet not absolutely
neither, but with some restrictions and limitations. For,

6. It is not, but that there may be sufficient. 2. In what cases Crellius
grants some may be lawfully punished for the sins of others.
causes assigned in some particular cases; wherein it may be just for God to
punish some for the sins of others. For Crellius himself has assigned diverse.
When there is such a near conjunction between them, that one may be said to be
punished in the punishment of another: as Parents in their Children and
Posterity, Kings Quia Deus hunc puniendo illum quoque alterum ob cujus peccati
eum dicitur punire, simul punire possit, ob arctiorem quae inter ill^s
intercedat conjunctionem. Crell. ib. sect. 5.
in their Subjects, or the body of a State in its Members, either in the most,
or the most principal, though the fewest: but we are to consider, how far he
does extend this way of punishment of some in others. 1. At the greatest
distance of time, if they have been of the same Nation; for he extends it to
the utmost degree of Gods patience toward a people; For, says he, God does
not presently punish as soon as they have sinned; but spares for a great while,
and forbears, in expectation of their repentance, in the mean while a great
many guilty persons dye, and seem Crell. p. 242.
to have escaped punishment. But at last the time of Gods patience being past,
he punishes their Posterity by exacting the full punishment of their sins upon
them, and by this means punishes their Ancestors too, and punishes their sins
in their punishment; for, says he, all that people are reckoned for one man of
several Ages, and that punishment which is taken of the last, may be for the
sins of the first, for the conjunction and succession of them: of which we have
an example, says he, in the destruction of Jerusalem. By which we see a very
remote conjunction, and a mere similitude in comparing a succession of Ages in
a people with those in a man, may (when occasion serves) be made use of to
justify Gods punishing one Generation of men for the sins of others that have
been long before. 2. When sins are more secret, or less remarkable, which God
might not punish, unless an occasion were given from others sins impelling him
to it; but because God would punish one very near them, he therefore punishes
them, that in their punishment he might punish the other: Or in case sins
spread through a Family, or a people, or they are committed by diverse persons
at sundry times, which God does not severally punish, but sometimes then, when
the Head of a People or Family has done something which remarkably deserves
punishment, whom he will punish in those he is related to, and therefore
generally punishes the whole Family or people. 3. That which may be a mere
exercise of dominion as to some, may be a proper punishment to others; as in
the case of Infants, being taken away for their Parents sins; For God, as to
the Children, he says, uses only an act of dominion, but the punishment only
redounds to the Parents, who loose them; and though this be done for the very
end of punishment, yet he denies, that it has the nature of Punishment in any
but the Parents. 4. That Punishment may be intended for those who can have no
sense at all of it; as Crellius asserts in the case of Crell. ib. sect. 11.
sect. 19.
Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 21. 8. 14. that the punishment was mainly intended for
Saul, who was already dead. From these concessions of Crellius in this case, we
may take notice, 1. That a remote conjunction may be sufficient for a
translation of penalty, viz. from one Generation to another. 2. That sins may
be truly said to be punished in others, when the offenders themselves may
escape punishment, thus the sins of Parents in their Children, and Princes in
their Subjects. 3. That an act of dominion in some may be designed as a proper
punishment to others. 4. That the nature of punishment is not to be measured by
the sense of it. Now upon these concessions, though our Adversaries will not
grant, that Christ was properly punished for our sins, yet they cannot deny but
that we may very properly be said to be punished for our sins in Christ, and if
they will yield us this, the other may be a strife about words. For surely
there may be easily imagined as great a conjunction between Christ and us, as
between the several Generations of the Jews, and that last which was punished
in the destruction of Jerusalem: and though we escape that punishment which
Christ did undergo, yet we might have our sins punished in him, as well as
Princes theirs in their Subjects, when they escape themselves; or rather as
Subjects in an innocent Prince, who may suffer for the faults of his people; if
it be said, that these are acts of mere dominion as to such a one, that nothing
hinders but granting it, yet our sins may be said to be punished in him; as
well as Parents sins are punished properly in mere acts of dominion upon their
Children; if it be said, that can be no punishment where there is no sense at
all of it, that is fully taken off by Crellius; for surely we have as great a
sense of the sufferings of Christ, as the first Generation of the Jews had of
the suffering of the last, before the fatal destruction of the City, or as Saul
had of the punishment of his Sons after his death. So that from Crellius his
own concessions, we have proved, that our sins may very properly be said to be
punished in Christ, although he will not say, that Christ could be properly
punished for our sins; nay he and the rest of our Adversaries not only deny it,
but earnestly contend, that it is very unjust to suppose it, and repugnant to
the rectitude of Gods nature to do it.

And so we come to consider the mighty. 3. Crellius his arguments propounded.
arguments that are insisted on for the proof of this, which may be reduced to
these three; viz. 1. That there can be no punishment but what is deserved, but
no man can deserve that another should be punished. 2. That punishment flows
from revenge, but there can be no revenge where there has been no fault. 3.
That the punishment of one, cannot any ways be made the punishment of another;
and in case it be supposed possible, then those in whose stead the other is
punished, must be actually delivered upon the payment of that debt which was
owing to God.

1. That one man cannot deserve another punishment, and therefore one cannot
be punished for another; for there is no just punishment, but what is deserved.
This being the main Argument insisted on by Crellius, must be more carefully
considered; but before an answer be made to it, it is necessary that a clear
account be given in what sense it is he understands it, which will be best
done, by laying down his principles, as to the justice of punishments, in a
more distinct method than himself has done; which are these following: 1. That
no person can be justly punished, either for his own or another faults, but he
that has deserved to be punished by some sin, of his own: For he still
asserts, That the justice of punishment arises from a Crell. c. 4. s^ct. 3. p.
239, 240.
man's own fault, though the actual punishment may be from another: But he that
is punished without respect to his own guilt, is punished undeservedly; and he
that is punished undeservedly, is punished unjustly. 2. That personal guilt
being, supposed one man's sin may be the impulsive cause of another punishment,
but they cannot be the meritorious. The difference between them he thus
explains, The cause, is that which makes a thing to be; the impulsive, that
which moves one to do a thing, without any consideration of right that one has
to do it: Merit, is that which makes a man worthy of a thing, either good or
bad, and so gives a right to it; if it be good, to himself; if bad, to him at
whose hands he has deserved it. Now he tells us, that it is impossible, That
one man's sins should make any other deserve punishment, but the person who
committed them; but they may impel one to punish another, and that justly, if
the person has otherwise deserved to be punished, unjustly if he has not. The
reason he gives of it is, That the vitiosity of the act, which is the proper
cause of punishment, cannot go beyond the person of the offender; and therefore
can oblige none to punishment, but him that has committed the fault. And
therefore he asserts, That no man can be justly punished beyond the desert of
his own sins, but there may sometimes be a double impulsive cause of that
punishment; viz. His own and other men's, whereof one made Crell. ib. sect. 18.
that they might be justly punished, the other that they should be actually:
but the latter, he says, always supposes the former, as the foundation of
just punishment; so that no part of punishment could be executed upon him,
wherein his own sins were not supposed as the meritorious cause of it. These
are his two main principles which we must now thoroughly examine, the main force
of his book lying in them. But if we can prove, that it has been generally
received by the consent of mankind, that a person may be punished beyond the
desert of his own actions; if God has justly punished some for the sins of
others, and there be no injustice in one man's suffering by his own consent for
another, then these principles of Crellius will be found not so firm as he
imagines them.

1. That it has been generally received ^y the consent of mankind, that a
person. 4. That a person by his own consent may be punished beyond the desert
of his own actions. Grot. de Satisf. c. 4.
may be justly punished beyond the desert of his own actions. For which purpose
Grotius objected against Socinus (who appealed to the consent of Nations, about
one being punished for another fault) That the Heathens did agree, that
Children might be punished for their Parents faults, and people for their
Princes, and that corporal punishment might be born by one for another, did
appear by the Persians punishing the whole family for the fault of one. The
Macedonians the near kindred in the case of Treason, some Cities of Greece,
destroying the children of Tyrants together with them; in all which, the mere
conjunction was supposed a sufficient reason without consent; but in case of
consent, he says, They all agreed in the justice of some being punished for
the faults of others. Thence the right of killing hostages among the most
civilized nations; and of sureties being punished in capital matters, if the
guilty appear not, who were thence caled (...) who were bound to answer body
for body. In which cases, the punishment did extend beyond the desert of the
person who suffered it; for no other reason is assigned of these sufferings,
besides the conjunction of the person, or h^ consent; but no antecedent guilt
is supposed as necessary, to make the punishment just. We are now to consider
what Crellius does answer to this: 1. As to their acknowledgements of Gods
punishing children for their Parents faults, he gives the same answer which he
does to the examples recorded in Scripture to that purpose, That either they
were punished for the sins (...) others, but their own sins deserved the
punishment; or that the Parents were punished i^ the children, but the Children
were not properly punished. 2. As to punishments among men, he answers two
things; 1. That such persons were truly punished, but not justly: for he
acknowledges, That Crell. c. 4. sect. 5. p. 244.
in such a case it is a proper punishment and that it is enough in order to
that that any fault be charged upon a person, whether his own or another,
whether true or false, on the account of which he is supposed worthy to be
punished: And that such a conjunction is sufficient f^ cruel, angry, or
imprudent men; for where ever there is a place, says he, for ange^ there is
likewise for punishment. So that he confesses, there may be a tr^ punishment,
and that which answers all the reason and ends of punishment assigned by him,
where there is no desert at all of it in the person who undergoes it. But then
he adds, that this is an unjust punishment, to which I reply, That then the
reason of punishment assigned by Crellius before is insufficient; for if this
answers all the ends of punishments assigned by him, and yet be unjust, then it
necessarily follows, that those ends of punishment are consistent with the
greatest injustice. For he before made punishment to have a natural respect to
anger, and makes the ordinary end of punishment to be a satisfaction of the
desire of revenge in men, yet now grants, that these may be in an unjust
punishment. Neither can it be said, that he considered punishment only
naturally, and not morally; for he tells us, that this is the nature of divine
punishments, which are therefore just, because designed for these ends; but in
case there be no supposal of a fault at all, then he denies that it is a
punishment, but only an affliction, and an exercise of dominion. So that
according to him, wherever there is a proper punishment, it must be just,
whenever God does punish men: and the only difference between God and man
supposable in this case is, that we have assurance God will never use his
dominion unjustly; but that men do so when they make one to suffer for another
fault, notwithstanding a consent and conjunction between the man that committed
the fault, and the person that suffers for him. But this is begging the thing
in question, for we are debating, whether it be an unlawful exercise of power
or no? for we have this presumption, that it is not unlawful, because it may
answer all the ends of punishments, and what way can we better judge, w^ether a
punishment be just or no, than by that?

But we are to consider, that we do not. 5. Objections answered.
here take the person we speak of, abstractly as an innocent person, for then
there is no question, but anger and punishment of one as such is unjust; but of
an innocent person as supposed under an obligation by his own consent to suffer
for another. And in this case we assert, since according to Crellius the
natural and proper ends of punishments may be obtained, and the consent of the
person takes away the wrong done to him in the matter of his sufferings, so far
as he has power over himself, that such a punishment is not unjust. For if it
be, it must suppose some injury to be done; but in this case let them assign
where the injury lies; it cannot be to the public, if the ends of punishments
may be obtained by such a suffering of one for another, by a valid consent of
the suffering party; it cannot be to the person in whose room the other
suffers, for what injury is that to escape punishment by another suffering; it
cannot be to the suffering person, supposing that to be true, which the
Heathens still supposed, viz. that every man had a power over his own life. If
it be said still, that the unjustice lies in this, that such a one suffers
Immerito quenquam punire est injuste punire. Crell. p. 240.
undeservedly, and therefore unjustly. I answer; if be meant by undeservedly
without sufficient cause or reason of punishment, then we deny that such a one
does suffer undeservedly. Immerito in the Greek Glosses is rendered by (...),
and Merito by (...) and (...), and in Cicero, jure and merito are most commonly
joined together. So that where there is a right to punish, and sufficient
reason for it, such a one does not suffer immerito, i. e. undeservedly. If it
be said, that such a one is not dignus poena, that implies no more than the
other, for dignus, or as the Ancients writ it dicnus, comes from the Greek
(...) jus as Vossius tells us, ut dignus sit cui tribui aliquid aquum est: so
that where there is an equity in the thing, there is a dignity in the person,
or he may be said to be worthy to undergo it. But does not this lay open the
greatest innocence to as great a desert of sufferings, as the highest guilt? By
no means. For we make a lyableness to punishment, the natural consequent of
guilt: and he that has committed a fault, cannot but deserve to be punished,
so that no sufferings of others can take away the natural consequence of a bad
action, which is a desert of punishment; So that as we say, a wicked action
cannot but deserve to be punished, i. e. there is an agreeableness in reason
and nature, that he who has done ill, should suffer ill; so we say likewise
there is no necessity in nature and reason, that he that has thus deserved it,
must unavoidably suffer it. And on the other side, we say, no man by his
innocence can deserve to be punished, i. e. no man's innocence makes him by
virtue of that obnoxious to punishment; but yet we add, that notwithstanding
his innocence, the circumstances may be such that he may be justly punished,
and in that sense deservedly. So that the Question is strangely mistaken, when
it is thus put, Whether an innocent person considered as such, may be justly
punished; for no one asserts that, or is bound to do it; but the true question
is, whether a person notwithstanding his innocence may not by some act of his
own will oblige himself to undergo that punishment which otherwise he did not
deserve? which punishment, in that case is just and agreeable to reason: And
this is that which we assert and plead for. So that innocence here is not
considered any other ways, than whether that alone makes it an unlawful
punishment, which otherwise would be lawful, i. e. whether the Magistrate in
such cases, where substitution is admittable by the Laws of Nations (as in the
cases we are now upon) be bound to regard any more than that the obligation to
punishment now lies upon the person, who by his own act has substituted
himself in the others room; and if he proceeds upon this, his action is
justifyable and agreeable to reason. If it be said, that the substitution is
unjust, unless the substituted person has before hand deserved to be punished;
it is easily answered, that this makes not the matter at all clearer; for
either the person is punished for the former fault, and then there is no
substitution; or if he be punished by way of substitution, then there is no
regard at all had to his former fault, and so it is all one as if he were
perfectly innocent.

And by this Crellius his answer to the instances both in Scripture and
elsewhere. 6. The instances of Scripture considered.
concerning Childrens being punished for their Parents faults, will appear to
be insufficient, Viz. That God does never punish them for their Parents faults
beyond the desert of their own sins, and therefore no argument can be drawn
from thence, that God may punish an innocent person for the sins of others,
because he has punished some for what they were innocent: For the force of the
argument does not lie in the supposition of their innocence, as to the ground
of punishment in general, for we do not deny, but that they may deserve to be
punished for their own faults: but the argument lies in this, whether their own
guilt were then considered as the reason of punishment, when God did punish
them for their fathers faults? And whether they by their own sins did deserve
to be punished not only with the punishment due to their own miscarriages, but
with the punishment due to their fathers too? If not, then some persons are
justly punished, who have not deserved that punishment they undergo; if they
did deserve it, then one person may deserve to be punished for another sins.
If it be said, as it is by Crellius, That his own sins make him capable of
punishment, and God by occasion of others sins does execute that punishment,
which he might not have done for his own. I answer, we are not enquiring into
the bare capacity of punishing, but into the reason of it: was the reason of
punishment his own or his fathers sins? If his own, then he was punished only
for his own sins; if his fathers, then the punishment may be just which is
inflicted without consideration of proper desert of it; for no man (say they)
can deserve to be punished, but for his own sins. But it is said, that the sins
of Fathers are only an impulsive cause for God to punish the Children according
to the desert of their own sins, which he might otherwise have forborne to
punish. Then, the sins of the Fathers are no reason why the Children should be
punished; but their own sins are the reason, and their Fathers the bare
occasion of being punished for them. But in Scripture, the reason of punishment
is drawn from the Fathers sins: and not from the Childrens: For then the words
would have run thus, if the Children sin, and deserve punishment by their own
iniquities, then I will take occasion from their Fathers sins, to visit their
own iniquities upon them: Whereas the words refer to the fathers sins as the
reason of the Childrens punishment. So in the words of the Law, wherein the
reason of punishment ought to be most expressly assigned, it is not, I will
certainly punish the children, if they continue in the Idolatry of their
Fathers; but, I will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth Generation Exodus 20. 3.
of them that hate me: If it were only because of imitation of the Fathers
sins by the Children, there could be no reason for the limitation to the third
and fourth Generation; for then the reason of punishment would be as long as
the imitation continued, whether to the fourth or tenth Generation: And as
Alphonsus a Castro observes, If the reason of punishment were Alph. a Castro de
just a haeret. punit. l. 2. c. 10.
the imitation of their Fathers sins, then the Children were not punished for
their Fathers sins, but for their own; for that imitation was a sin of their
own, and not of their Fathers. Besides, if the proper reason of punishment were
the sins of the children, and the Fathers sins only the occasion of it, then
where it is mentioned that children are punished for their Parents sins, the
childrens sins should have been particularly expressed, as the proper cause of
the punishment: But no other reason is assigned in the Law, but the sins of the
Fathers, no other cause mentioned of Canaans punishment, but his Fathers sin;
nor of the punishment Genesis 9. 25.
of the people in David's time, but his own sin; Lo, I have sinned, and I have 2 Samuel 24. 17.
done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done? Which is no hyperbolical
expression, but the assigning the proper cause of that judgment to have been
his own sin, as the whole Chapter declares: Nor, of the hanging up of Saul's
sons by the Gibeonites, Sam. 21. 5.
but, that Saul their Father had plotted their destruction. And in an instance
more remarkable than any of those which Crellius answers; viz. the punishment
of the people of Judah, for the sins of Manasses in the time of Josias; when a
through Reformation was designed among them, the Prince being very good, and
all the places of Idolatry destroyed, such a Passover kept 2 Kings 23. v. 4. to
v. 21
as had not been kept before in the time of any King in Israel, yet it then
follows, Verse. 22.
Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger Verse. 26.
was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations wherewith Manasses
had provoked him withal. Who can say here, that the sins of Manasseh were only
the occasion of Gods punishing the people in the time of Josias for their own
sins, when their sins were much less in the time of Josias, than in any time
mentioned before, after their lapse into Idolatry? Nay, it is expressly said,
That Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that
pertained to the children 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve
the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not from following the Lord
God of their Fathers: To say, that this was done in hypocrisy, and bare
outward compliance, is to speak without book; and if the reason of so severe
punishments had been their hypocrisy, that ought to have been mentioned; but
not only here, but afterward it is said, that the reason of Gods destroying
Judah, was for the sins of Manasseh; viz. his Idolatries and 2 Samuel 24. 3, 4.
Murder, which it is said, the Lord will not pardon. And if he would not
pardon, then he did punish for those sins, not barely as the occasion, but as
the meritorious cause of that punishment. What shall we say then? Did the
people in Josiah's time, deserve to be punished for the sins of Manasseh,
Grandfather to Josiah? Or was God so highly provoked with those sins, that
although he did not punish Manasseh himself upon his repentance, yet he would
let the world see, how much he abhorred them, by punishing those sins upon the
people afterward; although according to the usual proportion of sins and
punishments, the sins of the people in that age did not exceed the sins of
other ages, as much as the punishments they suffered, did exceed the
punishments of other ages: which is necessary according to Crellius his
Doctrine; for if God never punishes by occasion of their Fathers sins, the
children beyond the desert of their own sins; then it is necessary, that where
judgments are remarkably greater, the sins must be so too; the contrary to
which is plain in this instance. By which we see, that it is not contrary to
the Justice of God in punishing, to make the punishment of some on the account
of others sins, to exceed the desert of their own; measuring that desert, not
in a way common to all sin, but when the desert of some sins is compared with
the desert of others: For it is of this latter we speak of, and of the method
which God uses in punishing sin here, for the demonstration of his hatred of
it, according to which the greatest punishments must suppose the greatest sins,
either of their own, or others which they suffer for.

But has not God declared, That he will. 7. E^^k. 18. 20 exp^ain^d E^^k. 18.
4, 20.
never punish the children for the Fathers sins? for the soul that sins it
shall dye; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, etc. To which I
answer, These words are to be considered, as an answer to a complaint made by
the Jews, soon after their going into Captivity, which they imputed to Gods
severity in punishing them for their Fathers sins. Now the complaint was either
true or false; if it were true, then though this was looked upon as great
severity in God, yet it was no injustice in him; for though God may act
severely, he cannot act unjustly: If it was false, then the answer had been an
absolute denial of it, as a thing repugnant to the Justice of God. Which we do
not find here, but that God says unto them, v. 3. Ye shall not have occasion
any more to use this Proverb in Israel: if the thing had been plainly unjust,
which they complained of, he would have told them, they never had occasion to
use it. But we find the Prophets telling them before hand, that they should
suffer for their Fathers sins, Jerem. 15. 3, 4. where he threatens them with
destruction and banishment, because of the sins of Manasseh in Jerusalem; and
in the beginning of the captivity they complain of this, Lam. 5. 7. Our Fathers
have sinned, and are not, and we have born their iniquities. And Jerem. 31. 28.
God says by the Prophet, that he had watched over them to pluck up, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and to afflict: but that he would watch over them to
build, and to plant, and in those days they shall say no more, The Jer. 31. 29,
30.
Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; but
every one shall dye for his own iniquity. Which place is exactly parallel with
this in Ezekiel, and gives us a clear account of it, which is, that now indeed
God had dealt very severely with them, by making them suffer beyond, what in
the ordinary course of his providence their sins had deserved; but he punished
them not only for their own sins, but the sins of their Fathers: But lest they
should think, they should be utterly consumed for their iniquities, and be no
longer a people enjoying the Land which God had promised them, he tells them by
the Prophets, though they had smarted so much, by reason of their Fathers sins,
this severity should not always continue upon them; but that God would visit
them with his kindeness again, and would plant them in their own Land, then
they should see no reason to continue this Proverb among them; for they would
then find, Though their fathers had eaten sour grapes, their teeth should not
be always set on edge with it. And if we observe it, the occasion of the
Proverb, was concerning the Land of Israel, (...) super terra Israel, as the
Chaldee Ezekiel. 18. 2.
Paraphrast renders it more agreeable to the Hebrew, than the other Versions
do. So that the Land of Israel was the occasion of the Proverb, by their being
banished out of it for their Fathers sins: Now God tells them, they should have
no more occasion to use this Proverb concerning the Land of Israel; for they,
notwithstanding their Fathers sins, should return into their own Land. And even
during the continuance of their captivity, they should not undergo such great
severities for the future, but they should find their condition much more
tolerable than they imagined; only, if any were guilty of greater sins than
others, they should themselves suffer for their own faults, but he would not
punish the whole Nation for them, or their own posterity. This I take to be the
genuine meaning of this place; and I the rather embrace it, because I find such
insuperable difficulties in other Interpretations that are given of it: For to
say as our Adversaries do, That what God says, should not be for the future,
was repugnant to his nature and justice ever to do, is to charge God plainly
with injustice in what he had done: For the Prophets told them they should
suffer for the sins of their Fathers: Which sufferings were the ground of their
complaint now, and the answer here given must relate to the occasion of the
complaint; for God says, They should not have occasion to use that Proverb:
Wherein is implied, they should not have the same reason to complain which they
had then. I demand then, Do not these words imply, That God would not do for
the future with them, what he had done before? if not, the proper answer had
been a plain denial, and not a promise for the future he would not; if they do,
then either God properly punished them for the sins of their Fathers, and then
God must be unjust in doing so; or it was just with God to do it, and so this
place instead of overthrowing will prove, that some may be justly punished,
beyond the desert of their own sins: or else, God did only take occasion by
their Fathers sins, to punish them according to the desert of their own
iniquities: But then they had no cause to complain, that they were punished for
any more than their own iniquities; and withal, then God does oblige himself by
his promise here, never to punish men for the future by the occasion of others
sins: which is not only contrary to their own Doctrine, but to what is plainly
seen afterward in the punishment of the Jew^ for their Fathers sins, mentioned
by our Savior Matthew. 23. 35.
after this: And if this be a certain rule of equity which God here says, that
he would never vary from, then the punishing of some on the occasion of others
sins, would be as unjust, as our Adversaries suppose the punishing any beyond
the desert of their own sins to be. But is it not employed, that Gods ways would
be unequal, if he ever did Ezekiel. 18. 25.
otherwise than he there said he would do? No, it is not, if by equal he meant
just, for his ways never were, or can be so unequal; but here if it be taken
with a respect to the main dispute of the Chapter, no more is implied in them,
but that they judged amiss concerning Gods actions, and that they were just,
when they thought them not to be so: or ifat least, they thought his ways very
severe, though just, God by remitting of this severity, would show that he was
not only just, but kind; and so they would find his ways equal, that is,
always agreeable to themselves, and ending in kindeness to them, though they
hitherto were so severe toward them in their banishment and captivity. Or if
they be taken with a respect to the immediate occasion of them both, Ezekiel. 18.
-- 33. They do not relate to this dispute about Childrens suffering for their
Fathers sins; but to another, which was concerning a righteous Ezekiel. 33. 20.
man's sinning and dying in his sins, and a wicked man's repenting, and living in
his righteousness; which were directly contrary to the common opinion of the
Jews to this day, which is, that God will judge men according to the greatest
number of their actions good or bad: as appears by Maimonides and others. Now
they thought it a very hard case, for a man who had been righteous the far
greatest part of his time, if he did at last commit iniquity, that his former
righteousness should signify nothing, but he must dye in his iniquity. To this
therefore God answers, that it was only the inequality of their own ways, which
made them think Gods ways in doing so unequal. This then does not make it
unequal, for God either to punish men, upon the occasion, or by the desert of
other men's sins, supposing such a conjunction between them, as there is in the
same body of people, to those who went before them. And Crellius himself
grants, That Socinus never Crell. c. 4. sect. 15.
intended to prove, that one man's suffering for another sins was unjust in it
self, from this place: no, not though we take it in the strictest sense, for
one suffering in the stead of another.

Having thus far cleared, how far it is agreeable to Gods Justice, to punish
any. 8. The deliverance of the guilty by the sufferings of an innocent person
by his own consent, makes not the punishment unjust.
persons either by reason of his dominion, or the conjunction of persons, for
the sins of others, and consequently whether any punishment may be undergone
justly beyond the proper desert of their own sins, I now return to the consent
of Mankind in it, on supposition either of a near conjunction, or a valid
consent which must make up the want of dominion in men without it. And the
question still proceeds upon the supposition of those things, that there be a
proper dominion in men over that which they part with for others sakes, and
that they do it by their free consent; and then we justify it not to be
repugnant to the principles of Reason and Justice for any to suffer beyond the
desert of their own actions. And Crellius his saying, that such a punishment is
true punishment, but not just; is no answer at all to the consent of Nations
that it is so. And therefore finding this answer insufficient; he relyes upon
another, viz. That it was never received by the consent Crell. c. 4. sect. 30.
32, 34, etc.
of Nations, that one man should suffer in the stead of another, so as the
guilty should be freed by the others suffering. For he says, neither Socinus
nor he do deny that one man may be punished for another sins; but that which
they deny is, that ever the innocent were punished so as the guilty were freed
by it, and so he answers, in the case of Hostages and Sureties, their
punishment did never excuse the offenders themselves. And to this purpose he
says, Socinus his argument does hold good, that though one man's money may
become another, yet one man's sufferings cannot become another: For, says he,
if it could, then it would be all one who suffered, as it is who pays the money
due: And then the offender must be presently released, as the Debtor is upon
payment of the debt. This is the substance of what is said by him upon this
Argument. To which I reply; 1. That this gives up the matter in dispute at
present between us; for the present question is, Whether it be unjust for any
one to suffer beyond the desert of his own actions? Yes, says Crellius, it is,
in case he suffers so, as that the guilty be freed by his sufferings. But we
are not enquiring, Whether it be just for another person to be freed for a man's
suffering for him? but whether it be just for that man to suffer by his own
consent, more than his own actions, without that consent deserved? The release
of another person by virtue of his sufferings, is a matter of another
consideration. Does the freeing or not freeing of another by suffering, add any
thing to the desert of suffering? He that being wholly innocent, and does
suffer on the account of another fault, does he not suffer as undeservedly,
though another be not freed, as if he were? As in the case of Hostages or
Sureties, does it make them at all the more guilty, because the persons they
are concerned for, will be punished notwithstanding, if they come under the
power of those who exacted the punishment upon them, who suffered for them?
Nay, is not their desert of punishment so much the less, in as much as the
guilty are still bound to answer for their own offenses? If we could suppose
the guilty to be freed by the others sufferings, it would be by supposing their
guilt more fully translated upon those who suffer, and consequently, a greater
obligation to punishment following that guilt. From whence it follows, that if
it be just to punish, when the person is not delivered from whom the other
suffers, it is more just when he is; for the translation of the penalty is much
less in the former case, than in the latter; and what is just upon less grounds
of punishment, must be more just upon greater. I look on this therefore but as
a shift of Crellius, hoping thereby to avoid the consent of mankind in one man's
suffering for another, without attending to the main argument he was upon; viz.
The justice of one person suffering for another. 2. It is a very unreasonable
thing, to make an action unjust for that, which of it self is acknowledged by
our Adversaries to be very just; viz. The pardoning the offenders themselves.
If it were just to suffer, if the other were not pardoned, and it were just to
pardon, whether the other were punished or no, how comes this suffering to be
unjust, merely by the others being pardoned by it: nay, is it not rather an
Argument, that those sufferings are the most just, which do so fully answer all
the ends of punishments; that there is then no necessity that the offender
should suffer; but that the Supreme Governor having obtained the ends of
Government, by the suffering of one for the rest, declares himself so well
pleased with it, that he is willing to pardon the offenders themselves. 3. Many
of those persons who have had their sins punished in others, have themselves
escaped the punishment due to the desert of their sins. As is plain in the case
of Ahab, whose punishment was not so great as his sins deserved, because the
full punishment of them was reserved to his posterity. If it be said, as it is
by Crellius, That Ahab was not wholly Crell. c. 4. sect. 25. 1 King. 21. 19.
freed, his life being taken away, for his own sins: That gives no sufficient
answer; for if some part of the punishment was deferred, that part he was
delivered from; and the same reason in this case will hold for the whole as the
part. As is plain in the case of Manasseh, and several others, the guilt of
whose sins were punished on their posterity, themselves escaping it. 4. Our
Adversaries confess, that in some cases it is lawful and just for some to
suffer, with a design that others may be freed by their suffering for them.
Thus they assert, That one Christian, not only may, but ought to lay down his
life for another, if there be any danger of his denying the truth, or he judges
him far more useful and considerable Crell. c. 6. sect. 39.
than himself: so likewise a son for his Father, one Brother for another, or a
Friend, or any, whose life he thinks more useful than his own. Now I ask,
whether a man can be bound to a thing that is in its own nature unjust? if not,
as it is plain he cannot, then such an obligation of one man to suffer for the
delivery of another cannot be unjust, and consequently the suffering it self
cannot be so. But Crellius says, The injustice in this case lies wholly upon
the Magistrate who admits it: but I ask wherefore is it unjust in the
Magistrate to admit it? is it because the thing is in it self unjust? if so,
there can be no obligation to do it; and it would be as great a sin to undergo
it, as in the Magistrate to permit it; but if it be just in it self, we have
obtained what we contend for; viz. that it may be just for a man to suffer
beyond the desert of his own actions; for he that lays down his life for his
Brethren, does not deserve by his own actions that very punishment which he
undergoes. And if the thing be in it self just, how comes it to be unjust in
him that permits it? 5. The reason why among men the offenders themselves are
punished, is because those were not the terms, upon which the persons suffered.
For if they had suffered upon these terms that the other might be freed, and
their suffering was admitted of by the Magistrate on that consideration, then
in all reason and justice the offenders ought to be freed on the account of the
others suffering for them. But among men the chief reason of the obligation to
punishment of one man for another, is not, that the other might be freed, but
that there may be security given to the public, that the offender shall be
punish^ and the reason of the sureties suffering is not to deliver the
offender, but to satisfy the Law, by declaring that all care is taken that the
offender should be punished, when in case of his escape, the surety suffers for
him. But it is quite another thing when the person suffers purposely that
others might be freed by his suffering; for then in case the suffering be
admitted, the release of the other is not only not unjust, but becomes due to
him that suffered, on his own terms. Not as though it followed ipso facto as
Crellius fancies, but the manner of release does depend upon the terms which he
who suffered for them, shall make in order to it. For upon this suffering of
one for another upon such terms, the immediate consequent of the suffering is
not the actual discharge but the right to it which he has purchased; and which
he may dispense upon what terms he shall judge most for his honor. 6. Although
one persons sufferings cannot become another so as one man's Money may; yet one
man's sufferings may be a sufficient consideration on which a benefit may accrue
to another. For to that end a donation, or such a transferring right from one
to another as is in Money, is not necessary, but the acceptance which it has
from him who has the power to pardon. If he declare that he is so well pleased
with the sufferings of one for another, that in consideration of them, he will
pardon those from whom he suffered; where lies the impossibility or
unreasonableness of the thing? For Crellius grants, that rewards may be given
to others than the persons who did the actions Crell. ib. s^ct. 28.
in consideration of those actions; and why may not the sufferings of one for
others, being purposely undertaken for this end, be available for the pardon of
those whom he suffered for? For a man can no more transfer the right of his
good actions, than of his sufferings. From all which it follows, that one
person may by his own consent, and being admitted thereto by him to whom the
right of punishing belongs, suffer justly; though it be beyond the desert of
his own actions; and the guilty may be pardoned on the account of his
sufferings. Which was the first thing we designed to prove from Crellius, in
order to the overthrowing his own hypothesis. For it being confessed by him
that such sufferings have all that belongs to the nature of punishments, and
since God has justly punished some for the sins which they have not committed;
since all Nations have allowed it just for one man by his own consent to suffer
for another; since it cannot be unjust for the offender to be released by
another sufferings, if he were admitted to suffer for that end, it evidently
follows, contrary to Crellius his main Principle, that a person may be justly
punished beyond the desert of his own actions: And so that first argument of
Crellius cannot hold, that one man cannot by his own consent suffer for
another, because no man can deserve another punishment, and no punishment is
just but what is deserved. His second argument from the nature of anger and
revenge has been already answered in the first Discourse about the nature and
ends of punishments, and his third argument, that one man's punishment cannot
become another, immediately before. And so we have finished our first
consideration of the sufferings of Christ in general, as a punishment of our
sins, which we have showed to be agreeable both to Scripture and Reason.

CHAP. IV.
The Death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. What the
expiation of sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law; twofold, Civil and
Ritual. The Promises made to the Jews under the Law of Moses, respected them as
a People, and therefore must be temporal. The typical nature of Sacrifices
asserted. A substitution in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved from
Lev. 17. 11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of (...)
joined with (...). Levit. 10. 17. explained. The expiation of uncertain murder
proves a substitution. A substitution of Christ in our room proved, from
Christ's being said to dye for us; the importance of that phrase considered. In
what sense a Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Our
Redemption by Christ proves a substitution. Of the true notion of Redemption:
that explained, and proved against Socinus and Crellius. No necessity of paying
the price to him that detains captive, where the captivity is not by force, but
by sentence of Law. Christ's death a proper (...): and therefore the (...)
attributed to it, cannot be taken for mere deliverance.

WE come now to consider the death of Christ, as an Expiatory Sacrifice. 1. The
death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin.
for the sins of mankind: Which is as much denied by our Adversaries, as that
it was a punishment for our sins. For though they do not deny, That Christ as a
Priest did offer up a Sacrifice of Expiation for the sins of men; yet they
utterly deny, That this was performed on earth, or that the Expiation of sins
did respect God, but only us; or, that the death of Christ, had any proper
efficacy toward the expiation of sin, any further than as it comprehends in it
all the consequences of his death, by a strange Catechresis. I shall now
therefore prove, that all things which do belong to a proper Expiatory
Sacrifice, do agree to the death of Christ. There are three things especially
considerable in it: 1. A Substitution in the place of the Offenders. 2. An
Oblation of it to God. 3. An Expiation of sin consequent upon it. Now these
three, I shall make appear to agree fully to the death of Christ for us.

1. A Substitution in the place of the Osfenders. That we are to prove, was
designed in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, and that Christ in his
death for us, was substituted in our place. 1. That in the Expiatory Sacrifices
under the Law, there was a Substitution of them in the place of the Offenders.
This our Adversaries are not willing to yield us, because of the correspondency
which is so plain in the Epistle to the Hebrews, between those Sacrifices, and
that which was offered up by Christ. We now speak only of those Sacrifices,
which we are sure were appointed of old for the expiation of sin, by God
himself. As to which the great rule assigned by the Apostle was, That without
Heb. 9. 22.
shedding of blood there was no remission. If we yield Crellius what he so
often urges; viz. That these words are to be C^^ll. c. 10. sect. 14.
understood, of what was done under the Law: They will not be the less
serviceable to our purpose; for thereby it will appear, that the means of
Expiation lay in the shedding of blood: Which shows, that the very mactation of
the beast to be sacrificed, was designed in order to the expiation of sin. To
an inquisitive person, the reason of the slaying such multitudes of beasts in
the Sacrifices appointed by God himself among the Jews, would have appeared far
less evident than now it does, since the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
has given us so full an account of them. For it had been very unreasonable to
have thought, that they had been merely instituted out of compliance with the
customs of other Nations, since the whole design of their Religion, was to
separate them from them: and on such a supposition the great design of the
Epistle to the Hebrews signifies very little; which does far more explain to us
the nature and tendency of all the Sacrifices in use among them, that had any
respect to the expiation of sins, than all the customs of the Egyptians, or the
Commentaries of the latter Jews. But I intend not now to discourse at large,
upon this subject of Sacrifices, either as to the nature and institution of
them in general, or with a particular respect to the Sacrifice of Christ, since
a learned person of our Church, has already undertaken Crellius upon this
Argument, and we hope ere long will oblige the world with the benefit of his
pains. I shall therefore only insist on those things which are necessary for
our purpose, in order to the clearing the Substitution of Christ in our stead,
for the expiation of our sins by his death; and this we say was represented in
the Expiatory Sacrifices, which were instituted among the Jews. If we yield
Crellius what he Crell. c. 10. sect. 13.
after Socinus contends for; viz. That the Sacrifice of Christ was only
represented in the ^ublick and solemn Expiatory Sacrifices for the people, and
especially those on the day of Atone^ent: We may have enough from them to
indicate all that we assert, concerning ^he Expiatory Sacrifice of the blood of
Christ.

For that those were designed by way of. 2. What the expiation of sin was by
the sacrifices under the Law.
^bstitution in the place of the offenders, will ^pear from the circumstances
and reason ^f their Institution: But before we come (...) that, it will be
necessary to show what ^at Expiation was, which the Sacrifices ^der the Law
were designed for; the ^ot understanding of which, gives a greater ^rce to our
Adversaries Arguments, than ^therwise they would have. For while ^en assert,
that the expiation was wholly ^pical, and of the same nature with that ^piation
which is really obtained by the ^eath of Christ, they easily prove, That all ^e
expiation then, was only declarative, and ^d no more depend on the sacrifices
offered, ^an on a condition required by God, the neg^t of which would be an act
of disobedience in ^em; and by this means it could represent, ^y they, no more
than such an expiation to by Christ; viz. Gods declaring that sins ^e expiated
by him, on the performance of such condition required in order thereto, as
laying down his life was. But we assert anoth^ kind of expiation of sin, by
virtue of t^ Sacrifice being slain and offered; wh^ was real, and depended upon
the Sacrifi^ And this was twofold, a Civil, and a Ri^ expiation, according to
the double (...) pacity in which the people of the I^ may be considered, either
as members o^ Society, subsisting by a body of L^ which according to the
strictest Sanction (...) it, makes death the penalty of disobed^ ence, Deuteronomy.
27. 26. but by the will of (...) Legislator, did admit of a relaxation (...)
many cases, allowed by himself; in whi^ he declares, That the death of the be^
designed for a sacrifice should be (...) cepted, instead of the death of the
offe^ der; and so the offense should be fu^ expiated, as to the execution of
the pe^ Law upon him. And thus far, I freely (...) mit what Grotius asserts
upon this subje^ Grot. de Satus. c. 10.
and do yield that no other offense co^ be expiated in this manner, but such
whi^ God himself did particularly declare sho^ be so. And therefore no sin
which (...) to be punished by cutting off, was to (...) expiated by Sacrifice;
as wilful Idola^ Murder, etc. Which it is impossible f^ those to give an
account of, who make^ expiation wholly typical; for why the should not the
greatest sins much rather ^ave had sacrifices of expiation appointed ^or them:
because the Consciences of ^en would be more solicitous for the ^ardon of
greater than lesser sins; and the blood of Christ represented by them, was
designed for the expiation of all. From whence it is evident, that it was not a
mere typical expiation; but it did relate ^o the civil constitution among them.
But ^esides this, we are to consider the people with a respect to that mode of
Divine Worship which was among them; by reason of which, the people were to be
purified from the legal impurities which they contracted, which hindered them
from joining with others in the public Worship of God, and many Sacrifices
were appointed purposely for the expiating this legal guilt, as particularly,
the ashes of the red heifer, Numb. 19. 9. which is there called a purification
for sin. And the Apostle puts the blood of Bulls and of Goats, Heb. 9. 12, 13.
and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean, together; and the effect of
both of them, he says, was to sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; which
implies, that there was some proper and immediate effect of these sacrifices
upon the people at that time; though infinitely short of the effect of the
blood of Christ upon the Conscien^ of men. By which it is plain, the Apost^
does not speak of the same kind of expi^tion in those sacrifices, which was in
the S^crifice of Christ, and that the one w^ barely typical of the other; but
of a di^ferent kind of expiation, as far as purifying the flesh is from purging
the Conscien^ But we do not deny, that the whole dispensation was typical, and
that the Law (...) a shadow of good things to come, and not (...) Heb. 10. 1.
very image of the things, i. e. a dark a^^ obscure representation, and not the
perfect resemblance of them. There are tw^ things which the Apostle asserts
conce^^ing the Sacrifices of the Law: First, the they had an effect upon the
Bodies of m^ which he calls purifying the flesh; the oth^ is, that they had no
power to expiate for the sins of the Soul, considered with a respect to the
punishment of another lif^ which he calls purging the Conscience fr^^ dead
works; and therefore he says, that (...) the gifts and sacrifices under the
Law, co^ Heb. 9 9. 10. 4.
not make him that did the service perfect, (...) pertaining to the Conscience,
and that it (...) impossible that the blood of Bulls and Go^^ should take away
sin. So that the prop^ expiation which was made by them, (...) civil and
ritual, relating either to corporal punishment, or to legal uncleanness, from
whence the Apostle well proves the ^ecessity of a higher Sacrifice to make
^xpiation for sins, as pertaining to the Con^^ience: But that expiation among
the Jews ^id relate to that Polity which was esta^lished among them, as they
were a People under the Government of a body of ^aws distinct from the rest of
the world. and they being considered as such, it is ^ain to enquire, whether
they had only ^^mporal or eternal promises; for it was im^ossible they should
have any other than ^emporal, unless we imagine, that God ^ould own them for a
distinct people in ^^other World as he did in this. For what ^romises relate to
a People as such, must ^onsider them as a People, and in that ^^pacity they
must the blessings of a Socie^, viz. peace, plenty, number of People, ^ngth of
days, etc. But we are far from ^enying that the general Principles of ^eligion
did remain among them, viz. that ^re is a God, and a rewarder of them that ^k
him; and all the Promises God made (...) the Patriarchs, did continue in force
as another Country, and were continually ^proved by the Prophetical
instructions ^ong them. But we are now speaking what did respect the people in
general, by virtue of that Law which was giv^ them by Moses, and in that
respect (...) punishment of faults being either death (...) exclusion from the
public Worship, t^ expiation of them, was taking away t^ obligation to either
of these, whi^^ was the guilt of them in that consider^tion.

But does not this take away the typi^ nature of these sacrifices? No, but it
mu^ rather establishes it. For as Socinus argues, If the expiation was only
typi^ Socin. de servat. l. 2. c. 10. Praelect. Th^olog. cap. 22.
there must be something in the typ^ correspondent to that which is typif^ by
it. As the Brazen Serpent typifi^ Christ, and the benefit which was to co^ by
him, because as many as looked up^ it were healed. And Noah's Ark is s^ to be a
type of Baptism, because as any as entered into that were saved from the
deluge. So Corinth. 10. the Apost^ says, that those things happened to the in
types, v. 11. because the events whi^ happened to them, did represent tho^
which would fall upon disobedient Ch^^stians. So that to make good the the
notion of a Type, we must assert an exp^tion that was real then, and agreeable
(...) that dispensation, which does repres^ an expiation of a far higher
nature, whi^ was to be by the Sacrifice of the Blood of Christ.

Which being premised, I now come to ^rove, that there was a substitution
designed. 3. A substitution proved from Levit. 17. 11. etc.
of the Beast to be slain and sacrificed (...) stead of the offenders
themselves. Which will appear from Leviticus 17. 11. For the life of the flesh
is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make an
Atonement for your Souls; for it is the blood that makes an Atonement for the
Soul. The utmost that Crellius would have meant by this place is, that there is
a double reason Crell. c. 10. sect. 9.
assigned of the prohibition of eating blood, viz. that the life was in the
blood, and that the blood was designed for expiation; but he makes these wholly
independent upon each other. But we say, that the proper reason assigned
against the eating of the blood, is that which is elsewhere given, when this
Precept is mentioned, viz. that the blood was the life, as we may see Genesis 9.
4. Levit. 17. 14. but to confirm the reason given, that the blood was the life;
he adds, that God had given them that upon the Altar for an Atonement for
their Souls; So the Arabic Version renders it, and therefore have I given it
you upon the Altar, viz. because the blood is the life. And hereby a sufficient
reason is given, why God did make choice of the blood for atonement, for that
is expre^ in the latter clause, for it is the blood (...) makes an atonement
for the Soul; w^ should this be mentioned here, if no (...) were intended but
to give barely anoth^ reason why they should not eat the bloo^ what force is
there more in this cla^ to that end, than in the foregoing? (...) therein God
had said, that he had given them for an Atonement. If no more h^ been intended,
but the bare prohibit^ of common use of the blood, on the (...) count of its
being consecrated to sac^ use, it had been enough to have said, the the blood
was holy unto the Lord, as (...) is in the other instances mentioned b^
Crellius, of the holy Ointment and Perfu^ Exodus 30. 32, 33. 37. 38.
for no other reason is there given, why (...) should not be profaned to common
(...) but that it should be holy for the Lord; therefore the blood had been
forbidd^ upon that account, there had been no ^cessity at all of adding, that
the blood (...) it that made atonement for the Soul: whi^ gives no peculiar
reason why they sho^ not eat the blood, beyond that of b^ consecration of it to
a sacred use; but we consider it as respecting the first claus^ viz. For the
life of the flesh is in the bloo^ then there is a particular reason why the
blood should be for atonement, viz. because the life was in that; and therefore
when the blood was offered, the life of the Beast was supposed to be given
instead of the life of the offender. According to that of Ovid, Hanc animam
vobis pro meliore damus. Ovid. Fast. l. 6.

This will be yet made clearer by another instance produced by Crellius to
explain this, which is the forbidding the eating of fat, which, says he, is
joined with this of blood, Levit. 3. 17. It shall be a perpetual Statute for
your Generations, throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat, nor
blood. To the same purpose, Levit. 7. 23, 25, 26. Now no other reason is given
of the prohibition of the fat, but this, All the fat is the Lords. Which was
enough Lev. 3. 16.
to keep them from eating it; but we see here in the case of blood somewhat
further is assigned, viz. that it was the life; and therefore was the most
proper for expiation, the life of the beast being substituted in the place of
the offenders. Which was therefore called animalis hostia among the Romans, as
Grotius observes upon this place, and was distinguished from those whose
entrails were observed; for in those Sacrifices as Servius says, sola anima
Servius ad AEneid. 4.
Deo sacratur, the main of the Sacrifice lay in shedding of the blood, which
was called the Soul; and so it is (...) in this place. From whence it appears
that such a sacrifice was properly (...) for the same word (...) is used, both
relating to the blood and the soul, that is expiated by it: and the LXX. do
accordingly render it, (...), and in the last clause, (...). From whence
Eusebius calls Eusebius. demoust. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
these Sacrifices of living Creatures, (...), and afterward says they were
(...). And Crellius elsewhere grants, that Crell. cap. 8.. 23. Denotat enim vox
(...) eos quorum alter pro altero animam ponat aut devov^at, and sic id malum
quod alteri sub^^ndum erat ejus loco subire non d^treclet.
where (...) is joined with (...) it does imply, that one does undergo the
punishment which another was to have undergone, which is all we mean by
substitution, it being done in the place of another. From whence it follows,
that the Sacrifices under the Law being said to be (...) does necessarily
infer a substitution of them in the place of the offenders. And from hence may
be understood, what is meant by the Goat of the Sin-offering, bearing the
iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for them before the Lord,
Levit. 10. 17. for Crellius his saying, That bearing is as much as taking away,
or declaring that they are taken away, has been already disproved: And his
other answer has as little weight in it; viz. That it is not said, that the
sacrifice did bear their iniquities, but the Priest: For, 1. The Chaldee
Paraphrast, and the Syriack Version, understand it wholly of the Sacrifice. 2.
Socinus himself grants, Socia. de servat. l. 2. c. (...) 11.
That if it were said, the Priest did expiate by the sacrifices, it were all
one as if it were said, that the sacrifices themselves did expiate; because the
expiation of the Priest was by the sacrifice. Thus it is plain in the case of
uncertain murder, mentioned Deuteronomy. 21. from the first to the tenth; If a
murder were committed in the Land, and the person not known who did it, a
heifer was to have her head cut off by the Elders of the next City, and by this
means they were to put away the guilt of innocent blood from among them: The
reason of which was, because God had said before, That blood defiled the land,
and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, Numb. 35. 33.
but by the blood of him that shed it. From whence it appears, that upon the
shedding of blood, there was a guilt contracted upon the whole Land wherein it
was shed, and in case the Murderer was not found to expiate that guilt by his
own blood, then it was to be done by the cutting off the head of a heifer
instead of him: In which case, the death of the heifer was to do as much
toward the expiating the Land, as the death of the Murderer if he had been
found: And we do not contend, that this was designed to expiate the Murderers
guilt (which is the Objection of Crellius against ^ll. c. 10. sect. 9.
this instance) but that a substitution here was appointed by God himself, for
the expiation of the people: For what Crellius adds, That the people did not
deserve punishment, and therefore needed no expiation; it is a flat
contradiction to the Text: For the prayer appointed in that case is, Be
merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not
innocent blood unto thy people Isreal's charge; and the blood shall Deuteronomy. 21. 8.
be expiated; for the same word (...) is used here, which is in the other
places where Expiation is spoken of. So that here must be some guilt supposed,
where there was to be an expiation, and this expiation was performed by the
substitution of a sacrifice in the place of the offender. Which may be enough
at present to show, that a substitution was admitted by the Law, of a sacrifice
instead of the offender, in order to the expiation of guilt; but whether the
offender himself was to be freed by that Sacrifice, depends upon the terms on
which the sacrifice was offered; for we say still, that so much guilt was
expiated, as the sacrifice was designed to expiate; if the sacrifice was
designed to expiate the guilt of the offender, his sin was expiated by it; if
not his, in case no sacrifice was allowed by the Law, as in that of murder,
then the guilt which lay upon the Land was expiated, although the offender
himself were never discovered.

I now come to prove, that in correspondency. 4. A substitution of Christ in
our room proved by his dying for us.
to such a substitution of the sacrifices for sin under the Law, Christ was
substituted in our room for the expiation of our guilt; and that from his being
said to dye for us, and his death being called a price of Redemption for us.

1. From Christ's being said to dye for us. By S. Peter, For Christ has also
once suffered 1 Pet. 3. 18. 2. 21. 4. 1.
for sins, the just for the unjust; by whom he is also said, to suffer (...),
for us, and, for us in the flesh: By S. Paul, he is said to dye (...), for all,
and (...), for the ungodly, and to give himself (...), 2 Cor. 5. 14. Romans 5. 6.
1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. Joh. 11. 50. Luke 22. 19, 20.
a ransom for all, and, to taste death (...), for every man: By Caiaphas,
speaking by inspiration, he is said to dye (...), for the people. So Christ
himself instituting his last Supper said, This is my body which was given, and
my blood which was shed (...), for you; and before he had said, That the Math.
20. 28.
Son of man came to give his life (...), a ransom for many. We are now to
consider, what arts our Adversaries have made use of to pervert the meaning of
these places, so as not to imply a substitution of Christ in our room: 1. They
say, That all these phrases do imply no more, than a final cause; viz. That
Christ died for the good of mankind; for the Apostle tells us, We are bound to
lay down our lives for the Brethren, and 1 John 3. 16.
S. Paul is said to suffer for the Church. To Coloss. 1. 24.
which I answer; 1. This does not at all destroy that which we now plead for;
viz. That these phrases do imply a substitution of Christ in our room: For when
we are bid to lay down our lives for our brethren, a substitution is implied
therein; and supposing that dying for another, does signify dying for some
benefit to come to him, yet what does this hinder substitution, unless it be
proved, that one cannot obtain any benefit for another, by being substituted in
his room. Nay, it is observable, that although we produce so many places of
Scripture, implying such a substitution, they do not offer to produce one that
is inconsistent with Christ's suffering in our stead; all that they say is, That
(...) does not always signify so, which we never said it did, who say, that
Christ suffered (...) not instead of our sins, but by reason of them; but we
assert, that when one person is said to dye for others, as in the places
mentioned, no other sense can be so proper and agreeable, as dying in the stead
of the other. 2. Socinus himself grants, That there is a peculiarity implied in
Soc. de servat. l. 2. c. 8.
those phrases, when attributed to Christ, above what they have when attributed
to any other. And therefore he says, It cannot be properly said, That one
Brother dies for another, or that Paul suffered for the Colossians, or for the
Church, as Christ may truly and properly be said to suffer and to dye for us.
And from hence, says he, S. Paul says, was Paul crucified for you? implying
thereby, that there never was, or could 1 Cor. 1. 13.
be any, who truly and properly could be said to dye for men but Christ alone.
How unreasonable then is it, from the use of a particle as applied to others,
to infer, that it ought to be so understood, when applied to Christ? when a
peculiarity is acknowledged in the death of Christ for us, more than ever was
or could be in one man's dying for another. 3. It is not the bare force of the
particle (...) that we insist upon; but that a substitution could not be more
properly expressed, than it is in Scripture, by this and other particles, for
not only (...) is used, but (...) too: which Socinus says, Although it may
Socin. ib.
signify something else besides in the stead of another, yet in such places,
where it is spoken of a ransom, or price, it signifies the payment of something
which was owing before, as Mat. 17. 27. (...), and so he acknowledges, that
where redemption is spoken of, there (...) does imply a commutation, because
the price is given, and the person received, which, he says, holds in Christ
only metaphorical y: for the redemption according to him being only
Metaphorical, the commutation must be supposed to be so too.

And this mow leads us to the larger Answer of Crellius upon this argument.. 5.
In what sense a surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Crell. c.
9. sect. 3.
Wherein we shall consider, what he yields, what he denies, and upon what
reasons. 1. He yields, and so he says, does Socinus very freely, a
commutation: but it is necessary that we should thoroughly understand what he
means by it: to that end he tells us, That they acknowledge a twofold I^. s^ct.
2.
commutation; one of the person suffering, the kind of suffering being changed,
not actually but intentionally, because we were not actually freed by Christ
dying for us, but only Christ dyed for that end, that we might be freed. And
this commutation, he says, that Socinus does not deny to be employed in the
particle (...), in the places where Christ is said to dye for us. Another
commutation, which he acknowledges, is, that which is between a price, and the
thing or person which is bought or redeemed by it; where the price is paid, and
the thing or person is received upon it. And this kind of commutation, he
says, is to be understood in the places where (...) is mentioned; which price,
he says, by accident may be a person; and because the person is not presently
delivered, he therefore says, that the commutation is rather imperfect than
Ib. sect. 6.
metaphorical; and although, he says, (...) does not of it self imply a
commutation, yet he grants, that the circumstances of the places do imply it.
2. He denies, that there is any proper surrogation in Christ's dying for us, Ib.
sect. 7.
which, he says, is such a commutation of persons, that the substituted person
is in all respects to be in the same place and state wherein the other was; and
if it refers to sufferings; then it is when one suffers the very same which the
other was to suffer, he being immediately delivered by the others sufferings.
And against this kind of surrogation, Crellius needed not to have produced any
reasons; for Grotius never asserted it; neither do we say, that Christ suffered
eternal death for us, or that we were immediately freed by his sufferings. But
that which Grotius asserts that he meant by substitution was this, that unless
Christ had ayed for us, we must have dyed our selves, and because Christ has
dyed, we shall not dye eternally. But if this be all, says Crellius, he meant
by it, we grant the whole thing, and Ib. sect. 3.
he complains of it as an injury for any to think otherwise of them. If so,
they cannot deny but that there was a sufficient capacity in the death of
Christ to be made an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world. But
notwithstanding all these fair words, Crellius means no more than Socinus did;
and though he would allow the words which Grotius used, yet not in the sense he
understood them in; for Crellius means no more by all this, but that the death
of Christ was an antecedent condition to the expiation of sins in Heaven,
Grotius understands by them, that Christ did expiate sins by becoming a
Sacrifice for them in his death. However, from hence it appears, that our
Adversaries can have no plea against the death of Christ's being an expiatory
Sacrifice (from want of a substitution in our room) since they profess
themselves so willing to own such a substitution. But if they say, that there
could be no proper substitution, because the death of Christ was a bare
condition, and no punishment, they then express their minds more freely; and if
these places be allowed to prove a substitution, I hope the former discourse
will prove that it was by way of punishment. Neither is it necessary, that the
very same kind of punishment be undergone in order to surrogation, but that it
be sufficient in order to the accomplishing the end for which it was designed.
For this kind of substitution being in order to the delivery of another by it,
whatever is sufficient for that end, does make a proper surrogation. For no
more is necessary to the delivery of another person than the satisfying the
ends of the Law and Government, and if that may be done by an aequivalent
suffering, though not the same in all respects, then it may be a proper
surrogation. If David had obtained his wish, that he had dyed himself for his
Son Absalom, it had not been necessary in order to his Sons escape, that he had
hanged by the hair of his head, as his Son did; but his death, though in other
circumstances, had been sufficient. And therefore, when the Lawyers say,
subrogatum, sapit naturam ejus in cujus locum subrogatur: Covarru. To. 1. p. 1.
sect. 4. (...). 3.
Covarruvias tells us, it is to be understood secundum primordialem naturam non
secundum accidentalem; from whence it appears, that all circumstances are not
necessary to be the same in surrogation; but that the nature of the punishment
remain the same. Thus Christ dying for us, to deliver us from death, and the
curse of the Law, he underwent an accursed death for that end; although not the
very same which we were to have undergone, yet sufficient to show, that he
underwent the punishment of our iniquities in order to the delivering us from
it. And if our Adversaries will yield us this, we shall not much contend with
them about the name of a proper surrogation.

But in the matter of Redemption, or where. 6. Our Redemption by Christ proves
a substitution.
(...) is used, Crellius will by no means yield that there was a commutation of
persons between Christ and us, but all the commutation he will allow here is
only a commutation between a thing, or a price, and a person. Which he
therefore asserts, that so there may be no necessity of Christ's undergoing
Crell. c. 9. s^ct. 2.
the punishment of sin in order to redemption, because the price that is to be
paid, is not supposed to undergo the condition of the person delivered by it.
Which will evidently appear to have no force at all, in case we can prove, that
a proper redemption may be obtained by the punishment of one in the room of
another; for that punishment then comes to be the (...) or price of redemption;
and he that pays this, must be supposed to undergo punishment for it. So that
the commutation being between the punishment of one, and the other redeemed by
it, here is a proper commutation of persons employed in the payment of the
price. But hereby we may see that the great subtilty of our Adversaries is
designed on purpose to avoid the force of the places of Scripture, which are so
plain against them: For when these places where (...) and (...) are joined
together, are so clear for a substitution, that they cannot deny it; then they
say, by it is meant only a commutation of a price for a person; but when the
word (...) is urged to prove a redemption purchased by Christ, by the payment
of a price for it, then they deny that (...) does signify a proper price, but
is only taken metaphorically; and yet if it be so taken, then there can be no
force in what Crellius says, for a bare metaphorical price may be a real
punishment. Two things I shall then prove against Crellius. 1. That the (...)
as applied to Christ, is to be taken in a proper sense. 2. That although it be
taken in a proper sense, yet it does not imply a bare commutation of a price
and a person, but a substitution of one person in the room of another.

Both these will be cleared from the. 7. Of the true notion of Redemption.
right stating the notion of redemption between our Adversaries and us. For
they will not by any means have any other proper notion of redemption but from
captivity, and that by the payment of a price to him that did hold in
captivity, and therefore because Christ did not pay the price to the Devil,
there could be no proper sense either of the redemption, or the price which was
paid for it. This is the main strength of all the arguments used by Socinus and
Crellius, to Socin. de servat. l. 2. c. 1, 2. Crell. c. 8. s^ct. 11.
enervate the force of those places of Scripture which speak of our redemption
by Christ, and of the price which he paid in order to it. But how weak these
exceptions are, will appear upon a true examination of the proper notion of
Redemption, which in its primary importance signifies no more, than the
obtaining of one thing by another as a valuable consideration for it. Thence
redimere anciently among the Latins signified barely to purchase by a valuable
price, for the thing which they had a right to by it; and sometimes to purchase
that which a man has sold before, thence the pactum redimendi in contracts:
still in whatever sense it was used by the Lawyers or others, the main regard
was, to the consideration upon which the thing was obtained, thence redimere
delatorem pecunia, Ulpian. l. 29. D. de jure sisci.
h. e. eum a delatione deducere; so redimere litem; and redemptor litis was one
that upon certain consideration took the whole charge of a suit upon himself:
and those who undertook the farming of customs at certain rates, were called
redemptores vectigalium, Budaeus ad Pa^dect. p. 189. Live. l 23.
qui redempturis auxissent vectigalia, says Livy. And all those who undertook
any public work at a certain price, redemptores antiquitus dicebantur, says
Festus. v. red. Ulpian. l. 39. D. de rei vend.
Festus and Ulpian. From hence it was applied to the delivery of any person
from any inconvenience that he lay under, by something which was supposed a
valuable consideration for it. And that it does not only relate to captivity,
but to any other great calamity, the freedom from which is obtained by what
another suffers; is apparent from these two remarkable expressions of Cicero to
this purpose. Quam quidem Cic^r. ep. famil. l. 2. ep. 16.
ego (says he, speaking of the sharpness of the time) a rep. meis private is
and domesticis incommodis libentissime redemissem. And more expressly elsewhere,
Ego vitam Orat. pr^ Sylla.
omnium civium, statum orbis terrae, urbem hanc denique etc. quinque hominum
amenti^ ac perditorum poena redemi. Where it i^ plain, that redemption is used
for the delivery of some by the punishment o^ others; not from mere captivity,
but from a great calamity which they might have fallen into, without such a
punishment of those persons. So vain is that assertion of Socinus, redimere,
nihil aliud proprie significat, quam eum captivum e manibus illius, So^. de
servat l. 2. c. 1.
qui eum detinet, pretio illi dato liberare.

And yet supposing we should grant that. 8. No necessity of paying the price to
him that detains captive.
redemption as used in sacred Authors does properly relate to captivity, there
is no necessity at all of that which our Adversaries contend so earnestly for,
viz. That the price must be paid to him that detains captive. For we may very
easily conceive a double sort of captivity, from whence a redemption may be
obtained; the one by force, when a Captive is detained purposely for advantage
to be made by his redemption; and the other in a judicial manner, when the Law
condemns a person to captivity, and the thing designed by the Law is not a mere
price, but satisfaction to be made to the Law, upon which a redemption may be
obtained; now in the former case it is necessary, that the price be paid to the
person who detains, because the reason of his detaining, was the expectation of
the price to be paid; but in the latter, the detainer is merely the instrument
for execution of the Law, and the price of redemption is not to be paid to him;
but to those who are most concerned in the honor of the Law. But Crellius
objects, that the price can never be said to be paid to God, because our
redemption Cr^ll. c. 8. sect. 11.
is attributed to God as the author of it, and because we are said to be
redeemed for his use and service, now, says he, the price can never be paid to
him for whose service the person is redeemed. But all this depends upon the
former mistake, as though we spoke all this while of such a redemption, as that
is of a Captive by force; in whom the detainer is no further concerned, than
for the advantage to be made by him; and in that case the price must be paid to
him who detains, because it would otherwise be unsuccessfull for his
deliverance: but in case of captivity by Law, as the effect of disobedience,
the Magistrate who is concerned in the life of the person, and his future
obedience, may himself take care that satisfaction may be given to the Law for
his redemption, in order to his future service ableness. From hence we see both
that the (...) is proper in this case of our redemption, and that it is not a
mere commutation of a price for a person, but a commutation of one persons
suffering for others, which suffering being a punishment in order to
satisfaction, is a valuable consideration, and therefore a price for the
redemption of others by it. Which price in this sense does imply a proper
substitution; which was the thing to be proved. Which was the first thing to be
made good concerning the death of Christ being a sacrifice for sin, viz. that
there was a substitution of Christ in our stead as of the sacrifices of old
under the Law; and in this sense the death of Christ was a proper (...), or
price of redemption for us. Nothing then can be more vain, than the way of our
Adversaries, to take away the force of all this, because (...) is sometimes
taken for a mere deliverance without any price, which we deny not; but the main
force of our argument is from the importance of (...), where the (...) is
mentioned; and then we say that (...) when applied to sins, signifies
expiation, (as Heb. 9.. 15. (...),) but when applied to persons, it signifies
the deliverance purchased by the (...), which is not to be considered as a bare
price, or a thing given, but as a thing undergone in order to that deliverance:
and is therefore not only called (...), but (...) too, which Crellius
confesses does imply a commutation, and we have showed, does prove a
substitution of Christ in our place.

CHAP. V.
The notion of a sacrifice belongs to the death of Christ, because of the
Oblation made therein to God. Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed.
Against him it is proved, that the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary
respect to God, and not to us. Expiatory Sacrifices did divert the wrath of
God. Christ not a bare Metaphorical High Priest. Crellius destroys the
Priesthood of Christ by confounding it with the exercise of his Regal Power. No
proper expiation of sin belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his Doctrine
be true. Ephesians. 5. 2. proves the death of Christ an expiatory Sacrifice, and an
Oblation to God. The Phrase of a sweet smelling savor, belongs to expiatory
Sacrifices; Crellius his gross notion of it. His mistakes about the kinds of
Sacrifices. Burnt-offerings were expiatory sacrifices both before and under the
Law. A new distribution of sacrifices proposed. What influence the mactation of
the Sacrifice had on Expiation. The High Priest only to slay the Sin-offering
on the day of Atonement; from whence it is proved, that Christ's Priesthood did
not begin from his entrance into Heaven. The mactation in expiatory sacrifices
no bare preparation to a sacrifice, proved by the Jewish Laws, and the customs
of other Nations. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in
Heaven, or on Earth? Of the proper notion of Oblations under the Levitical Law.
Several things observed from thence to our purpose. All things necessary to a
legal Oblation, concur in the death of Christ. His entrance into Heaven has
no correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ were no sacrifice for sin. In
Sin Offerings for the People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the
sacrifices allowed the Priests, but in those for private Persons. Christ's
exercise of Power in Heaven, in no sense an Oblation to God. Crellius, his
sense repugnant to the circumstances of the places in dispute. Objections
answered.

THE Second thing to prove the death. 1. Of the Oblation made by Christ unto
God.
of Christ a Sacrifice for sin, is the Oblation of it to God for that end.
Grotius toward the conclusion of his book, makes a twofold Oblation of Christ,
parallel to that of the Sacrifices under the Law, the first of Mactation, the
second of Representation; whereof the first was done in the Temple, the second
in the Holy of Holies; so the first of Christ was on Earth, the second in
Heaven; the first is not a bare preparation to a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice:
the latter not so much a Sacrifice, as the commemoration of one already past.
Wherefore, since appearing and interceding are not properly sacerdotal acts,
any further than they depend on the efficacy of a sacrifice already offered, he
that takes away that Sacrifice, does not leave to Christ any proper Priesthood,
against the plain authority of the Scripture, which assigns to Christ the
office of a Priest distinct from that of a Prophet and a King. To which
Crellius replies: That the expiation Crell. c. 10. sect. 45.
of sin does properly belong to what Christ does in Heaven; and may be applied
to the death of Christ only, as the condition by which he was to enjoy that
power in Heaven, whereby Ib. sect. 55.
he does expiate sins; but the Priest was never said to expiate sins when he
killed the beast, but when the blood was sprinkled or carried into the Holy of
Holyes, to which the Oblation of Christ in Heaven does answer: but the
mactation, says he, was not proper to the Priests, but did belong to the
Levites also. Ib. sect. 47.
And Christ was not truly a Priest, while he was on Earth, but only prepared by
his sufferings Ib. sect. 53.
to be one in Heaven, where by the perpetual care he takes of his People, and
exercising Ib. sect. 54. Sect. 56.
his Power for them, he is said to offer up himself, and intercede for them,
and by that means he discharges the Office of a High Priest for them. For his
Priestly Office, he says, is never in Scripture mentioned as distinct from his
Kingly, but is comprehended under it; and the great difference between them is,
that one is of a larger extension than the other is, the Kingly Office
extending to punishing, and the Priestly only to expiation. This is the
substance of what Crellius more at large discourses upon this subject. Wherein
he asserts these things. 1. That the Priestly Office of Christ does not in
reference to the expiation of sins respect God but us; his Intercession and
Oblation wherein he makes the sacerdotal function of Christ to consist, being
the exercise of his power for the good of his People. 2. That Christ did offer
up no Sacrifice of expiation to God upon Earth, because the mactation had no
reference to expiation, any other than as a preparation for it; and Christ not
yet being constituted a High Priest till after his Resurrection from the dead.
Against these two assertions I shall direct my following discourse, by proving;
1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to
us, 2. That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of himself
to God upon the Cross.

1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had. 2. That the Priestly Office of
Christ had a primary respect to God, and not us. Crell. in Heb. 5. 1.
a primary respect to God, and not to us; which appears from the first
Institution of a High Priest, mentioned by the Apostle, Hebr. 5. 1. For every
High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to
God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: Id est, says
Crellius elsewhere, ut procuret and peragat ea quae ad colendum ac propitiandum
numen pertinent; i. e. That he may perform the things which appertain to the
worshipping and propitiating God: We desire no more, but that the propitiating
God, may as immediately be said to respect him, as the worshipping of God does;
or let Crellius tell us, what sense the propitiating God will bear; if all that
the High Priest had to do, did immediately respect the people: nay, he says
not long after, That it was the chief Office of a High Priest, to plead the
cause of sinners with God, and to take care, that they may find him kind and
propitious, and not angry or displeased. In what sense God was said to be moved
by the Expiatory Sacrifices, is not here our business to discuss; it is
sufficient for our purpose, that they were instituted with a respect to God, so
as to procure his favor, and divert his wrath. In which sense, the Priest is
so often in the Levitical Law said, by the offering up of Sacrifices, to
expiate the sins of the people. But Crellius says, This ought not Crell. c.
10. sect. 3.
so to be understood, as though God by Expiatory Sacrifices, were diverted from
his anger, and inclined to pardon; which is a plain contradiction, not only to
the words of the Law, but to the instances that are recorded therein; as when
Aaron was bid in the time of the Plague, to make an Numb. 16. 46.
Atonement for the people, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord: and he
stood between Verse. 48.
the living and the dead, and the plague was stayed. Was not Gods anger then
diverted here, by the making this Atonement? The like instance we read in
David's time, that by the offering burnt-offerings, etc. the Lord 2 Samuel 24. 25.
was entreated for the Land, and the plague was stayed from Israel: By which
nothing can be more plain, than that the primary intention of such Sacrifices,
and consequently of the Office of the Priest who offered them, did immediately
respect the Atoning God: But yet Crellius urges, This cannot be said of all,
or of the most proper Expiatory Sacrifices: but we see it said of more than the
mere Sacrifices f^ sin, as appointed by the Law; viz. of burntofferings, and
peace offerings, and incense, i^ the examples mentioned. So that these
Levitical Sacrifices did all respect the atoning God; although in some
particular cases, different Sacrifices were to be offered; for it is said, the
burnt-offering wa^ to make atonement for them, as well as the Lev. 1. 4. 4. 20.
5. 7.
sin and trespass-offerings (excepting those sacrifices which were instituted
in acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty over them and presence among them, as
the daily Sacrifices, the meat and drink offerings, o^ such as were merely
occasional, etc.) Thus it is said, that Aaron and his sons were appointed to
make an Atonement for Israel 1 Chronicles. 6. 49.
So that as Grotius observes out of Phil^ The High Priest was a Mediator
betwee^ God and man, by whom men might propitiate Grot. in Heb. 5. 1.
God, and God dispense his favors to men. But the means whereby he did procure
favors to men, was by atoning God by the Sacrifices, which h^ was by his
Office to offer to him. W^ are now to consider, how far this hol^ in reference
to Christ, for whose sake t^ Apostle brings in these words; and su^ would not
have mentioned this as the pr^ mary Office of a High Priest, in order to ^he
proving Christ to be our High Priest, after a more excellent manner than the
^ronical was, unless he had agreed with ^im in the nature of his Office, and
ex^eeded him in the manner of perform^nce.

For the Apostle both proves, that he was 3. Christ no barely metaphorical
High Priest.
(...) true and proper, and not a bare Meta^horical High Priest, and that in
such a capa^ity, he very far exceeded the Priests after the order of Aaron. But
how could that possibly be, if he failed in the primary Office of a
High Priest; viz. In offering up gifts and sacrifices to God? If his Office as
High Priest did primarily respect men, when the Office of the Aaronical Priest
did respect God? To avoid this, Crellius makes these words to be only an
allusion to the Legal Priesthood, and some kind of Crell. c. 10. s^ct. 3.
similitude between Christ and the Aaronical Priests; but it is such a kind of
allusion, that the Apostle designs to prove, Christ to be an High Priest by it;
and which is of the greatest force, he proves the necessity of Christ's having
somewhat to offer from hence: For every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts,
and sacrifices; wherefore Hebr. 8. 3.
it is of necessity, that this man have somewhat also to offer. This is that
which he looks at as the peculiar and distinguishi^ character of a High Priest;
for intercedi^^ for others, and having compassion upon them, might be done by
others besides the High Priest; but this was that, without which he could not
make good his name what order soever he were of. If Chri^ then had no proper
sacrifice to offer upto God, to what purpose does the Apostle s^ industriously
set himself to prove, that h^ is our High Priest? when he must needs fai^ in
the main thing, according to his own assertion? How easy had it been for the
Jews, to have answered all the Apostles Arguments concerning the Priesthood of
Christ, if he had been such a Priest, and made no^ other Oblation than Crellius
allows him? When the Apostle proves against the Jews, that there was no
necessity, that they should still retain the Mosaical Dispensation, because now
they had a more excellent High Priest than the Aaronical were; and makes use of
that character of a High Priest, that he was one taken out from among men,
(...) things pertaining to God to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: Well,
say the Jews, we accept of this character, but how do yo^ prove concerning
Christ, that he was such a one? Did he offer up a sacrifice for sin to God upon
earth, as our High Priest do? No, says Crellius, his sufferings were ^ely a
preparation for his Priesthood in Hea^^n: But did he then offer up such a
Sacrifice to God in Heaven? Yes, says Crellius, He made an Oblation there. But
is that Oblation such a Sacrifice to God for sin, as our High Priest offers?
Yes, ^aith Crellius, it may be called so by way of ^llusion. Well then, say
they, you grant that your Jesus is only a High Priest by way of allusion,
which was against your first design to prove; viz. That he was a true
High Priest, and more excellent than ours. But suppose it be by way of
allusion, does he make any Oblation to God in Heaven or not? No, says
Crellius, really and truly he does not; for all his Office does respect us, but
the benefits we enjoy coming ^^iginally from the kindness of God, you may all
it an Oblation to God if you please. But how is it possible then, say the Jews,
you can ever convince us, that he is any High Priest, or Priest at all, much
less, that he should ever exceed the Aaronical Highpriests in their Office?
for we are assured, that they do offer Sacrifices for sin, and that God is
atoned by them: but if your High Priest make no atonement for sin, he falls far
short of ours, and therefore we will still hold to our Levitical Priesthood,
and not forsake that for o^ barely Metaphorical, and having nothin^ really
answering the name of a High Priest. Thus the force of all the Apostl^
Arguments is plainly taken away, by wh^^ Crellius and his Brethren assert
concernin^ the Priesthood of Christ. But Crelli^ thinks to make it good by
saying, Th^^ Crell. c. 10. sect. 3. Id. sect. 56. p. 547.
things that are improper and figurative, man be far more excellent than the
things that ar^ proper, to which they are opposed; so (...) Christ's Priesthood
may be far more excelle^^ than the Aaronical, although his be only figurative,
and the other proper. But the question is not, Whether Christ's Priesthood by
any other adventitious considerations, as o^ greater Power and Authority than
the Aaronical Priests had, may be said to be far more excellent than theirs
was; but, Whether in the notion of Priesthood, it does exceed theirs? Which it
is impossible to make good, unless he had some proper oblation to make unto
God, which in it sel^ did far exceed all the Sacrifices and Offerings under the
Law.

But what that oblation of Christ in Heaven was, which had any correspondency.
4. Crellius destroys the Priesthood of Christ.
with the Sacrifices under the Law, our Adversaries can never assign; nay, when
they go about it, they speak of it in such a manner, as makes it very evident
they could heartily have wished the Epistle to the Hebrews had said as little
of the Priesthood of Christ, as they say, any other part of the New Testament
does. Thence Smalcius Smalc. c. Smiglec. Crell. c. 10. p. 544.
and Crellius insist so much upon the Priesthood of Christ, being distinctly
mentioned by none but the Author to the Hebrews; which, say they, had surely
been done, if Christ had been a proper Priest, or that Office in him distinct
from his Kingly. Which sufficiently discovers what they would be at; viz. That
the testimony of the Author to the Hebrews, is but a single testimony in this
matter; and in truth, they do (as far as is consistent with not doing it in
express words) wholly take away the Priesthood of Christ: For what is there
which they say his Priesthood implies, which he might not have had, supposing
he had never been called a Priest? His being in Heaven, does not imply that he
is a Priest, unless it be impossible for any but Priests ever to come there:
His Power and Authority over the Church, does not imply it; for that power is
by themselves confessed to be a Regal power: his readiness to use that power,
cannot imply it, which is the thing Smalcius insists on; for his being a King
of the Church, does necessarily imply his readiness to make use of his power
for the good of his Church. H^ receiving his power from God, does not i^ply
that he was a Priest, although Crelli^^ insists on that, unless all the Kings
of the Earth are Priests by that means too, an^ Christ could not have had a
subordinat^ power as King, as well as Priest. But hi^ death is more implied,
says Crellius, in the name of a Priest, than of a King; true, if his death be
considered as a Sacrifice, but not otherwise: For what is there of a Priest in
bare dying, do not others so too? But this represents greater tenderness and
care in Christ, than the mere title of a King: What kind of King do they
imagine Christ the mean while, if his being so, did not give the greatest
encouragement to all his subjects? nay, it is plain, the name of a King must
yield greater comfort to his people, because that implies his power to defend
them, which the bare name of a Priest does not. So that there could be no
reason at all given, why the name of a High Priest should be at all given to
Christ, if no more were implied in it, than the exercise of his power, with
respect to us, without any proper oblation to God: For here is no proper
Sacerdotal act at all attributed to him; so that upon their hypothesis, the
name of High Priest, is a mere insignificant title used by the author to the
Hebrews, without any foundation at all for it. By no means, says Crellius, for
his expiation of sin is employed by it, which is not employed in the name of
King: True, if the expiation of sin were done by him in the way of a Priest by
an oblation to God, which they deny; but though they call it Expiation, they
mean no more than the exercise of his divine power in the delivering his
people. But what parallel was there to this in the expiation of sins by the
Levitical Priesthood? that was certainly done by a Sacrifice offered to God by
the Priest, who was thereby said to expiate the sins of the people: how Levit.
4. 26. v. 31. 35.
comes it now to be taken quite in another sense, and yet still called by the
same name?

But this being the main thing insisted. 5. No proper expiation of sin belongs
to Christ in Heaven, if Cr^ his doctrine be true.
on by them, I shall prove from their own Principles, that no expiation of sin
in their own sense can belong to Christ in Heaven, by virtue of his Oblation of
himself there, and consequently that they must unavoidably overthrow the whole
notion of the Priesthood of Christ. For this we are to consider, what their
notion of the expiation of sins is, which is set down briefly by Crellius in
the beginning of his discourse of Sacrifices, There is a twofold power, Crell.
c. 10. sect. 2.
says he, of the sacrifice of Christ toward the expiation of sin, one taking
away the guilt and the punishment of sin, and that partly by declaring, that
God will do it, and giving us a right to it, partly by actual deliverance from
punishment; the other is by beg^tting Faith in us, and so drawing us off from
the practice of sin: Now the first and last Crellius and Socinus attribute to
the death of Christ, as that was a confirmation of the Covenant God made for
the remission of sin; and as it was an argument to persuade us to believe the
truth of his doctrine; and the other, viz. the actual deliverance from
punishment, is by themselves attributed to the second coming of Christ; for
then only, they say, the just shall be actually delivered from the punishment
of sin, viz. eternal death; and what expiation is there now left to the
Oblation of Christ in Heaven? Does Christ in Heaven declare the pardon of sin
any other way than it was declared by him upon Earth? What efficacy has his
Oblation in Heaven upon persuading men to believe? or is his second coming,
when he shall sit as Judge, the main part of his Priesthood; for then the
expiation of sins in our Adversaries sense is most proper? And yet nothing can
be more remote from the notion of Christ's Priesthood, than that is; so that
expiation of sins according to them can have no respect at all to the Oblation
of Christ in Heaven, or (which is all one in their sense) his continuance in
Heaven to his second coming. Yes, says Crellius, his continuance there, is a
condition Crell. c. 10. sect. 3. p. 476.
in order to the expiation by actual deliverance, and therefore it may be said,
that God is as it were moved by it to expiate sins. The utmost then, that is
attributed to Christ's being in Heaven, in order to the expiation of sins, is
that he must continue there without doing any thing in order to it; for if he
does, it must either respect God or us: but they deny (though contrary to the
importance of the words, and the design of the places where they are used) that
the terms of Christ's interceding Heb. 7. 25. Rom 8. 3 (...) 1 John 2. 1.
for us, or being an Advocate with the Father for us, does note any respect to
God, but only to us; if he does any thing with respect to us in expiation of
sin, it must be either declaring, persuading, or actual deliverance; but it is
none of these by their own assertions; and therefore that which they call
Christ's Oblation, or his being in Heaven, signifies nothing as to the expiation
of sin: and it is unreasonable to suppose that a thing, which has no influence
at all upon it, should be looked on as a condition in order to it. From whence
it appears, that while our Adversaries do make the exercise of Christ's
Priesthood to respect us and not God, they destroy the very nature of it, and
leave Christ only an empty name without any thing answering to it: But if
Christ be truly a High Priest, as the Apostle asserts that he is, from thence
it follows that he must have a respect to God in offering up gifts and
sacrifices for sin: which was the thing to be proved.

2. That Christ did exercise this Priestly-Office. 6. Ephesians. 5. 2. proves the
death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice and an oblation to God.
in the Oblation of himself to God upon the Cross. Which I shall prove by two
things, 1. Because the death of Christ is said in Scripture to be an Offering,
and a Sacrifice to God. 2. Because Christ is said to offer up himself
antecedently to his entrance into Heaven. 1. Because the death of Christ is
said to be an offering, and a sacrifice to God, which is plain Ephesians. 5. 2.
from the words of S. Paul, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for
us, an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Our
Adversaries do not deny that the death of Christ is here called an Oblation,
but they deny, That it is Crell. c. 10. sect. 47.
meant of an Expiatory Sacrifice, but of a free will offering; and the reason
Crellius gives is, because that phrase of a sweet smelling savor is generally
and almost always used of sacrifices which are not expiatory; but if ever they
be used of an Expiatory Sacrifice, they are not applied to that which was
properly expiatory in it, viz. the offering up of the blood, for no smell,
says he, went up from thence, but to the burning of the fat, and the kidneys,
which although required to perfect the expiation, yet not being done till the
High Priest returned out of the Holy of Holies, has nothing correspondent to
the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, where all things are perfected before Christ
the High Priest goes forth of his Sanctuary. How inconsistent these last words
are with what they assert concerning the expiation of sin by actual deliverance
at the great day, the former discourse has already discovered. For what can be
more absurd, than to say, that all things which pertain to the expiation of sin
are perfected before Christ goes forth from his Sanctuary, and yet to make the
most proper expiation of sin to lie in that act of Christ which is consequent
to his going forth of the Sanctuary, viz. when he proceeds to judge the quick
and the dead. But of that already. We now come to a punctual and direct answer,
as to which two things must be enquired into. 1. What the importance of the
phrase of a sweet smelling savor is? 2. What the Sacrifices are to which that
phrase is applied. 1. For the importance of the phrase. The first time we read
it used in Scripture was upon the occasion of Noah's sacrifice after the flood,
of which it is said, that he offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, Genesis 8. 20.
21.
and the Lord smelled a savor of rest, or a sweet savor. Which we are not to
imagine in a gross corporeal manner, as Crellius seems to understand it, when
he says, the blood could not make such a savor as the fat and the kidneys;
for surely, none ever thought the smell of flesh burnt was a sweet smelling
savor of it self, and we must least of all imagine that of God, which Porphyry
says, was the property only of the worst of Demons to be pleased, and as it
were, to grow fat, (...), with the smell and vapors of blood, Porphyr. de
abstinent. l. 2. sect. 42.
and flesh, (by which testimony, it withal appears, that the same steams in
sacrifices were supposed to arise from the blood as the flesh:) But we are to
understand that phrase in a sense agreeable to the divine nature, which we may
easily do, if we take it in the sense the Syriack Version takes it in, when it
calls it, Odorem placabilitatis, or the savor of rest, as the word properly
signifies; for (...) is the word formed from the Verb (...) which is used for
the resting of the Ark, v. 4. of the same Chapter, and so it imports a rest
after some commotion, and in that sense is very proper to Atonement, or that
whereby God makes his anger to rest; so Aben Ezra upon that place expounds the
Savor of rest, to be such a one which makes God cease from his anger: Thence
in Hiphil (...) signifies to appeal, or to make peace; in which sense it is
used by R. Solom. upon Isa. 27. 5. Munster tells us the sense is, Deus nunc
quievit ab ira and placatus suit, and to the same purpose Vatablus: which sense
is most agreeable to the design of the following words, in which God expresses
his great kindness, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the
ground any more for man's sake; which are words highly expressing, how much God
was propitiated by the Sacrifice which Noah offered, and therefore Josephus
does well interpret this Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 4.
to be a proper Expiatory Sacrifice; that God would now be atoned, and send no
more such a deluge upon the world; which he says, was the substance of Noah's
prayer, when he offered this Burnt-offering, and that God would receive his
Sacrifice (...) (...), That he would no more receive such displeasure against
the earth: So that the first time ever this expression was used, it is taken in
the proper sense of an Expiatory Sacrifice.

And by that the second enquiry may be easily resolved; viz. What kind of
Sacrifices. 7. Crellius his mistakes about the kinds of sacrifices.
it does belong to, which we see in the first place is, to expiatory; which
Crellius denies by a great mistake, of the sense of the phrase, and of the
nature of the Offerings, concerning which this expression is most used; viz.
Holocausts, as though those were not Expiatory Sacrifices: But if we can make
it appear, that the Holocausts were Expiatory Sacrifices, then it will follow,
that this phrase does most properly agree to a Sacrifice designed for
expiation. But Crellius here speaks very confusedly concerning Sacrifices,
opposing Holocausts and Freewil-offerings to Expiatory Sacrifices; whereas the
Freewill-offerings might be Expiatory, as well as Eucharistical; that
denomination not respecting the end the Sacrifices were designed for, but that
the precise time of offering them was not determined by the Law, as in the
stated and solemn Sacrifices. For the general distribution of Sacrifices, seems
most proper into Propitiatory and Eucharistical; which distinction is thought
by some to ^old from the first time we read of Sacri^^ces in Scripture; because
the Sacrifice of ^^in was of the fruits of the ground, and of Genesis 4. 3, 4.
^^bel, of the Firstlings of his flock. Although ^here seems to be nothing
meant by this difference of Sacrifices, but the diversity of their employments,
either of them sacrificing according to them; and I cannot ^ay what some do,
that the reason of Gods rejecting Cains Sacrifice, was because it was not
designed for expiation. But the practice of after ages, wherein we have a
fuller account of the grounds of the several Sacrifices, makes it appear, that
the Expiatory Sacrifices before the Law, were all Burnt-offerings; and of all
those who were not under the particular obligation of that Law: As is plain in
the Expiatory Sacrifices of Job for his sons, and for his friends, which were
Burnt-offerings; and among the Jews, all the Sacrifices that Job 1. 5. 42. 8.
were offered up before the Levitical Law, were, as the Jews themselves tell
us, only Burnt-offerings: And after the settling of their Worship among
themselves, they did receive Burnt-offerings for expiation from Seldom. de jure
not. and gent. apud Ebrae. l. 3. c. 2. etc. 6.
strangers, as Mr. Seldom at large proves from the Jewish Writers. It seems
then very strange, that since Burnt-offerings before the Law were expiatory,
and under the Law they continued so for strangers they should be of another
nature for the Jews themselves. But what reason is ther^ for it in the text?
not the least that I ca^ find, but expressly the contrary. For i^ the beginning
of Leviticus, where the La^ for Burnt-offerings is delivered, the word^ are,
And he shall put his hand upon the hea^ Levit. 1. 4.
of the Burnt-offering, and it shall be accepte^ for him, to make atonement for
him; which is as much as is ever said of any Expiatory Sacrifices: And in the
Verse before, where we render (...) of his own voluntary will; i^ is by the
vulgar Latin rendered, Ad plac^^dum sibi Dominum; by the Syriack Version, Ad
placationem sibi obtinendam a Domino; and to the same purpose by the Chald^^
Paraphrast; but no one Version considerable that so renders it, as to make
Burnt-offerings to be Freewill-offerings here, which are spoken of distinctly,
and by Levit. 7 16. 22. 18, etc. Lev. 6. 7.
themselves afterward: And the Chald^^ Paraphrast, Jonathan thus explains,
This is the Law of the burnt-offering; i. e. Quod ve^ ad expiandum pro
cogitationibus cordis; bu^ although the Jews be not fully agreed what the
Burnt-offerings were designed to expiate, yet they consent that they were of an
expiatory nature. Which might make us the more wonder, that Crellius Crell. ^c.
10. p. 530.
^d others should exclude them from it, ^t the only reason given by him is,
be^se they are distinguished from Sacrifices for (...), as though no Sacrifices
were of an ^piatory nature but they, and then the ^spass-offerings must be
excluded too, for ^ey are distinguished from Sin Offerings as ^ell as the
other. The ignorance of the ^s in the reason of their own customs, ^^th been an
occasion of great mistakes ^^ong Christians, concerning the nature (...) them;
when they judge of them according to the blind or uncertain conjectures which
they make concerning them: So that ^^e Text is oftimes far clearer than their
Commentaries are. Setting aside then the ^^tricate and unsatisfactory niceties
of the ^ewish Writers, about the several reasons ^f the Burnt-offerings and Sin
and Trespass-^fferings, and the differences they make be^ween them, which are
so various and in^oherent, I shall propose this conjecture ^oncerning the
different reasons of them, ^iz. That some Sacrifices were assumed into ^he
Jewish Religion, which had been long ^n use in the world before, and were
common to them with the Patriarchs, and all those who in that age of the world
did fear and serve God, and such were the Burnt-offerings for expiation of sin,
and the frui^ of the earth by way of gratitude to Go^ Other Sacrifices were
instituted amo^^ them, with a particular respect to the^ selves, as a people
governed by the Law^ of God: And these were of several sorts 1. Symbolical, of
Gods presence amo^^ them, such was the daily Sacrifice, institute as a
testimony of Gods presence, Exodus 29^ from v. 38. to the end. 2. Occasional,
for some great mercies vouchsafed to them, a^ the Passover and the Solemn
Festivals, etc* 3. Expiatory, for the sins ^^mmitted against their Law: And
th^se were of three sorts 1. Such as were wholly consumed to the honor of God,
which were the Burnt-offerings. 2. Such, of which some part wa^ consumed upon
the Altar, and some part fell to the share of the Priests; and these were
either sins particularly enumerated by God himself, under the (...), or else
generally comprehended under the (...) being allowed to be expiated, because
committed through inadvertency. 3. Such whereof a less part was consumed, as in
the Peace Offerings of the Congregation, mentioned Levit. 23. 19. whereof the
blood (...) sprinkled, only the inwards burnt, and (...) flesh not eaten by
the persons that offered them, (...) it was in the Peace Offerings of
particular persons (of which as being private Sacrifices, have here no occasion
to speak) but ^ely by the Priests in the Court; and these ^ad something of
expiation in them: For ^ence, says Vatablus, the Peace Offering was ^all'd by
the Greeks (...), i. e. Expiato^m, and the LXX. commonly render it, ^lae (...),
and several of the Jews think ^he reason of the name was, That it made ^ace
between God and him that offered it: ^ut the great reason I insist on, is,
Because ^ll the things which were used in an Expia^ory Sacrifice, were in this
too; the slay^ng of the Beast, the sprinkling of the blood, and the consumption
of some part of it upon the Altar, as an Oblation to God, which are the three
ingredients of ^n Expiatory Sacrifice, for the shedding of ^e blood, noted the
bearing the punishment of our iniquity; and, the sprinkling of (...) on the
Altar, and the consuming of the part ^f the sacrifice, or the whole there, that
it was designed for the expiation of sin. From whence it follows, that the
phrase of a sweet smelling savor, being applied under the Law to Expiatory
Sacrifices, is very proper^y used by S. Paul, concerning Christ's giving up
himself for us: ^o that from this phrase, nothing can be inferred contrary ^o
the Expiatory nature of the death of Christ, but rather it is fully agreea^ to
it.

But Crellius has yet a further Argume^. 8. What influence the mactation of
the sacrifice had on expiation. Crell. c. 10. p. 533.
to prove that Christ's death cannot be (...) meant as the Expiatory Sacrifice;
viz. (...) the notion of a sacrifice, does consist in the ^lation whereby the
thing is consecrated to (...) honor and service of God, to which the ma^tion
is but a bare preparation; which (...) proves, Because the slaying the
sacrifice (...) belong to others besides the Priests, Ezekiel. (...) 10, 11. but
the oblation only to the Prie^ To this I answer, 1. The mactation may (...)
considered two ways, either with a resp^ to the bare instrument of taking away
t^ life, or to the design of the Offerer of the which was to be sacrificed: As
the mac^tion has a respect only to the instrume^^ so it is no otherways to be
considered the as a punishment; but as it has a respect (...) him that designs
it for a Sacrifice, so t^ shedding of the blood, has an immedi^ influence on
the expiation of sin. A^ that by this clear Argument, The blood (...) said to
make an Atonement for the soul; (...) the reason given is, because the life of
(...) Levit. 17. 11.
flesh is in the blood: So that which was (...) life, is the great thing which
makes (...) atonement; and when the blood was she the life was then given; from
whence follows, that the great efficacy of the sacrifice for atonement lay in
the shedding of ^he blood for that end. Thence the Apostle ^ttributes remission
of sins to the (...), the shedding of the blood; and not to the bare Heb. 9. 22.
Oblation of it on the Altar, or the carrying it into the Holy of Holies, both
which seem to be nothing else but a more solemn representation of that blood
before God, which was already shed for the expiation of sins, which was
therefore necessary to be performed, that the concurrence of the Priest might
be seen with the sacrifice in order to expiation. For if no more had been
necessary but the bare slaying of the Beasts, which was the meanest part of the
service, the people would never have thought the institution of the Priesthood
necessary, and least of all that of the High Priest, unless some solemn action
of his had been performed, such as the entering into the Holy of Holies, on the
day of expiation, and carrying it, and sprinkling the blood of the sin-offering
in order to the expiation of the sins of the people. And it is observable, that
although the Levitical Law be silent in the common Sacrifices, who were to kill
them whether the Priests or the Levites; yet on that day whereon the
High Priest was to appear himself for the expiation of sin, (...) is expressly
said, that he should not o^ kill, the bullock of the sin-offering, which (...)
for himself, but the goat of the sin-offeri^^ Levit. 16. 11, 15.
which is for the people. And although the Talmudists dispute from their
Tradition on both sides, whether any one else might on the day of expiation,
slay the sin offerings besides the High Priest; yet it i^ no news for them to
dispute against the Text: and the Talmud it self is clear, tha^ Codex Joma.
cap. 4. sect. 3. c. 5. sect. 4.
the High Priest did it. From whence i^ appears, there was something peculiar
o^ that day as to the slaying of the sin offerings; and if our Adversaries
opinion hold good, that the Sacrifices on the day of expiation did, if not
alone, yet chiefly represent the sacrifice of Christ, no greater argument can
be brought against themselves than this is, for the office of the High Priest
did not begin at his carrying the blood into the holy of holies, but the
slaying the sacrifice did belong to him too: from whence it will unavoidably
follow, that Christ did not enter upon his Office of High Priest, when he
entered into Heaven, but when the Sacrifice was to be slain which was designed
for the expiation of sins. It is then to no purpose at all, if Crelli^ could
prove that sometimes in ordinary Sacrifices, (which he will not say, the
Sacrifice of Christ was represented by) the Levites might kill the beasts for
sacrifice; for it appears, that in those sacrifices, wherein themselves contend
that Christ's was represented, the office of the High Priest did not begin with
entering into the Sanctuary, but with the mactation of that Sacrifice whose
blood was to be carried in thither. Therefore if we speak of the bare
instruments of mactation in the death of Christ, those were the Jews, and we
make not them Priests in it, for they aimed at no more than taking away his
life (as the Popae among the Romans, and those whose bare office it was to kill
the beasts for Sacrifice among the Jews did:) but if we consider it with a
respect to him that offered up his life to God, then we say, that Christ was
the High Priest in doing it; it being designed for the expiation of sin; and by
virtue of this bloodshed for that end, he enters into Heaven as the Holy of
Holies, there ever living to make intercession for us. But the virtue of the
consequent acts, depends upon the efficacy of the blood shed for expiation;
otherwise the High Priest might have entered with the same effect into the Holy
of Holies with any other blood besides that which was shed on purpose as a
sin-offering, for expiation of the sins of the people; which it was unlawful
for him to do. And from hence it is, that the Apostle to the Hebrews insists
so much on the comparison between the blood of Christ, and the blood of the
legal sacrifices, and the efficacy of the one Heb. 9. 13, 14. 10. 4, 10.
far above the other, in its power of expiation; which he needed not to have
done, if the shedding of his blood, had been only a preparation for his
entrance on his Priesthood in Heaven. So that the proper notion of a Sacrifice
for sin, as it notes the giving the life of one for the expiation of the sins
of another, does properly lie in the mactation, though other sacrificial acts
may be consequent upon it. So it was in the animales hostiae among the Romans,
in which, says Macrobius, Sola anima Deo sacratur: Ma^^^h. (...). l. 3. c. 5.
of which he tells us Virgil properly speaks in those words, Hanc tibi Eryx
meliorem animam pro morte Daretis.
And that we may the better understand what he means by the anima here, he
says elsewhere (as Macrobius and Servius observe out of his excellent skill
and accuracy in the Pontifical rites) Sanguine placastis ventos and virgin
caesa,
Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistis ad oras:
Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum
Argolica.
Which shows, that the expiation was supposed to lie in the blood which they
called the Soul, as the Scripture does. And the Persians as Strabo tells us,
looked upon the bare mactation as the Sacrifice, for they did not porricere as
the Romans called it, they laid none of the parts of the Sacrifice upon the
Altar to be consumed there, (...). Stra^o l. 15.
for God regarded nothing but the Soul in the sacrifice: which words Eustathius
likewise (...). in Hom. Iliad. 1.
uses upon Homer, of the Sacrifices of the Magi. And Strabo affirms of the
ancient Lusitani, that they cut off nothing of the St^^^o l. 3.
Sacrifice: but consumed the entrails whole; but though such sacrifices which
were for divination were not thought expiatory, and therefore different from
the animales hostiae, yet among the Persians, every sacrifice had a respect to
expiation of the whole people. For Herodotus tells us, that every one that
offers Sacrifice among them, (...), Herod. l. 1.
prays for good to all Persians and the King. But thus much may serve to prove
against Crellius, that the mactation in an Expiatory Sacrifice, was not a mere
preparation to a Sacrifice, but that it was a proper sacrificial act, and
consequently that Christ acted as High Priest, when he gave himself for us, an
offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.

But this will further appear from those places wherein Christ is said to offer
up. 9. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven or on
Earth.
himself once to God: the places to this purpose are. Heb. 7. 27. Who needs
not daily as those Highpriests to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins,
and then for the Peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up himself.
Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God. V. 25, 26, 27, 28. Nor yet that he should offer
himself often, as the High Priest enters into the holy place every year with
the blood of others; for then must he often have suffered since the foundation
of the World: but now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed to men once to dye, but
after this the Judgment: so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many,
and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin
unto salvation. Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12. By the which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. And every
High Priest, stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sins: but this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever sat down on the right hand of God. To these
places Crellius gives this answer, That the Crell. c. 10. sect. 54.
name of Oblation as applied to Christ, primarily signifies Christ's first
entrance into Heaven, and appearance before the face of God there, but
consequently the continuance of that appearance; so that when a thing is once
actually exhibited and presented, it is said to be once offered, although being
offered, it always remains in the same place, and so may be said to be a
continual Oblation. But this first appearance, says he, has a peculiar
agreement with the legal Oblation; and therefore the name of Oblation does most
properly belong to that, because Christ by this means obtained that power on
which the perfect remission of our sins depends: but although the continuance
of that appearance, seems only consequentially to have the name of Oblation
belonging to it, yet in its own nature, it has a nearer conjunction with the
effect of the Oblation, viz. the remission of sins, or deliverance from
punishment, and does of it self confer more to it than the other does. And
therefore in regard of that, Christ is said most perfectly to exercise his
Priesthood, and to offer and intercede for us, from the time he is said to sit
down at the right hand of God. Against this answer, I shall prove these two
things, 1. That it is incoherent, and repugnant to it self. 2. That it by no
means agrees to the places before mentioned. 1. That it is incoherent and
repugnant to it self in two things. 1. In making that to be the proper Oblation
in correspondency to the Oblations of the Law, which has no immediate respect
to the expiation of sins. 2. In making that to have the most immediate respect
to the expiation of sins, which can in no tolerable sense be called an
Oblation. For the first, since Crellius says, that the proper notion of
Oblation is to be taken from the Oblations in the Levitical Law, we must
consider what it was there, and whether Christ's first entrance into Heaven can
have any correspondency with it. An Oblation under the Law was in general, any
thing which was immediately dedicated to God, but in a more limited sense it
was proper to what was dedicated to him by way of Sacrifice according to the
appointments of the Levitical Law. We are not now enquiring what was properly
called an Oblation in other Sacrifices, but in those which then were for
expiation of sin; And in the Oblation was, first of the persons for whom the
Sacrifice was offered. So in the Burnt-offering, the person who brought it, was
to offer it at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: i. e. as the
Lev. 1. 3.
Jews expound it at the entrance of the Court of the Priests, and there he was
to lay his hands upon the head of it, and it shall be accepted for him to make
atonement for V. 4.
him. This Offering was made before the Beast was slain; after the killing the
beast, then the Priests were to make an Offering of the blood, by sprinkling it
round about the Altar of Burnt-offerings, the rest of the blood, say the Jews,
was poured out by the Priests, at the South Side of the Altar upon the
foundation, where the two holes were for the passage into the Channel which
conveyed the blood into the valley of Kidron: thus the blood being offered, the
parts of the beast, were by the Priests to be laid upon the Altar, and there
they were all to be consumed by fire; and then it was called an Offering made
by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord. The same rites were used in the
Peace Offerings, and Trespass-offerings, as to the laying on of hands, and the
sprinkling the blood, and consuming some part by fire: and in the
sin offerings, there was to be the same imposition of hands: but concerning the
sprinkling of the blood, and the way of consuming the remainders of the
Sacrifice, there was this considerable difference; that in the common
sinofferings for particular persons, the blood was sprinkled upon the horns of
the Altar of Lev. 4. 25. 30.
burnt-offerings, but in the sin offerings for the High Priest and the
Congregation, or all the People, he was to carry the blood within the
Sanctuary, and to sprinkle of it seven times before the Vail of the Sanctuary;
and some of the blood was to be put upon the horns of the V. 6.
Altar of Incense; but the remainder of the blood, and the same things (which
were offered by fire in Peace Offerings) were to be disposed of accordingly, on
the Altar of Burnt-offerings. And withal, there was this great difference,
that in other sin offerings the Priests were to eat the remainder of the
sacrifice in the Holy place; but in Lev. 6. 26.
these there was nothing to be eaten by them; for the whole Bullock was to be
carried forth without the Camp, and there he was to be burned till all were
consumed. For it was an ex^ress Lev. 4. 11, 12.
Law, That no sin-offering, whereof any (...) the blood is brought into the
tabernacle of ^he Congregation, to reconcile withal in the Levit. 6. 30.
Holy-place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in ^^e fire. All the difference
that was on the great day of Atonement, was this, that the High Priest himself
was to slay the Sin Offerings, and then to carry the blood of them into the
Holy of Holies, and there was to sprinkle Levit. 16. 14, 15.
^he blood with his finger toward the Mercy^^at seven times: after which, and
the sending away the scapegoat, the ceremonies were the same for the Atonement
of the people, which were at other solemn sin offerings, for the Priest or the
people.

From all which being thus laid together,. 10. All things necessary to a legal
oblation concur in the death of Christ.
we shall observe several things, which are very material to our purpose: 1.
That in the oblations which were made for expiation of sins, the difference
between the mactation and the oblation, did arise from the difference between
the Priest and the Sacrifice. For the Priests Office was to atone, but he was
to atone by the Sacrifice; on which account, although the Priest were to offer
the Sacrifice for himself, yet the oblation did not lie in the bare presenting
himself before God, but in the presenting the blood of that Sacrifice, which
was shed in order to expiation. If we could have supposed, that the High Priest
under the Law, instead of offering a Goat for (...) Sin-offering for the
people, on the day o^ Atonement, should have made an oblatio^ of himself to
God, by dying for the expiation of their sins: In this case, his death being
the Sacrifice, and himself the Priest, the mactation, as it relates to his own
act, and his oblation had been one and the same thing. For his death had been
nothing else, but the offering up himself to God, in order to the expiation of
the sins of the people; and there can be no reason, why the oblation must be of
necessity something consequent to his death, since all things necessary to a
perfect oblation do concur in it. For where there is something solemnly devoted
to God, and in order to the expiation of sins, and by the hand of a Priest,
there are all things concurring to a legal oblation; but in this case, all
these things do concur, and therefore there can be no imaginable necessity of
making the oblation of Christ, only consequent to his Ascension, since in his
death all things concur to a proper oblation. In the Law, we grant that the
oblation made by the Priest, was consequent to the death of the beast for
Sacrifice; but the reason of that was, because the beast could not offer up
(...) self to God, and God had made it neces^ry, that the Priest should expiate
sins, ^ot by himself, but by those Sacrifices, and therefore the oblation of
the blood ^as after the Sacrifice was slain; neither ^ould this have been
solved barely by the ^riests slaying of the Sacrifices; for this being (...)
act of violence toward the beasts that ^ere thus killed, could not be a proper
ob^ation, which must suppose a consent ante^edent to it. All which showed the
great imperfection of the Levitical Law, in which so many several things were
to concur, to make up a sacrifice for sin; viz. The first offering made by the
party concerned, of what was under his dominion; viz. The beast to be
sacrificed at the door of the tabernacle of the Congregation: but the beast not
being able to offer up it self, it was necessary for the offering up its blood,
that it must be slain by others; and for the better understanding, not only of
the efficacy of the blood, but the concurrence of the Priest for expiation, he
was to take the blood, and sprinkle some of it on the Altar, and pour out the
rest at the foundation of it. But since we assert a far more noble and
excellent Sacrifice, by the Son of God freely offering up himself, to be made a
Sacrifice for the sins of the world, why may not this b^ as proper an oblation
made unto God, (...) any was under the Law, and far more excellent, both in
regard of the Priest and the Sacrifice: why should his oblation of himself then
be made only consequent to hi^ death and resurrection? Which latter, being by
our Adversaries made not his own act, but Gods upon him, and his entrance into
Heaven, being given him (as they assert) as a reward of his sufferings, in what
tolerable sense can that be called an oblation of himself, which was conferred
upon him as a reward of his former sufferings? From whence it follows, that
upon our Adversaries own grounds, the death of Christ may far more properly be
called the oblation of himself, than his entrance into Heaven; and that there
is no necessity of making the oblation of Christ consequent to his death, there
being so great a difference between the Sacrifice of Christ, and that of the
Sacrifices for sin under the Levitical Law.

2. We observe, That the oblation as performed by the Priest, did not depend
upon his presenting himself before God, but upon the presenting the blood of a
Sacrifice, which had been already slain for the expiation of sins. If the
Priest had gone into the Holy of Holies, and there only ^esented himself
before the Mercy-seat, ^d that had been all required in order (...) the
expiation of sins, there had been ^me pretense for our Adversaries mak^g
Christ's presenting himself in Heaven, (...) be the oblation of himself to God;
but under the Law, the efficacy of the High-^iests entrance into the Holy of
Holies, did ^epend upon the blood which he carried in ^ither, which was the
blood of the Sin^ring, which was already slain for the expiation of sins: And
in correspondency ^o this, Christ's efficacy in his entrance in^ Heaven, as it
respects our expiation, must ^ave a respect to that Sacrifice which was ^ffered
up to God antecedent to it. And (...) wonder our Adversaries do so much insist
on the High Priests entering into the most ^oly place once a year, as though all
the ex^iation had depended upon that; whereas all the promise of expiation, was
not upon his bare entrance into it; but upon the blood which he carried along
with him, and sprinkled there: In correspondency to which, our Savior is not
barely said, to enter into Heaven, and present himself to God, but that he did
this by his own blood, having obtained Eternal Redemption for Heb. 9. 12.
(...).

3. We observe, That there was som^thing correspondent in the death of Christ
to somewhat consequent to the oblatio^ under the Law, and therefore there c^ be
no reason to suppose, that the oblatio^ of Christ must be consequent to his
death for that destroys the correspondency between them. Now this appears in
thi^ particular, in the solemn sacrifices for sin^ after the sprinkling of the
blood, which wa^ carried into the Holy place to reconcile with all, all the
remainder of the Sacrifice wa^ to be burnt without the Camp, and this held on
the day of Atonement, as well as in other Sin Offerings for the Congregation.
Now the Author to the Hebrews tells us, That in correspondency to this, Jesus
that h^ Heb. 13. ^2.
might sanctify the people with his, own blood, suffered without the gate:
What force i^ there in this, unless the blood of Christ did answer to the
Sin Offerings for the people, and his oblation was supposed to be made before;
and therefore that he might have all things agreeable to those Sin Offerings,
the last part was to be completed too; viz. That he was to suffer without the
gate; which after the peoples settlement in Jerusalem, answered to the being
burnt without the Camp in the Wilderness.

4. We observe, That the Oblation in Ex^iatory Sacrifices under the Law, by the
Priest, had always relation to the consumption of what was offered: Thus the
offering of ^he blood, in token of the destruction of the ^ife of the beast,
whose blood was offered; for no blood was to be offered of a living creature,
nor of one killed upon any other account, but for that end to be a sacrifice
for sin, and after the sprinkling and pouring out of the blood, the inwards of
some, and all of the other, were to be consumed by fire. And it is observable,
that the greater the Sacrifice for sin was, always the more was consumed of it;
as appears plainly by the forementioned difference of the Sin Offerings for
private persons, and for the people; of the former, the Priests were allowed to
eat, but not at all of the latter. And so it was observed among the Egyptians,
in the most solemn Sacrifices for expiation, nothing was allowed to be eaten of
that part which was designed for that end. For Herodotus gives us an account
why the Egyptians never eat the head of any living (...). Herodot. l. 2. c. 39.
Creature; which is, That when they offer up a sacrifice, they make a solemn
execration upon it, that if any evil were to fall upon the the persons who
sacrificed, or upon all Egypt* it might be turned upon the head of that beast
And Plutarch adds, that after this sole^ execration, They cut off the head,
and of old, threw it i^to (...). Plutarch. de Fide.
the River, but then g^ it to strangers. From which custom we observe, that in
a solemn Sacrifice for expiation, the guilt of the offenders, was by this rite
of execration supposed to be transferred upon the head of the Sacrifice, as it
was in the Sacrifices among the Jews, by the laying on of hands; and that
nothing was to be eaten of what was supposed to have that guilt transferred
upon it. From hence all Expiatory Sacrifices were at first whole
Burnt-offerings, as appears by the Patriarchal Sacrifices, and the customs of
other Xenoph. Cyropaed. l. 7, 8. Strab. l. 4. Plutarch. Symp. l. 6. probl. 8.
Nations, and among the Jews themselves, as we have already proved in all
solemn offerings for the people. And although in the sacrifices of private
persons, some parts were allowed to be eaten by the Priests; yet those which
were designed for expiation were consumed. So that the greater the offering was
to God, the more it implied the Consumption of the thing which was so offered:
How strangely improbable then is it, That the Oblation of Christ should not (as
under the Law) have respect to his death and sufferings; but to his entrance
into Heaven, wherein nothing is supposed to be consumed, but all things given
him with far greater power, as our Adversaries suppose, than ever he had
before. But we see the Apostle parallels Christ's suffering with the burning of
the sacrifices, and his blood with the blood of them, and consequently his
offering up himself, must relate not to his entrance into Heaven, but to that
act of his whereby he suffered for sins, and offered up his blood as a
Sacrifice for the sins of the world.

From all which it appears; how far. 11. Christ's entrance into Heaven could not
be the Oblation of himself mentioned.
more agreeably to the Oblations under the Law, Christ is said to offer up
himself for the expiation of sins by his death and sufferings, than by his
entrance into Heaven; For it is apparent, that the Oblations in expiatory
Sacrifices under the Law, were such upon which the expiation of sin did chiefly
depend; but by our Adversaries own confession, Christ's oblation of himself by
his entrance into Heaven, has no immediate respect at all to the expiation of
sin: only as the way whereby he was to enjoy that power by which he did expiate
sins, as Crellius says; now, let us consider, what more propriety there is in
making this presenting of Christ in Heaven to have a correspondency with the
legal Oblations, than the offering up himself upon the Cross. For 1. on the
very same reason that his entrance into Heaven is made an Oblation, his death
is so too; viz. Because it was the way whereby he obtained the power of
expiation; and far more properly so than the other, since they make Christ's
entrance and power the reward of his sufferings, but they never make his
sitting at the right hand of God, the reward of his entrance into Heaven. 2.
His offering up himself to God upon the Cross, was his own act, but his
entrance into Heaven was Gods, as themselves acknowledge, and therefore could
not in any propriety of speech be called Christ's offering up himself. 3. If it
were his own act, it could not have that respect to the expiation of sins,
which his death had; for our Adversaries say, that his death was by reason of
our sins, and that he suffered to purge us from sin; but his entrance into
Heaven was upon his own account, to enjoy that power and authority, which he
was to have at the right hand of God. 4. How could Christ's entrance into
Heaven, be the way for his enjoying that power which was necessary for the
expiation of sin, when Christ before his entrance into Heaven, says, that
Matthew. 28. 18.
all power was given to him in Heaven and Earth: and the reason assigned in
Scripture of that power and authority which God gave him is, because he humbled
himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of Phil. 2. 8, 9.
(...) Cross: So that the entrance of Christ in^^ Heaven, could not be the
means of obtaining that power which was conferred before; but the death of
Christ is mentioned on that account in Scripture. 5. If the death of Christ
were no expiatory Sacrifice, the entrance of Christ into Heaven could be no
Oblation proper to a High Priest; for his entrance into the Holy of Holies, was
on the account of the blood of the ^^n-offering which he carried in with him.
^f there were then no Expiatory Sacrifice before, that was slain for the sins
of men; Christ could not be said to make any Obla^ion in Heaven, for the
Oblation had respect to a Sacrifice already slain; so that ^f men deny that
Christ's death was a pro^er Sacrifice for sin, he could make no Oblation at all
in Heaven, and Christ ^ould not be said to enter thither, as ^he High Priest
entered into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the Sacri^^ce; which is the
thing which the Author to the Hebrews, asserts concerning Christ.

2. There is as great an inconsistency i^ making 12. Christ's exercise of power
in Heaven in no sense an Oblation to God.
the exercise of Christ's power i^ Heaven, an Oblation in any sense, as in
making Christ's entrance into Heaven, to (...) the Oblation which had
corresponde^^^ with the Oblations of the Law. For what is there which has the
least resemblance with an Oblation in it? Has it any respect to God, as all
the legal Oblations had? no^ for his intercession and power, Crellius, says,
respects us, and not God. Was there any Sacrifice at all in it for expiation?
how is it possible, that the mere exercise of power should be called a
sacrifice? What analogy is there at all between them? And how could he be then
said most perfectly to exercise his Priesthood, when there was no consideration
at all of any sacrifice offered up to God? so that upon these suppositions the
Author to the Hebrews must argu^ upon strange similitudes, and fancy
resemblances to himself, which it was impossible for the Jews to understand him
in, who were to judge of the nature of Priesthoo^ and Oblations in a way
agreeable to t^^ Institutions among themselves. But was^ possible for them to
understand such Obl^tions and a Priesthood which had no respec^ at all to God,
but wholly to the People; and such an entrance into the Holy of Holies without
the blood of an expiatory Sacrifice ^or the sins of the people? But such
abs^^dities do men betray themselves into, when they are forced to strain
express pla^es of Scripture to serve an hypothesis, which they think themselves
obliged to ^^intain.

We now come to show that this interpretation. 13. Crellius his sense repugnant
to the circumstances of the places.
of Crellius does not agree with the circumstances of the places before
mentioned, which will easily appear by these brief considerations. 1. That the
apostle always speaks of the offering of Christ as a thing past and once done,
so as not Heb. 7. 27. 9. 26. 10. 10.
(...) be done again; which had been very improper, if by the Oblation of
Christ, he had meant the continual appearance of Christ in Heaven for us, which
yet is, and will never cease to be till all his enemies be made his footstool.
2. That he Heb. 9. 12, 13. 10. 4, 5.
^ill speaks in allusion to the Sacrifices which were in use among the Jews,
and therefore the Oblation of Christ must be (...) such a way as was agreeable
to what ^as used in the Levitical Sacrifices, which ^e have already at large
proved he could ^ot do in our Adversaries sense. 3. That ^^e Apostle speaks of
such a sacrifice for sins to which the sitting at the right hand of God was
consequent; so that the Oblation Heb. 10. 12.
antecedent to it must be properly that Sacrifice for sins which he offered to
God; and therefore the exercise of his power for expiation of sins, which they
say is meant by sitting at the right hand of God, cannot be that Sacrifice for
sins: Neither can his entrance into Heaven be it, which in what sense it can be
called a Sacrifice for sins, since themselves acknowledge it had no immediate
relation to the expiation of them, I cannot understand. 4. The Apostle speaks
of such an Offering of Christ once, which if it had been repeated, does imply,
that Christ's sufferings must have been repeated too. For then must he often
have suffered since the foundation of the World: but the Heb. 9. 26.
repeated exercise of Christ's power in Heaven does imply no necessity at all of
Christ's frequent suffering, nor his frequent entrance into Heaven; which might
have been done without suffering, therefore it must be meant of such an
offering up himself as was employed in his death and sufferings. 5. He speaks of
the offering up of that body which God gave him wh^^ he came into the World;
but our Adversaries Heb. 10. 5. 10.
deny, that he carried the same Body into Heaven, and therefore he must speak
not of an offering of Christ in Heaven, but what was performed here on Earth.
But here, our Adversaries have shown us a trial of their skill, when they tell
us with much confidence that the World into which Christ is here said to come,
is Crell. c. 10. sec^. 53.
not to be understood of this World, but of that to come; which is not only
contrary to the general acceptance of the word when taken absolutely as it is
here; but to the whole scope and design of the place. For he speaks of that
World, wherein Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings were ^ed, and the Levitical Law
was observed, although not sufficient for perfect expiation, and so rejected
for that end, and withal he speaks of that World wherein the cheerful
obedience of Christ to the will of his Father was seen, for he says, Lo I come
to do thy will O God, Heb. 10. 7, 9.
which is repeated afterward; but will they say, that this World was not the
place into which Christ came to obey the Will of his Father? and how could it
he so properly said of the future World, Lo I come to do thy will; when they
make the design of his ascension to be the receiving the reward of his doing
and suffering the will of God upon Earth?

But yet they attempt to prove from the same Author to the Hebrews, that
Christ's. 14. Objections answered.
entrance into Heaven, was necessary to his being a perfect High Priest; for he
was to be made higher then the heavens; and if he were on earth, he should not
be a Priest; but Heb. 7. 26. 8. 4. 7. 16.
he was a Priest after the power of an e^^lless life: Neither could he, say
they, be a perfect High Priest, till those words were spoken to him, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee; which as appears by other places, was
after 5. 5.
the Resurrection: But all the sufferings he underwent in the world, were only
to qualify him for this Office in Heaven; therefore it is said, That in all
things it behoved him to be made 2. 17.
like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest,
etc. This is the substance of what is produced by Crellius and his Brethren, to
prove that Christ did not become Crell. c. 10. sect. 53.
a perfect High Priest, till he entered into heaven: But it were worth the
knowing, what they mean by a perfect High Priest; Is it that Christ did then
begin the Office of a High Priest, and that he made no offering at all before?
No, that they dare not assert at last, but that there was no perfect sacrifice
offered for sin, otherwise Socinus contends, That Christ did offer upon Socin.
praelect. c. ^^t.
earth, and that for himself too: So that all kind of offering is not excluded
by themselves, before Christ's entrance into Heaven: But if they mean by perfect
High Priest in Heaven, that his Office of High Priest was not consummated by
what he did on earth, but that a very considerable part of the Priesthood of
Christ was still remaining to be performed in Heaven; it is no more than we do
freely acknowledge, and this is all we say is meant by those places: For the
Apostles design is to prove, the excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above
the Aaronical; which he does, not only from the excellency of the Sacrifice
which he offered, above the blood of Bulls and Goats; but from the excellency
of the Priest, who did excel the Aaronical Priests; both in regard of his
calling from God, which is all the Apostle designs, Heb. 5. 5. not at all
intending to determine the time when he was made, but by whom he was made
High Priest, even by him that had said, Thou art my Son, etc. and in regard of
the excellency of the Sanctuary which he entered into, which was not an earthly,
but a heavenly Sanctuary; and in regard of the perpetuity of his function
there, Not going in once a year, as the Highpriests under the Law did, but
there ever living to make intercession for us: Now this being the Apostles
design, we may easily understand why he says, That he was to be a heavenly
High Priest, and if he, had been on earth, he could not have been a Priest: The
meaning of which is only this, that if Christ's Office had ended in what he did
on earth, he would not have had such an excellency as he was speaking of; for
then he had ceased to be at all such a High Priest, having no Holy of holies to
go into, which should as much transcend the earthly Sanctuary, as his Sacrifice
did the blood of Bulls and Goats: Therefore in correspondency to that
Priesthood, which he did so far excel in all the parts of it, he was not to
end his Priesthood merely with the blood which was shed for a Sacrifice, but he
was to carry it into Heaven, and present it before God, and to be a perpetual
Intercessor in the behalf of his people: And so was in regard of the perpetuity
of his Office, a Priest after the Law of an endless life: But lest the people
should imagine, that so great and excellent a High Priest, being so far exalted
above them, should have no sense or compassion upon the infirmities of his
people, therefore to encourage them to adhere to him, he tells them, That he
was made like to his Brethren; and therefore they need not doubt, but by the
sense which he had of the infirmities of humane nature, he will have pity on
the weaknesses of his people; which is all the Apostle means by those
expressions. So that none of these places do destroy the Priesthood of Christ
on earth, but only assert the excellency, and the continuance of it in heaven:
Which latter, we are as far from denying, as our Adversaries are from granting
the former. And thus much may suffice for the second thing, to prove the death
of Christ a proper sacrifice for sin; viz. The Oblation which Christ made of
himself to God by it.

CHAP. VI.
That the effects of proper Expiatory Sacrifices belong to the death of Christ,
which either respect the sin or the person. Of the true notion of expiation of
sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the importance of (...), as applied to
them. Socinus his proper sense of it examined. Crellius his Objections
answered. The Jews notion of (...). The Sacrifices not bare conditions of
pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part of obedience. Gods expiating sin,
destroys not expiation by Sacrifice. The importance of (...) and (...),
relating to Sacrifices. Expiation attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ, in the
same sense that it was to other Sacrifices: and from thence, and the places of
Scripture which mention it, proved not to be merely declarative. If it had been
so, it had more properly belonged to his Resurrection than his death. The Death
of Christ not taken Metonymically for all the Consequents of it; because of the
peculiar effects of the death of Christ in Scripture, and because Expiation is
attributed to him antecedently to his entrance into Heaven. No distinction in
Scripture of the effects of Christ's entrance into Heaven from his sitting at
the right hand of God. The effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice, respecting the
person, belong to the death of Christ, which are Atonement and Reconciliation.
Of the signification of (...) and (...). The Reconciliation by Christ's death,
does not merely respect us; but God; why the latter less used in the New
Testament. A twofold Reconciliation with God mentioned in Scripture. Crellius
his evasion answered. The Objections from Gods being reconciled in the sending
his Son, and the inconsistency of the Freeness of Grace with the Doctrine of
Satisfaction answered, and the whole concluded.

THE last thing to prove the death of. 1. Of the true notion of Expiation, as
attributed to Sacrifices.
Christ a proper Expiatory Sacrifice, is, That the effects of a proper
Sacrifice for sin are attributed to it. Which do either respect the sins
committed, and are then called Expiation and Remission, or the persons who were
guilty of them, as they stand obnoxious to the displeasure of God, and so the
effect of them is Atonement and Reconciliation. Now these we shall prove do
most properly and immediately refer to the death of Christ, and are attributed
to it, as the procuring cause of them; and not as a bare condition of Christ's
entrance into Heaven, or as comprehending in it the consequents of it. I begin
with the Expiation and Remission of sins; as to which Socinus does acknowledge,
That the great correspondency does lie between Christ's and the Legal
Sacrifices. Socia. de Christo servat. p. 2. l. 13. Crell. c. 10. sect. 26.
We are therefore to enquire: 1. What respect the Expiation of sins had to the
Sacrifices under the Law. 2. In what sense the Expiation of sins is attributed
to the Sacrifice of Christ: For the due explication of the respect which
Expiation of sins had to the Legal Sacrifices, we are to consider in what sense
Expiation is understood, and in what respect it is attributed to them. For this
we are to enquire into the importance of the several phrases it is set forth
by, which are (...) and (...) in the Old Testament, (...) in the New; all which
are acknowledged by our Adversaries to have a peculiar respect to the Expiation
made by a Sacrifice. We shall begin with the former, because Crellius objects
this against Grotius, That he employed his greatest diligence Crell. c. 10.
sect. 38.
in the explication of the Greek and Latin words for Expiation of sin, and was
contented only to say, that the Hebrew words would bear the same signification:
Whereas, says he, he ought to have proved, that the Hebrew words do require
that sense which he takes them in. But by Crellius his leave, Grotius took the
best course was to be taken in words, whose signification is so obscure as
those are in the Hebrew Language. For (...) being so very rarely used in
Scripture in that which Socinus, and Crellius contend to be the proper and
natural signification of it; viz. To hide or cover, and so frequently in the
sense of Expiation, what better way could be taken for determining the sense of
it, as applied to Sacrifices, than by insisting upon those words which are used
in the New Testament, to the very same purpose that (...) is used in the old?
For they cannot pretend that which they say is the most proper sense, can be
applied to this subject; viz. To cover with pitch, or a bituminous matter,
which is called (...) Genesis 6. 14. Therefore it must of necessity be taken in
another sense here. But Socinus contends, That it ought to be taken in a sense
most agreeable to that, which Socia. de Servat. p. 2. c. 11.
is, says he, that the Expiation of sin be nothing else, but the covering of
it, by Gods grace and benignity. Thence, says he, David says, Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is covered. But how can this prove, that the
proper signification of (...) as applied to sin, is covering by Gods Grace,
when neither the word (...) is here used, nor is there any respect at all
mentioned of an Expiation by Sacrifice, which is the thing we are discoursing
of? And is the covering of sin such an easy and intelligible phrase, that this
should be made choice of to explain the difficulty of (...) by? What is it that
they would have us understand by the covering sin? surely not to make it
stronger and more lasting, as the ark was covered, with that bituminous matter
for that end, and yet this would come the nearest to the proper sense of (...).
So that from their own interpretation it appears, that (...) as applied to the
expiation of sin by Sacrifices, cannot be taken so much as in allusion to that
other sense; for their sense of Expiation, is either by the destruction of sin,
or deliverance of the sinner from the punishment of it, but what resemblance is
there between the covering of a thing, in order to its preservation, and the
making it not to be, or at least destroying all the power of it? But supposing
we should grant that it has some allusion to the sense of covering, why must
it necessarily be supposed to be done by the mere Grace of God, as excluding
all antecedent causes which should move to it? would not the propriety of the
sense remain as well, supposing a moving cause, as excluding it? What should
hinder, but that God may be said as well to cover sin upon a Sacrifice as to
forgive it, and this is very frequently used Lev. 4. 26. Ver. 31. 35.
upon a Sacrifice, That the sin shall be forgiven? But yet themselves
acknowledge, that the Sacrifices were conditions required in order to
expiation; if then (...) has an immediate respect to Gods immediate favor and
benignity, how comes it to be used where a condition is necessarily supposed in
order to it? Had it not been more agreeable to this benignity of God to have
pardoned sin without requiring any sacrifice for it, than so strictly insisting
upon the offering up Sacrifice in order to it, and then declaring that the sin
is expiated, and it should be forgiven? from hence we see that there is no
necessity why (...) should be used as applied to sacrifices in a sense most
agreeable to that of covering with pitch, nor that it is not possible it should
have such a sense when applied to sins; and withal that it is very consistent
with an antecedent condition to it, and therefore can by no means destroy
satisfaction.

Yes, says Crellius, it does, for expiation is Crellius his Objections
answered.
explained in the Law by non-imputation, Deuteronomy. 21. 8. Be merciful, O Lord unto
thy. 2. Crell. c. 10. sect. 9.
people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy
people of Isreal's charge; and the blood shall be forgiven them. But not to
impute, says he, and to receive true and full satisfaction overthrow each
other: and so expiation being the same with that, will overthrow it too. To
this I answer, 1. I grant that (...) is here used both as applied to God, and
to the sin, and that the sense of it is used as to the people, when the prayer
is, that God would not lay it to their charge, which is the same with expiating
of it. 2. We are to consider, what the foundation of this Prayer was, viz. the
slaying of the Heifer for expiation of the uncertain murder; and when the
Elders had washed their hands over the head of the Heifer, then they were to
protest their own innocence, and to use this prayer. (...) Expiate thy people
Israel, etc. i. e. accept of this Sacrifice as an expiation for them, and so
charge not on them the innocent blood, etc. and upon doing of this it is said,
(...) and the blood shall be expiated, i. e. as the Vulgar Latin explain it,
the guilt of the blood shall be taken from them. But how then should the
expiating sin upon a Sacrifice slain in order thereto, destroy that
satisfaction which we assert by the blood of Christ being shed in order to the
expiation of our sins? Nay, it much rather shows the consistency and
agreeableness of these one with another. For we have before proved, that the
Sacrifice here did expiate the sin by a substitution, and bearing the guilt
which could not have been expiated without it. But Crellius further urges,
that God himself is here said to expiate, and therefore to expiate cannot
signify to atone or satisfy; in which sense Christ may be said to expiate
too, not by atoning or satisfying, but by not imputing sins, or taking away the
punishment of them by his power. To which we need no other answer than what
Crellius himself elsewhere gives, viz. that Socinus never denies but that (...)
does signify to appease or atone; which is most evidently C^^^ n^ neget (...)
n^s ho^ b^m (...) di sig^ tio^^m (...) b^re. (...). c. 10. (...). 38.
proved from the place mentioned by Grotius, Genesis 32. 20. (...) Expiabo faciem
ejus in munere, says the interlineary Version, placabo illum muneribus, the
Vulg. Lat. (...), the LXX. and all the circumstances of the place make it
appear to be meant in the proper sense of appeasing the anger of a person by
something which may move him to show favor. And if Crellius will yield this to
be the sense of expiation as applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, he need not
quarrel with the word satisfaction. But why should he rather attribute that
sense of expiation to Christ, which is alone given to God, wherein the
expiation is attributed to him that receives the Sacrifice: rather than to him
that offers the sacrifice in order to the atonement of another? since it is
acknowledged that Christ did offer a sacrifice; and therefore there can be no
reason why that sense of expiation should not belong to him, which was most
peculiar to that; which we shall now show to be of the same kind with what is
here mentioned, viz. an appeasing by a gift offered up to God. So we find the
word used to the same sense, 2 Samuel 21. 3. (...), and wherewith shall I make
the Atonement, i. e. wherewith shall I satisfy you for all the wrong which
Saul has done unto you? and we see afterward it was by the death of Saul's
sons. In which place it cannot be denied but that (...) not only signifies to
appease, but such a kind of satisfaction as is by the death of some for the
faults of others; and so comes home, not only to the importance of the
expiation belonging to a Sacrifice in general; but to such a kind of expiation
as is by the suffering of some in the place of others. Which though it be more
clear and distinct, where one man suffers for others, yet this was sufficiently
represented in the sacrifices under the Law, in which we have already proved
that there was a substitution of them in the place of the offenders. 3. The
Jews rotion of (...)


And in this sense the Jews themselves do understand (...) viz. such an
expiation as is made by the substitution of one in the place of another. Of
which many instances Buxtorf. Lexic. Talmud. v. (...)
are collected by Buxtorf, wherein (...) is taken by the Rabbinical Writers for
such an expiation, whereby one was to undergo a punishment in the place of
another. So when in the title Sanhedrin the people say to the High Priest (...)
simus nos expiatio tua, let us be for an expiation for you, the Gloss explains
it thus, hoc est, in nobis fiat expiatio tua, nosque subeamus tuo loco quicquid
tibi evenire debet. And when they tell us how Children ought to honor their
Parents after their death, they say when they recite any memorable speech of
their Fathers, they are not barely to say, My father said so: but my Lord and
Father said so, would I had been the expiation of his death: i. e. as they
explain it themselves, would I had undergone what he did, and they give this
general rule, Where ever it is said, behold I am for expiation, it is to be
understood, behold I am in the place of another to bear his iniquities. So that
this signifies the same with (...) or a price of redemption for others. Hence
(...) is taken for a price of redemption of the life of another, and rendered by
(...), Exodus 21. 30. -- 30. 12. Numb. 35. 31, 32. where we render it
satisfaction, and by (...), Psalm. 48. 7. and thereby we fully understand, what
our Savior meant when he said, that he gave his Soul, (...), a ransom for
many, and to this day the Jews call the Cock which they (...) (...).
kill for Expiation on the day of Atonement, by the name of Cappara; and when
they beat the Cock against their heads thrice, they every time use words to
this purpose, Let this Cock be an exchange for me, let him be in my room, and
be made an Expiation for me; let death come to him, but to me and all Israel
life and happiness. I insist on these things, only to let us understand, that
the Jews never understood (...) in the sense our Adversaries contend for, when
applied to an Expiatory Sacrifice, but as implying a Commutation, and a
Substitution of one in the place of another, so as by the punishment of that,
the other in whose room he suffers, may obtain deliverance. Which is the sense
we plead for. But the utmost which Socinus and Crellius will allow to the
Sacrifices in order to Expiation, is barely Socia. l. 2. c. 11. ^o^^t Soci^s
victi^m ob^ ^tiam (...) ac^ ^quam l^vem continuisse, quam ex promisso Dei
l^vi^^ quorundam er^ ac peccatorum venia consequeretur. Crell. c. 10. sect. 10.
this, That the offering of them is to be considered as a mere condition (that
has no other respect to the expiation of sins, than the paring a man's nails
would have had, if God had required it) upon which slight obedience, the pardon
of some light sins might be obtained. But can any one imagine, that this was
all that was designed by the Sacrifices of old, who considers the antiquity and
universality of them in the world in those elder times before the Law, the
great severity by which they were required under the Law, the punctual
prescriptions that were made in all circumstances for them, the vast and almost
inestimable expense the people were at about them, but above all, the reason
that God himself assigns in the Law, That the blood was given for expiation,
because it was the life, and the correspondency so clearly expressed in the New
Testament, between the Sacrifice of Christ and those Levitical Sacrifices? Can
any one, I say, imagine upon these considerations, that the Sacrifices had no
other respect to the expiation of sin, than as they were a slight testimony of
their obedience to God? Why were not an inward sorrow for sin, and tears and
prayers rather made the only conditions of Expiation, than such a burdensome
and chargeable service imposed upon them, which at last signified nothing, but
that a command being supposed, they would have sinned if they had broken it?
But upon our supposition, a reasonable account is given of all the expiatory
Sacrifices; viz. That God would have them see, how highly he esteemed his Laws,
because an expiation was not to be made for the breach of them, but by the
sacrificing of the life of some Creature which he should appoint in stead of
the death of the Offender; and if the breach of those Laws which he had given
them must require such an expiation, what might they then think would the sins
of the whole world do, which must be expiated by a Sacrifice infinitely greater
than all those put together were; viz. The death and sufferings of the Son of
God for the sins of men? But if the offering Sacrifice had been a bare
condition required of the person who committed the fault, in order to
expiation; Why is it never said, That the person who offered it, did expiate
his own fault thereby? For that had been the most proper sense; for if the
expiation did depend on the offering the Sacrifice, as on the condition of it,
then the performing the condition, gave him an immediate right to the benefit
of the promise. If it be said, That his own act was, not only necessary in
bringing the Sacrifice, but the Priests also in offering up the blood: This
will not make it at all the more reasonable; because the pardon of sin should
not only depend upon a^ (...) man's own act, but upon the act of another, which
he could not in reason be accountable for, if he miscarried in it. If the
Priest should refuse to do his part, or be unfit to do it, or break some Law in
the doing of it, how hard would it seem, that a man's sins could not be
expiated, when he had done all that lay in his own power in order to the
expiation of them, but that another person, whose actions he had no command
over, neglected the doing his duty? So that if the Sacrifice had no other
influence on expiation, but as a part of obedience, in all reason the expiation
should have depended on no other conditions but such as were under the power of
him, whose sins were to be expiated by (...).

But Crellius urges against our sense of. 4. Gods expiating sin, destroys not
expiation by sacrifices. Crell. ib. sect. 39.
Expiation, That if it were by Substitution, ^hen the Expiation would be most
properly attri^^ted to the Sacrifices themselves; whereas it is ^ly said, that
by the Sacrifices the Expiation is ^btained, but that God or the Priest do
expiate; ^d to God it belongs properly, because he takes ^ay the guilt and
punishment of sin; which is, ^aith he, all meant by expiation; to the Priest
^ly consequently, as doing what God requires (...) order to it; and to the
Sacrifices only as the ^^nditions by which it was obtained. But if the
Expiation does properly belong to God, and implies no more than bare pardon, it
is hard to conceive that it should have any necessary relation to the blood of
the Sacrifice: but the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that Remission had a
necessary respect to the shedding of blood, so that without that Heb. 9. 22.
there was no remission. How improperly does the Apostle discourse throughout
that Chapter, wherein he speaks so much concerning the blood of the Sacrifices
purifying, and in correspondency to that, the blood of Christ Ver. 13, 14.
purging our Consciences; and that all things under the Law, were purified with
blood; Had Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 23.
all this no other signification, but that this was a bare condition that had
no other importance, but as a mere act of obedience when God had required it?
why does not the Apostle rather say, without Gods favor there is no remission,
than without the sheding of blood; if all the expiation did properly belong to
that, and only very remotely to the blood of the Sacrifice? What imaginable
necessity was there, that Christ must shed his blood in order to the expiation
of our sins, if all that blood of the Legal Sacrifices did signify no more
than a bare condition of pardon, though a slight part of obedience in it self?
Why must Christ lay down his life in correspondency to these Levitical
Sacrifices? for that was surely no slight part of his obedience. Why might not
this condition have been dispensed with in him, since our Adversaries say, that
in it self it has no proper efficacy on the expiation of sin? And does not
this speak the greatest repugnancy to the kindness and Grace of God in the
Gospel, that he would not dispense with the ignominious death of his Son,
although he knew it could have no influence of it self on the expiation of the
sins of the world? But upon this supposition, that the blood of Sacrifices
under the Law had no proper influence upon Expiation, the Apostles discourse
proceeds upon weak and insufficient grounds. For what necessity in the thing
was there, because the blood of the Sacrifices was made a condition of pardon
under the Law, therefore the blood of Christ must be so now; although in it
self it has no proper efficacy for that end? But the Apostles words and way of
Argumentation does imply, that there was a peculiar efficacy both in the one
and the other, in order to Expiation; although a far greater in the blood of
Christ, than could be in the other; as the thing typified, ought to exceed that
which was the representation of it. From hence we see, that the Apostle
attributes what Expiation there was under the Law, not immediately to God, as
belonging properly to him, but to the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes
of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean. Which he had very great reason to do,
since God expressly says to the Jews, that the blood was given them (...) ad
expiandum, to expiate for their souls, for the blood (...) shall expiate the
soul. Than which words, nothing Jev. 17. 11.
could have been more plainly said to overthrow Crellius his assertion, that
Expiation is not properly or chiefly attributed to the Sacrifices, but
primarily to God, and consequentially to the Priest: who is never said to
expiate, but by the Sacrifice which he offered, so that his Office was barely
Ministerial in it. But from this we may easily understand, in what sense God is
said to expiate sins, where it has respect to a Sacrifice (which is that we
are now discoursing of, and not in any larger or more improper use of the word)
for since God himself has declared, that the blood was given for Expiation,
the Expiation which belongs to God, must imply his acceptance of it for that
end, for which it was offered. For the execution or discharge of the punishment
belonging to him, he may be said in that sense to expiate, because it is only
in his power to discharge the sinner from that obligation to punishment he lies
under by his sins. And we do not say, that where expiating is attributed to him
that accepts the Atonement, that it does imply his undergoing any punishment
which is impossible to suppose; but that where it is attributed to a Sacrifice,
as the means of Atonement, there we say it does not imply a bare condition, but
such a Substitution of one in the place of another, that on the account of
that, the fault of the offender himself is expiated thereby.

And to this sense the other word (...) does very well agree; for Socinus and
Crellius. 5. The importance of (...), and (...), relating to sacrifices.
cannot deny, but that Genesis 31. 39. it properly signifies Luere, or to bear
punishment; although they say, it no where else signifies so, and the reason
is, because it is applied to the Altar, and such other things, which are not
capable of it; but does it hence follow, that it should not retain that
signification where the matter will bear it, as in the case of Sacrifices. And
although it be frequently rendered by (...), yet that will be no prejudice to
the sense we plead for in respect of Sacrifices, because those words when used
concerning them, do signify Expiation too. Grotius proves, that they do from
their own nature and constant use in Greek Authors, not only signify an
antecedency of order, but a peculiar efficacy in order to Expiation. Thence
expiatory Sacrifices among the Greeks were called (...), and (...), frequently
in Homer, applied to Sacrifices, (...) in Plutarch, and (...) used in the same
sense; an Expiatory Sacrifice in Herodotus is called (...), and to the same
purpose it is used in Hermogenes, Plato and Plutarch: as among the Latins,
placare, purgare, purificare, conciliare, lustrare in the same sense, and piare
when used in Sacrifices, he proves to signify Luere per successionem rei
alterius in locum poenae debitae. Thence piaculum used for an Expiatory
Sacrifice: and expiare is to appease by such a Sacrifice, so Cereris numen
expiare is used in Cicero; filium expiare in Livy. So that all these Sacrifices
among them, were supposed still to pertain to the atoning the Deity, and
obtaining a remission of sins committed by them. And from hence (because where
there was a greater equality and neerness, there might be the greater efficacy
of the Sacrifice for expiation) came the custom of sacrificing men, which
Grotius at large shows to have almost universally obtained before the coming of
Christ. We are now to consider what Crellius answers to this; the substance of
which lies in these two things, 1. He denies not but that (...) and (...) do in
their proper use in the Greek Crell. c. 10. sect. 23, and 24.
Tongue signify the purging of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God and
punishment, but that those and such other words are attributed to Sacrifices,
because those were supposed to be the effects of them among the Heathens; but
the attributing such effects to them, did arise from their superstition,
whereby greater things were attributed to Sacrifices, than God would have given
to them, either before or under the Law. 2. He denies not, but that those
words, (...) and (...), being used by the Author to the Hebrews more than once
Itaque quod ad votes Graecas (...) attinet, quibus in hoc argumento non semel
utitur D. scriptor ad Heb. eae ad Christi Sacrificium and Sacerdotii functionem
relatae to etiam sensu usurpantur, quem Graeca lingua receperat, h. e. de
expurgatione rea^^s and aversione irae numinis aut poenae. Crell. c. 10. p. 499.
with respect to the Sacrifices and Priesthood of Christ, were taken in the
same sense in which they are used in the Greek Tongue; viz. For the purging of
guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment consequent upon
it: But all that he contends for is, That there is a difference in the manner
of effecting it, which he acknowledges the words themselves do not imply; and
the reasons he gives for it are, That the other were proper, but Christ's an
improper Sacrifice; and that the other Sacrifices were offered by men to God,
but the Sacrifice of Christ was given by God to men, and therefore he must be
supposed to be reconciled before. From whence he would at least have other
senses of these words joined together with the former; viz. Either for purging
away the filth of sin, or for a delaration of a deliverance from guilt and
punishment, in imitation of the Idiome of the Hebrew, in which many words are
used in the New Testament. From hence it follows, that Crellius does yield the
main cause, if it appear, that Christ did offer up an Expiatory Sacrifice to
God in his death, for then he grants that (...) and (...) being applied to the
Sacrifice of Christ, are to be taken for the purging away of guilt, and the
aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment of sin. And it is to no
purpose to say, that it is not a proper Sacrifice, for if the effects of a
proper Sacrifice do belong to it, that proves that it is so; for these words
being acknowledged to be applied to the Sacrifice of Christ by the Author to
the Hebrews, what could more evince that Christ's was a proper Sacrifice, then
that those things are attributed to it, which by the consent of all Nations,
are said to belong to proper Sacrifices, and that in the very same sense in
which they are used by those who understood them in the most proper sense. And
what reason could Crellius have to say, that it was only the superstition of
the Heathens, which made them attribute such effects to sacrifices; when
himself acknowledges that the very same sense does belong to the Sacrifice of
Christ under that notion? and as to the Jews we have already proved that the
sense of expiation among them was by virtue of the Law to be taken in as proper
a sense as among the Heathens, for the purging of guilt, and the aversion of
the wrath of God. And why should Crellius deny that effect of the Sacrifice of
Christ as to the atonement of God, because Gods love was seen in giving him who
was to offer the sacrifice? since that effect is attributed to those sacrifices
under the Law which God himself appointed to be offered, and showed his great
kindness to the people in the Institution of such a way, whereby their sins
might be expiated, and they delivered from the punishment of them. But of the
consistency of these two, I shall speak more afterward, in the effect of the
Sacrifices as relating to Persons.

We now come to consider in what sense. 6. Expiation attributed to the
Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that it was to other Sacrifices.
the expiation of sins is in Scripture attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ,
and therein I shall prove these two things. 1. That the expiation is attributed
to the Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that is attributed to other
Sacrifices, and as the words in themselves do signify. 2. That what is so
attributed does belong to the Sacrifice of Christ in his death, antecedent to
his entrance into Heaven. 1. That the expiation is to be taken in a proper
sense, when it is attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ. Crellius tells us, the
controversy Crell. c. 10. sect. 24.
is not about the thing, viz. whether expiation in the sense we take it in for
purging away guilt, and aversion of the wrath of God, does belong to the
Sacrifice of Christ, for he acknowledges it does; but all the question is about
the manner of it: which in the next Section he thus explains: There are three
senses in which Christ may be said to expiate sins; either by begetting Faith
in us, whereby we are drawn off from the practice of sin, in which sense, he
says, it is a remoter antecedent to it; or as it relates to the expiation by
actual deliverance from punishment, so he says, it is an immediate antecedent
to it; or as he declares that they are expiated, but this, he says, does not
so properly relate to Christ as a Sacrifice, but as a Priest. But never a one
of these senses comes near to that which Crellius grants to be the proper
importance of (...) and (...), as applied to a Sacrifice, viz. the purging away
guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and punishment, not any way, but
by the means of the Sacrifice offered. For in the Legal Sacrifices nothing can
be more plain than that the expiation was to be by the Sacrifice offered for
Atonement: supposing then that in some other way (which could be by no means
proper to those Sacrifices) Christ may be said to expiate sins, what does this
prove that there was an expiation belonging to his Sacrifice agreeable to the
Sacrifices of old? But as I urged before in the case of Christ's being
High Priest, that by their assertions the Jews might utterly deny the force of
any argument used by the author to the Hebrews to prove it: so I say as to the
expiation by Christ's Sacrifice, that it has no analogy or correspondency at
all with any Sacrifice that was ever offered for the expiation of sins. For by
that they always understood something which was immediately offered to God for
that end, upon which they obtained remission of sins; but here is nothing
answerable to it in their sense of Christ's Sacrifice; for here is no Oblation
at all made unto God for this end; all the efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ,
in order to expiation does wholly and immediately respect us; so that if it be
a proper Sacrifice to any, it must be a sacrifice to us, and not to God: for a
Sacrifice is always said to be made to him whom it does immediately respect;
but Christ in the planting Faith, in actual deliverance, in declaring to us
this deliverance, does wholly respect us, and therefore his Sacrifice must be
made to men, and not to God. Which is in it self a gross absurdity, and
repugnant to the nature and design of Sacrifices from the first institution of
them; which were always esteemed such immediate parts of divine Worship, that
they ought to respect none else but God, as the object to which they were
directed, though for the benefit and advantage of Mankind. As well then might
Christ be said to pray for us, and by that no more be meant but that he does
teach us to understand our duty; as be made an expiatory Sacrifice for us, and
all the effect of it only respect us and not God. And this is so far from
adding to the perfection of Christ's Sacrifice above the Legal (which is the
thing pleaded by Crellius) that it destroys the Crell. c. 10. sect. 26.
very nature of a sacrifice, if such a way of expiation be attributed to it
(which though conceived to be more excellent in it self) yet is wholly
incongruous to the end and design of a sacrifice for expiation. And the
excellency of the manner of expiation ought to be in the same kind, and not
quite of another nature; for, will any one say, that a General of an Army has
a more excellent conduct than all that went before him, because he can make
finer speeches; or that the Assomanaean Family discharged the Office of
Priesthood best, because they had a greater power over the people; or that Nero
was the most excellent Emperor of Rome because he excelled the rest in Music
and Poetr^ by which we see that to assert an excellency of one above another,
we must not go to another kind, but show its excellency in that wherein the
comparison lies: So that this does not prove the excellency of the Sacrifice of
Christ, because he has a greater power to persuade, deliver and govern, than
any Sacrifice under the Law; for these are things quite of another nature from
the consideration of a sacrifice: But therein the excellency of a sacrifice is
to be demonstrated, that it excells all other in the proper end and design of a
Sacrifice, i. e. if it be more effectual toward God for obtaining the
expiation of sin; which was always thought to be the proper end of all
Sacrifices for expiation. Although then Christ may be allowed to excel all
other sacrifices in all imaginable respects but that which is the proper
intention of a Sacrifice; it may prove far greater excellency in Christ, but it
does withal prove a greater imperfection in his Sacrifice, if it fail in that
which is the proper end of it. So that if we should grant that the expiation
attributed to Christ's Sacrifice signified no more than reclaiming men from
their sins, or their deliverance by his power, or a declara^^^n of Gods decree
to pardon, this may prove that there are better arguments to believe the
remission of sins now under the Gospel; but they do not in the least prove that
Christ is to be considered as a Sacrifice; much less that he does far excel in
the notion of an Expiatory Sacrifice all those which were offered up to God for
that end under the Law.

But we must now further consider, whether this be all attributed to Christ in
order. 7. Expiation by Christ not merely declarative.
to expiation in Scripture; i. e. Whether those words which of themselves do
imply the aversion of the wrath of God, when used concerning other Sacrifices,
when applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, do only imply the begetting faith in
us, or a declaration of pardon. The words which are used to this purpose, are
(...), which are all applied to the blood of Christ, and the dispute is,
whether they signify no more but a declaration of pardon, or a means to beget
faith in us. The first words (...) and (...) Crellius acknowledges do
frequently signify deliverance from guilt and punishment; but, he says, they
may Crell. c. 10. sect. 28. p. 506.
likewise signify a declaration of that deliverance, as decreed by God, or a
purging from the sins themselves, or from the custom of sinning. So that by
Crellius his own confession, the sense we contend for is most proper and usual,
the other are more remote, and only possible; why then should we forsake the
former sense, which does most perfectly agree to the nature of a Sacrifice,
which the other senses have no such relation to, as that has? For these being
the words made use of in the New Testament, to imply the force and efficacy of
a Sacrifice, why should they not be understood in the same sense which the
Hebrew words were taken in, when they are applied to the Sacrifices under the
Law? We are not enquiring into all possible senses of words, but into the most
natural and agreeable to the scope of them that use them: and that we shall
make it appear to be the same, we plead for in the places in dispute between
us; as, 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, (...), purges us from
all sin, Heb. 9. 13, 14. If the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of
an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, (...), sanctifies to the purifying of the
flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from dead
works, (...), Heb. 1. 3. (...), when he had by himself purged our sins. So,
(...) and (...) are used with a respect to the blood of Christ, Heb. 10. 22.
Apocalip. 1. 5. And because remission of sin was looked on as the consequent of
expiation by Sacrifice under the Law; therefore that is likewise attributed to
the blood of Christ, Matthew. 26. 28. This is the blood of the New Testament
which was shed for many, (...), for the remission of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom
we have redemption through his blood, the remission of sins, and to the same
purpose, Coloss. 1. 14. And from hence we are said to be justified by his
blood, Romans 5. 9. and Christ is said to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, Romans 3. 25. The substance of all that Crellius replies to these places
is, That those words which do Crell. c. 10. sect. 28.
properly signify the thing it self, may very conveniently be taken only for
the declaration of it, when the performance of the thing does follow by virtue
of that declaration: which then happens, when the declaration is made of the
thing decreed by another, and that in the name and by the command of him who
did decree it. And in this sense, Christ by his blood may be said to deliver us
from the punishment of our sins, by declaring or testifying to us the will and
decree of God for that purpose. But this answer is by no means sufficient, upon
these considerations; 1. Because it does not reach the proper and natural sense
of the words, as Crellius himself confesses; and yet he assigns no reason at
all, why we ought to depart from it, unless the bare possibility of another
meaning be sufficient. But how had it been possible for the efficacy of the
blood of Christ for purging away the guilt of our sins, to have been expressed
in clearer and plainer terms than these, which are acknowledged of themselves
to signify as much as we assert? If the most proper expressions for this
purpose, are not of force enough to persuade our Adversaries, none else could
ever do it; so that it had been impossible for our Doctrine to have been
delivered in such terms, but they would have found out ways to evade the
meaning of them. It seems very strange, that so great an efficacy should not
only once or twice, but so frequently be attributed to the blood of Christ for
expiation of sin, if nothing else were meant by it, but that Christ by his
death did only declare that God was willing to pardon sin? If there were danger
in understanding the words in their proper sense, why are they so frequently
used to this purpose? why are there no other places of Scripture that might
help to undeceive us, and tell us plainly, that Christ dyed only to declare his
Fathers will? but what ever other words might signify, this was the only true
meaning of them. But what miserable shifts are these, when men are forced to
put off such Texts which are confessed to express our Doctrine, only by saying
that they may be otherwise understood? which destroys all kind of certainty in
words; which by reason of the various use of them, may be interpreted to so
many several senses, that if this liberty be allowed, upon no other pretense,
but that another meaning is possible, men will never agree about the intention
of any person in speaking. For upon the same reason, if it had been said, That
Christ declared by his death Gods readiness to pardon, it might have been
interpreted, That the blood of Christ was therefore the declaration of Gods
readiness to pardon, because it was the consideration upon which God would do
it: So that if the words had been as express for them, as they are now against
them, according to their way of answering places, they would have been
reconcilable to our opinion. 2. The Scripture in these expressions, does
attribute something peculiar to the blood of Christ; but if all that were meant
by it were no more, than the declaring Gods will to pardon, this could in no
sense be said to be peculiar to it. For this was the design of the Doctrine of
Christ, and all his miracles were wrought to confirm the truth of that part of
his Doctrine, which concerned remission of sins as well as any other: but how
absurd would it have been to say, that the miracles of Christ purge us from all
sin, that through Christ healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. we have
redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, which are attributed to the blood of
Christ? but if in no other respect, than as a testimony to the truth of the
Doctrine of Remission of sins, they were equally applicable to one as to the
other. Besides, if this had been all intended in these expressions, they were
the most incongruously applied to the blood of Christ; nothing seeming more
repugnant to the Doctrine of the Remission of sins, which was declared by it,
than that very thing by which it was declared, if no more were intended by it:
For how unsuitable a way was it to declare the pardon of the guilty persons, by
such severities used toward the most Innocent! Who could believe, that God
should declare his willingness to pardon others, by the death of his own Son;
unless that death of his be considered as the Meritorious cause for procuring
it? And in that sense we acknowledge, That the death of Christ was a
declaration of Gods will and decree to pardon, but not merely as it gave
testimony to the truth of his Doctrine (for in that sense the blood of the
Apostles and Martyrs might be said to purge us from sin, as well as the blood
of Christ) but because it was the consideration upon which God had decreed to
pardon. And so as the acceptance of the condition required, or the price paid,
may be said to declare or manifest, the intention of a person to release or
deliver a Captive: So Gods acceptance of what Christ did suffer for our sakes,
may be said to declare his readiness to pardon us upon his account. But then
this declaration does not belong properly to the act of Christ in suffering;
but to the act of God in accepting: and it can be no other ways known, than
Gods acceptance is known; which was not by the Sufferings, but by the
Resurrection of Christ. And therefore the declaring Gods will and decree to
pardon, does properly belong to that: and if that had been all which the
Scripture had meant, by purging of sin by the blood of Christ, it had been very
incongruously applied to that, but most properly to his Resurrection. But these
phrases being never attributed to that which most properly might be said to
declare the will of God; and being peculiarly attributed to the death of
Christ, which cannot be said properly to do it; nothing can be more plain, than
that these expressions ought to be taken in that which is confessed to be their
proper sense; viz. That Expiation of sin, which does belong to the death of
Christ, as a Sacrifice for the sins of the world.

But yet Socinus and Crellius have another. 8. The death of Christ not taken
Metonymically for all the consequents of it.
subterfuge. (For therein lies their great art, in seeking rather by any means
to escape their enemies, than to overcome them.) For being sensible, that the
main scope and design of the Scripture is against them, they seldom, and but
very weakly assault: but show all their subtilty in avoiding by all imaginable
arts, the force of what is brought against them. And the Scripture being so
plain in attributing such great effects to the death of Christ, when no other
answer will serve turn, then they tell us, That the death of Christ is taken
Metonymically Crell. c. 1. sect. 103. Sect. 119. c. 10. Sect. 45. p. 527.
for all the consequents of his death; viz. His Resurrection, Exaltation, and
the Power and Authority which he has at the right hand of his Father. But how
is it possible to convince those, who by death, can understand life; by
sufferings, can mean glory; and by the shedding of blood, sitting at the right
hand of God? And that the Scripture is very far from giving any countenance to
these bold Interpretations, will appear by these considerations; 1. because the
effect of Expiation of our sins, is attributed to the death of Christ, as
distinct from his Resurrection; viz. Our reconciliation with God, Romans 5. 10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son;
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. To which Crellius
Crell. c. 1. sect. 112.
answers, That the Apostle does not speak of the death of Christ alone, or as
it is considered distinct from the consequences of it; but only that our
Reconciliation was effected^ by the death of Christ intervening. But nothing
can be more evident to any one, who considers the design of the Apostles
discourse, than that he speaks of what was peculiar to the death of Christ: for
therefore it is said, that Christ dyed for the ungodly. Romans 5. v. 6.
For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye: but God commends his love
toward 7.
us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ 8.
dyed for us. Much more then being now 9.
justified by his blood, we shall be saved through him; upon which those words
follow, For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled 10.
to God by the death of his Son, etc. The Reconciliation here mentioned, is
attributed to the death of Christ in the same sense, that it is mentioned
before; but there it is not mentioned as a. bare condition intervening in order
to some thing farther; but as the great instance of the love both of God and
Christ; of God, in sending his Son; of Christ, in laying down his life for
sinners, in order to their being justified by his blood. But where is it that
St. Paul says, that the death of Christ had no other influence on the
expiation of our sins, but as a bare condition intervening in order to that
power and authority whereby he should expiate sins? what makes him attribute so
much to the death of Christ, if all the benefits we enjoy depend upon the
consequences of it; and no otherwise upon that, than merely as a preparation
for it? what peculiar emphasis were there in Christ's dying for sinners, and for
the ungodly; unless his death had a particular relation to the expiation of
their sins? Why are men said to be justified by his blood, and not much rather
by his glorious resurrection, if the blood of Christ be only considered as an
antecedent to the other? And that would have been the great demonstration of
the love of God which had the most immediate influence upon our advantage:
which could not have been the death in this sense, but the life and glory of
Christ. But nothing can be more absurd than what Crellius would have to be the
meaning of this place, viz. that the Apostle does not speak of the proper force
of the death of Christ distinct from his life; but that two things are opposed
to each other for the effecting of one of which the death of Christ did
intervene, but it should not intervene for the other; viz. it did intervene for
our reconciliation, but it should not for our life. For did not the death of
Christ equally intervene for our life as for our reconciliation? was not our
eternal deliverance the great thing designed by Christ, and our reconciliation
in order to that end? what opposition then can be imagined, that it should be
necessary for the death of Christ to intervene in order to the one than in
order to the other? But he means, that the death of Christ should not intervene
any more; what need that, when it is acknowledged by themselves, that Christ
dyed only for this end before, that he might have power to bestow eternal life
on them that obey him? But the main force of the Apostles argument lies in the
comparison between the death of Christ having respect to us as enemies in order
to reconciliation, and the life of Christ to us considered as reconciled; so
that if he had so much kindness for enemies, to dye for their reconciliation,
we may much more presume that he now living in Heaven will accomplish the end
of that reconciliation, in the eternal salvation of them that obey him. By
which it is apparent that he speaks of the death of Christ in a notion proper
to it self, having influence upon our reconciliation; and does not consider it
metonymically as comprehending in it, the consequents of it.

2. Because the expiation of sins is attributed to Christ antecedently to the
great 9. Expiation attributed to Christ antecedently to his entrance into
heaven.
consequents of his death, viz. his sitting at the right hand of God. Heb. 1.
3. When he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of his
Majesty on high. Heb. 9. 12. But by his own blood he entered in once into the
Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. To these places Crellius
gives a double answer. 1. That indefinite particles ((...) and (...)) being
joined with Verbs of the praeterperfect Crell. c. 10. sect. 50.
tense do not always require that the action expressed by them, should precede
that which is designed in the Verbs to which they are joined; but they have
sometimes the force of particles of the present or imperfect tense; which
sometimes happens in particles of the praeter-perfect tense, as Matthew. 10. 5.
(...), so (...); and several other instances produced by him: according to
which manner of interpretation the sense he puts upon those words, Heb. 9. 12.
is, Christ by the shedding of his blood entered into the Holy of Holies, and in
so doing he found eternal redemption, or the expiation of sins. But not to
dispute with Crellius concerning the importance of the Aorist being joined with
a Verb of the praeterperfect tense, which in all reason and common acceptance
does imply the action past by him who writes the words antecedent to his
writing of it, as is plain in the instances produced by Crellius; but according
to his sense of Christ's expiation of sin, it was yet to come after Christ's
entrance into Heaven, and so it should have been more properly (...), than
(...); not I say to insist upon that, the Apostle manifests, that he had a
respect to the death of Christ in the obtaining this eternal redemption, by his
following discourse: for v. 14. he compares the blood of Christ in point of
efficacy for expiation of sin, with the blood of the Legal Sacrifices: whereas
if the expiation meant by him had been found by Christ's Oblation of himself in
Heaven, he would have compared Christ's entrance into Heaven in order to it,
with the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy of Holies, and his argument
had run thus. For if the High Priest under the Law did expiate sins by entering
into the Holy of Holies; How much more shall the Son of God entering into Heaven
expiate the sins of Mankind: but we see the Apostle had no sooner mentioned the
redemption obtained for us; but he presently speaks of the efficacy of the
blood of Christ in order to it, and as plainly asserts the same, v. 15. And for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament that by means of death, for
the redemption of the transgressions which were under the first Testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Why does the
Apostle here speak of the (...), the expiation of sins by the means of death;
if he had so lately asserted before that the redemption or expiation was found
not by his death, but by his entrance into Heaven? and withal the Apostle here
does not speak of such a kind of expiation as wholly respects the future, but
of sins that were under the first Testament, not barely such as could not be
expiated by virtue of it, but such as were committed during the time of it,
although the Levitical Law allowed no expiation for them. And to confirm this
sense, the Apostle does not go on to prove the necessity of Christ's entrance
into Heaven; but of his dying, v. 16, 17, 18. But granting that he does allude
to the Highpriests entering into the Holy of holies, yet that was but the
representation of a Sacrifice already offered, and he could not be said to find
expiation by his entrance; but that was already found by the blood of the
Sacrifice, and his entrance was only to accomplish the end for which the blood
was offered up in sacrifice. And the benefit which came to men is attributed to
the Sacrifice, and not to the sprinkling of the blood before the Mercy-seat:
and whatever effect was consequent upon his entrance into the Sanctuary, was by
virtue of the blood which he carried in with him, and was before shed at the
Altar. Neither can it with any reason be said, that if the redemption were
obtained by the blood of Christ, there could be no need of his entrance into
Heaven; since we do not make the Priesthood of Christ to expire at his death;
but that he is in Heaven a merciful High Priest in negotiating the affairs of
his People with God, and there ever lives to make intercession for them.

Crellius answers, That granting the Aorist being put before the Verb (...)
should imply. 10. No distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's
entrance into Heaven from his sitting at the right hand of God.
such an action which was antecedent to Christ's sitting at the right hand of
God, yet it is not there said, that the expiation of sins was made before
Christ's entrance into Heaven; for those, says he, are to be considered as two
different things; for a Prince first enters into his Palace, before he sits
upon his throne. And therefore, says he, Christ may be said to have made
expiation of sins before he sat down at the right hand of his Father, not that
it was done by his death, but by his entrance into Heaven, and offering Crell.
c. 10. sect. 50. p. 537.
himself to God there, by which means he obtained his sitting on the right hand
of the Majesty on high, and thereby the full power of remission of sins, and
giving eternal life. To which I answer, 1. That the Scripture never makes such
a distinction between Christ's entrance into Heaven, and sitting at the right
hand of God; which latter implying no more but the glorious state of Christ in
Heaven, his entrance into Heaven does imply it: For therefore God exalted him
to be a Prince and a Savior; and the reason of the power and authority given
him in Heaven is no where attributed to his entrance into it as the means of
it; but our Savior before that tells us that all power and authority was
committed to Matthew. 28. 18.
him; and his very entrance into Heaven was a part of his glory; and given him
in consideration of his sufferings; as the Apostle plainly asserts; and he
became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8, 9.
wherefore God has highly exalted him, etc. There can be then no imaginable
reason to make the entrance of Christ into Heaven, and presenting himself to
God there, a condition or means of obtaining that power and authority which is
employed in his sitting at the right hand of God. 2. Supposing, we should look
on these as distinct, there is as little reason to attribute the expiation of
sin to his entrance, considered as distinct from the other: For the expiation
of sins in Heaven being by Crellius himself confessed to be by the exercise of
Christ's power, and this being only the means to that power, how could Christ
expiate sins by that power which he had not? But of this I have spoken before,
and showed that in no sense allowed by themselves the expiation of sins can be
attributed to the entrance of Christ into Heaven as distinct from his sitting
at the right hand of God. Thus much may suffice to prove, that those effects of
an Expiatory Sacrifice, which do respect the sins committed, do properly agree
to the death of Christ.

I now come to that which respects the person, considered as obnoxious to the.
11. Of the Atonement made by Christ's death.
wrath of God by reason of his sins; and so the effect of an Expiatory
Sacrifice is Atonement and Reconciliation. By the wrath of God, I mean, the
reason which God has from the holiness and justice of his nature, to punish
sin in those who commit it: by the means of Atonement and Reconciliation, I
mean, that in consideration of which, God is willing to release the sinner from
the obligation to punishment he lies under by the Law of God, and to receive
him into favor, upon the terms which are declared by the Doctrine of Christ.
And that the death of Christ was such a means of Atonement and Reconciliation
for us, I shall prove by those places of Scripture which speak of it. But
Crellius would seem to acknowledge, That if Grotius seem to contend for no
more, than Crell. c. 7. sect. 3.
that Christ did avert that wrath of God which men had deserved by their sins,
they would willingly yield him all that he pleads for: but then he adds, That
this deliverance from the wrath to come, is not by the death, but by the power
of Christ. So that the question is, Whether the death of Christ were the means
of Atonement and Reconciliation between God and us? and yet Crellius would seem
willing to yield too, that the death of Christ may be said to avert the wrath
of God from us, as it was a condition in order to it; for in that sense it had
no more influence upon it than his birth had: but we have already seen, that
the Scripture attributes much more to the death and blood of Christ, in order
to the expiation of sin. We do not deny, that the death of Christ may be called
a condition, as the performance of any thing in order to an end, may be called
the condition upon which that thing is to be obtained; but we say, that it is
not a bare condition, but such a one as implies a consideration, upon which the
thing is obtained, being such as answers the end of him that grants it: by
which means it does propitiate or atone him, who had before just reason to
punish, but is now willing to forgive and be reconciled to them, who have so
highly offended him. And in this sense we assert, that Christ is said to be
(...), a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 2. -- 4. 10. which we take in the
same sense that (...) is saken for the Sin-offering for Atonement. Ezekiel. 44.
27. (...), they shall offer a sin-offering; for so (...) there signifies: and
in the same sense (...) is taken, Ezekiel. 45. 19. and the Ram for Atonement is
called (...), Numb. 5. 8. And thence the High Priest when he made an Atonement,
is said (...), 2 Maccab. 3. 33. which is of the greater consequence to us,
because Crellius would not have the sense Crell 7. sect. 10.
either of (...) or (...), to be taken from the common use of the word in the
Greek Tongue; but from that which some call the Hellenistical use of it; viz.
That which is used in the Greek of the New Testament, out of the LXX. and the
Apocryphal Greek; in both which we have found the word (...) in a sense fully
correspondent to what we plead for. But he yet urges, and takes a great deal of
pains to prove, that (...) and (...) do not always signify to be appeased by
another; but sometimes signifies to be propitious and merciful in pardoning;
and sometimes to expiate, and then signifies the same with (...) and (...):
which if it be granted, proves nothing against us, having already proved, that
those words do sig^ifie the aversion of the wrath of God by a ^^crifice, and
that there is no reason to ^cede from that signification, when they ^e applied
to the blood of Christ. And ^e do not contend, that when the word (...) or
(...) is applied to him that ^oth forgive, it does imply appeasing; ^t the
effect of it, which is pardoning; ^ut that which we assert, is, that when (...)
is applied to a third person, or a thing ^ade use of in order to forgiveness,
then ^e say it signifies the propitiating him that as justly displeased: so as
by what was ^one or suffered for that end, he is wil^g to pardon what he had
just reason to ^nish. So Moses is said, to make Atone^ent for the people by his
prayers, (...), Exodus 34. 14. and we ^ay see Verse. 11. how much God was
^^spleased before. And Moses besought the lord his God, and said, Why does thy
wrath ^x hot against thy people: and Verse. 12. ^rn from thy fierce wrath, and
repent of ^is evil against thy people: and then it is ^id, Verse. 14. The Lord
was atoned for the ^il which he thought to do unto his people. would therefore
willingly know, why ^oses might not here properly be said, (...), as it is
said, (...), and therefore since it i^ so very often said in the Levitical Law
(...) and (...), as (...), and the accusative cas^ scarce ever put but in two
cases; (viz When these words are applied to i^ animate things, as the Altar,
etc. or when to God himself, implying forgiveness) wh^ reason can we assign
more probable for this different construction, then that when (...) is used,
the verb has a respect t^ the offended party as the accusative u^ derstood? as
Christ is said in the place mentioned to be (...), which ought in reason to be
understood as thos^ words after Moses his intercession, (...). But Crellius
asks, W^ then do we never read once concerning t^ Priest, that he did, (...) or
(...), but we read that he did (...), and God is sai^ (...). To this I answer
1. That the reason why the person pr^ pitiated, is not expressed, is, because
(...) was so much taken for granted, that the whole Institution of Sacrifices
did immediately respect God, and therefore the^ was no danger of mistaking,
concernin^ the person who was to be atoned. 2. I ^onder Crellius can himself
produce no ^stance where (...) is used ^ith respect to the Sacrifices, and the
person whose offenses are remitted by the Atonement; but where (...) has a
^elation to that, it is still joined with a Preposition relating, either to the
person (...) to the offenses; if no more were understood when it is so used,
then when God himself is said to do it, why is not the phrase (...), as well
said of the Priest, as it is of God? From whence Grotius his sense of Hebr. 2.
17. (...) for (...), is far more agreeable to the use of the phrase in the Old
Testament, than that which Crellius would put upon it. Therefore since the
(...) is attributed to Christ, we ought to take it in the sense proper to a
Propitiatory Sacrifice: so it is said by Moses, where God is left out, but is
necessarily understood, after the people had provoked God by their Idolatry; Ye
have sinned'a great sin: And now I will go up unto the Lord, (...), That I may
make an Atonement for your sin: What way could Moses be said to make this
Atonement, but by propitiating God; yet his name is not there expressed, but
necessarily understood. So (...) is used in the most proper sense for appeasing
the anger of a person, Gen 32. 20. and (...), 2 Samuel 21. 3 which places have
been already insisted on, in the signification of the word (...). And that
those places wherein Christ is said to be a propitiation for our sins, are
capable of no other sense, will appear from the consideration of Christ, as a
middle person between God and us; and therefore his being (...), cannot be
parallel with that phrase, where God himself is said, (...), for Christ is here
considered as interposing between God and us, as Moses and the Priests under
the Law did between God and the people, in order to the averting his wrath from
them. And when one does thus interpose in order to the Atonement of the
offended party, something is always supposed to be done or suffered by him, as
the means of that Atonement. As Jacob supposed the present he made to his
Brother would propitiate him; and David appeased the Gibeonites by the death of
Saul's Sons, both which are said (...). So the shedding of the blood of
Sacrifices before and under the Law, was the means of atoning God for the sins
they committed. What reason can there be then why so received a sense of
Atonement, both among the Jews, and all other Nations at that time when these
words were written, must be forsaken; and any other sense be embraced, which
neither agrees with the propriety of the expression, nor with so many other
places of Scripture, which make the blood of Christ to be a Sacrifice for the
Expiation of sin?

Neither is it only our Atonement, but our Reconciliation is attributed to
Christ. 12. Of Reconciliation by Christ's death.
too, with a respect to his Death and Sufferings. As in the place before
insisted on; For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 18. 19, 21.
Son; and more largely in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. And all things
are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given
to us the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them,
and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. For he has made him to be
sin for (...) who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him. And to the Ephesians, And that he might reconcile Ephesians. 2. 16.
both unto God in one body by his Cross, having slain the enmity thereby. To
the same purpose to the Colossians, And having made peace through the blood of
his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, by Col. 1. 20, 21, 22.
him I say whether they be things in Heaven or in Earth; and you that were
sometimes ^lienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Two things the substance of
Crellius his answer Crell. c. 7. sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.
may be reduced to concerning these places. 1. That it is no where said that
God was reconciled to us, but that we are reconciled to God, and therefore this
reconciliation does not imply any averting of the anger of God. 2. That none of
these places do assert any reconciliation with God antecedent to our
conversion, and so that the Reconciliation mentioned implies only the laying
aside our enmity to God by our sins. I begin with the first of these,
concerning which we are to consider not barely the phrases used in Scripture,
but what the nature of the thing implies; as to which a difference being
supposed between God and Man on the account of sin, no reconciliation can be
imagined but what is mutual. For did man only fall out with God, and had not
God just reason to be displeased with men for their Apostasy from him? If not,
what made him so severely punish the first sin that ever was committed by man?
what made him punish the old World for their impieties by a deluge? what made
him leave such Monuments of his anger against the sins of the World in
succeeding Ages? what made him add such severe sanctions to the Laws he made
to the people of the Jews? what made the most upright among them so vehemently
to deprecate his wrath and displeasure upon the sense Psalm. 6. 1. 38. 1. Psalm.
5. 5. 7. 11. 11. 5. Lev. 26. 30.
of their sins? what makes him declare not only his hatred of the sins of men,
but of the persons of those who commit them; so far as to express the greatest
abhorrency of them? Nay, what makes our Adversaries themselves to say, that
Crell. de Deo and Attrib. l. 1. c. 30.
impiety is in its own nature hateful to God, and stirrs him up to anger
against all who commit it? what means, I say, all this, if God be not angry
with men on the account of sin? Well then; supposing God to be averse from men
by reason of their sins, shall this displeasure always continue or not; if it
always continues, men must certainly suffer the desert of their sins; if it
does not always continue, then God may be said to be reconciled in the same
sense that an offended party is capable of being reconciled to him who has
provoked him. Now there are two ways whereby a party justly offended may be
said to be reconciled to him that has offended him. First, when he is not only
willing to admit of terms of agreement, but does declare his acceptance of the
mediation of a third person, and that he is so well satisfied with what he has
done in order to it, that he appoints this to be published to the World to
assure the offender, that if the breach continues, the fault wholly lies upon
himself. The second is, when the offender does accept of the terms of agreement
offered, and submits himself to him whom he has provoked, and is upon that
received into favor. And these two we assert must necessarily be distinguished
in the reconciliation between God and us. For upon the death and sufferings of
Christ, God declares to the World he is so well satisfied with what Christ has
done and suffered in order to the reconciliation between himself and us, that
he now publishes remission of sins to the World upon those terms which the
Mediator has declared by his own doctrine, and the Apostles he sent to preach
it: But because remission of sins does not immediately follow upon the death of
Christ, without supposition of any act on our part, therefore the state of
favor does commence from the performance of the conditions which are required
from us. So that upon the death of Christ God declaring his acceptance of
Christ's mediation, and that the obstacle did not lie upon his part; therefore
those Messengers who were sent abroad into the world to persuade men to accept
of these terms of agreement, do insist most upon that which was the remaining
obstacle, viz. the sins of Mankind, that men by laying aside them, would be now
reconciled to God, since there was nothing to hinder this reconciliation, their
obstinacy in sin excepted. Which may be a very reasonable account why we read
more frequently in the writings of the Apostles, of men's duty in being
reconciled to God; the other being supposed by them as the foundation of their
preaching to the world, and is insisted on by them upon that account, as is
clear in that place to the Corinthians, That God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing unto men 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
their trespasses, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation; and
therefore adds, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, me pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God: And
least these words should seem dubious, he declares that the reconciliation in
Christ was distinct from that reconciliation he persuades them to' for the
reconciliation in Christ he supposes past. v. 18. All things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and v. 21. he shows us how this
Reconciliation was wrought: For he has made him to be sin for us who know no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Crellius here finds
it necessary to acknowledge a twofold Reconciliation, Crell. c. 1. sect. 114.
c. 7. sect. 24.
but hopes to escape the force of this place by a rare distinction of the
Reconciliation as preached by Christ, and by his Apostles; and so Gods having
reconciled the World to himself by Jesus Christ (...) thing else but Christ's
preaching the Gospel himself, who afterward (...) that Office to his Apostles.
But if such shifts as these will serve to baffle men's understandings, both they
were made, and the Scriptures were written to very little purpose; for if this
had been all the Apostle had meant, that Christ preached the same Doctrine of
Reconciliation before them, what mighty matter had this been to have solemnly
told the World, that Christ's Apostles preached no other Doctrine, but what
their Master had preached before? especially if no more were meant by it, but
that men should leave their sins, and be reconciled to God. But besides, why is
the Ministry of Reconciliation, then attributed only to the Apostles, and not
to Christ, which ought in the first place have been given to him, since the
Apostles did only receive it from him? Why is that Ministry of Reconciliation
said to be, viz. that God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself? was
this all the subject of the Apostles preaching, to tell the World, that Christ
persuaded men to leave off their sins? how comes God to reconcile the World to
himself by the preaching of Christ, since Christ himself says, he was not sent
to preach to the world, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? Was the
World reconciled to God by the preaching of Christ before they had ever heard
of him? Why is God said not to impute to men their trespasses by the preaching
of Christ, rather than his Apostles; if the not imputing were no more than
declaring Gods readiness to pardon; which was equally done by the Apostles as
by Christ himself? Lastly, what force or dependence is there in the last words,
For he made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, etc. if all he had been
speaking of before had only related to Christ's preaching? How was he made sin
more than the Apostles, if he were only treated as a sinner upon the account of
the same Doctrine which they preached equally with him? and might not men be
said to be made the righteousness of God in the Apostles, as well as in Christ,
if no more be meant, but being persuaded to be righteous, by the Doctrine
delivered to them?

In the two latter places, Ephesians. 2. 16. Coloss. 1. 20. etc. it is plain, that a
twofold reconciliation is likewise mentioned, the one of the Jews and Gentiles
to one another, the other of both of them to God. For nothing can be more
ridiculous than the Exposition of Socinus, who would have (...) not to be
joined with the Verb, (...), but to stand by it self, and to signify that this
reconciliation of the Jews and Gentiles did tend to the glory of God. And
Crellius, who stands out at nothing, Crell. c. 7. sect. 30.
hopes to bring off Socinus here too; by saying, that it is very common, for
the end to which a thing was appointed to be expressed by a Dative case
following the Verb; but he might have spared his pains in proving a thing no
one questions; the shorter answer had been to have produced but one place where
(...) ever signifies any thing but to be reconciled to God as the offended
party; or wherever the Dative of the person following the Verb importing
reconciliation, did signify any thing else but the party with whom the
reconciliation was to be made. As for that objection concerning things in
Heaven being reconciled; that phrase does not import such a Reconciliation of
the Angels as of Men, but that Men and Angels upon the reconciliation of men to
God, become one body under Christ, and are gathered together in him, as the
Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 1. 10.

Having thus far proved, that the effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice do belong.
12. Objections answered.
to the death of Christ, nothing now remains but an answer to be made to two
Objections, which are commonly insisted on by our Adversaries. The first is,
That God was reconciled before he sent his Son, and therefore Christ could not
dye to reconcile God to us. The second is, That the Doctrine of Satisfaction
asserted by us, is inconsistent with the freeness of Gods grace in the
remission of sins: Both which will admit of an easy Solution upon the
principles of the foregoing discourse. To the first I answer, That we assert
nothing inconsistent with that love of God, which was discovered in sending his
Son into the world; we do not say, That God hated mankind so much on the
account of sin, that it was impossible he should ever admit of any terms of
Reconciliation with them, which is the only thing inconsistent with the
greatness of Gods love, in sending Christ into the world; but we adore and
magnify the infiniteness and unexpressible, greatness of his love, that
notwithstanding all the contempt of the former kindness and mercies of Heaven,
he should be pleased to send his own Son to dye for sinners, that they might be
reconciled to him. And herein was the great love of God manifested, that while
we were enemies and sinners, Christ dyed for us, and that for this end, that we
might be reconciled to God by his death. And therefore surely, not in the state
of favor or Reconciliation with God then. But it were worth the while, to
understand what it is our Adversaries mean, when they say, God was reconciled
when he sent his son, and therefore he could not dye to reconcile God to us.
Either they mean, that God had decreed to be reconciled upon the sending his
son, or that he was actually reconciled when he sent him: if he only decreed to
be reconciled, that was not at all inconsistent with Christ's dying to reconcile
God and us in pursuance of that decree: if they mean, he was actually
reconciled, then there was no need for Christ to dye to reconcile God and us;
but withal, actual Reconciliation implies pardon of sin; and if sin were
actually pardoned before Christ came, there could be no need of his coming at
all, and sins would have been pardoned before committed; if they were not
pardoned, notwithstanding that love of God, then it can imply no more, but that
God was willing to be reconciled. If therefore the not-remission of sins were
consistent with that love of God, by which he sent Christ into the world, then
notwithstanding that he was yet capable of being reconciled by his death. So
that our Adversaries are bound to reconcile that love of God, with not
presently pardoning the sins of the world, as we are to reconcile it with the
ends of the death of Christ, which are asserted by us.

To the other Objection, Concerning the inconsistency of the Freeness of Gods
Grace,. 13. The freeness of Grace asserted in Scripture, destroys not
satisfaction.
with the Doctrine of Satisfaction. I answer, Either Gods Grace is so free as
to exclude all conditions, or not: If it be so free, as to exclude all
conditions, than the highest Antinomianism is the truest Doctrine; for that is
the highest degree of the Freeness of Grace, which admits of no conditions at
all. If our Adversaries say, That the Freeness of Grace is consistent with
Conditions required on our part, Why shall it not admit of conditions on Gods
part? especially, when the condition required, tends so highly to the end of
Gods governing the world, in the manifestation of his hatred against sin, and
the vindication of the honor of his Laws by the Sufferings of the Son of God
in our stead, as an Expiatory Sacrifice for our sins. There are two things to
be considered in sin, the dishonor done to God, by the breach of his Laws, and
the injury men do to themselves by it; now remission of sins, that respects the
injury which men bring upon themselves by it; and that is Free, when the
penalty is wholly forgiven, as we assert it is by the Gospel to all penitent
sinners: but shall not God be free to vindicate his own Honor, and to declare
his righteousness to the world, while he is the Justifier of them that believe?
Shall men in case of Defamation, be bound to vindicate themselves, though they
freely forgive the Authors of the slander, by our Adversaries own Doctrine? and
must it be repugnant to Gods Grace, to admit of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that
the world may understand, that it is no such easy thing to obtain pardon of
sin committed against God; but that as often as they consider the bitter
Sufferings of Christ, in order to the obtaining the forgiveness of our sins,
that should be the greatest Argument to dissuade them from the practice of
them? But why should it be more inconsistent with the Sacrifice of Christ, for
God freely to pardon sin, than it was ever presumed to be in all the Sacrifices
of either Jews of Gentiles? who all supposed Sacrifices necessary in order to
Atonement; and yet thought themselves obliged to the goodness of God in the
Remission of their sins? Nay, we find that God himself, in the case of
Abimelech, appointed Abraham to pray for Genesis 20. 7.
him, in order to his pardon; And will any one say, this was a derogation to
the grace of God in his pardon? Or to the pardon of Jobs Friends, because Job
was appointed to sacrifice for them? Job 42. 7.
Or to the pardon of the Israelites, because God out of his kindness to them,
directed them by the Prophets, and appointed the means in order to it? But
although God appointed our High Priest for us, and out of his great love sent
him into the world, yet his Sacrifice was not what was given him, but what he
freely underwent himself; he gave us Christ, but Christ offered up himself a
full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins
of the world.

Thus, Sir, I have now given you a larger account of what I then more briefly
discoursed of, concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ; and
heartily wishing you a right understanding in all things, and requesting from
you an impartial consideration of what I have written,

I am, SIR, Your, etc. E. S.
Jan. 6. 1668/9,
FINIS.
Books printed for Henry Mortlock at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall.
A Rational account of the grounds of Protestant Religion, being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburies relation of a Conference, and from the
pretended Answer by T. C. wherein the true grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the false discovered; the Church of England Vindicated from the Imputation of
the Schism, and the most important Controversies between us and the Church of
Rome thoroughly examined.

Origines Sacrae, or a Rational account of the grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and the matters therein
contained.

Irenicum: A Weapon-Salve for the Churches wounds. All three by Edward
Stillingfleet, D. D.

Knowledge and Practice; or a plain Discourse of the chief things necessary to
be known, believed and practiced, in order to Salvation. By S. Cradoc^.

The Being and Well-being of a Christian, in three Treatises:

The first, setting forth the property of the Righteous.

The second, the Excellency of Grace.

The third, the Nature and Sweetness of Fellowship with Christ. By Edward
Reyner.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics, Translated out of French into English. By
Charles Cotton, Esquire.


