A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, ON Christmass-Day,
1693.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.

S. JOHN III.17. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World;
but that the World through him might be saved.
THese words are part of the Gospel written by S. John, wherein he does not
only fill up the History of our Savior with many Particular Discourses omitted
by the other Evangelists, but the Whole seems to be Penned in another Strain
and with some different Purpose and Design. It Is true, that they all Agree in
the same general End of Writing which S. John mentions, viz. chapter 20.31.
That we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing we might have life through his Name; but they make Use of several
Methods, as most agreeable to the Circumstances of the Time and Place and
Occasion of their Writing. S. Matthew wrote his Gospel for the sake of the
Jews; and therefore he begins with the Genealogy of Jesus Christ from Abraham,
and shows that the Prophecies were accomplished in him, and how he came not to
destroy the Law but to fulfill it, and that his Miracles and Doctrine were
sufficient to convince them that he was the promised Messiah. S. Mark wrote
only a Summary Account of the most material Passages relating to the Person and
Doctrine of Christ for the sake of the Gentiles. S. Luke takes a larger
Compass, and puts things into an exacter order of Time, as himself tells us,
chapter 1.3.
and adds many Circumstances relating to the Birth of Christ, and the general
Advantage to Mankind by his coming; that he was to be a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, 2.32.
as well as the Glory of his people Israel. S. John succeeding the rest, found
two great things which gave him Occasion of Writing his Gospel;

1. The perverting the Doctrine of Christ by the Ebionites and Cerinthians, who
pretended to give great Honor to Christ as an Excellent Person both for Wisdom
and Holiness, but yet so that he was but a mere Man, to whom God, upon his
Baptism, had given extraordinary Gifts and Assistances of his Holy Spirit.

2. The other was, that the Gospel which was designed for the universal Good of
the World met with such cold Reception and Entertainment from it. He was in the
World, chapter 1.11.12.
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not. He came unto his
own, and his own received him not.

What could be more uneasy to so true a lover of Christ as S. John was, than
that he lived to see his Doctrine perverted, and his Design in so great a
measure rendered ineffectual? And therefore in the writing of this Gospel,

1. He begins after another manner; and in a very short, significant and lofty
style, he sets forth his Eternal Being and Godhead. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And as the Eternal Power
and Godhead were understood by the things that were made, as S. Paul says, so
he adds, Romans 1.20 ver. 3.
that all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made. Which is as certain an Argument of the Divinity of Christ, as there
is of the Being of God from the Creation of the World.

2. As to the other Point; it was indeed a sad and amazing Consideration, that
the wonderful Love of God in sending his Son into the World should have so
little Effect upon the Generality of those to whom he was sent and his Doctrine
Preached; but the Apostle contents himself with these two Accounts of it;

1. That it was far from being God's Intention or Design in sending his Son to
make Men's Condition worse and more desperate; For God sent not his Son into the
World to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved.

2. But it might be presently objected, That if this were God's Intention, the
World would not have received so little Benefit by it, but according to the
Terms of Salvation proposed by the Gospel so few will have advantage by it;
therefore the Evangelist adds, that if Men did perish they must thank
themselves for it; For, this is the Condemnation that light is come into the
World, and men loved darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil,
v. 19.

So that here are two things which deserve our Consideration.

I. The wonderful Condescension and gracious Intention of God in sending his
Son into the World.

II. The true Reason why so many Miscarry, as to their Salvation
notwithstanding; viz. their own Wickedness and Folly.

1. The former of these, is that, which upon this Day we have particular Reason
to take Notice of; not in a slight superficial Manner, (as though an Annual
Commemoration of it were all that God expected from us,) but our Minds and
Souls ought to be possessed with a deep and humble Sense of so great, so
undeserved, so astonishing a Condescension of God to Mankind. And the more we
think and consider of it, the more amazing and surprising it must appear to us:
For when the Psalmist thought but of God's Providence toward Mankind, he could
not but break out into that Expression, Lord, what is man, that thou art
mindful of him, Psalm. 8.4.144.3.
and the son of man, that thou so regardest him! What is man indeed! a Mass of
Vanity and Disorder; weak in his Judgment, wilful in his Passions; uncertain
in his best Resolutions, violent in his worst Inclinations; strangely bent upon
what tends to his Ruin, and hardly brought to understand and pursue his truest
Interest! What is such a Creature as this, that a God infinitely Wise and
Powerful, far above our Thoughts as well as our Services, should concern
himself about the low and trifling Affairs of Mankind! But such is the Goodness
and Condescension of God, that he humbles himself so far, as not only to
behold, but to Govern the Things that are done upon Earth.

But what is Man that he should visit him! Not with the mere common
Demonstrations of his Kindness, which he affords to other Creatures; but that
when Mankind had so far degenerated and fallen off from God by their Sins, that
they deserved to be for ever cast off and forgotten by him; that then God
should visit him by sending his Son into the World that the World through him
might be saved; this is so far above our Imaginations as well as Deserts, that
it seems to be the most colorable Pretense for Infidelity, that it is too
great a thing for Mankind to believe.

But I am sensible, that in this Skeptical and Unbelieving Age, there is such a
Humor of Cavilling against Matters of Revelation, especially this Fundamental
Article of it, that it would seem as if we were afraid to look their Objections
in the Face, if we take no Notice of them; and on the other side, to insist too
much upon them, were to make them appear much more considerable than they are.
Therefore I shall pass over all the Trifling and Impertinent Talk of such Men
(which is not whispered in Corners, but I am afraid is become a Matter of too
Common and Public Discourse) and I shall single out that which seems to have
the greatest Weight in it; viz. Suppose God should have an Intention to offer
Terms of Salvation to Mankind, yet what need was there that the Son of God
should come into the World for that End? Had not God easier Methods of doing it
than by the Incarnation and Crucifixion of his Son? Is it not more Credible,
that God should forgive Sins without any Atonement, than that he should send
his Son to be a Sacrifice of Propitiation to himself? Is it not enough for us
to believe all the Principles of Natural Religion to be true; for we own a God,
and Providence, and a Life to come, and Rewards and Punishments of Mankind
according to the Nature of their Actions; but why should our Faith be cramped
by such incredible Mysteries as these, concerning the Son of God's coming into
the World; in such a manner as the Evangelists describe it: This is so far from
being a Kindness to the World, that it makes the Condition of Salvation so much
harder, if we must believe things which seem so impossible to us, and so hard
to be reconciled to the Natural Principles of Reason and Religion.

I shall not dispute it with such Men whether these late Pretenders to Natural
Religion have at the bottom any real kindness for the Principles of it, or not;
I am willing to hope the best, and that it is a mere Dissatisfaction in them as
to our Revealed Religion; and that this pretended Zeal for Natural Religion is
little more than a mere Sham and Disguise to avoid a more odious Imputation.
But let it be as great and real as they pretend, what I at present undertake,
is to make it appear, That none who do embrace the Principles of Natural
Religion can have any Reason to reject the Christian, even as to this Article
of God's sending his Son into the World, which they seem most to stumble at.

I shall not go about to show, how the Christian Religion not only Supposes,
but Improves, Refines, Establishes and Enforces the most noted and allowed
Principles of Natural Religion, as to the Being of God and Providence; the most
Agreeable way of Worship; the Nature and Kinds of Moral Duties, the Rewards and
Punishments of another World, since no one of common Sense can deny that the
Christian Religion is very Exact and Particular in these things above any other
Institution in the World.

And therefore I cannot, but in passing, take notice, that I do not remember
any one Institution in the World with respect to Religion, except that which we
have by Revelation, which has not some notorious Blunders in it, as to the
Principles of Natural Religion and Virtue; and therefore they have far less
Reason to quarrel with Christianity than any other Religion (if their quarrel
were not really against all, as I fear it is;) Let them look abroad over the
unchristian World; and they will find such foolish Notions, such vain
Superstitions, such incoherent Fables, such immoral Practices allowed by their
several Religions, as would make a considering Man wonder how the Notion of
Religion could be so debased among Men. Let them look backward upon the
Passages of elder Times, and they shall find either they set up false Gods with
the true, or the false Worship of the true God; or a Worship disagreeable to
the Divine Nature by mean Representations, or uncouth Sacrifices, or impure
Rites; or else there were some horrible Flaws, as to the Common Principles of
Morality, as to Conjugal Society, or the Rights of Property, or the due Regard
to the Preservation of Mankind; or they give such a pitiful Representation of
the Rewards and Punishments of another Life, as if they had a Mind to have them
looked on as Fables, or despised as unworthy our regarding them above the
present Pleasures of Life. But I dare challenge the most Cavilling Sceptick to
find any just Fault with the Duties of Christianity; For the Worship of God
required therein, is Pure, Holy, Spiritual, very agreeable to the Divine Nature
and the common Reason of Mankind. The Moral Precepts of it are clear, weighty
and comprehensive. And those who have delivered them to us, neither commend any
Vice, nor sink the Reputation of any Virtue; they never lessen our Duties to
God, or to one another; all the just Complaint is, that the Precepts are too
strict and severe, too good and too hard for Mankind to practice them. But is
this an Objection against our Religion, or against Mankind? If they think that,
let our Religion require what it will, the generality of the World will still
live and act like Brutes, and go against all Reason and Religion; how can we
help it? But we hope the blame is not to be laid on Reason or Religion, that so
great a part of Mankind are either Fools or Madmen; i. e. either want Sense to
understand their Duty, or are resolved not to Practice it. Especially
considering, that the Rewards and Punishments of another Life, are set forth in
the Gospel, with that Clearness, that Force, that Authority, that if any thing
of that nature would work upon Mankind, these must.

But all these things I pass over, and come to that which I proposed as my
chief Design, which is to prove, That none who truly believe the Principles of
Natural Religion, can have any Reason to reject this Fundamental Article of it,
as to God's sending his Son into the World. And that upon two Accounts.

I. That the Principles of Natural Religion make this Design appear very
Credible, or fit to be believed by Men of Sense and Understanding.

II. That the Principles on which this Fundamental Article of our Revealed
Religion stands, afford sufficient Evidence to prove it True; and therefore
that we are bound to Believe it.

As to the former, the Grounds or Principles which I go upon, are these:

I. That the great End of Christ's coming into the World, viz. the Salvation of
Mankind, is most agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God. No one
who believes a God, can deny him to be of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness; for the
very same Reasons which move Men to believe a God, do convince them that he
must be of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, seeing the strongest Evidences to
prove his Being are from the Instances of them in the World.

These being then supposed, as essential and inseparable Attributes of the
Divine Nature; we are to consider what End with Respect to Mankind is most
agreeable to these to carry on; and we must suppose Mankind to be made up of
Soul and Body, which are capable of Pleasures and Satisfaction, both in this
World and another: But our Souls are of an Immortal Nature, that will subsist
in Happiness or Misery after this Life, otherwise the Rewards and Punishments
of another World signify nothing; the Question then is (if it can be made a
Question) Whether it be more agreeable to the Infinite Goodness and Wisdom of
God to provide for the Well-being of Mankind in such a low and gloomy a Region,
as this Earth is, or to advance them into a far better Place, and better
Company, and more noble and divine Delights, and those not depending on a
fading, drooping, dying Life, but on the perpetual Enjoyment of a complete
Happiness both of Soul and Body. No one that ever dares to think or consider of
these things, can believe there is any Comparison between them; so that the
Salvation tendered by the Gospel, is the most agreeable End which the Wisdom and
Goodness of God could carry on for the Benefit of Mankind.

But why should Mankind flatter themselves with the Hopes or Expectation of a
Happiness so far above what they can pretend to deserve?

There were some Grounds for such an Objection as this; if we supposed the
Rewards of another Life to come from any other Fountain than the Infinite
Goodness of God toward those who sincerely love him and endeavor to please
him; although with many Failings and Imperfections. But this is the only
Hypothesis, which we maintain to be the Christian Doctrine: And what is there
in it, which is repugnant to the Wisdom and Goodness of God? What was it but
Infinite Goodness which gave a Being to the World at first, and has preserved
it ever since, and made it so useful and beneficial to Mankind? What is it,
but infinite Goodness that suffers us to live and enjoy so many Comforts of
Life, after so many great and continual Provocations? If we were to argue from
our Deserts, it were impossible for us to justify the wonderful Patience and
Long-suffering of God toward the sinful Race of Mankind; for we are certain,
that they have long since deserved to be cut off from the Face of the Earth? If
we consider the Justice and Holiness of God, whereby he is daily provoked to
punish Offenders, and the Power he has to execute his Justice in a Moment,
without any opposite Power to control or resist him; we have Reason to be
astonished at the Wonderful Patience and Forbearance of God, of which we every
day see so large Experience. But this is not all; he does not only suffer them
to live, but often makes their Condition easy and prosperous as to this World,
having Health, Riches and Honor, and the Hopes of their Posterity, enjoying
the same things after them. Now these to such, who do not believe or value
another Life, are the greatest things God can do to their Satisfaction. But if
they can allow so much Goodness in God toward those who continually offend
him; why should they question greater Instances of it toward those that
endeavor to please him? I do not mean as to this World, but as to another
which they value far before it; for if they do not, they have no reason to
expect any Happiness in it: Why then should it be thought more unreasonable for
God to bestow the Happiness of another Life, on those who esteem and choose it,
than to give the good things of this Life to those who love and admire it? I do
not say, the Wisdom is equal in the Choice; but the Goodness of God is
wonderful in both. And there can be no imaginable Ground to suspect, that God
should be really less kind to those who love him best. It is a vain thing to
talk of those being saved by Christ's coming into the World, who do not
heartily love God and keep his Commandments; for the whole Design of the Gospel
is to persuade us to one in order to the other; and therefore it is not a
well-grounded Hope, but a fond Imagination for any to expect Salvation by
Christ on any other Terms. If we then take in the whole Hypothesis or true
Scheme of Christianity together, it is no other than that God sent his Son into
the World, that the World through him might be saved; not by continuing in the
sinful Practices of this World, ^ Joh. 1.16.
which S. John calls the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye, and the
Pride of Life; but by subduing and mortifying all disorderly Passions do
prepare themselves for a better State. Now, if there be in our Minds a firm
Persuasion of the infinite Goodness of God, of which we are convinced by mere
Natural Reason; why should it be thought hard to believe, that God should take
Care of so great and good an End, as the Eternal Salvation of those who truly
love and obey him.

II. The next Principle agreeable to Natural Reason and Religion is, That no
such thing as Salvation or Happiness in a future State can be expected without
the particular Favor of God. For, all who do own Natural Religion, must agree
that the Soul of Man is an Immortal Thinking Being; and therefore its Happiness
must consist in such a sort of Thinking, as carries the greatest Pleasure and
Satisfaction along with it. Let us think with our selves what a Soul separate
from the Body can do, to make it self Happy: Here it was Entangled, Corrupted,
and therefore apt to be deceived by the false Appearances of things, which
glide through the Senses and leave too lasting Impressions on the Mind; and
thereby it comes to mistake Shows for Substance and mere Colors for Realities.
But this is a Mistake so common and so fatal to Mankind, that very few are
thoroughly undeceived in this World; for one way or other they are apt to
flatter themselves with some Pleasing Mistakes and Delightful Errors of Life.
But as soon as the Soul is dislodged from this cloudy Mansion in the Body, all
things will then appear, not as by an uncertain Sky-light in a dark Room, but
in an open and distinct View, and then it will be impossible to be any longer
deceived by false Representations of Things. What then can be conceived
sufficient to entertain and please the Mind? Will it be the Reflection on the
past Pleasures of the Body? No certainly; for those cannot bear a severe
Reflection onw; and the very thoughts of them make men's Minds very uneasy;
for the most tempting Pleasures of Sin leave no grateful Relish behind them.
How then should the Mind bear up it self in another State, when its Reflections
must be far more constant and severe? What then? Can the Mind lay it self
asleep, and put it self into a State of Unthinking? That were all one, as a
kind of self-Annihilation if it be of a Thinking Nature. There is a State of
Unthinking in this World, which is too common; when the Mind is as it were
overlaid and stifled with Feathers; I mean is so taken up with trifling and
vain Imaginations, as hardly give way to one serious Thought. But this is
impossible in another State; and therefore nothing but what will bear a most
strict and severe Scrutiny can give any Support or Comfort to the Mind then. It
must be true and real Good to create any Satisfaction; It must be durable and
lasting to keep it up; It must be Complete and Perfect to answer all the just
and reasonable Desires of an Immortal Soul. And what can this be less than God
himself? And therefore the Christian Religion speaks most agreeably to Natural
Reason, when it still supposes the Happiness of another World to consist in
the Presence and Enjoyment of God. For those must have all that is desirable,
who enjoy the Favor of him who commands all things, and knows how to suit them
to the greatest Advantage to those to whom he designs to show his Favor.

And this Prospect of another State, or of the Salvation of Mankind by Christ's
coming into the World, is that which lets us into another View of all that
relates to the Son of God's coming into the World: For if our Minds be
possessed with great Apprehensions of the Power and Greatness of the World;
all that the Gospel represents as to the manner of God's sending his Son into
the World, his being born of an obscure Virgin, being laid in the common
Manger, being bred up in a private Place, having so mean Followers, meeting
with so cold a Reception from his own People, and at last, being exposed to an
Ignominious Death by them, looks very Reproachful and Contemptible. But on the
other side, if we could raise our Minds to such Idea's of things here, as the
Glorious Spirits above have; and see how all things are esteemed by them
according to the Ends and Purposes they are designed for, we should then
perceive how admirably all these things were fitted for his great End; which
was to wean Men's Hearts from the Pomp and Vanities of this World and to
prepare them for a better; and we should then have quite another Opinion of
these things: For as there is a certain Greatness, which is above all the
formal Shows and affected Appearances of it, so when a Great and Noble Design
is to be carried on, the true Measure of Decorum in that Case, is that which is
most serviceable to the principal End. If a great Person had a Design to rescue
some near Relations out of Slavery, he would never go with a splendid Equipage
and a long Train of Attendance, which would but make his Person more gazed at
and his Design less Effectual. If he had intended to have rescued them by Force
out of Captivity, it had been necessary to have had Power and Strength
proportionable to his Design; but if it were only by Persuasion, then he must
accommodate himself to such Methods as were most likely to prevail.

The great End of the coming of Christ was to deliver the Souls of Men from a
much worse Captivity, viz. of their own Sinful Passions and the Devil's
Tyranny by their means; but he did not come in a way of Violence to break open
the Prison-doors and in an instant to knock off their Fetters and bid them be
free; but he makes use of all the gentle and effectual methods of Persuasion,
not only by his Words but by his own Example; that they might learn by him to
despise this World, who had so little in it, and to prepare for that from
whence he came, where their Happiness should be unconceivable and without End.

III. The Third Principle is, That no such Particular Favor of God is to be
expected, as long as his Displeasure is so just against Mankind for Sin, and no
effectual Means used to remove it. The truth is, the whole Scheme of the Gospel
turns upon this Point, whether God be really displeased with Mankind for their
Sins, so as to need a Reconciliation: For, if all that the Scripture so often
expresses concerning the Wrath and Displeasure of God against Mankind for Sin,
be only Figurative and Hyperbolical Expressions, then the whole Design of the
Gospel must be given up as a mere Scheme; for, if God be not really displeased,
there is no need of Reconciliation; if no need of that, then there can be no
need of Christ's coming to reconcile us to God; and if he did not come for that
End, we have no Reason to believe the Scripture, which affirms it over and
over. And I do not think any stronger Argument can be brought to prove a thing,
than that the most Emphatical Expressions are so often applied to that purpose,
by such Persons who used all Sincerity and Plainness. So that this matter as to
the Scripture is clear, if any thing can be made so; and if nothing can, I
cannot see how it is possible to have a written Rule of Faith; since all
Writings are capable by Ambiguity of Words and Phrases, by the different Use of
Particles and Transposition of Letters and Syllables, of very different
Interpretations.

But this is not my present Business, which is rather to consider the Natural
Sense and Reason of Mankind as to this matter. We cannot in Reason suppose any
such Passion in an Infinitely Perfect Being, as that which we call Wrath and
Anger in Men. For that is a violent Perturbation arising from Surprise and
Indignation; but there can be no Disorder or Surprise in a Being of Infinite
Wisdom. Therefore Wrath in God must suppose two Things.

1. A just Cause of Displeasure given by us.

2. Such a Just Displeasure following upon it as will End in the severe
Punishment of Offenders if it be not removed.

Now, whether there be a just Cause of Displeasure or not, must depend upon the
Natural Differences of Good and Evil. And it is impossible that any one who
exercises his Reason, can judge amiss in this Matter. Not, that all the
Differences of Good and Evil are equally clear, for all Propositions in
Mathematics are not so; but it is sufficient to our Purpose, that the general
Principles are so; and the greater Instances; so that no Man can think that he
Acts as much according to Reason in one as the other. And, can any one of common
Sense imagine God to be as well pleased with him who blasphemes his Name, and
despises his Service, and hates Religion, as with one that Fears and Honors
him, and endeavors to Please him? Can he be as well pleased with him, that
assassines his Parents, as with him that obeys them? With him that robs and
defrauds his Neighbor, as with him that relieves him in his Necessities? With
him who subdues his disorderly Passions, as with him that gives way to them?
With him who is Cruel, Inhuman and Perfidious, as with him that is Faithful
and Just and Compassionate? These are but some of the Instances of the
Differences of Good and Evil, but they are so plain and notorious, that a man
must renounce the common Principles of Humanity, who does not own them. And to
say there are no such Differences, because there have been Mistakes and
Disputes about some things accounted Good and Evil, is as Absurd, as to say,
there is no Difference between Day and Night, because in the Twilight it is
hard to distinguish them. But if there be such a real Difference in the Nature
of Human Actions, and God be a strict Observer of them, he being a God of
Infinite Holiness and Justice, cannot but be offended with Mankind's wilful
Omission of what they know to be Good, and Commission of what they know to be
Evil.

But here we must distingush between God's Displeasure against the Actions and
against the Persons who commit them. The former is a Necessary Consequent upon
the Evil of Sin and can never be removed, for God is irreconcilable to Sin.
But those who commit Sin are his Creatures; and therefore Capable of Mercy and
Forgiveness. There is always a Desert of Punishment following upon Sin; but
there is no inseparable Connection between the Sin and the Punishment; for the
great and wise Governor of the World acts not by Necessity of Nature in
punishing Sinners, but by the Methods of Wisdom and Justice. And if the saving
of Sinners upon their Repentance can be made agreeable to these, such is the
Mercy and Goodness of God to his Creatures, that there is great Reason to hope
for a Reconciliation. For, although God be displeased, he is not implacable;
although he be justly provoked to punish Sinners, yet there is no Absolute
Necessity that he should; nor any irreversible Decree that he will do it; and
therefore notwithstanding this Displeasure of God, there is a way still left
open for Reconciliation, which leads to the next.

IV. The Fourth Principle is, That if God be thus displeased with the Sins of
Mankind, and yet there is a Possibility of Reconciliation between God and them,
He alone is the most proper and competent Judge, on what Terms this
Reconciliation may be obtained. For being both the Offended Party and the
Supreme Governor, he has the sole Right on both Accounts of fixing those Terms
and Conditions, upon which he will forgive Sins, and receive the Offenders into
Favor. It is a vain thing for any to argue from one Attribute of God against
another. Some are apt to flatter themselves that God will easily forgive Sins,
because he is Merciful, but they ought to consider that he is Just and Holy as
well as Merciful; and there is as much ground to fear that he will not forgive
because he is Just; as there can be to hope that he will because he is
Merciful. And thus it is impossible for a considering Man to satisfy his own
Mind as to God's forgiving his Sins; unless he be some way assured from himself
that he will do it. And therefore a particular Revelation in this case must be
made, if God designs to bring Men to Repentance by the Hopes of Forgiveness.
But mere Repentance can never make any satisfaction to God for the Breach of
his Laws. Suppose a Sinner comes to himself and is heartily sorry that he has
Offended God so many ways, and with such aggravating Circumstances as he has
done; and now resolves in the Anguish of his Soul never more to return to the
Practice of them; This no doubt, is far more pleasing to God, than going on to
offend still; but all this is no more than a man in justice to God and to
himself is bound to do; for he is bound to vindicate the Honor of God's Laws,
and to condemn himself for his own Folly, and to return no more to the Practice
of it. But what Amends is made by all this, for the infinite Dishonor which
has been done to God and his Laws by the Violation of them? The Courts of
Justice among Men take no Notice of the Malefactors Repentance; however he be
affected, the Law must be observed, and Offenders punished. How then can any
persons be assured from mere Natural Reason, that God will not be as tender of
the Honor and Justice of his Laws, as Mankind are allowed to be without any
imputation of Cruelty or Injustice?

If God should be exact in punishing Offenders, who could complain? For who can
plead Not-Guilty before his Maker? And when a man's own Conscience condemns him
that he has deserved Punishment, what reason can he have from himself not to
expect it? And if he does justly expect to be punished, what reason can he have
to hope for Forgiveness? Since he knows that he deserves to be punished, and
therefore can never deserve to be Forgiven. It must be therefore a Free Act of
Grace and Mercy in God to forgive even Penitent Sinners; and upon what Terms
and in what Manner he will do it depends wholly upon his own Good Will. He may
forgive Sins if he pleases, and it is agreeable to his Nature to do it, if
Sinners do Repent and Forsake their Sins; but whether God has actually made
known to us the Way of Reconciliation cannot be known by any Principles of
Nature; because it is a matter of Fact and must have such Proof as a thing of
that Nature is capable of.

II. Having thus showed, how strongly the Principles of Natural Religion do
make way for entertaining this point of the Christian Doctrine, as to God's
sending his Son into the World in order to our Reconciliation with him and our
Salvation by him; it remains now to show how justly God does require the Belief
of it from us as True; for the next words tell us, That he that believes on
him is not condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God, v. 18.

This, some may say, is very hard Doctrine; for they believe as much as they
can; and if they can believe no more it is no fault; for no man can be bound to
believe more than he can. I do not question but Nicodemus (to whom these words
are generally supposed to be spoken by our Savior) thought he had gone a great
way, when he used those words to Christ, v. 2. Rabbi we know that thou art a
Teacher come from God, for no man can do these Miracles that thou do except
God be with him. i. e. He was willing to believe him some great Prophet whom
God had sent; and this was a fair step for a Ruler among the Jews, who were
generally very unreasonable Unbelievers. But Christ tells him plainly this
would not do; for unless he believed him to be the only begotten Son of God, he
could not be saved. And this is the great Point, That God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have everlasting life, v. 16. Not, as though mere Believing this
were sufficient (for this carries a great many other things along with it) but
that since God had sent his only begotten Son into the World upon such a
Message, he did expect that he should be received and entertained as such upon
their utmost peril.

But can we believe farther than we have Reason to believe? No; God does not
expect it from us, provided that with sincere and impartial Minds we set our
selves to consider and weigh the Evidence and with great Humility beg the
Assistance of Divine Grace, without which God may justly leave us to our
Unbelief.

It would be too large a Subject now to lay open the several Arguments to prove
that it is as evident, as a matter of Fact can be made to us, that God did send
his Son that the World through him might be saved; Therefore I shall only
mention these two things.

1. That if the Matters of Fact are true concerning the History of Christ's
Coming, as related by the Evangelists, there can be no Reason to doubt his
being the Son of God. For he that was the most Exact Pattern of Humility and
Self-denial, not only frequently assumes this Title to himself, and his most
intimate Disciples affirm it of him; but God himself gave the most ample and
convincing Testimony to it; by his miraculous Birth; and a Voice from Heaven to
that purpose at his Baptism; by a long Train and Series of Public and Useful
Miracles to attest the Truth of his Doctrine; by his Resurrection from the Dead
and Ascension into Heaven, and wonderful Effusion of the H. Ghost, with the
strange Effects which followed it; so that no one who does believe these things
to be true can have any ground to say that he cannot believe Christ to be the
Son of God.

2. That if these Matters of Fact are not to be believed as True we cannot be
bound to believe any thing but what we see our selves. For the distance of Time
and Place are equal in this Case; and no other Matters of Fact are so well
Attesten as these are. And so, as the Apostle says of Christ's Resurrection,
If he be not risen our Faith is vain; so in this case I say if there be not
Reason to believe these things All Faith is vain. For no other Matters of Fact,
which we should be accounted Fools for not believing, have had such a sort of
Testimony which these have had. For these things were not conveyed by a silent
Tradition for some time till the Chief Parties were dead who could either Prove
or Disprove them; but they were Public and Exposed to all manner of
Examination; They were not delivered by one or two, who were trusted with a
Secret, but openly avowed by a great number of Competent Witnesses, who were
present; and none of them could be brought by the greatest Sufferings to deny,
or falsify, or conceal any part of their Evidence; that when these things had
been thus delivered by those who saw them, who were most remarkable for their
Innocence and Integrity, in the next Ages they were examined and enquired into
by Men of Sagacity and Learning, who upon the strictest Search found no reason
to suspect their Testimony; and therefore heartily embraced and defended the
Christian Faith. And from thence they have been conveyed down to us; not by an
uncertain Oral Tradition, which can hardly hold the same from one end of the
Town to another; but by unquestionable Writings; of such Authority, that the
Christians would rather dye than deliver up their Books. And in these are all
those Circumstances contained, which we are bound to believe as Christians;
among which this is one of the Chief, that God sent his Son into the World for
the Salvation of Mankind.

To sum up all; I desire those who after all this pretend that they are
willing to believe as much as they can, and those who are liable to any
Suggestions of Infidelity, to consider seriously with themselves, whether there
can be a greater and more noble Design, more becoming the Wisdom, Power and
Goodness of God to carry on, than that of rescuing Mankind out of a miserable
State, and putting them into a certain way of Eternal Happiness? Whether such a
Design must not be discovered in some particular Age of the World, with all the
Circumstances relating to it? Whether that Age were not the fittest of all
others, wherein the most remarkable Prophecies were to be accomplished, as to
the Coming of the Messiah, while the second Temple was standing? Whether the
Difficulties as to Human Testimonies be not equal to all Ages and Things?
Whether because it is possible for all men to deceive, it be reasonable to
infer that all men are deceived; and that there is nothing but Illusion and
Imposture in the World; and that all men lie and deceive for the sake of Lying
and Deceiving? But if there be a Difference to be made between Men and between
Testimonies; then we are to examine the different Characters of Truth and
Falsehood and give our Assent according to them. And if after the severest
Examination we do not find sufficient Reason to believe that God sent his Son
into the World for the Salvation of Mankind, upon such Testimonies as are given
of it, we must conclude all Mankind to be made up of Fraud and Imposture; and
that there is no such thing as Sincerity and Honesty in the World; or that if
there be, it is not possible for others to discern it. Which are such fatal
Reproaches upon Human Nature, that no one who pretends to any Regard to it can
be guilty of. For if they be universally true, they must condemn themselves; if
not, we must see some very particular Reason why we should not rather think
them deceived, than fix such an Indelible Blot upon the Reputation of Mankind.
And surely it is a great Advantage to the Truth of Religion to find, that it
cannot be overthrown but by such Methods, as equally overturn all Truth and
Certainty, and that the Faith of Christianity stands not only upon the same
Bottom with the common Faith of Mankind. But if we reject such Assurance as is
offered us for the Faith of the Gospel, our Infidelity cannot be the effect of
Reason and Argument, but of a causeless Suspicion and unreasonable Mistrust of
the best Part of Mankind. Who have most firmly believed the Truth of these
things and have led the most Holy and Exemplary Lives in Hopes of a Blessed
Immortality. And if the Testimony of any Persons deserves to be taken before
others, it must be of such who could have no Design upon this World but were
resolved by Faith and Patience to prepare for a Better.

To Conclude. For us who believe and own the Truth of this great and
fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, we have something else to do than
merely to Vindicate and Assert it. This at some times is more necessary than at
others; and I heartily wish this were none of them. I am willing to hope the
best of all who in such an Age of Infidelity have the Courage and Zeal to own
the Faith of this Day; viz. That God sent his Son into the World in order to
the making us for ever Happy. And I hope none who profess themselves Christians
this Day will ever be discouraged by the Mocks and Flouts of Infidels so as to
let go the Anchor of their Hope, or mistrust the Foundation of their Faith. It
is as great a piece of Wisdom to know when to Believe, as when not to Believe;
and it is as certain an Argument of a Weak Mind to be always Doubting, as to be
over-forward in Believing: For the Soil must be very bad that can bear no
Foundation. But withal let us not flatter our selves only that we have a
better Faith than others. For how miserable will our Case be, if we have
nothing but a Superficial Faith; and a sort of Anniversary Devotion. We can
never thank God too much for the Blessing of this Day; but God expects
something more from us, than merely the giving him Solemn Thanks once a Year
for Sending his Son into the World. We must endeavor to answer the End of
God's sending him, i. e. to save us first from our Sins, and then from the
wrath to come. This is the Method which God himself has appointed, not barely
from his own Will and Pleasure, but from the necessary Order and Reason of
Things. For, otherwise a Man might be Rewarded for doing amiss, and Punished
for performing his Duty. If we therefore ever hope for any Benefit by this
coming of Christ into the World, we must apply our Minds to consider seriously
on what Conditions we may reasonably hope for Salvation by him. Can they think
that Christ came to so little purpose as to save Men in their Sins? If that
were to be hoped, there had been no need of his Coming; but it is a hard Work
indeed to save us from them. The Guilt must be expiated, and the Power subdued;
the former Christ has done; but he expects, and with great Reason, that we
should deny ungodly and worldly Lusts, and work out our own Salvation with Fear
and Trembling.

FINIS.
Lately Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall Feb. 22. 1688/9. upon 1 Pet.
4.18.

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, March 23. 1689/90.
upon Ecclesiastes 11.9.

Christian Magnanimity: A Sermon preached in the Cathedral-Church at Worcester,
at the time of the Assizes, Sept. 21. 1690. upon 2 Timothy 1.7.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall, March 1. 1690/1 on Luke 6.46.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at White Hall, March 13. 1691/2. upon Romans
8.6.

The Mysteries of the Christian Faith Vindicated, in a Sermon preached at St.
Lawrence-Iewry, London, April 7. 1691. upon 1 Timothy 1.15.

All Six by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Bishop of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his Diocese, in his Primary
Visitation, begun at Worcester, Sept. 11. 1690.

The Unreasonableness of a Separation from the New Bishops: Or a Treatise out
of Ecclesiastical History. Showing, That although a Bishop was unjustly
deprived, neither He nor the Church ever made a Separation, if the Successor
was not a Heretic. Translated out of an ancient Greek Manuscript in the
Public Library at Oxford.

The Case of Sees Vacant, by an Unjust or Uncanonical Deprivation, stated: in
Reply to a Treatise, entitled, A Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, etc.
Together with the several Pamphlets lately published as Answers to the
Baroccian Treatise: both by Humphrey Hody, D. D. Fellow of Wadham-College in
Oxford.

The Folly and Unreasonableness of Atheism demonstrated, from the Advantage and
Pleasure of a Religious Life; The Faculties of Human Souls; The Structure of
Animate Bodies, and the Origin and Frame of the World: in Eight Sermons,
preached at the Lecture founded by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire in the First
Year 1692. by Richard Bentley, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in
God, Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester.


