Medicina Statica: OR, RULES OF Health, In Eight Sections OF APHORISMS.
Originally written by Sanctorius Chief Professor of Physic at Padua.

Englished by J. D.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar. MDCLXXVI.

The Weighing Chair
a man sitting in a chair on a pulley system, with a meal on a table in front
of him

LICENSED,

May 23. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

TO THE Much Honored, W. Witherings Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
THE grand Concern, in order to felicity in the next World, is that of true
Religion, in order to happiness in this, that of our health. How industriously
and tenderly we ought to demean our selves for the attaining of the former, and
preserving of the latter, the elaborate Works of Divine and Spiritual
Directors, on the one side, and Physicians, on the other, are a sufficient
testimony.

Among the latter, our Author, Sanctorius, chief Professor of Physic, in his
time, at Padua, has been very eminent for his many Productions upon that
Subject; but more particularly by this, wherein he entertains us with a new
discovery; but such as he had found confirmable by above thirty years
experience.

But, Sir, as to the present publication of it in the English Tongue, so long
after its first appearance in the Original, I have only to say, that you were
in some measure the occasion of it. For, though I had had the Traduction by me
some considerable time before; Yet I should have suffered it to have lain by a
while longer, if some accidental discourse concerning it, had not awakened my
thoughts into a change of that Resolution. And that encouraged me to this
Dedication, with this desire only, that it may stand as a public
acknowledgement of the satisfaction and advantages, which I have derived from
your happy ucquaintance, and consequently how much I am,

Worthy Sir, Your most humble Servant, J. D.

Sanctorius TO THE READER.
IT is a thing new, and not before heard of, in Medicine, that any one should
be able to find out the exact weight of insensible perspiration, nor has any
one of the Philosophers or Physicians attempted the doing of any thing in that
part of the Medical Faculty. I am the first that has essayed it, and (if I am
not mistaken) brought the Art to perfection, by reason, and the experience of
thirty years. I have thought it fitter to deliver it in an Aphoristical, than a
Diexodical method, for several reasons: as first, that so I might imitate our
great Dictator, whose steps I have always thought it an honor to follow.
Secondly, I was in a manner necessitated to do so, in regard that the
experiments themselves, wherein I had spent many years, did naturally so lead
me to this Aphoristical way of doctrine, as that I have digested the Aphorisms,
excellently well connected amongst themselves, in this wonderful order, as Bees
having first gathered the Honey from a great variety of flowers, do afterward
in an excellent order and aeconomy dispose it wrought up to perfection into the
little receptacles of their hony-combs.

As to the Advantages of the Art, I shall say nothing, since it is known to
all, of how great concern in the medical faculty, the knowledge of insensible
perspiration is. Only I would have the kind Reader take this one Advertisement,
that since the state of humane affairs is such that men are more apt enviously
to oppose, than studiously to promote the advancement of new designs, I know
that many, not only among the vulgar, but also among the learned, not conducted
by a love of the Truth, but hurried away by ambition, or the vain letchery of
contradiction, or pure envy, will rise up against this new Art, and will
heavily inveigh against it, though they are not so much as acquainted with the
very name of it. But, if they are desirous to be followers of the truth, I
shall so far satisfy them all, as that they shall not only apprehend the pure
refined truth in their minds and understandings, but they shall see it with
their Eyes, and feel it with their Hands, if they shall but strictly examine,
by the Balance, all those things which I have delivered in this Book,
concerning the ponderation of insensible Perspiration, its causes, time,
advantages and disadvantages, excess and defect, as also of the Air, meats,
drinks, and the other six non-natural things, by which perspiration is
obstructed, or advanced.

Let them not therefore with a supercilious arrogance make a light account of
this Balance, or, like smatterers in knowledge, calumniate this most excellent
Art, inasmuch as I shall not think they deserve any other answer, than that
smart raillery of the Poet Persius; when blinding themselves like the
Andabatae, and being obstinate Truth-haters, they discover to all the world,
that they are not only dull Euboeans and Cordubans, in the perception of the
Truth, but also most frivolous Aristarchus's and Critics, in their censures of
it.

An Account of the Weighing Chair.
THE Aphorisms comprehended in our Book of Statick Medicine, published some
years since, are found to be true, by the use of the Chair, placed at the
Frontispiece.

From which Chair we gain two advantages; the former, by finding out the daily
insensible perspiration of our bodies; which perspiration not well considered,
Medicine proves for the the most part vain and ineffectual: for all
indispositions almost are the productions of a lesser, or larger, perspiration
than is requisite.

The latter, in that, having seated our selves in this Chair, we perceive,
during our refection, when we are come to that just proportion of meat, and
drink, beyond which, or short of which, we are prejudiced.

The Chair is set as it is represented in the aforesaid Figure wherein the Beam
is fastened to the Rafters, at a secret place, in a room above that where you
take refection, because it would be somewhat unsightly in the same Room; as
also by reason of the unlearned, to whom all things that are unusual seem
ridiculous. Now the Chair, being a fingers breadth distant from the Floor,
stands firm, so as that it cannot easily be shaken.

When therefore, by reason of the refection we have taken, we are come to the
just weight and measure before prescribed, then the remote part of the Beam is
a little elevated, and the Chair withal immediately descends a little. That
descent of the Chair tells the person sitting in it, that he has taken the
requisite quantity of his refection.

Now what quantity or weight of wholesome meats is convenient for every one,
and how much the insensible perspiration ought to be in their respective
bodies, to wit, that perspiration which is commodiously weighed by the Chair,
any one may easily understand by our Book of Statick Medicine.

THE SECTIONS.
1. OF the Ponderation of insensible Perspiration. 2. Of Air and Waters. 3. Of
Meat and Drink. 4. Of Sleep and Vigilance. 5. Of Exercise and Rest. 6. Of
Venery. 7. Of the Affections of the Mind. 8. An Answer to the Staticomastix.
Rules of Health.
The First Section.
OF Insensible Perspiration, AND THE EXACT WEIGHT thereof.
Aphorism I.
IF the addition of those things that are deficient, and the substraction of
those that are exuberant, be daily made, as to quantity and quality, such as it
ought to be, lost health would be recovered, and the present always preserved.

II.
If the Physician, who has the oversight of other men's Health, be capable of
judging only of the sensible addition, and evacuation, and knows not the
quantity of their daily insensible perspiration, he does not cure, but deceive
them.

III.
He only who knows, to what quantity, and when, the secret perspiration of a
man's body amounts to more or less, shall find out how much, and when, any
thing ought to be added, or subtracted, in order to the preservation, or
recovery of his Health.

IV.
Insensible perspiration alone is commonly wont to exceed all the sensible
perspirations put together.

V.
Insensible perspiration is made either by the pores of the body, which is
transpirable in all its parts, and is enclosed in the Skin as it were in a net;
or by respiration, performed by the Mouth, which in one day commonly amounts to
about half a pound: for that may be discovered by the dewey drops upon a
Looking-glass, if it be set close to the Mouth.

VI.
If the meat and drink taken in one day amount to the weight of eight pounds,
the insensible transpiration ordinarily amounts to five pounds, or thereabouts.

VII.
The quantity of insensible transpiration admits of some variety according to
the diversity of Nature, Climate, Seasons, Age, Diseases, Aliment, and other
things that are non-natural.

VIII.
It may be easily computed what was the quantity of the nocturnal perspiration,
and that of the sensible excrements, by weighing the body in the morning,
before and after sensible excretion.

IX.
If the weight of the body begin to be augmented more than it is wont, without
any greater addition of meat and drink, or a retention of the sensible
excrements, there ensues a difficulty of breathing.

X.
The Body is preserved in the same state of Health, when it returns to the same
weight, without any unusual sensible evacuation: But if it be reduced to the
same weight, by a more than ordinary evacuation, by Urine, or Stool, it begins
to receed from its former Health.

XI.
If it be perceived by ponderation, that there has been any obstruction of the
perspiration, there will succeed in the subsequent days, either a more
plentiful perspiration, or some more abundant sensible evacuation, or some
symptom of an evil habit of the body, or a Fever.

XII.
Much perspiration, and a plentiful and more than usual sensible evacuation are
not consistent together.

XIII.
If any one does sensibly evacuate more than is requisite, his perspiration is
less than is requisite.

XIV.
It is an ill sign, when a man goes to Stool, Urines, or Sweats, more than is
requisite, and perspires less than he should do.

XV.
If the body be daily reduced to the same weight, without any alteration in the
evacuation of those things that are perspirable, it will need no crisis, and
will be continued in a sound posture.

XVI.
When the body is one day of one weight, and another day of another, it argues
an introduction of evil qualities into it.

XVII.
That weight, which to any one is such, as that, when he goes up some steepy
place, he feels himself lighter than he is wont, is the exact standard of good
Health.

XVIII.
Evil qualities are the productions of excess, but we must not affirm the
contrary, to wit, that good qualities are the productions of defect.

XIX.
Not only the weight, but the excess also is diminished, either by the
evacuation of the sensible or insensible crude matter, or by that of the
sensible or insensible concocted matter. The latter conduces to health, the
former takes away the excess, but leaves the ill quality behind.

XX.
There are two kinds of insensible transpiration; the one is immediately made
after sleeping, upon the completing of the concoction, and after this there is
an augmentation of a man's strength; the other, in the time of vigilance; and
this later is occasioned by crude humors, and by reason thereof the strength
is impaired. For it is performed with more or less violence, answerably to the
greater or less motion of the vigilance.

XXI.
That perspiration which eases the body of a great and that an unprofitale
burden, is not that which is attended with Sweating, but that invisible
expiration or breathing, such as is that, which in the space of Four and Twenty
hours, in the winter time, may exhale Fifty Ounces, or more.

XXII.
Invisible perspiration becomes visible, either when there is an excess of
nutriment, or when there is a remission of Heat, or by reason of violent motion.

XXIII.
Insensible perspiration attended by Sweating is not good; because sweating
abates the strength of the fibers. Yet sometimes it is accounted good, because
it occasions a diversion from a greater evil.

XXIV.
The more subtle and free from moisture the invisible perspiration is; the
more Healthy it is.

XXV.
All the liquid excrements are the more weighty, and fall down to the bottom:
the thick are lighter, and keep up on the top, such as are hard and thick
Dregs, Spittles, and others of that kind.

XXVI.
Liquid excrements, allowing an equality as to quantity, take off a greater
burden from the body, than the hard and consistent.

XXVII.
Liquid meats are also the more weighty, and the solid the more light; Bread
and Flesh are light; Wine and Broaths are heavy. A Cup of Wine is of equivalent
weight to a piece of Bread though above thrice as big as it in bulk.

XXVIII.
When the Body seems to be more burdensome to a man, when it is not really so,
he is in a worse condition, than if it seem and is felt to be such, when it is
really such.

XXIX.
The weight of an Animal may be considered two ways; for these two things are
consistent, to wit, that the body may be more weighty than usual, and yet the
person fancy himself lighter; and on the contrary, that the body may be
lighter than usual, yet the party feel himself heavier.

XXX.
If these two things concur, to wit, that a man feel himself lighter than he
is, and yet is not really so, it is an argument of a most healthful
constitution.

XXXI.
That body which is reduced to a less weight, than is proportionable to the
just computation of its healthful state, is in a worse condition, than that,
which acquires a greater weight than is proportionable to its Healthfulness.

XXXII.
When the body, by reason of any exercise of it self, or of the mind, becomes
of less weight, there immediately ensues a diminution of its vigor; which does
not happen, if it becomes of less weight after sleep, when there is a perfect
concoction.

XXXIII.
If without any precedent violence there be a diminution of the weight, and an
impairing of the vigor; the reason is, because there is not so much restored,
as had been lost.

XXXIV.
There are but three ways, whereby an Animal is weakened, either while the
weight of the body is augmented, without any impairing of its vigor; when the
vigor is diminished, the same weight of the body still remaining; or lastly,
when both vigor, and weight admit of diminution.

XXXV.
That weariness which ensues upon the Body's becoming less strong, and of less
weight, is more dangerous than any other: for ponderosity is a kind of strength.

XXXVI.
The weight of the body communicates strength to us, when we either draw any
thing downwards, or carry, turn, or thrust it.

XXXVII.
The strength of an old man does many times depend more on the weight, than the
vigor of his body: an old Animal of little weight may live a long time, but
cannot be strong.

XXXVIII.
If after sleeping the body be reduced to its usual weight, without feeling any
trouble, it is well; for it argu^ perfect concoction; but if with trouble, it is
ill.

XXXIX.
The body does not fall into any disease upon external miscarriages, unless it
have some of the entrails prepared for it: that preparation is discovered by
the more or less than usual weight, occasioned not without some precedent
disturbance.

XL.
If nature be obstructed while she is employed in the office of perspiration,
she becomes presently defective in diverse others.

XLI.
When the head aches, the body receives a sudden check in perspiration, and
becomes more ponderous.

XLII.
The first seeds of diseases are more certainly discovered by the alteration of
the unusual perspiration, than by the obstruction of the offices.

XLIII.
If by ponderation thou shall find that the matter of usual perspiration is
retained in the body, and that the party does neither sweat nor urine for some
days after, infer thence that the retained matter prognosticates future
corruption.

XLIV.
But if by ponderation thou shall find, that, upon some violent cause, the
perspirable matter is more than usually emitted out of the body, be assured,
that the place where the perspirable matters had been lodged, and whence they
were violently evacuated, is filled with crudities, which are crowded into the
smallest passages.

XLV.
Yet if those crudities which so force their way in, could, as to all parts, be
rendered fluid and perspirable, 'twere well; but if not, the part wherein they
are contained first becomes hard, like Leather, and at last schirrous.

XLVI.
If that which is perspirable should not be dissipated either by nature, or
some feverish heat, the body would be immediately prepared for a malignant
Fever.

XLVII.
Such as are in Fevers are as likely to grow worse and worse, if their
perspiration be diverted by the excessive applications of Medicines from an
unskilful Physician, as it might be if diverted by the miscarriages of the
patients themselves.

XLVIII.
A small quantity of Cassia does not divert perspiration, does not impair the
strength, but only eases the body of a superfluous weight: but other Medicines
contribute more to evacuation, are diffused to the more remote parts, and
render the body lighter; and yet the Meat and Drink, which is received
afterward, fill up the evacuated passages, thence the belly and bladder are
exsicatted, and soon after the body commonly becomes more ponderous.

XLIX.
Any Pain, or Grief of the body, obstructs the passage of that perspirable
matter which is concocted.

L.
Any cold, even the least, that we feel in the night while we are asleep,
obstructs perspiration.

LI.
One of the most frequent causes that hinder perspiration, in the Summer time,
is the often turning of our bodies in bed.

LII.
There are three internal causes of the obstruction of perspiration, Nature's
being otherwise employed, diversion, and want of strength.

LIII.
Hence it appears by a statical ponderation, that on the day a man takes
Physic, and during the space of three hours after refection, there is little
perspiration: for on such day of taking Physic Nature is busied about sensible
evacuation; and after meat she is intent on the first concoction.

LIVE.
In Fluxes, and Vomiting, perspiration is obstructed, because it is diverted.

LV.
A burdensome weight of Garments is a hindrance to perspiration, because they
abate a man's strength.

LVI.
The body does not perspire every hour after the same rate, in regard that
after refection, in the space of five hours, it is commonly wont to exhale a
pound or thereabouts; from the fifth hour to the twelfth, about three Pound;
from the twelfth to the sixteenth (at which time we are to take refection, or
Physic) hardly half a pound.

LVII.
He who takes his refection, or is evacuated by Physic, during the hours of
greatest perspiration; such as are, for the most part, those of the morning, is
highly injured; because presently after meat, as also after Physic,
perspiration is extremely diverted.

LVIII.
The secret and insensible perspiration eases us more than all the sensible
ones put together: for, after sleep, before there be any evacuation of the
sensible excrements, every one feels himself lighter, because he is really
become lighter, by three pound or thereabouts.

LIX.
In the space of one night, there are commonly evacuated, of Urine, sixteen
Ounces, more or less; of concocted excrements, by stool, four Ounces; and by
occult perspiration, forty and above.

LX.
There are many who in the space of four and twenty hours evacuate as much by
insensible perspiration as they do by stool in the space of fifteen days.

LXI.
How comes it then, that most of our Countrymen, in all discases, mind only
the evacuation by Stool or Urine, and hardly ever think of insensible
perspiration?

LXII.
If in the night thou have perspir'd more than usually, but without Sweating or
any disturbance, be assured of thy being in perfect Health.

LXIII.
Then are we at the greatest distance from any disease, when we are come to the
mean proportion of the latitude of healthy ponderation, not through spontaneous
sensible evacuation, or that prescribed by the Physician, or yet by fasting,
but by the insensible perspiration, which comes by sleep, after perfect
concoction.

LXIV.
What quantity of perspiration is convenient for every one, in order to his
continuance in a most healthful constitution of body, you will thus find out.
Observe in the morning, after a somewhat-plentiful Supper over night, that sort
of greater perspiration, which may be completed in thy self in the space of
Twelve Hours: grant it to have amounted to Fifty Ounces: some other morning,
after fasting overnight, yet with this proviso, that thou did not exceed at
thy Dinner the day before, make the same observation; let us admit the
perspiration to have amounted to Twenty Ounces: This fore-known, pitch upon
that moderate proportion of Meat and other non-natural causes, which will be
likely to reduce thee daily to the mean between Fifty and Twenty Ounces; and
that mean will be Thirty Five Ounces. Thus may thou live a long and healthful
life, nay happily arrive to that of a hundred years.

LXV.
The healthful bodies of men, and such as are most moderate in their diet,
become every month more than usually ponderous, to wit, by one pound or two,
and are reduced to the usual weight about the month's end, as it happens to
Women, but after a crisis made by a more plentiful or more muddy emission of
Urne,

LXVI.
Before the said menstrual crisis made soon after sleep, either there is felt a
drowsiness of the head, or weariness of the body; and afterward, by a more
plentiful Evacuation of Urine, all things are quieted.

LXVII.
The external causes which ordinarily obstruct perspiration are a cold,
troubled, and moist air; swimming in cold water, gross, and viscous meats; the
intermission of Corporeal exercise, or that of the mind, and, in robust
persons, over much abstinence from venery.

LXVIII.
External cold obstructs Perspiration in a weak body, because its heat is
dissipated; but in a robust person, it augments it: for the heat is forced to
the bottom, and reduplicated, and thereupon nature is corroborated, and upon
that the weight of the perspirable matter that is retained being by her
consumed, the body becomes, and is felt lighter.

LXIX.
The health of that body is more firm and of longer continuance, whose weight
in the process of many years is neither augmented nor diminished, than that of
a body whose weight is altered every year.

LXX.
For a body to be reduced to its usual ponderosity, by the accession of crude
humors, is ill; but if it be by the addition of such as are concocted, it is
most wholesome.

LXXI.
It is an ill sign, when a healthy person becomes of less weight than usual, it
being supposed his course of life be the same as before: for there is not any
refusion of that wholesome matter which had been lost.

LXXII.
The concocted excrements of the belly are of great bulk, but little weight;
they swim on the surface, by reason of the air contained in them, and whatever
may be evacuated, at one and the same time, never exceeds the third part of a
pound.

LXXIII.
If it happen that in one days space, through some miscarriage or other, there
be so great a retention of perspiration as may amount to a pound, nature is
commonly three days employed in the insensible expurgation of that which had
been retained.

LXXIV.
Then does nature make a great insensible evacuation, when she endeavors to
void perspirable matter retained, by yawnings and extensions of the joints.

LXXV.
The perspirable matter consists of two parts, to wit, a light, and a ponderous.

LXXVI.
The ponderous part is so exuberant that living creatures are generated of it,
as Punaizes, lice, and the like.

LXXVII.
From the more ponderous part of perspiration do proceed the contagious
Infections of such as lie together: for the light part vanishes, but the more
ponderous, being adhesive, does infect.

LXXVIII.
They who in the scorching Heats of Summer are obstructed in the exhalation of
the perspirable matter, are incommodated by Heat; but to those who have an
absolute freedom of respiration, the Heat is not troublesome.

LXXIX.
A greater weight differs from a lesser equal healthful, because the greater
does the more accelerate old Age. Be it supposed, that some person has his
Health as well when he weighs two hundred weight, as at two hundred and five
pound: we have observed that the excess of those five pounds did more
accelerate old Age.

LXXX.
Why does Animated Flesh live, and not putrify, as a carcass does? Because it
is daily renewed. Why are Children in a capacity of living longer than old men?
Because they may be more often renewed, since they begin from the lowest weight
of the whole latitude, and so proceed to the highest: for they are capable of
most of the Healthful weights. Why is there a necessity that old men should
die? Because they are capable only of the last proportions of weight. But why
only of those? because their fibers are hard, and, as such, cannot be any more
renewed; whence death ensues.

LXXXI.
Why are they cured are who surpised by some dangerous Disease? because they
are capable of several sorts of Healthy weights: for such Diseases take away
thirty pounds from men's bodies, more or less, as the bodies are more or less
repleat, and as the Disease is more or less hot, and according to its
continuance.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
LXXXII.
Old men prolong their lives by frequent Spittings; for these being retained
within the body, as being incapable of coction or digestion, hinder
perspiration; the consequences whereof are suffocation and death.

LXXXIII.
Old Age is indeed a Disease, but may last a long time, if the body be made
easily perspirable.

LXXXIV.
Venery, actual frigidity of the body, over-plentiful drinking, supping as
young men do, to be angry more than needs, and much exercise; all these shorten
the lives of old men.

LXXXV.
Old men reach not decrepit Age by reason of the weakness of their expulsive
faculties. Thence it comes to pass; that when they drink more than it was
requisite they should, they urine less, and perspire less than they are wont.
The remedy is, that the substraction be equivalent to the addition.

LXXXVI.
Insensible perspiration being quite obstructed, does not only deprive the
chiefest parts of life, but also one ignoble part. It deprives the chiefest,
when there is an Apoplexy in the Brain; palpitation in the Heart, an excess of
Blood in the Liver; and a suffocation in the Matrix; it deprives the ignoble
part by Gangrene.

LXXXVII.
That Women are troubled with the suffocation does not proceed from the Womb's
compressing the midriff, but from the frigidity of the corrupted seed, which
does not want perspiration.

LXXXVIII.
The humors of persons troubled with the Gout, though they are most gross, are
dissolved only by way of vapor.

LXXXIX.
Vomiting diverts Urine and perspiration.

XC.
The frequent turning of the body in bed, since the doing of it requires the
assistance of all the muscles, does weaken, and obstruct concoction and
perspiration. The remedy is, for one to be obstinately resolv*d to lie in one
and the same posture.

XCI.
While the knees are kept actually warm the feet are not chil'd; such persons
sleep well, they perspire more, and urine less.

XCII.
Looseness of the belly is taken away by those things which augment
perspiration, of which kind Bathing is one.

XCIII.
As the Loadstone is better preserved where there is much iron; and wine,
better kept in a great vessel, than a little one: So such bodies as are more
ponderous, yet healthy withal, do better preserve strength, than such as abate
in their weight, through want of aliment.

XCIV.
They who urine more than they drink, do perspire little, or nothing at all.

XCV.
Why is there an obstruction of insensible perspiration in intermittent
Fevers? because the peccant humor is in the circumference of the body.

XCVI.
In the Dropsy, the water in the lower part of the belly is not dissolved,
because its drought and hardness hinder perspiration.

XCVII.
Hot humors being got together into any part are to be entertained with hot
digestives, in order to their dissolution by insensible perspiration.

XCVIII.
Why is fainting or swouning beneficial in high Fevers? because it causes
sweating and a strong perspiration.

XCIX.
If the pricking of a nerve be closed up with Milk, Meal, or any such thing,
the retained ichor becomes so sharp and corroding, that the Patients die of
Convulsions, if the wound be not opened with Oil.

C.
Perspiration is beneficial in tumors, if it be procured by things actually
and potentially moist; otherwise they turn to a scirrhus, by dissolving the
tenuious humor, and leaving the gross.

CI.
If any part of the body be full of blood, or some other humor, as it is
observed in tumors, and in the pleurisy it self, it is not to be refrigerated;
because, the matter being evacuated, it is refrigerated of it self.

CII.
Hypochondriacal persons are recovered of their Distemper, if their bodies be
made perspirable by frequent Bathings, and be kept to moist diet.

CIII.
Insensible perspiration procured by fomentations, in an unpurged body,
attracts more humors than it dissolves; as appeared in Simon's case.

CIV.
Those bodies which insensibly perspire much are neither purged nor blooded, as
it is manifest in Children.

CV.
How come Lice to be generated? Because the perspiration of the malignant
ichor, or thin matter, is obstructed.

CVI.
A Gangrene is prevented by those things that promote perspiration; by those
that promote suppuration, it becomes a sphacelus, that is, when any part is
mortified by inflammation.

CVII.
Why does the part affected with a Gangrene die? Because the little arteries,
by reason of the redundancy of blood, are not raised up. It Is remedied by
sensible and insensible perspiration.

CVIII.
The most clammy humors in robust bodies make their way out through the
narrowest passages, as it is manifest by the Fatness voided by Urine, as also
by a mixture of Water and Honey injected into a wounded breast; and consequently
they must make their way through the insensible passages.

CIX.
By difflation, as well the beneficial as the superfluous matter is evacuated;
but if after sleep strength and vigor be acquired, the superfluous matter only
is for the most part evacuated.

CX.
That difflation which is not sensibly perceived is natural, and is an argument
of strength; but sweating argues the contrary.

CXI.
If in the winter time any part of the body be very cold, the whole does so far
sympathize with it, that the concoction and perspiration of the whole is
thereby lessened.

CXII.
Swimming is more safe toward the evening: in the morning, the pores are
stopped by the coldness of the water, whence there is some danger of a Fever.

CXIII.
If in the Summer time the body ly uncovered, the perspiration is obstructed;
whereupon ensue a drowsiness and heaviness of the Head, and a bruised
unweildiness of the body.

CXIV.
If the weight of the body be augmented in the space of five or six days, it
is not to be taken off of a sudden, but by degrees: for abstinence from food,
if it be extraordinary, hurts the Stomach, the Brain, and the Heart, and after
a while, the whole body.

CXV.
In Autumn, the weight of the body is augmented; which if it exceed the
standard of the Healthy latitude, Tertians, and other putrid Fevers, are apt
to be the consequences thereof.

CXVI.
Things that are extreme cold in a violent Fever, if they be not heated, prove
mortal, by reason of the difficulty of transpiration.

CXVII.
Nothing is more hurtful to malignant Ulcers, than those things that hinder
perspiration, as fatness, oil, wax.

CXVIII.
Of all the intermittent Fevers, the Quotidian only is not without danger; for
Phlegm is one of the chiefest things that obstruct perspiration.

CXIX.
If the perspiration be stopped in the neck, the sense of the pericranium is
stupify'd, as may be observed in persons walking in the wind and rain.

CXX.
Nothing is more apt to take away putrefaction, than for one to use much
Ventilation, not only that which is procured by what is drawn in, but also by
what is evacuated through the insensible passages.

CXXI.
Refrigerations in acute diseases are symptoms of death, as in Hermocrates: for
they take away perspiration.

CXXII.
After bathing, the pores of the skin ar^ condensed with oil, to the end that,
the alimental moisture being ^ttracted may not be dissolved. In dangerous cases
therefore, use oil to close and not to open the pores.

CXXIII.
And yet that course of diet, which we least regard, brings us to an old age
great as that of Philip.

CXXIV.
The Diaphragma, or Midriff by contracting it self to its principle, dilates
the breast; by that dilatation, is inspiration wrought. And by dilating it
self, it contracts the breast, and by that contraction expiration is wrought.

CXXV.
But the Spincter, or the Muscle that shuts the bladder, by contracting it self
to its principle closes the bladder, and keeps in the Urine; by spreading it
self, it dilates the bladder, and emits the urine.

Of the Pestilence.
CXXVI.
THings infected with the plague, communicate the infection, as long as the
next and remote causes remain; but any one of those failing, the poison ceases,
like the motion of a clock, when, upon the breaking of a Tooth in any one
Wheel, it is at a stand.

CXXVII.
We are not infected with the Plague by contact, but by drawing in the
pestiferous Air, or the vapors arising from infected goods. It happens thus:
the vital spirit is infected by the Air, by such infection of the spirit the
blood is congealed, which last being fore'd outward raises carbuncles, black
spots, and Buboes: if it remain within, it causes death; if it be quite
expelled, we are past all danger.

CXXVIII.
If the whole infection be fore'd out into Carbuncles and Buboes, it is a good
sign; if not, it is mortal.

CXXIX.
We are not of our selves infected with the Plague, but it is brought to us by
others. This is manifest by the experiment of such as are shut up in Nunneries.

CXXX.
Not all, but much about the third part of mankind dies of the Pestilence. That
it is so, may be seen by the experiment of those whose office it is to view the
dead.

CXXXI.
They who conceive the blackness of the spots to be a sign of adustion, are
mistaken; for many times aged men, being internally and externally cold,
without any fever, depart this life in two days time, with the same blackness,
but proceeding from a Thrombus, or clots of blood.

CXXXII.
If a small quantity of blood, by reason of the vital spirit's being infected,
becomes a clot of blood, and this last be wholly thrust out by buboes and
carbuncles, they are cured; if it be not wholly forced out, they die, as in the
black spots.

CXXXIII.
Consequent to this is it, that they, who have their ulcers and buboes opened,
if the internal infection be wholly come out, recover; if not, they die.

CXXXIV.
There are two ways to put a stop to the plague; to wit, that the sound be
separated, and that the infected may have place enough to air themselves. There
are two ways to do the latter; to wit, that they be not sent to places they
abhor to come into; and that their household stuff be not burnt.

CXXXV.
They whose lungs are thin, are easily infected with the Plague; the contrary
is to be affirmed of those whose Lungs are thick. It argues the thinness of the
Lungs, when any one drawing in his breath, as much as he can, that single
stroke of the Pulse is somewhat weaker, or more gentle.

CXXXVI.
The Plague is not to be compared to fire, which increases upon the addition of
fuel; but the former decreases, though the fuel of it remain in the same
posture.

CXXXVII.
The rays of the Plague are removed from one place to another by the wind; but
not by any violence of a lucid body.

CXXXVIII.
They who prescribe any other remedy for the shunning of the Plague, besides
that of flying from it, are either ignorant men, or cheating Quacks.

CXXXIX.
Hence it comes to pass, that persons of Quality none almost are cured by
remedies; but very many of the meaner sort of people, without them.

CXL.
Why does the Plague continue long? Because, while it rages, they air things
that are infected; which, while they are cleaning, Thieves steal and scatter up
and down; after the Plague is at a stand, they do not infect, otherwise the
Plague would be perpetual.

Because some among the infected persons, when they are forced out of the City,
do not air themselves as they should do; by which means the infection increases.

Because they do not prohibit the peoples assembling in Churches. Divine
service at such times should be performed in the open air.

Because men make use of Surgeons that are strangers, or foreigners, who
are the better pleased, the greater the Plague is.

Because they do not separate the sound into other houses from the infected.

Because they use internal remedies against the Plague, when none can be
administered, but what are hurtful.

Because they permit poultry to be brought to the market, which the sound
coming to handle, after they had been handled by the infected, are afterward
thereby infected.

OF AIR and WATERS.
SECT. II.
Aphorism I.
A Cold Air, and cold bathings put strong bodies into a heat, and, by taking
away what is superfluous, make them lighter; but they refrigerate weak bodies,
and, by mastering the heat, make them more ponderous.

II.
Warm air, and bushes actually warm, if crudities do not obstruct, do also
promote perspiration, refresh the inward parts, and render men's bodies lighter.

III.
An external air, penetrating into the innermost parts of the body, through the
trunks of the arteries, may make the body more or less ponderous; less, if it
be subtle, and warm; more, if it be thick, and moist.

IV.
How great the ponderousness of the air is, may in the first place, be gathered
from the greater or lesser weight of the dregs of alom dried before in the Sun,
and afterward exposed to the air in the night time. Secondly, from our feeling
a greater cold than what is observable in the weather-glass. For the moisture
or ponderousness of the air is to us the measure of its coldness. Thirdly, from
the greater or lesser bending of a very thin board, especially if it be of
Pear Tree. Fourthly, from the contraction of the strings of a Lute, or from
Hemp.

V.
How great the ponderousness of water is, may easily be understood, if some
heavy thing be supposed appendent in the water. For that water is lighter, and
consequently the more wholesome, wherein the heavy thing does the more
gravitate; but that wherein it does less gravitate, is the more ponderous and
the more unwholesome.

VI.
That water which is more heavy, and the Air that is more muddy, and more
ponderous, convert the invisible perspiration into an ichor (or thin Matter)
which being pent in, and afterward not dissolved, does for the most part cause
a cachexy, or evil disposition of the body.

VII.
In a cold healthful Air perspiration is also obstructed, the pores are
condensated; but the fibers are corroborated, and the weight of that
perspirable Matter which is retained neither hurts, nor is felt.

VIII.
In a thick foggy air perspiration is obstructed, the passages are filled, but
not condensed, the fibers are loosned, not strengthened, and the weight of the
perspirable Matter unevacuated hurts, and is felt.

XI.
If cold weather succeed a warm Air, such as that in Summer time, it shall that
day, it being supposed that a man takes the same liberty of drinking, hinder
about a third part of the perspiration, which, if it be not made sensible, is
apt to dispose the body to putrefaction, or some evil habit.

X.
The hindrance of perspiration occasioned by unexpected cold is more hurtful to
work bodies, than that which is hindered by degrees.

XI.
He who is surpised unclothed at such time as a cool Air succeeds a precedent
heat, is wont to perspire less by about two pounds in one days space, yet
without any sensible inconvenience to him.

XII.
A pleasant and somewhat cool breeze is more prejudicial to bodies well warmed,
than the cold of Air and Water in an excessive degree: For the former does not
render the body lighter, but obstructs and loosens it; but the latter obstructs
and corroborates it, and thence it comes that the bodies are less ponderous.

XIII.
When the unwholesome qualities of the Air and Water dispose bodies to a
malignant putrefaction, their weight for the most part is but little heeded; as
if this should be the reason of it, that by their corruption the nerves become
stronger, as it is observed in distracted persons.

XIV.
To Swim in cold water after violent exercise is extremely pleasant, but
mortal: for there is nothing more pernicious than opposite motions.

XV.
That which treacherously disposes the entrails to indisposition, does not many
times seem to be either heavy, or unpleasant.

XVI.
A pleasant gale of wind from the south surprising a man at a violent exercise,
is many times mortal; for the gale occasions a difficulty of breathing, and
from the exercise proceeds acrimony.

XVII.
It happens to those, who after supper, are desirous of having a cooler gale of
wind than is requisite, that the perspiration of that part which is not well
clothed is obstructed: but that night or the next day, most of them are
subject to a great aching of the head.

XVIII.
If bodies be suddenly shifted out of a warm air into a cool, they are injured;
because they are rendered of greater weight than is requisite. If removed out of
a cold air into a warm, they are also endammag'd, because they become less
strong.

XIX.
Persons of weak constitutions make a greater conversion of the perspirable
matter retained, into Urine, in the winter time; robust persons do the same in
the summer.

XX.
Fanning obstructs perspiration, and makes the head more ponderous, and more
hot.

XXI.
The wind, as it is colder than the skin, so is it ever obstructive and hurtful
to it, but more than any part to the head, because it is most exposed.

XXII.
In all seasons of the year generally, dry weather is more healthy than
continual rains, for it renders men's bodies lighter.

XXIII.
In the summer time, temperate bodies are less ponderous, than they are in
winter, by about three pounds.

XXIV.
In the summer time men are subject to weariness; not because the body is more
ponderous, but because it is less strong.

XXV.
In a warm air, the body is of less strength, as well by reason that with the
perspiration there is somewhat of the better spirits exhaled, as because the
warmth is not concentrated.

XXVI.
There is always by a warm air somewhat dispersed through the whole skin,
which carries away with it somewhat of the internal good humor.

XXVII.
In the summer time we are troubled with heat, not principally proceeding from
the warmth of the air, for every part of the body is warmer than the
summer-air, but because there is not so much coldness in the summer-air, as
that the natural heat may be sufficiently concentrated. Whence it comes to
pass, that, being so diffused it cannot insensibly evacuate that perspirable
matter which is of its own nature hot: which matter being kept in becomes
sharp, and is the cause of our being troubled with much heat.

XXVIII.
When men's bodies in the hottest seasons, upon sleeping in the night or day
time perspire abundantly, or sweat, they become lighter, and are not that day
troubled with any heat.

XXIX.
If a cold Air immediately succeed the Summer-heat, there will be occasioned,
for the most part, that day, the retention of about a pound of the insensible
excrements.

XXX.
If the Summer prove like the Spring, so as that men's bodies may be reduced to
the weight answerable to the Summer, it must be the effect of Sweating.

XXXI.
At the beginning of Summer, if intense heat come of a sudden, weariness and
faintness ensue, which do not continue long though the sultriness be increased
for some days after, because the weight of the perspirable body is abated.

XXXII.
The same vigor is not so much concerned in struggling with a lesser, as it is
with a greater weight of the body.

XXXIII.
Perspiration procured by the force of warm air or water, is hurtful, unless
the malignancy of it be not balanced by some greater benefit.

XXXIV.
Robust bodies perspire more in the Summer time, by day, in the Winter, by
night.

XXXV.
That impediment of respiration which in the Summertime is apt to be
introductory to a malignant Fever, does hardly in the wintertime cause the
least alternation: for, in the summer, men's bodies are filled with a
perspirable matter of a sharper nature, than they are in winter.

XXXVI.
To sleep in the Summertime with the body uncovered, or abroad in the open
Air, does for the most part dispose it to putrefaction, by hindering the
perspiration.

XXXVII.
The difficulty of respiration does not heat the entrails, unless the
perspirable matter become sharp by reason of its retention, or upon the account
of external heat, or violent motion.

XXXVIII.
In the Summertime when cold does of a sudden succeed heat, the inconvenience
of excessive Venery is hardly perceived: but if the Air reassume its former
warmth, men are very sensible of the injury they have received by the precedent
miscarriage.

XXXIX.
The injury men receive by the not-immoderate exercise of Venery is commonly
balanced by an equal benefit, if the heat be concentrated by the cool Air.

XL.
In the Summer-nights men's bodies are most disposed to Fevers, by reason of
the vicissitude of the Air; for at the beginning of the night, the Air is
enflamed, but about midnight it is more temperate, and in the morning cool;
whence it comes to pass, that the usual perspirable matter is not evacuated in
such as sleep with the Bed-cloaths off, and their bodies are more ponderous;
which happens not in winter.

XLI.
From the Autumnal Equinox to the Winter Solstice, we perspire every day much
about a pound: from thence to the Spring-Equinox we begin to perspire more
freely.

XLII.
Autumn is an unhealthy season, as well by reason that the perspiration is
obstructed by the cold then coming in, as for that what is not perspir'd
becomes sharp, and corroding.

XLIII.
Autumnal indispositions are avoided, if the body be not of greater weight in
Autumn than it had been in Summer.

XLIV.
That weight which is augmented by degrees, is to be abated by degrees.

XLV.
The more than usual weight of the body is not to be taken off in the Spring,
but in Autumn; for the cold air then coming in is a greater enemy to the weight.

XLVI.
Thou will not be troubled with any disease in Autumn, if the cold weather then
coming in find thee well furnished with clothes, if thou use diuretics, and
wilt be kept in the same weight as before.

XLVII.
He who is well clothed perspires the better for it, and is rendered of less
weight.

XLVIII.
They who in the Wintertime are commonly troubled with diseases proceeding
from the abundance of humors, are to be purged in Autumn, and not in the
Spring, and ought to be reduced to the weight they were of at the beginning of
Summer.

XLIX.
But if the diseases proceed from some malignant quality, the bodies are to be
purged in the Spring, and not in Autumn; for the malignancy of the quality is
more augmented in Summer, than in Winter.

L.
They who at the beginning of the Spring divest themselves too soon, and in
Autumn are backward in putting on their winter-garments, are, in Summer, apt to
fall into Fevers, and in Winter, to be troubled with distillations.

LI.
The retention of the perspirable matter, as it has a sharp quality, causes
Fevers, and Erysipelas's; as to its redundancy, it causes Apostems,
Distillations, or an evil habit of the body.

LII.
External cold, by concentrating the heat, makes nature so much the stronger,
by how much it is the more able to bear about two pounds of perspirable matter
unevacuated over and above its ordinary weight.

LIII.
At the beginning of winter, men's bodies are easily reduced to their usual
weight; but in the beginning of Summer, it is with much ado that they are
reduced to the Summer-weight.

LIVE.
There would be an uninterrupted healthfulness even to the extremity of age, if
men's bodies were kept in an equal weight during the four seasons of the year.

LV.
Those bodies whose weights are much augmented and diminished in the space of a
year, are in great danger.

LVI.
The greater variety there is of the weight of any body in the space of a year;
and the greater the augmentation or diminution of the blood is, so much the
worse is the condition of that body.

LVII.
The augmentation of the weight happens at the beginning of Autumn, the
diminution at the beginning of Summer.

LVIII.
Those bodies, whose weight is augmented, are in a more dangerous condition,
than those whose weight is diminished.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
LIX.
THose parts of the body which are covered do healthfully perspite; but if they
be found uncovered after sleep, their pores are condensated by even the warmest
air.

LX.
That air, which is over cool, moist, or windy, obstructs perspiration: whence
it happens, that such as keep within doors, as for example Women, are not
troubled with Co^^hs, Catarrhes, or inflammations of the lungs.

LXI.
The City air is worse than that of the Country; because it is more thick, and,
not rarifi'd by the wind, takes away the appetite.

OF MEAT and DRINK.
SECT. III.
Aphorism I.
IF the Stomach filled with meat does, while the body sleeps, complete the
first concoction, the perspiration of that night does commonly amount to forty
ounces; if it does not complete it, it comes to but about eighteen.

II.
If the Stomach be quite empty and fasting, though the party sleep, he does not
perspire above eighteen ounces.

III.
A full body, that does not concoct, perspires much about the same rate as one
in a manner fasting, that has not any thing to concoct.

IV.
Meats that are very nourishing, mutton only excepted, from supper over night
to dinner the next day, do not usually perspire above eighteen ounces.

V.
Many who feed plentifully on meats of little nourishment, may, in the space of
one night, perspire above forty ounces.

VI.
Those aliments which continue bodies in their usual weight are either those of
very much nourishment, or such as cause obstinate crudities.

VII.
Those which continue them in their usual lightness are such as they are
accustomed to, and easily evaporated.

VIII.
Mutton is easily concocted, and vaporous; for in a night's space it perspires
one third part of a pound more than other meats, and such as a man is
accustomed to.

IX.
The meats which are made of leavened paste do not make bodies more ponderous,
for they perspire more easily, than turnips.

X.
A healthy person does insensibly exhale as much in the space of one day, as he
does by stool in a fortnight; nay though he once every day evacuate the
concocted and consistent faeces.

XI.
The full Stomach, and the empty, diminish the perspiration; the full stomach
diverts it, by the corruption of meats; the empty attracts it, that it may be
filled.

XII.
When the full Stomach does not complete the concoction, is discovered by the
weight; for then the body perspires less; but the empty stomach is filled with
wind.

XIII.
Windiness is nothing else but an imperfect kind of perspirable matter.

XIV.
The robust person consumes his plentiful feeding by insensible perspiration;
one less robust, by urine; a weak person, for the most part, by the corruption
of the chyle.

XV.
When a man forbears supping, the stomach being empty, and no paroxysm pressing
upon a man, there is a retention of the perspirable matter, and that being
retained becomes sharp, and thereupon the body is prepared for hot distempers.

XVI.
That abstinence from meat which reduces men's bodies to a lesser weight, but
withal such as is unusual to them, is hurtful.

XVII.
Why are there some that die of Hunger, if there be never any defect of blood
in the living creature? Because the blood, making to the empty part of the
belly, forsakes the heart.

XVIII.
Undigested meat, not only as to its quantity, but also as to its quality,
makes the body more ponderous, inasmuch as it hinders Perspiration.

XIX.
When any one seems to himself lighter than he is, and yet is not so, it is a
very good sign; for this proceeds from the Juices of the three Concoctions
exactly digested.

XX.
When there is a lightness and agility of the body felt for a whole day
together, it argues there preceeded a concoction of the chyle and blood, and
that the Dregs, as it were, of the third concoction are almost evacuated.

XXI.
Undigested meat, the more full of nourishment it is, is so much the worse,
either because it causes a greater weight or a worse corruption.

XXII.
The body is rendered most light by the corruption of meat; for all the liquid
excrements are of great weight.

XXIII.
The use of Swines-flesh, and Mushrooms is hurtful, as well because these do
not perspire, as because they suffer not other meats eaten with them to
perspire.

XXIV.
Upon the eating of Swines-flesh and Mushrooms the body commonly perspires less
than it is wont by a third part of a pound.

XXV.
Melons perspire so little, that they abate about a fourth part of the usual
perspiration.

XXVI.
That retention of the perspiration caused by Melons is evacuated by Urine, or
Sweating.

XXVII.
Grapes and green Figs perspire but little, and somewhat hinder the
perspiration of other meats; happily because they are sensibly evacuated.

XXVIII.
That kind of food does perspire best of all, and conveniently nourishes, whose
weight is not felt in the belly.

XXIX.
Plentiful feeding is more hurtful in a sedentary and idle person, than in one
that is employed; for the entrails are made heavy by rest, but are eased of
their weight by exercise.

XXX.
The body perspires best after that meat, whose faeces are emitted in a certain
consistency.

XXXI.
Chickens-flesh shall be of less nourishment than a Lettice, if a man eat so
plentifully thereof, as that it cannot be evacuated otherwise than by the way
of liquid faeces.

XXXII.
By ponderation you will find out when fasting conduces to your Health, and
when it does not: it will be healthful, if there be any thing of the precedent
day's refection left to be perspir'd, if there be not, it will be unhealthful.

XXXIII.
When the body is reduced by diet to a weight below the lesser standard of its
healthy weight, what it loses of its strength is irrecoverable. But that there
is a lesser and greater weight in reference to Health, you will find by the
LXIV. Aphorism of the first Section, and by the XL. of this third.

XXXIV.
If thou can but find out every day what quantity of meat is convenient for
thee, thou will know how to preserve thy vigor and life a long time, and that
thou will discover by the same Aphorism.

XXXV.
The strength of nature is not a little impaired, when a man's supper amounts
sometimes to four pound, sometimes to six.

XXXVI.
That is the most healthful proportion of meat, when after eating, the body
performs whatever it has to do with the same agility, as if it were fasting.

XXXVII.
The body also is much more burdened by eight pounds of meat eaten in a day at
one meal, than by ten pounds taken in the same space of time at three several
meals.

XXXVIII.
That quantity of meat is the most wholesome for every man, which may without any
trouble be overcome by the concoctive faculty; and that is done, if so much be
consumed as is received into the body; for these things will be discovered by
ponderation.

XXXIX.
That quantity of meat is to be received into the body, which nature is able to
concoct, digest, and perspire.

XL.
If nature could digest a hundred pound weight of meat, and there be given but
ninety nine pounds, the animal would upon that account be destroyed in process
of time.

XLI.
Then will meats of good nutriment and juice promise thee a long continuance of
health, when the quantity of perspiration is in the mean, between excess and
defect: The excess, after a plentiful supper of meats of easy perspiration
commonly amounts, in the space of one night, to forty ounces or thereabouts,
the defect but to fourteen. That proportion therefore of meat, which will bring
thee to two and twenty ounces, which is the mean between the other two, will
promise thee infallible health and long life.

XLII.
The opinion of Celsus is not safe for all persons, to wit, that in the use of
the six not natural things, men ought sometimes to be sparing, and sometimes to
exceed.

XLIII.
Bodies are with less trouble reduced to their usual weight, if men take four
pounds of meat at dinner, and four at supper, observing a convenient interval,
than if they take six at dinner and two at supper.

XLIV.
That person destroys himself by degrees, who eats once a day besides his
ordinary meals, whether he eat little or much.

XLV.
The body is made more ponlerous by four ounces of meat that is of much
nutriment, such as Pork, Eeles, and all fat things, than by six ounces of meat
that is of little nourishment, such as are small Fishes, Chickens, small Birds;
and the like.

XLVI.
If there be any difficulty in the concoction of meat which is of little
nourishment, it will happen only in the first concoction; but if there be a
difficulty in the concoction of meat of much nutriment, it will happen in all
the concoctions.

XLVII.
Meat of little nutriment moistens and loosens the belly, is soon digested, and
readily promotes the perspiration of men whether sleeping or waking.

XLVIII.
Meat of much nutriment binds the belly, if it be no^ corrupted, is of
difficult concoction, and perspires little.

XLIX.
Where there is a difficulty of concoction, there is but a slow perspiration.

L.
Not that meat which is fluid, but that which is of better juice ought to be
eaten first; for the Pylorus, or Stomach-gut, is not at the bottom, in men, as
it is in Dogs

LI.
Three inconveniences are consequent to men's feeding on variety of meats; there
is an excess of eating, the concoction is less, and the perspiration less.

LII.
The time of least perspiration is, when the stomach is full, especially with
variety so meats.

LIII.
They who vomit up their supper do immediately remove the pain of their
stomach, but the next morning, they feel their bodies more ponderous: for
vomiting diverts perspiration, by attracting the perspirable matter to the
inward parts; which matter, upon the score of its being sharp causes lassitude
and heat, upon that of its redundancy, it causes heaviness.

LIVE.
That person, who eats more than is requisite, is nourished less than is
requisite.

LV.
They who in their youth are immoderate in their diet, make the Stomach larger
than it should be, whence it comes to pass, that it proves a hard matter to
reduce them afterward to a moderate diet.

LVI.
If any one be desirous to be reduced to a moderate diet, let him use food of
little nutriment, and so the Stomach soon disburthening it self of it, will be
contracted, and reduced to a less capacity.

LVII.
You will find what quantity of meat you should eat, if for several days
together you observe that the body after sleep is without any trouble, reduced
to the same weight.

LVIII.
If after a plentiful supper the body be of less weight the next day, it
happens either by reason of the corruption of the meat, or because nature is
stirred up to expel that which is beneficial, which is extremely hurtful: for
the body is prepared for diseases when those things which are beneficial are
evacuated, and crudities kept within the body.

LIX.
If a man's supper amount to eight pounds, and what he has eaten be corrupted
in the stomach, the next day the body will be of less weight, than if the
supper had been of three pounds, and the meat had not been corrupted.

LX.
Those meats that are most conducive to perspiration are not corrupted, nay
after watching whole nights, they keep a man from weariness and heaviness.

LXI.
Meats not apt to perspire are wont to cause obstructions, corruptions,
lassitude, pensiveness, and ponderosity.

LXII.
Then is a living creature in the worst condition, when after the concoction is
completed, the body seems to be more burdensome than ordinary, while yet it
is of less weight.

LXIII.
If any one has been excessive in eating or drinking, and there ensue thereupon
such sensible evacuations as are greater than usual, the body is, next day,
lighter than usual.

LXIV.
Liquid meats, supposing an equality as to quantity, are more ponderous than
the solid: the liquids go to the bottom, the solid keep on the top: a cup of
wine, or mess of Broth is of more weight, than a whole loaf.

LXV.
If excess in drinking make the Eyes as't were full of tears, it is a sign the
body has not perpir'd as much as it should have done.

LXVI.
If after much drinking, you sweat, or urine much, it is an argument of either
great strength or great weakness.

LXVII.
The drinking of cold water obstructs insensible perspiration, but augments the
sensible.

LXVIII.
In these our days, Drinking, even in temperate persons, is disproportionate:
for men eat commonly after the rate of twelve Ounces, but drink, after that of
forty, and above.

LXIX.
In a man of moderate diet, the nocturnal perspiration sometimes amounts to
three pound; in a person who feeds plentifully, the stomach being empty before,
and strong, it may amount to five pounds.

LXX.
If a body be in its standard of greater weight, fasting is beneficial to it,
if in its mean, it is hurtful, if in its lesser weight, it is much more hurtful.

LXXI.
If after long fasting the body be plentifully fed, the perspiration amounts to
a pound more than it usually does.

LXXII.
To eat immediately after immoderate exercise of body or mind, is hurtful; for
the wearied body perspires with some difficulty.

LXXIII.
When sober persons and such as are moderate in their diet die betimes, their
friends wonder at the strangeness of it, because they know nothing of
insensible perspiration.

LXXIV.
Excess of meat and drink does not only keep the acrimony of the perspirable
matter which is retained lurking in the body, but also the depraved affections
of the parts, especially of those that are not the principal, and that for a
long time; which affections, when the bodies are purged, or brought low by much
fasting, break forth of a sudden, and turn into violent distempers.

LXXV.
That Physician who is to regulate the diet of Princes, if he be ignorant, how
much, and when they daily perspire, deludes, and does not cure them, and if he
do them any good, it is by chance.

LXXVI.
For about the space of four hours after meat, most people do hardly perspire a
pound, thence to the ninth hour, two pound, from the ninth to the sixteenth,
hardly a pound.

LXXVII.
Then is it the proper time to take refection, when the body shall be reduced
to that weight, yet healthful, which it was of a little before the party had
eaten the day before. And this only Apollo himself shall find out without the
Balance.

LXXVIII.
But if the unusual weight of the over-night's drinking be not taken off,
either by the strength of the concoctive faculty, or by corruption the next
day, take the advice of these two verses.

Si nocturna tibi noceat potatio vini,
Hoc tu mane bibas iterum, and fuerit medicina.
If overnight thou take a dose,
And find'st thy self amiss,
Thou must next morn another take:
No remedy like this.
LXXIX.
If the healthful weight of the body, after supper, amount to two hundred pound
weight, the body being rendered less healthful by immoderate venery shall weigh
about a hundred ninety eight pounds, because that remission of vigor is the
hindrance, why two pounds of the aliments cannot, at least without some trouble
or anguish, be converted into the healthful weight.

LXXX.
Meat of easy perspiration does more easily, and with much less trouble recruit
the wasted strength of those who use venery, than does that of difficult
perspiration, or of much nutriment.

LXXXI.
New Wine, though somewhat muddy, if it be concocted in the Stomach, does not
only perspire it self, but very much promotes the perspiration of other meats.
This quality also have those hot things that are flatulent.

LXXXII.
Onions, Garlic, Mutton, Pheasants, but above all the Cyrenaick juice promote
the perspiration of meats not easily perspirable.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
LXXXIII.
A Very small quantity of food is not embraced by the Stomach. Thence comes it,
that it is not concocted, it does not nourish, it does not perspire.

LXXXIV.
Insensible perspiration is an excrement of the third concoction; if therefore
the first concoction be not performed, neither will the third.

LXXXV.
If that quantity of food which amounts to about four pound be hurtful, taken
all at once in a day, the same quantity divided into two or three meals may be
healthful: the repletion of the belly diverts insensible evacuation.

LXXXVI.
The inconveniences attending extraordinary fasting are these, the Head is
filled with humors, the Temples beat, the Hypochondries are dilated, and a
weariness of the arms and thighs.

LXXXVII.
That emptiness of the Stomach which is occasioned by the scantiness of meat,
is greater than that which is occasioned by Physic; which Latter does indeed
excite sensible evacuation, but diverts the insensible.

LXXXVIII.
In Phlegmatic constitutions, if the Stomach be empty in the morning, by
reason of their not having supped the night before, dry food is very
beneficial, such as biscuit.

LXXXIX.
No man will fall into any disease, if he carefully provide that he be not
troubled with crudities.

XC.
It is safer for aged persons to take their refection thrice in a day, as
Antiochus did, than twice, or to eat much at once; for it much obstructs
perspiration.

XCI.
Why did not Antiochus eat Fish at supper? Because they hinder perspiration:
After sleep perspiration is very good, which not performed, there is a
remission of strength and vigor.

XCII.
The coldness and clamminess of the juice of cucumbers is kept in the veins,
nay other unwholesome juices though of easy concoction, by obstructing the
perspiration, cause malignant Fevers.

XCIII.
Why does the corruption of meat cause weariness? Because it diverts
perspiration. But how? Because it causes the coeliack disease. But why does the
coeliack disease cause weariness? Because there comes out along with the
excrements somewhat of the former well concocted meat.

XCIV.
If any one goes with a tired body to supper, or to wash himself, there ensues,
immediately after sleep, a certain chilness over the body, and weariness; yet
about twelve hours after supper, all is well again; because then the concoction
and perspiration is good.

XCV.
Meat after violent exercise is hurtful, as well by reason it is not embraced,
as that it diverts Perspiration.

XCVI.
He who goes to supper with a disturbed mind, digests much less than another,
who is undisturbed and cheerful.

XCVII.
Drinking between dinner and supper is hurtful: but if we drink so much the
less at supper, the hurtfulness is taken off.

XCVIII.
Vomiting after supper weakens a man, not only upon this score, that it voids
the aliment, but also because it diverts perspiration.

XCIX.
If a man exceed in meat and drink once or twice in a month, though he does not
sensibly evacuate the next day, yet he weighs less than usual.

C.
He who confines himself to a regular diet, wants the conveniences of those
persons, who exceed once or twice a month: for the expulsive faculty being
stirred up by redundancy excites so great a perspiration, as without Staticks
no body would believe.

CI.
In a cold body, honey is good, because it nourishes and perspires; in a hot, it
is hurtful, because it turns into choler.

CII.
Nothing more obstructs perspiration, than for a man to drink while the chyle
is preparing.

CIII.
The Liver does not attract the chyle, by reason of its coolness, much less
does it expel the perspirable matter.

CIV.
In a healthy man, if the belly be loose, it either happens through some defect
in the concoction, or the distribution of the chyle, by reason of the
obstruction of perspiration.

CV.
There are two things extremely prejudicial to good health, viz. to give up the
body wholly to a slothful repose, and to eat, before the concoction of what had
been eaten before.

OF SLEEP AND VIGILANCE.
SECT. IV.
Aphorism I.
UNdisturbed sleep is so great a promoter of Perspiration, that, in the space
of seven hours, fifty ounces of the concocted perspirable matter do commonly
exhale out of strong bodies.

II.
A man sleeping the space of seven hours is wont, insensibly, healthfully, and
without any violence, to perspire twice as much as one awake.

III.
That perspiration of a sleeping person, which is attended with much sweating,
is not more plentiful, than any kind of insensible Perspiration, without
sweating.

IV.
After a good night's rest, the body is felt of less weight, as well by reason
of the augmentation of strength, as by that of the exhalation of at the least
about three pounds of excrements.

V.
Disturbed sleep does commonly obstruct one third part of a pound of the usual
Perspiration.

VI.
In undisturbed rest, the Perspiration is sometimes greater, allowing the same
proportion of time, than in violent exercise.

VII.
In the morning-sleep, but after the completing of the first concoction, a
pound of the perspirable Excrements do commonly exhale in the space of one
hour, but if it be not completed, there is not a fourth part exhaled.

VIII.
Those things which hinder sleeping do also obstruct the Perspiration of the
concocted perspirable matter.

IX.
Short sleeping proceeds from the acrimony of the perspirable matter, which is
not evacuated; but the retention of the perspirable matter is commonly
occasioned, by Nature's being more than usually employed about some other
internal functions.

X.
The acrimony of the perspirable matter which is retained, very often ascends
up to the head, disturbs sleep, and diverts the perspiration of the superior
parts.

XI.
If any one, after sleep, feels a kind of pain in his arms, or imagines them
more than usually wearied, it is an argument that the body is of greater
weight, than nature can long endure.

XII.
They who sleep with their feet and legs uncovered, are deprived of as much
perspiration as may amount to a pound in the space of one night.

XIII.
A continual agitation of the body in bed is more disturbant than swift
running; for in the motion of a person running, the muscles only of the
inferior parts are moved, in that of a person lying along, the muscles of the
whole body in a manner are in motion.

XIV.
Perspiration is more obstructed in persons sleeping, by a cool southerly gale
of wind, than it is in persons awake by a great cold.

XV.
If the night's rest be less than usual, there is a diminution in the
exhalation of the concocted perspirable matter, but the perspiration of
crudities is augmented.

XVI.
After meats of easy perspiration men's bodies are rendered rather weak than
weighty; but after those of difficult perspiration, they become both weak and
weighty.

XVII.
The perspiration occasioned by sleep differs in species from that which comes
by vigilance; the former implies the evacuation of concocted perspirables
without acrimony, and with a recruiting of the strength; the latter, that of
crudities, and is sharp, violent, and with some difficulty.

XVIII.
A person sleeping perspires twice as much as one waking. Thence came that
remarkable saying, Two hours of rest in a person awake are but equivasent to
one of sleep.

XIX.
I have found by experience, that in the space of seven hours, the insensible
perspiration, in a person sleeping, as to many, amounted to about forty ounces;
in one awake, but to twenty.

XX.
He who goes to bed with an empty Stomach perspires that night about a third
part less than he is wont to do.

XXI.
Persons of a choleric constitution who go to bed with a stomach quite empty,
have these inconveniences; the belly and head are filled with crudities, their
temples beat their flesh wastes away, they are troubled with vehement
stretchings about the arms and hands, sometimes a heart-burning, or corrosion
of the mouth of the Stomach, vertigo's and epilepsies; as it happened to
Diodorus.

XXII.
After a perspiration greater than we are wont to have, a more plentiful supper
promises a longer and founder sleep.

XXIII.
A less than the usual perspiration is the foreteller of disturbed sleep, and a
troublesome night.

XXIV.
If after a short and unquiet sleep, the flesh be found cold, and that
thereupon a feverish fit succeeds, in weak persons it commonly presignifies
death, in strong, a long continuance of sickness.

XXV.
By change of lodging sleep is disturbed, and the perspiration is less. For
unwonted things, though better, are prejudicial to body and mind.

XXVI.
Men dream more in a bed they are not accustomed to, than in that they
constantly ly in.

XXVII.
They who sleep and do not dream perspire well, and so on the contrary.

XXVIII.
Sleep about four hours after meat is best; for then nature is least employed
about the first concoction, it better recruits what was lost, and more promotes
perspiration.

XXIX.
If about five hours after supper you weigh a person just awaked out of his
sleep, you will find that he hardly perspir'd a pound; if it be done eight
hours after sleep, you will find that he has perspir'd three pound.

XXX.
If a man's sleep be shorter than it is wont to be, there is somewhat of the
perspiration obstructed, which if it be not repaired in the subsequent days by
a more plentiful perspiration, there is some danger of a Fever.

XXXI.
If there be a retention of any part of the usual perspiration, the next day,
or after dinner, we are overcome with sleep, and in an hours space perspire
about a pound: or the night following, lowing, our sleep is so much the longer,
the more expedient it was that we should perspire more than usually; otherwise
we fall into a sensible crisis, or into a disease.

XXXII.
Oscitation, and the stretching of the joints after sleep denote that the body
has perspir'd very well, as it is related of Cocks, smiting themselves with
their wings before they crow.

XXXIII.
The oscitations and extensions of the joints and limbs, which happen
immediately after sleep, are raised out of the plenty of perspirables
excellently well prepared for evacuation.

XXXIV.
Men's bodies perspire more in half an hours space, by yawning, gaping, and
stretching out of the body, than in three hours of any other time.

XXXV.
They who administer syrups, or other medicines to sick persons during the time
of their best perspiration, which is commonly for the space of two hours after
sleep, injure them; but in the subsequent hours they do them good.

XXXVI.
In Paroxysmes, or any great fits of sickness, gaping and stretching of the
body signify the concentration of the heat, but the evacuation of a great
quantity of acrimonious perspible matter that had been retained.

XXXVII.
In an hours sleep at noon, after meat, men's bodies commonly evacuate sometimes
a pound, sometimes half a pound of excrements insensibly perspirable; a pound,
if there be ought retained of the precedent day's perspiration; half a pound,
if nothing.

XXXVIII.
If ought of the precedent day's Perspiration be retained, and that it be not
evacuated by sleeping at noon, immediately after Sleep, there is felt a great
heaviness of the head, and a very afflictive pain.

XXXIX.
If within four hours after sleep the meat a man has eaten be corrupted,
immediately these two inconveniences mutually consequent one to the other will
follow, to wit, an obstruction of Perspiration, and Watching.

XL.
There is no cause does more frequently interrupt sleep, than the corruption of
a man's meat. This is caused by the Sympathy there is between the Stomach, and
the Brain.

XLI.
Sleep is better in Winter, than in Summer, not because men's bellies are
hotter, or their sleep longer, but because before daylight their bodieis are
actually hotter, and as such are apt to perspire very much, whereas in Summer
they are more cold.

XLII.
Purity of discourse, and agility of body after sleep are indications, that the
body has perspir'd that night commonly at least three pound.

XLIII.
Lightness of the head after sleep at noon, denotes that there had not been any
thing retained of the precedent day's Perspiration.

XLIV.
Sleep moistens all the external, and internal parts, because it attenuates the
perspirable matter, and being so attenuated it disperses it into all the
members.

XLV.
Vigilance stirs from the center to the circumference that blood which is less
prepared for Perspiration than it is in such as are asleep.

XLVI.
By Sleep the humors are concentrated, the influent heat is united to the
innate, thirst is taken away, unless Choler be predominant, there is a
conversion made of the blood into the second moistures, and the bodies become
lighter.

XLVII.
By Sleep the animal spirits languish; by Vigilance, the vital and natural
spirits languish.

XLVIII.
By Vigilance the animal spirits are corroborated, but the vital and natural
languish.

XLIX.
By Sleep the internal parts are more heated, and are also made more light. By
Vigilance the external parts are made more hot, and also more light.

L.
By too much sleep the internal and external parts grow cold, the humors are
forcibly crowded in, and made imperspirable, and the bodies are rendered more
ponderous.

LI.
Choleric bodies are extremely prejudiced by excessive sleeping, not because
the excrements of the third concoction are made imperspirable, but because they
become extreme sharp, and are afterward noxious to the head and other entrails.

LII.
In persons sleeping with the bed clothes cast off, perspiration is more
obstructed than it is in persons awake who have no clothes on; as well by
reason of the quiet posture of such as are asleep, as also for that the heat of
the external parts retreats inward.

LIII.
A more than usual watching ^enders men's bodies, during the first subsequent
days after it, more ponderous, and more weak. They are more ponderous, because
after the evacuation of the perspirable excrements there is left behind a
certain juice, which, of it self, is crude, and, by accident, ponderous; they
are weaker, because where there is any crudity, there is no conversion made,
and consequently the strength is impaired.

LIVE.
If after immoderate watching a man sleep seven hours, the Perspiration will be
more than usual, by about a pound.

LV.
Continued watching renders men's bodies more ponderous, not by reason of the
greater Perspiration, or sensible evacuation, but because the recruit of fat
and flesh is not answerable to what had been wasted.

LVI.
In the morning the body both is, and is felt less ponderous; it is so, because
by the precedent sleep three pound of perspirable excrements were evacuated; it
is so felt, not only because it is lighter, but also in regard that by the
concoction of the meats that were easily perspirable, there is an augmentation
of strength.

LVII.
A man's body may become more ponderous by unusual watching, if the meat,
wherewith it is fed, be unfit for perspiration.

LVIII.
There is so plentiful an exhalation of the body in persons steeping, that not
only the sick lying with the sound, but also the sound among themselves do
mutually communicate their good or evil dispositions.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
LIX.
AFter meat sleep; after sleep concoction; after concoction, transpiration is
best.

LX.
Diacydonium, or Marmalet, not taken immediately after supper but after the
first sleep, excites sleep, provided there be nothing drunk after it.

LXI.
Diacydonium, or Marmalet, taken with a little Cinnamon strengthens the
stomach; and that being strengthened, sleep always follows.

LXII.
A small quantity of Generous Wine and Garlic cause sleep and perspiration,
but if a man take more than is requisite, they obstruct both; however they
convert the perspirable matter into sweating.

LXIII.
That man will doubtless come to a great age, who does daily concoct and digest
well; concoction is caused by sleep and rest; digestion by vigilance and
exercise.

LXIV.
If the weariness ensuing after sleep be taken off by usual exercise, the
defect was in the digestion, and not in the concoction,

LXV.
When we rise from sleep with our usual weight, but with greater unweildiness,
if it be not taken off by our accustomed exercise, it signisies an accumulation
of crudities, corruption of meat, or immoderate coition.

LXVI.
Unusual sleeping at noon is hurtful to all the entrails, and checks
perspiration.

LXVII.
Weariness or unweildiness after sleep is taken off by those things which
facilitate perspiration: These are abstinence, exercise, vigilance, and anger.

LXVIII.
If the body lie loose and flat, sleep is hurtful; if it be contracted, it is
good: the entrails lying close and compacted together havean easy concoction,
but when they are loose by one's lying at length, they have a difficult
concoction.

LXIX.
If in sound persons, a cold sweat ensue after sleep, it argues they perspire
less than they should do, and in process of time, if the same thing happens,
they are troubled with the Gout.

LXX.
By immoderate sleep, and excessive drinking of Wine the strength is
suffocated; by excessive vigilance and exercise, it is dissolved: all these
dimimishconcoction, and that diminished, there is a stoppage of requisite
perspiration.

OF EXERCISE AND REST.
SECT. V.
Aphorism I.
THE occult perspiration of a man's body is less, in violent motion, than it is
in the morning, nine or ten hours from the time he had supped.

II.
That which is evacuated in violent motion by the pores is sweat, and an occult
perspirable matter: but, as it is violent, it is raised for the most part out
of unconcocted juices: for it seldom happens that there should be so great a
collection of concocted perspirable matter in the body, as is evacuated by
violence.

III.
Sweating always proceeds from a violent cause, and as such (as statical
experiments make it appear) it obstructs the occult evacuation of concocted
perspirable matter.

IV.
The body perspires much more lying quietly in bed, than turning from one side
to another by frequent agitation.

V.
Cheerful and angry persons are less wearied by long traveling, than the
fearful and pensive: for the former perspire more healthfully, but the other,
less.

VI.
Those bodies which are admitted to refection after immoderate exercise,
receive much prejudice; because, as they are wearied and burdened with meat,
they perspire less.

VII.
Exercise from the seventh hour to the twelfth after refection, does insensibly
dissolve more in the space of one hour, than it does in three hours at any
other time.

VIII.
Insensible evacuation after violent exercise obstructs the successive
recruiting of that which is wasted: nay if the same violence should continue,
the body will be rendered so light, that in many there would be some danger of a
future consumption.

IX.
By exercise men's bodies are made lighter: for all the parts, especially the
muscles and ligaments are cleans'd from excrements by motion, the perspirable
matter is prepared for exhalation, and the spirits are made more tenuious, or
subtle.

X.
Motion prepares bodies for the evacuation of sensible and insensible
excrements; rest does it rather for that of the insensible only.

XI.
If the body lie quietly in the bed after supper for the space of ten hours, it
shall perspire excellently well: if it rest there yet somewhat longer, there
follows immediately a diminution of both sensible and insensible evacuation.

XII.
Long rest renders indisposed bodies more weighty, as well in regard the
perspirable excrements are prepared for evacuation by motion, as also for that
the meat and drink, if such as the patient is not accustomed to, or more in
quantity than is requisite, are not digested; and thence proceed all
inconveniences, and many times death.

XIII.
If a person who has kept his bed long be troubled with pain in the feet, the
remedy is walking; if one that is upon a journey be so troubled, the remedy is
rest.

XIV.
There are two kinds of exercises, one of the body, the other of the mind: that
of the body evacuates the sensible excrements; that of the mind the insensible
rather, and especially those of the heart and brain, where the mind is seated.

XV.
An excessive rest of the mind does more obstruct perspiration, than that of
the body.

XVI.
The exercises of the mind which most conduce to the cheering up of the
spirits, are anger, sudden joy, fear, and sorrow.

XVII.
Men's bodies resting in bed, and agitated with a vehement motion of the mind,
for the most part become more faint, and less ponderous, than if there be a
tranquillity of mind, with a violent motion of the body, as it happens at
Tennice, or any game at Ball.

XVIII.
By immoderate exercise the excrements of the first and second concoction are
for the most part dispersed through the compass of the whole body, and
therefore the belly is hardened: yet are the bodies made lighter, because the
insensible evacuation is much greater than the excretion of the sensible
excrements made by the belly.

XIX.
Violent exercise of mind and body renders bodies of lighter weight, hastens
old age, and threatens untimely death: for, according to the Philosopher, those
persons that are exercised dye sooner than such as are not.

XX.
Violent exercise takes off from a body filled with meat or crude humors a
less than usual weight of the sensible excrements; of the insensible, almost
nothing at all.

XXI.
By exercise the body perspires less, by sleep, more, and the belly is more
loosned.

XXII.
Frictions and cupping-glasses, in bodies full of crudities, obstruct
perspiration.

XXIII.
Then is exercise most wholesome; when, after the completing of the first and
second concoction, the body is reduced twice in a day, before meat, to its
usual weight.

XXIV.
Swimming immediately after violent exercise, is hurtful; for it very much
obstructs perspiration.

XXV.
Violent exercise in a place where the wind blows is hurtful.

XXVI.
From the wind proceeds a difficulty of respiration, from the motion, acrimony.

XXVII.
Riding relates more to the perspirable matter of the parts of the Body from
the waste upwards, than downwards: but in riding the amble is the most wholesome,
the trot the most unwholsom pace.

XXVIII.
Waftage in Sedan or Horse-litter, as also going by water, does not so much
dispose bodies to due perspiration, as walking.

XXIX.
The motion of a Boat and Litter, if it be continued long, is most wholesome; for
then only it does wonderfully dispose the body to due perspiration.

XXX.
Riding in a Coach or Chariot is the most violent of any way: for it does not
only cause the unconcocted perspirable matter to exhale out of the body, but
also offends the solid parts of the body, and particularly the Reins.

XXXI.
Leaping does at first attract the strength inwards, then impetuously forces it
to the external parts, and with a certain violence expells the concocted
matter, together with the unconcocted

XXXII.
The exercise of the Top, consisting of moderate and violent motion, to wit
walking and the agitation of the Arms, promotes perspiration.

XXXIII.
Moderate dancing, without any capering or jumping, comes near the commendation
of moderate walking; for it moderately expels the concocted perspirable matter.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
XXXIV.
WHen there is a defect of perspiration in sound bodies, it is remedied by
exercise.

XXXV.
By immoderate exercise the Fibers are hardened, whence follows old age, which
is an universal hardness of the Fibers: this hardness, by condensating the
passages obstructs the heat; softness, by keeping them open, causes length of
life.

XXXVI.
He who would have a youthful face long, let him avoid sweating, or perspiring
too much through heat.

OF VENERY.
SECT. VI.
Aphorism I.
TOO great abstinence from Venery, and the immoderate use of it obstruct
perspiration; but the immoderate use of it does more obstruct it.

II.
After immoderate coition, the fourth part of the usual perspiration is
commonly obstructed in most persons.

III.
The mischiefs occasioned by immoderate Coition do mediately depend on the
hindrance of Perspiration, immediately on the hurt done to the concoctive
faculties.

IV.
We find that Coition has done good, if after the subsequent sleep, there be
no weariness felt, nor any alteration be made of the body, as to Gravity or
Levity.

V.
The continual thoughts of venereous persons do sometimes make their bodies
heavier, sometimes lighter; heavier, if they give way to them upon a full
Stomach; lighter, if upon an empty one.

VI.
After immoderate Coition with a woman whom a man had long desired to enjoy,
weariness is not presently felt: for the satisfaction of the mind does then
promote the Perspiration of the heart, and augments its strength; whence it
comes, that, in such a person, what is lost is the sooner recruited.

VII.
If those persons who have a great inclination to Venery, do forbear the
exercise of it, there presently follows an agility of body, because such
perspire so much the better.

VIII.
Immoderate coition oce sions the Perspiration of Crudities, which afterward
causes a Chilness over the whole body.

IX.
These are the signs that coition has not been hurtful; Urine equally
concocted as before; Agility of body; a more easy Respiration, and the same
weight of the body still continuing; yet with an observance of the same diet,
as to quantity and quality.

X.
The present inconvenience of immoderate Coition is the Refrigeration of the
Stomach; the consequent to that obstructed Perspiration; whence proceed
Palpitations in the eyebrows, and Joints, and afterward in the principal
members.

XI.
Coition in the Summer is more hurtful than at other times, not by reason of
the greater Perspiration of the body, but because the concoction being less,
that which is lost is with greater difficulty recruited.

XII.
In the act of Venery there is much crude matter perspir'd, and if it continue
long, the crudities are transferred from the center, to the Circumference of the
body, obstructions ensue, and thereupon the belly becomes costive

XIII.
The greater Propension a man has to the act of Venery, the less hurtful is the
immoderate exercise of it to him.

XIV.
The detriment of immoderate Coition is particularly discovered after the
subsequent sleep: for then it is found, by statical Experiments, that the
Perspiration was obstructed, and the meat ill-digested, as also that the
Stomach was much prejudiced.

XV.
Coition is commonly hurtful to the first concoction, first by repressing the
forwardness of Perspiration, afterward by converting the meat into a crude
quality.

XVI.
He who uses Coition, without any Emission of seed, is so much the less
weakened. But if he again use the same exercise the next day, and emit what had
been prepared the day before, he is so much the less weakened.

XVII.
They, who, in the time of Coition, purposely forbear the Emission of seed, are
apt to be troubled with a swelling of the testicles: for the seed is
imperspirable.

XVIII.
Immoderate Coition, next to the Stomach, is prejudicial to the eyes.

XIX.
Immoderate Coition is hurtful to the sight, because it withdraws a very great
plenty of spirits from the eyes, thence comes it that the Tunicles of the eyes
become very hard and wrinkled, and the passages less pervious.

XX.
The Fibers of the Tunicles of the Eyes become more opake upon the diminution
of perspiration; thence the sight is made through very small spaces, such as
are those in lattices. Spectacles unite the objects into a point, that they may
be distinctly seen through one single space.

XXI.
By immoderate Coition, the natural heat is diminished, by the diminution of
the heat, there comes a diminution of the Perspiration; from the diminution of
the Perspiration proceed Flatulency and Palpitation.

XXII.
Immoderate Coition requires little meat, and that of good nutriment.

XXIII.
Coition heats the liver and reins, because the excited heat exhales not: but
it cools the stomach, the brain, and the heart, because it is wholly excited
through the more open passages, and the innate heat is thereupon in some part
dissolved.

XXIV.
Hence it comes, that immoderate coition causes choler in the Liver; a painful
aching in the Reins; a crude humor in the stomach; a catarrhe in the Brain; and
palpitation and a syncope in the heart.

XXV.
If the meat a man eats after immoderate coition beget flatulency, as Oysters,
and new wine, they are pernicious; for they hinder the body from being reduced
to its usual weight.

XXVI.
Coition is more hurtful to lean persons, because they are the more heated, and
the more refrigerated.

XXVII.
Immoderate coition does immediately make the body more light, though it
afterward obstruct perspiration; for it is a vehement motion of the body and
mind; of the body, because there is a concussion of all the members; of the
mind, because that which makes a conjunction between the body and the mind is
loosned, to wit, the vital spirit.

XXVIII.
If a disturbance in sleeping succeeds coition, the substraction made by
coition is greater, than the addition of the vital spirit made by sleep.

XXIX.
After the immoderate use of Venery, sleep attracts crudities to the heart; the
consequences whereof are a languishing faintness, an obstruction of
perspiration, and augmentation of weight.

XXX.
Old men by the use of moderate coition become more ponderous and more cold;
but young men more light, and more hot.

XXXI.
Coition, in young men, corroborates the Animal, vital, and natural heat; it
drives out the Animal heat by motion, and excites the sluggish natural heat by
the evacuation of that which is superfluous, and the vital, by alacrity.

XXXII.
More plentiful feeding than is usual to a man, after immodederate coition
would destroy him, if there ensued not some corruption of the meat.

XXXIII.
When a man is to use coition, he should eat little or nothing; when he is to
eat, he should be very moderate in coition, or quite forbear it.

XXXIV.
If after excessive coition there be no weariness felt, it is an ill sign. The
case is the same as happens in distracted persons by the inflamed spirits,
which by drying in a short space corroborate the nerves and tendons, but a
while after the generation of the spirits is abated, and the strength is
immediately remitted.

APHORISMS Added by the Author.
XXXV.
COition excited by nature is good; excited by the mind is hurtful to the mind
and memory.

XXXVI.
In weak persons the weight of the body is augmented by coition; because they
perspire the less.

XXXVII.
Insatiable coition obstructs perspiration, because it abates the strength;
whence the body becomes more ponderous, unless a looseness of the belly ensue.

XXXVIII.
Immoderate coition occasions a great detriment, by calefaction and
exsiccation: but if the heat be recruited by insensible perspiration, and the
drought by aliment, none at all.

XXXIX.
The agitation of the body in coition, like that of Dogs, does, more hurt than
the emission of the seed; for the latter wearies only the internal parts; the
other tires all the nerves and entrails.

XL.
The use of coition after meat, and standing, is hurtful; after meat, it
diverts the office of the entrails; standing, it diverts the muscles, and
diminishes their beneficial perspiration.

XLI.
After motion, coition is unwholesome; after meat, not so much; after sleep, it
is most wholesome of all.

XLII.
Coition heats the liver, and cools the stomach; from the stomach proceeds a
crude moisture; from the liver, choler; whence proceeds that kind of choler
which is called Porracea, being of a color resembling that of a Leek. The
remedy is, a slender diet, and a free perspiration.

OF THE AFFECTIONS OF THE MIND.
SECT. VII.
Aphorism I.
AMongst the affections of the mind, Anger and alacrity render men's bodies
lighter; Fear and Sadness, more ponderous; And the rest of the affections
operate answerably to their participation of these.

II.
In Grief and Fear that which is lighter perspires, but what is more ponderous
is left behind; in Gladness and Anger there is a perspiration of both.

III.
Hence it comes to pass that such as are subject to Fear and Grief are apt to
be troubled with obstructions, hardness of the parts, and hypochondriacal
affections.

IV.
Such as are angry or joyful feel no weariness in traveling; for their bodies
easily perspire the gross matter; which happens not, when they are troubled
with grief, or fear.

V.
The ponderous part of perspirable matter, being more than usually retained in
the body, disposes a man to sadness and fear; but the light part disposes him
to gladness and anger.

VI.
Nothing contributes more to freedom of respiration, than satisfaction and
consolation of mind.

VII.
By sadness and fear the members most full of moisture are easily indurated.

VIII.
Grief and fear obstruct the perspiration of the gross perspirable excrements;
and the obstruction of perspiration, from what cause soever it proceeds, causes
grief and fear.

IX.
Grief, if it continue long, brings a coldness on the flesh; for it hinders the
exhalation of the gross portion of the perspirable matter.

X.
Hence it comes, that that fever which a man falls into after much grief
discovers it self in cold sweats, and those many times mortal.

XI.
The acrimony of the perspirable matter which is retained by the means of
grief, is conveniently taken off by alacrity: for pleasant humors are thereby
diffused through the body, and thereupon ponderosity and acrimony are taken off
from it.

XII.
Anger and hope take away fear, and joy takes away sadness: for a passion of
the mind is overcome, not by Medicines, but by some contrary passion: for
contraries are under the same genus.

XIII.
It does not imply any contradiction, to affirm, that the retention of the
perspirable matter in melancholy persons, is cold and acrimonious, or hot: such
are the Livers of Hydropical persons who are in Fevers; to wit, they are cold
in respect of the natural heat, and hot, in respect of the adventitious.

XIV.
Diseases proceeding from melancholy and a close muddy air, agree in this, that
they are immediately occasioned by the grossness of the perspirable matter
which is retained: For grief does intrinsecally obstruct the excretion of the
gross matter, and the muddy air does it extrinsecally.

XV.
They who carry grief along with them to their beds, perspire so much the less
that night; and the next day their bodies continue more than usually ponderous.

XVI.
In venereous meditations, the gross part of the perspirable excrements, is,
with grief retained; which part, upon the evaporation of the subtle, becomes
yet more gross and more cold: If this be pent up together, it causes an almost
invincible coldness in the head, and a hardly curable palpitation in the heart,
or other members.

XVII.
Melancholy is two ways overcome, either by a free perspiration, or some
continual satisfaction of the mind.

XVIII.
If men's bodies become lighter after grief than after joy, it must of necessity
happen either by reason of a less quantity of meat, or by that of their more
transpirable quality.

XIX.
The consolation of the mind, from whatsoever cause it proceeds, opens the
passages, and very much promotes perspiration.

XX.
'f after anger there immediatey ensue some consolation of the mind; or the
contrary happen, men's bodies, allowing an equal proportion of aliment, are
lighter the next day, than they would be if only anger or joy had continued.

XXI.
As there is a sudden period put to some great pleasure by a small evacuation
of seed: so all other immoderate affections of the mind may be abated and taken
off, by some evacuation of the perspirable matter.

XXII.
Fear and grief, as we find by statical experiments, are taken off by the
evacuation of the gross perspirable excrements; anger and alacrity, by that of
the tenuious.

XXIII.
If any one find himself in a merry jocund humor, without any cause, it
proceeds from a greater freedom of perspiration, and his body will be found ^he
next day of less weight.

XXIV.
Moderate joy insensibly evacuates what is superfluous; immoderate joy, both
what is superfluous, and what is beneficial.

XXV.
Moderate joy assists the concoctive faculties; for nature, not being burdened
with that which is superfluous, does much better perform her functions.

XXVI.
Unexpected joy is more hurtful than that which is looked for: For it does not
only excite the evacuation of the excrements of the third concoction, but also
the exhalation of the vital spirits; but the expected joy promotes only that of
the excrements.

XXVII.
Joy and anger take off from the body what makes it more ponderous, and what
renders it more light: Grief and fear take away only what makes it more light,
but what makes it more ponderous is left behind.

XXVIII.
A continual gladness for many days together hinders sleep, and renders a man
weaker.

XXIX.
If any one, after moderate joy finds himself lighter, it does not proceed
principally from the evacuation of the whole body, but from that of the heart
and brain, whence what is evacuated is least of all, as to quantity, and
greatest, as to virtue.

XXX.
Those aliments, which open and facilitate perspiration, produce joy, those
that obstruct it, grief.

XXXI.
Parsley, and other aliments that are opening, induce joy; Pulse, fat meat, and
other things which incrassate, and presently fill the cavities of the passages,
cause grief.

XXXII.
If the cavities of the passages be evacuated, and afterward presently filled,
it was rightly said of Hippocrates, that evil passions of the mind are
generated.

XXXIII.
To those who are subject to anger, immoderate exercise is very hurtful; for
their passages are immediately emptied, and with much violence are filled up
again. Whence it came that Hippocrates forbad Choleric persons to use
frictions, and wrestling.

XXXIV.
In a person who uses no exercise of body or mind, the passages are not
emptied, nor are there any evil passions of the mind contracted.

XXXV.
A body lying all along does perspire more, and becomes of less weight, if the
mind be vehemently active, than if the body were in a very swift motion, and
the mind were idle.

XXXVI.
The shifting of the body from one place to another makes a longer alteration
of the body, than of the mind it self.

XXXVII.
The passions of the mind are concerned about the internal subject, which
rather moves, than is moved: inasmuch as it is least, as to quantity, and
greatest, as to Virtue, like the sperm of man, and by the disposal thereof, in
several manners is the origin of Perspiration, or Ponderosity, and Lightness.

XXXVIII
Those bodies which perspire more than usually, not occasioned by any motion of
the body, but through some vehement agitation of the mind, are with greater
difficulty reduced to their usual and healthy Perspiration.

XXXIX.
An immoderate affection of the mind is more hurtful, than an immoderate motion
of the body.

XL.
The body would pine away, and be destroyed through idleness, were it not for
the motion of the mind; but the contrary cannot be affirmed.

XLI.
A vehement motion of the mind differs from a vehement motion of the body; the
latter is taken off by rest and sleep; the former by neither rest nor sleep.

XLII.
Let those forbear gaming whose thoughts are altogether upon winning; because
if they always have good fortune, out of excessive joy, they will hardly sleep
in the night, and, in time, will find the want of the exhalation of the
concocted perspirable matter.

XLIII.
A moderate victory is more wholesome than a glorious one.

XLIV.
Study is longer endured in a vicissitude of the affections of the mind, than
if it be without affection, or without any change of affections; for
Perspiration becomes more moderate, and more wholesome.

XLV.
Study, without any affection, hardly endures an hour; with any one affection,
hardly four hours; with vicissitude of affections, as at Dice, at which kind of
gaming men feel, one while, the joy for winning, another, sadness for losing,
it may continue night and day.

XLVI.
In all Study continual sadness disturbs the good constitution of the heart,
and excess of gladness hinders sleep; for every excess is destructive to nature.

XLVII.
They who are sometimes merry, sometimes sad, sometimes angry, sometimes
timorous, have a more healthful perspiration, than they who continue in one and
the same, though that a constantly-good affection.

XLVIII.
Gladness makes the Diastole and the Systole more easy; grief and sadness
render them more difficult.

TO THE STATICOMASTIX.
SECT. VIII.
Aphorism I.
THE Staticomastix, while he attributes the cure of diseases to the position of
the Heavens, Paralogizes, by assigning a more common cause than he needed to
have done.

II.
The fool first denies, yet afterward admits Staticks or Ponderation,
affirming, that there is a diversity of weight in a guilty person, and an
innocent. In like manner, he first denies that the spirits of Swine are light;
and afterward he would have their getting up to any place to proceed from the
lightness of their spirits.

III.
He who is experienced in Staticks, knows the weight of the excrements, though
he neither see them, nor weigh them. He weighs the body before, and again,
after all evacuation; what is deficient is their weight: And so it is no
unseemly thing to weigh the excrements, as the Trifler affirms.

IV.
No Student in Physic, besides the fool himself, but knows, that the vital
faculty is diffused into the Arteries, and the animal into the nerves, by
rays, and not by spirits; as he imagines.

V.
The fool thinks that lightness, as to the balance, in living bodies, proceeds
from the plenty of spirits; it seems he never knew, that dead bodies are
lighter than the living, and that living bodies, after coition, weigh less.

VI.
He belies the Author, affirming that the faculty of moving bodies upwards is
no other than the spirits themselves; whereas the Author affirms, that the
spirits are inanimate, and that they gravitate more than air.

VII.
He is out again, when he affirms that men's bodies are colder in the night
time; therefore they perspire little, or nothing. Nor did he ever observe, that
the pulse and nocturnal perspiration are signs of a more hot body.

VIII.
The fool thinks that living bodies are lighter than the dead; never having
taken notice, that Butchers, Fish-mongers, and such as deal in Swine, when they
sell the living, make a deduction of ten pounds in the hundred weight.

IX.
The extravagant man never thinks of the difference there is between ones being
light, if weighed in the balance, and the same person's feeling himself
lighter. A man may be sensible of his being very ponderous, and yet be lighter
in the balance.

X.
We know the weight of the body by measure, not by imagination, as our
inconsiderate fool does, who imagines that phlegm is more ponderous than blood,
yet never observed, that the former does swim on the top; and that by reason of
phlegm the body is not really, but is felt of greater weight. But why? because
it obstructs perspiration.

XI.
He charges the Author with a falsity in making him affirm that insensible
perspiration is a difflation of the flesh, when he affirms no such thing. In
the wintertime, there are about sixty ounces perspir'd in the space of one day
with ease; if that perspiration were of flesh, a man's body would be destroyed.

XII.
Galen made no mention of Statick Medicine, therefore it is a vain science. He
is doubly mistaken; first, because he never read his six Books De Tuenda, etc.
Secondly, it does not follow, Galen said nothing of it, therefore it is vain:
we have found out many instruments, and those not contemptible, which were not
known before our times.

XIII.
The famous Author of the Commentary on the XII. of the first Section of
Aphorisms, affirms, that the meat is proportionated to the difflation, and Com.
XV. that there is a greater difflation in the wintertime, therefore it is
requisite there should be more meat eaten: it is therefore requisite the weight
should be known; all which the trifling Staticomastix denies.

XIV.
The fool, making no experiments himself, denies those things, that others have
found true by experience. He boldly adds this assertion; If thirty six ounces
be perspir'd in the space of one night, there will be thirty two of flesh, and
four of excrements.

XV.
The trifling Answerer puts the lie on all Authors, affirming that the spirits
are more tenuious than the Air. Are they not made of the blood and Air? Does
not the Air pass through the whole body? but the spirits remain enclosed in
Vessels.

XVI.
He affirms that a plentiful perspiration does not take away, from the body,
one ounce of its weight. There Is no temerity deserves greater punishment, than
such a man's, as makes no account of experience, yet opposes experience. We
have found it certainly true, that in the space of a night, the body weighs
less by three pound, and that after coition, men's bodies are lighter, as to the
Balance. Therefore the fool is chargeble with a lie.

XVII.
He affirms, that, after an immoderate purgation of the terms, bodies are more
ponderous, after an extraordinary retention of them, more light. A fatal error
to the inconsiderate man, who does not distinguish, between being heavy, in
reference to the Balance, and one's feeling himself heavy.

What literal faults there may be, the intelligent Reader will easily find, and
Correct.

FINIS.

