A WARNING TO DRUNKARDS, Delivered in several SERMONS To a Congregation in
COLCHESTER.

Upon The Occasion of a sad Providence toward a Young Man, dying in the Act of
Drunkenness.

By that Reverend, Faithful, and painful Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ,
Mr. Owen Stockton, lately deceased.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and 3 Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside. 1682.

To the Worshipful Ralph Cr^^eild, Esquire; and Nathaniel Lawrence, Esquire; Aldermen
of Colchester, and Justices of the Peace for the County of Essex.
Gentlemen,
YOU may believe it is no pleasure to me to complain of the Immorality of a
degenerate age: and the vast conquests which prevailing vice like a potent
Tyrant has of late years made, I say, not over the Religion, but the very
reason of Humane Nature, and the Dependencies thereof. Which as it is not to be
mentioned by good men without lamentation, so cannot be dissembled or excused
without participation. Profane swearing, unclean whoredom, and beastly
Drunkenness, with other too manifest, are not only abounding, but as the
Prophet speaks mighty sins amongst us; strengthened as well by the quality, as
the number of the guilty. It is a prodigious mode of estimation for men to
value themselves, or be valued by others according to the measure of their
intemperate excess. Etiam viri fortis accipit nomen, qui tamen tanto nequior,
quanto sub poculo invictior. They are the mighty who can drink most wine, and
the men of strength who can mingle strong Drink, as if they envyed that Royal
Heathen Name, and were ambitious of the Honor of his Inscription upon his
Tomb, (...). I have been able to drink abundantly, and to bear it strongly. In
the pride of which strength some will have the confidence to glory, even while
a paralytick trembling, (no weak evidence of their great achievements in their
Bacchanalia) has disabled their hands to serve their mouth, and monstrous
swellings have mishaped their Bodies into such unweldie burdens that some are
tempted to ask, Homines hi an utres verius aestimandi? Whither they be not
rather Barrels, than Bodies of men.

Fallen Nature, even in Heathens have retained some principles of restraint
from impudence and excess of vice. The Spartanes thought it an effectual
preservative of their Children from intemperate drinking to present to their
view their drunken Vassals (for, as drunk as a Beggar has been the Proverb)
that beholding their loathsome vomit, and ridiculous behavior they might the
more abhor such gratifying of inordinate appetite, which debaseth the honor
of a man into the shame of a beast. And the very Turks after a fit of
Drunkenness, will lie day and night crying, and praying to Mahomet for
intercession. But the very Remnants of Conscience and shame seem utterly
extinct among some Christians of this generation. Surely the days of the
Apostles were modest, when they that were drunk, were drunk in the night: but
now St. Peter's argument is too weak to refel the accusation, for these men may
be drunk at the third hour of the day. And some do so declare their sin as
Sodom, and hide it not, Drinking and Singing, Roaring and Revelling, Reeling
and Staggering in the open Sun, as if they would confute St. Paul, and
demonstrate Rioting and Drunkenness to be no works of Darkness.

Yea, such credit and power has Debauchery obtained, that it lifts up it self
above control, and is impatient to be touched, and ready to turn again, and
rent the wisest reprover. And who so is resolved to possess his Vessel in
sobriety, and Honor, does tantum non forfit his reputation, and is in danger
to be written among the suspected by those whose God is Bacchus, whose Temple
the Tavern, whose Altar the Table, whose Priest the Vintner, whose Offering
Wine and strong Drink, and whose Heaven is sensual. Who have arrived to that
degree of Atheism, as to fortify their Lusts against their Conscience with the
vainest flattery, and self deluding conceit, that their great pretenses of
loyalty and zeal for King and Church shall sanctify the grossest violations of
the Laws of Morality, both sacred and civil. Nay, vice will scarce acknowledge
it self to violate, but even claims a right, and calls it self by the name of
Virtue. According to the Moralist's Character of the worst times. Habebitur
ebrietati honor, et plurimum meri cepisse victus erit, says Seneca. Offering
excess, of Wine is become an Instance of Noble and Generous Entertainment, and
a part of answerable civility to accept it. Guests are scarce made welcome, if
not made Drunk. Such an obliging bond is courting, courtesy and complement,
such force in great examples, such arguments applied of Honor and Loyalty,
Such color, motion, and sparkling in the glass to provoke, that he must be a
Nazarite, or a Rechabite that has the courage to withstand the power of so
great temptation. He that will be sober, is uncivil, and it is an high affront,
deserving no less than a stab, to boggle at life and Soul-destroying Healths,
or to refuse to be drowned for Company. Thus does the pride of debauchery
magnify it self, Hectoring virtue out of its due honor, and arrogating an
unjust Glory to its own shame.

What the issue of this great evil will be, is the fear of the Good, viz. least
for the Vomit and filth whereof all Tables are full, the Land also in just
retribution spue out her Inhabitants. That so many Judgments by which Heaven
has contended with a sinful Nation should not only prove it incorrigible, but
leave it declining into worse, is no weak indication of a desperate disease. He
that has denovnced Woe to the Drunkards, is faithful to keep and Almighty to
execute his word. Whereof he has in his righteous providence made many sad and
woeful Instances. As in too many other places so particularly in your
Colchester. He has not left himself without witness, by a very quick and
remarkable judgment upon a young Drunkard, twice dead, dying dead drunk. The
Report whereof at least came not short of your special notice. May I have leave
to speak it. God sometimes blessed your Town with the happy Ministry of his
laborious and faithful Servant, Mr. Owen Stockton, whose due Character is
elsewhere read, whose Head, Heart, Tongue, and Pen constantly traveled for the
Salvation of precious, yet perishing Souls. At this warning and amazing stroke,
as formerly at the destroying Pestilence among you, which exercised the labor
of his Pen to a considerable Vo ume, which yet never saw the light, His Spirit
like St. Paul's was stirred in him, to improve the advantage of so severe a
Providence, by joining to it the Word of God committed to his trust, hoping
that the Sword of the Spirit being therewith sharpened, might be the more
effectual and mighty through God against this fleshly Lust which warreth
against the Soul, and has made more havoc of the Sons of men, than ever Saul
did of the Saints of God. In which honorable and pious engagement with this
deadly sin. He convicts it as the common Enemy of the Bodies and Souls of men,
declares open war against it, defieth, and casts dirt upon the face of its
glory, armeth and incourageth the assailing host of Christians to oppose it,
discharges against it the thundering Canon, laden with the vengeance of
Almighty justice, pursues it to its higher Mountains, raises batteries
against its strongest holds, discovers and defeateth all its subtle
stratagems, and confuteth all its pretenses. Having performed his work
according to his great ability, and delivered his zealous Soul to a particular
Congregation viva voce, he designed with some enlargement for general use to
commit it to the Press, But before he had put to it ultimam manum, God put to
his Life ultimam lineam. Which Providence I am not prone to interpret, as a
voice from Heaven saying to him, let the Drunkard alone, thou shall be dumb,
and shall not be a reproover. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, but
will rather hope, God so ordered that it should be his dying Pen, that it might
be the more affecting.

Such as he left it, worthy of the Press beyond my commendation, is here
Published, and humbly presented Gentlemen to your hands. I am aware how much I
presume thus to approach you, for which I am concerned to make my Apology. I am
not ignorant what Honorable Respects the Reverend Author deservedly had for
your Worships, and what reciprocal Respects obliged him thereunto: which I am
bound to believe he would gladly have expressed, and acknowledged by some more
public Testimony. Be pleased then to understand and accept this as a
posthumous offering, which a lesser hand, though not with less Respects, humbly
makes to you as in his Name.

The Relation, affection and compassion which he had toward Colchester, and
the Souls therein always excited the vehemence of his desires, sharpened the
edge of his just actions, directed the aim of his endeavors, and intended the
fervor of his Prayers on its behalf, that some happy fruit of the travail of
his Soul, and particularly of this, might there be found. In compliance
wherewith, considering the Character you bear in your Town, I have presumed to
prefix your worthy Names to this small Volume, which being an Orphan does more
earnestly crave your Patronage, and is ambitious of the favor and influence of
your recommendation to the concerned Reader.

The dreadful providence toward the young man, who was made an open spectacle
of God's Righteous Judgment, (the occasion of the following sheets) speaking
more especially to Colchester, because in it, did naturally prompt me to betake
my self to the advantage of some more eminent names among you, through which to
revive the memory of so loud a warning, if happily, some at least who have been
long instances of Patience, might with the greater intention legere exemplum
justitiae ne fiant.

I must not forbear to add, that by Royal favor and trust, you fill honorable
seats of Authority, extended to a large Province in the Civil Government. Now
such is the pride and frowardness, the obstinacy and contradiction of the sin
complained of, so strengthened by corruption within, and temptation without,
that the best instructed Ministry cannot prevail against it, but is forced to
confess the weakness of its most powerful arguments and passionate persuasions,
and therefore cries to you, as the woman in Holy Writ, in another case, help O
Magistrate, ye also are the Ministers of God, into whose hands God has put the
Sword of Justice, not to be born in vain. Your own great examples of Sobriety
shall strengthen your hands in exerting your just Authority, to restrain the
intemperance of licentious appetites. Wherein you are beyond doubt assured,
there is no color of disloyalty to Prince, no Nonconformity to Church, no
violation of Oaths, no breach of Trust, none to be offended but the guilty, who
ought not to be pleased. God and the King, Law Sacred and Civil, Conscience and
Honor call upon you, and warrant you to apply your politic remedies to this
Insatiable Dropsy, which if Universally practiced by the State-Physitians,
would no doubt as effectually cure, as the policy of the ancient Gauls
maintained the moderation of their days, who were wont to fine those who
through intemperance out grew their girdles.

But here I reform my Pen, least I seem to teach you your Office, while I only
implore your aid, and aggravate my presumption, while I labor to excuse it. As
the publication of what the Reverend Author has so industriously, and with the
Evidence and Authority of Holy Scripture, as well as strength of argument so
convincingly written, is a Testimony of my full consent with him, in
representing this unmanly and ungodly excess, as matter of just indignation and
abhorrence to the reason and ingenuity of men, and Religion of Christians: So
this Dedication and Presenting thereof to your hands, desires to be understood
as a Testimony of that true Honor and Reverence for your Persons, Virtues and
Offices, (the Dignity whereof can never be lessened by disgracing an inglorious
vice,) which he justly has, who is

Gentlemen, Your Worship's most humble Servant John Fairfax.
Barking. Feb. 25. 1681.
Isa. 28.1. Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim.


SECT. 1
THE occasion of my handling this Text is a sad and dreadful Providence, which
lately befell a young man, who for some years was very hopeful for Religion, a
diligent attender upon God's Ordinances, and well esteemed of among the people
of God, but afterward being led away with temptation, he was sometime
overtaken with the sin of drunkenness, and it seemed good to the Holy and
Righteous God to cut him off in the act of sin, when he was (as is generally
reported) so far overcome with strong drink that he was not able to go, but was
led, and laid upon a bed, and dyed in few hours, without coming to himself
again. When a Malefactor is punished by men, all that hear thereof should fear
to commit the like sins. Deuteronomy. 13.11. And all Israel shall hear and fear, and
shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. This is spoken of
stoneing to death a person, that should entice another to go and serve other
Gods. God expected that the hearing of such a man's death should make all Israel
fear, and do no more any such wickedness. When a sinner is cut off by the
immediate hand of God, his death is as much or more to be regarded, than when
he dies by the hands of men, and therefore I may say of this judgment, that
befell this young man, Oh that all Colchester would hear, and oh that all
England might hear and fear, and do no more any such wickedness as this is, to
drink Wine or strong drink till they be drunk. I do the rather take this
occasion to preach against this sin of drunkenness, because this young man, on
whom God sent this judgment was one, that used to attend on my Ministry, and I
thought it necessary to warn others, yea to warn all my hearers to take heed
and beware of this sin of drunkenness.

If any say, I have no need to be warned to take heed of the sin of
drunkenness, I hate and abhor it, and look upon it as a most beastly sin, what
manner of persons do you take us to be, that you warn us to take heed of
drunkenness.

A. 1. They do not know the corruption of their own hearts, nor what strength
and power there is in a temptation, that think they have no need to be warned
to take heed of drunkenness. There is in our corrupt natures an inclination to
all sin, Romans 7.8. Sin, taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence. And it is from God's restraining us, that those evil
inclinations, that are in our hearts, do not break forth in our lives. Genesis
20.6. I withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I thee not
to touch her. By the power of temptation we may be drawn to those sins, which
we think our selves most averse unto, yea to which we apprehend that we have
such an averseness, that we will rather suffer death than consent to them.
Matthew. 26.35. Peter said unto him, though I should dye with thee, yet will I
not deny thee. Though Peter thought and said this, that he would rather dye
than deny Christ, yet being in a temptation, he did three times fall into that
sin, which he thought he of all men should never have yielded to; ver. 33.
Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet I will never be offended.
And which he thought he should rather dye than commit, he fell thrice into in
one night, in the same night in which he solemnly professed, he would rather
dye than deny the Lord Jesus. Hazael seemed to scorn the Prophets words, when
he told him how cruelly he would deal with the people of Israel, that he would
kill their young men with the sword, and dash out their childrens brains, and
rip up the women with child, and replied, 2 King. 8.13. But what is thy servant
a dog that he should do this great thing; Yet he fullfilled what the Prophet
had foretold.

2. Our Lord Jesus Christ saw it needful to warn his own Disciples, who had
left all to follow him, to take heed of this sin of drunkenness. Luke 21.34.
And take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. That our Lord Jesus Christ speaks here to his own Disciples
is evident from Chapter 20.45. and Luke 21.5, 7. Compared with Matthew. 24.1, 3.
Matthew relating much of the same discourse, tells that it was a private
discourse between Christ and his Disciples. And several passages in the Chapter
show plainly that it was spoken to the Disciples; As ver. 12.15, 17, 28. They
shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you -- and ye shall be hated of all
men for my names sake. etc. Now if our Lord Jesus Christ saw it needful to
warn his own Disciples, who were enabled to suffer persecution for
Righteousness sake, to take heed of drunkenness, why should any of us think we
have no need to be warned to take heed of this sin.

3. Persons of great eminency for the grace of God have been overtaken with
this sin of drunkenness, and that in a very shameful manner. Noah was a man of
great eminency in the grace of God: he kept his integrity when all the men on
the earth had corrupted their ways, Genesis 6.9, 11, 12. He was a Preacher of
Righteousness. 2 Pet. 2.5. He was renowned for his faith, and fear of God, and
was an heir of the Righteousness which is by says. Heb. 11.7. He was a man in
great favor with God, and could do great things with God in Prayer, and is
ranked with Job and Daniel, God's special favorites. Ezekiel. 14.14.16, 18, 20.
Yet this Noah who was so eminent and famous in his Generation, was overcome
with Wine in a most shameful manner, in so much as he lay uncovered in his
Tent, and his Son saw his nakedness, and this after he had seen Gods judgment
in drowning the old World for their sins, and his infinite mercy in sparing him
and his Family. Genesis 9.20, 21, 22. And Noah planted a Vineyard, and he drunk of
the Wine, and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his Tent, and Ham saw
the nakedness of his Father, and told it his two brethren without. Lot was a
Righteous man, so eminent for Holiness that he was vexed in his Soul to see the
unrighteousness of the Sodomites. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. He was in such favor with
God, that the Lord sent two Angels to his house to give him warning of the
destruction of Sodom, and to bid him hasten out of that place, lest he was
consumed. Genesis 19.1, 12, 13, 15. He was in such favor with God, that though
Sodom's sins were exceeding great, and Angels were come down from Heaven to
destroy that place, yet they could do nothing, toward destroying that City,
till Lot was gone out of it, and escaped to Zoar, ver. 22. Have thee, escape
thither, for I cannot do any thing till thou art come thither. He had such
power with God that he prevailed for the sparing of a whole City, which had
deserved destruction, as well as Sodom, for the Cities about Sodom were given
to fornication, and going after strange flesh as well as Sodom. Jude 7. Yet at
Lot's request the City of Zoar was spared. Genesis 19.21. See, I have accepted
thee concerning this thing, that I will not overthrow this City, for the which
thou have spoken. Yet this Righteous Lot was twice overcome with wine, and that
to such an high degree as that he knew not what he did, and in his drunkenness
committed the heinous sin of incest with both his Daughters, for his two
Daughters were with Child by lying with their Father, when they had made him
drunk. Genesis 19.30. to the 36. And Lot's sin was the greater because it was
committed after he had seen God's terrible judgments on Sodom, and the adjacent
Cities for their sins, and after God had shown a miracle of mercy toward him
in his deliverance out of Sodom. Now if such eminent Saints as Noah and Lot
were overtaken with the sin of drunkenness, and that in a very dreadful
manner, who can say they have no need of being warned to take heed of this
sin? Let these examples have this effect upon us, to make such as think they
stand, take heed least they fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.

Sect. 2. The Text opened. What Is meant by the Crown of Pride, what by the
drunkards of Ephraim, what by the woe denounced against them.
The Prophet in this Text denounces God's judgments against two great sins,
Pride and Drunkenness, for opening whereof let us consider.

1. What is meant by the Crown of Pride? 2. What is meant by the Drunkards of
Ephraim. 3. What by the woe denounced against Pride and Drunkenness.
What is meant by the Crown of Pride?

A. 1. By the Prophets crying woe to the Crown of Pride, we may understand that
Pride is odious to God in all sorts of persons, though they be Kings and
Princes, such as wear Crowns, if great men; If the greatest Kings be lifted up
with Pride they are an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 16.5. Every one that is
proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. Nebuchadnezzar was the greatest
Monarch in the World; All People, Nations and Languages trembled and feared
before him, whom he would he slew, and whom he would he saved alive. Dan. 5.19.
Yet when this great King was lifted up with Pride, God did no spare him, but
deposed him from his Kingly Throne, and made him lower than the lowest of men:
For he was driven from among men, and had his dwelling among the beasts, and
did eat grass as the Oxen. Dan. 5.20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his
mind hardened in Pride, he was deposed from his Kingly Throne. Dan. 4.31, 32. O
King Nebuchadnezzar the Kingdom is departed from thee, and they shall drive
thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, they
shall make thee to eat grass as Oxen.

2. By woe to the Crown of Pride, we may understand, woe to those in whom Pride
is a reigning sin. Crowns are worn by those that reign, in token of their regal
dignity. We must not suffer Pride or any other sin to reign in us. Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof. Good men may be overtaken with Pride as well as other sins, but it
does not reign over them, but they resist and oppose it, and humble themselves
for it, as we may see in the case of Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26. -- His heart
was lifted up -- Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the Pride of his
heart. Now the woe denounced against Pride, is against the Crown of Pride, that
is, where Pride is a reigning sin.

3. By the Crown of pride may be understood those Crowns or Garlands made of
Roses or other Flowers, which drunkards use to wear at their drunken meetings.
Ebrii solebant sibi coronas imponere; As Grotius observes. It was an
Heathenish custom for drunkards to put Crowns on their heads, which custom was
imitated by many of the Israelites, against such as these the Prophet
denounces Gods judgments, woe to the Crown of pride, to the drunkards of
Ephraim, as if he should have said, woe to those drunkards in Ephraim, that take
a pride in drunkenness, that glory in their shame, that strive to excel and
get the mastery of each of other in drunkenness.

What is meant by the Drunkards of Ephraim.

A. A drunkard is one that is given, addicted, accustomed to the sin of
drunkenness, one that is frequently drunk, Noah was once overtaken with
drunkenness, but he was no drunkard, he was not addicted and accustomed to this
sin.

Ephraim was a Tribe in Israel. Numb. 1.33. Of the Tribe of Ephraim were 40500.
Sometimes by Ephraim is understood the Ten Tribes of Israel which revolted from
the house of David in the days of Jeroboam, As Isa. 7.2. It was told the house
of David, Syria is confederate with Ephraim, that is, with the Ten Tribes of
Israel, which were called by the name of Ephraim, because Jeroboam who was
the first King that the ten Tribes set up, after their defection from the house
of David was of the Tribe of Ephraim. 1 King. 11.26, 31. And also because
Ephraim was the chiefest of the ten Tribes: so that vvo to the drunkards of
Ephraim is as much as vvo to the drunkards in Israel. Israel was a people that
had God's Word and Prophets, a people for whom God had done greater things
than for any Nation under Heaven. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Israel professed themselves
to be the people of the Lord; And therefore to be a drunkard in Israel was far
worse than to be a drunkard in Egypt or Moab, or any other Heathenish Land.

What is meant by that woe which the Prophet denounces against the Crown of
pride, and the drunkards of Ephraim.

A. It implies that pride and drunkenness are woeful sins, and that all proud
persons, and all drunkards are in a woeful condition. This little word woe, is
a comprehensive word, it comprehends all sorts of miseries, both in this Life
and the Life to come. When the Scripture says vvo to drunkards, it implies
that the curse of God is upon them in this Life, and will without Repentance
remain upon them to Eternity. But see more particularly what is included in the
woe denounced in the Scripture.

1. The woe denounced in Scripture implies all sorts of misery and calamity on
the outward man, even to our utter ruin and destruction. Numb. 21.29. Woe to
thee Moab, thou art undone. 2. The woe denounced in Scripture implies Spiritual
judgments, that God will send his plagues on those men's souls, to whom his word
says woe. Isa. 3.9. Woe unto their Soul, for they have rewarded evil against
themselves. 3. When the Scripture denounces woe against sinners, this woe
includes in it the certain and unavoidable damnation of Hell. Mat. 23.28, 33.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites -- How can ye escape the
damnation of Hell. So that this woe comprehends all sorts of judgments,
internal, external, and eternal judgments.
Sect. 3. Drunkenness is a woeful sin. What drunkenness is, when a man is, in
Scripture account, a drunken man.
The text being explained, I shall not at present treat of the woe denounced
against the sin of pride, though that be an abominable sin, but of the woe
denounced against the drunkards of Ephraim, which concerns all other
drunkards as well as those of Ephraim, though more especially such drunkards as
live under the means of grace, and are professors of the Christian Religion.
And the Doctrine which I shall insist on is this.

Doct. Drunkenness is a woeful sin, and all drunkards are in a woeful
condition, especially such as live under the means of grace, and make a
profession of Religion.
VVo to the drunkards of Ephraim: It is not to be understood exclusive, as if
other drunkards were not in a woeful condition, as well as those of Ephraim,
but eminenter, the drunkards of Ephraim above others were in a woeful
condition, because they sinned against more light and more means of grace than
the drunkards in Heathenish Countries. Before I show what a woeful sin
drunkenness is, it will be expedient to enquire what drunkenness is.

Drunkenness is sometimes taken figuratively, as when it is applied to sin,
Rev. 17.2, 6. or affliction; Isa. 51.21. Or properly for being drunk with wine
or other strong drink. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine. And in this sense I
shall handle it in this discourse. Drunkenness is a vice so well known that
there is little need of any definition to be given of it, yet for a fuller
opening of the nature of this sin, I shall give this description of it.

Drunkenness is a sin whereby a man is inclined to excess in drinking, to the
depriving of himself of the use of his reason. For the explaining of this
description of drunkenness, there are three things to be considered in the sin
of drunkenness.

1. The inordinate love and desire of wine or other strong drink. This is
sinful when the heart is inordinately inclined to the love and desire of wine
or strong drink. It is noted as a vice in the children of Israel that they
loved flagons of wine. Hos. 3.1. The children of Israel who look to other Gods,
and love flagons of wine. It is mentioned as a requisite in the Minister of the
Gospel, that he must be one not given to wines. 1 Timothy 3.3. His heart, his
affections must not run after wine. As the going out of the heart after Idols
is sinful, as well as the bowing the body to Idols. Ezekiel. 20.16. Their heart
goes after their Idols. So the going out of the heart to wine or strong drink
in an inordinate manner is sinful as well as excessive drinking; For
inordinate affections to things, in themselves lawful, become sinful. A man
may be guilty of drunkenness by his inordinate desire, as well as the
immoderate use of wine. Ebrietas est inordinata vini concupiscentia, vel usus.
Tho. Aquinas. 22 ae. q. 150.

2. Excess in drinking wine or strong drink. Drunkenness is sometime called by
this name, excess of wine. 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past of our life may suffice
us, to have wrought the will of the Gentiles when we walked in lasciviousness,
lusts, excess of wines -- There is a lawful use of wine and strong drink,
especially for such as have weakly stomachs, and such as are oppressed with
grief, but then it must be with moderation. 1 Timothy 5.23. Use a little wine for
thy stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities. Prove. 31.6. Give strong drink
unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts.
But it must be temperately and with moderation; All excess in drinking is
sinful, and a degree of drunkenness. If any say what is excess in drinking,
when may men be counted excessive in drinking.

( A. 1.) When they drink more than conduces to their health. The end of our
eating and drinking is the preservation of our health. Act. 27.34. Take some
meat, for this is for your health.

(2.) When a man is so overcharged with drink that he is unfitted either for
the service of God, or the works of his calling. Luk 21.34. Take heed to your
selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness. etc. The end of eating and drinking is for strength, that we may
be enabled for the duties of our general and particular callings. Eccl. 10.17.
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and
not for drunkenness. When we are rendered unfit for our callings by wine or
strong drink, that is excessive and sinful drinking. Prove. 31.4, 5.

3. The deprivation of the use of our reason and understanding. It is ordinary
for some men to drink so much, that they lose the use of their understanding,
they know not what they say, or what they do; And when men have drunk so much,
that they know not what they say or do, this is drunkenness in an high degree.

For the further convincing of men when they are guilty of this sin of
drunkenness, I shall show when a man is in the account of the Scripture,
esteemed and called a drunken man.

1. When a man has drunk so much that he cannot go upright, but reels and
staggers as he goes in the streets, not through bodily weakness, but through
abundance of drink, such a man is a drunken man. Psalm. 107.27. They reel to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man. Job 12.25. He makes them to stagger like
a drunken man. Isa. 24.20. The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard. 2.
When a man has drunk so much as that he vomits and spues up what he has
drunk, and that not from the weakness of his stomach, but from abundance of
drink, this shows a man to be a drunken man. Jer. 25.27. Drink ye, and be
drunken, and spue. Isa. 28.7, 8. They have erred through wine, and through
strong drink are out of the way -- For all Tables are full of vomit and
filthiness, so that there is no place clean. He proves them guilty of
drunkenness by their filthy vomiting on the Tables and Places, where they sat
drinking together. 3. When a man has drunk so much that wine has overcome
him, and taken from him the use of his understanding, that he is like a man at
his wits end, he knows not what he says, or what he does, that man is guilty
of drunkenness in an high degree. Jer. 23.9. I am like a drunken man, and like
a man whom wine has overcome. Psalm. 107.27. They reel to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. 4. Such as are frequently at
Taverns and Alehouses, and set tippling there a long time together, though
through the strength of their brain, they do not come away disguised and
staggering as others do, yet these are ranked amongst drunkards, Joel. 1.5.
Awake ye drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of wine. And have a woe
denounced against them, as well as those that are common and notorious
drunkards. Prove. 23.30, 31. Who has woe? They that tarry long at the wine, they
that go to seek mixed wine. Isa. 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till
wine inflame them. Such as set bibbing and tippling wine or strong drink, are
noted as a detestable generation of men, whose company is to be shunned,
avoided by sober men. Prove. 23.20. Be not amongst wine bibbers.
Sect. 4. Drunkenness proved to be a great and woeful sin, several ways.
We have seen what the sin of drunkenness is, now I shall prove by several
arguments that drunkenness is a great, a dangerous, a woeful sin, whereby it
will appear that all drunkards are in a woeful condition.

. Drunkenness is expressly against the command of God.

I. Drunkenness is plainly and expressly forbidden in Gods word. Ephesians. 5.18. Be
not drunk with wine. Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness -- Romans 13.12. Let
us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness -- The drunkard
cannot plead ignorance that he did not know drunkenness to be a sin. He cannot
plead for himself as Peter did for the Jews, that put Christ to death. Act.
3.17. I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers. 1 Cor.
2.8. For had they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory.
Drunkards sin against light, both against the light of nature: For nature
teaches us that it is a shameful thing for a man to be drunk, and against the
light of Gods word, and that is a great aggravation of sin, to sin against the
light of Gods word. Sins of ignorance are as it were no sins compared with sins
against knowledge. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them they had
not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. Drunkards cast Gods word
behind their backs, and trample his Commandments under their feet. God faith,
be not drunk with wine -- Take heed least your hearts be overcharged with
drunkenness; But they say in affect though not in words, we will not regard
these commands of God, let God say and do what he will, we will take our fill
of wine and strong drink. Drunkards and other sinners that know God's will, and
will not do it, contemn and despise God. Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore does the wicked
contemn God? Drunkards are guilty of rebellion against God, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, for sinning against the light of Gods word is
accounted rebellion; Job. 24.13. They are of those that rebel against the
light. And that is an heinous sin to be stubborn, and rebellious against the
God of Heaven. 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry.

. It is a beastly sin.

II. Drunkenness is a beastly sin, it deprives a man of his reason, and makes
him carry himself like a beast. It is a vile thing for a man to degrade and
make himself like a beast. Job. 18.3. Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and
reputed as vile in your sight. Bildad thought himself and his friends
wonderfully disparaged, when he thought they were counted as beasts; But how do
they vilify and disparage themselves, who do in reality make themselves no
better than brute beasts by their drunkenness? yea this sin makes a man worse
than a beast. The Ass is a silly beast, yet the Asses will not drink to excess,
they drink no more than will quench their thirst. Psalm. 104.11. The wild Asses
quench their thirst. And therefore as Solomon sends the sluggard to the Ant,
Prove. 6.6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise. So may I
send the drunkard to the wild Asses, go to the wild Asses thou drunkard, and
consider their ways and be wise, who having no guide, over-seer or ruler, never
drink any more than will quench their thirst, though they meet with the best
and pleasantest Springs, and purest Fountains under Heaven; And will thou who
have had many instructors, that have taught thee the odiousness of this sin of
drunkenness; be enticed by the pureness of the wine, or the pleasantness of thy
drink, to drink to excess? Toads and Serpents which are hateful creatures will
not drink more than is suitable and convenient to their natures; And shall man
who was made after the Image of God, make himself worse than a Toad or a
Serpent, by drinking to excess.

. It is a mischievous sin, both to body, soul and estate.

III. Drunkenness is a most mischievous sin, and brings a world of mischief
along with it both to soul and body, and estate, and good name.

1. It does great mischief to the Soul. For (1.) It besots and stupifies the
Soul, and estrangeth a man's heart from God, who is his chiefest good. Hos.
4.11. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart; We may take heart
here for the understanding; As Romans 2.21. Their foolish heart was darkened. And
so it is true that wine takes away the heart, that is, it stupifieth the mind,
it blinds and darkens the understanding, and makes men sottish, as Jeremiah
complains of the Jews, who were much addicted to drunkenness. Jer. 4.22. My
people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish children, and have
none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. Or we may take heart for the affections, and so it is true that wine
takes away the heart, for drunkenness takes of the heart from God, and all
that is good. Drunkards have no love to God, no delight in God, no desire of
enjoying God, no fear of God, no heart to that which is good. Drunkenness is a
fleshly lust, and fleshly lusts war against, and tend to the ruin of our
precious Souls. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul. 2. It brings
great mischief to the body by the painful diseases that it breeds in the body,
and by the wounds and bruises men get by falls when they have drunk so much,
they are not able to go, or to guide the Horses they ride on, and also by the
wounds they get in quarrels and contentions with their Companions, when they
are in their cups. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe, who has sorrow, who has
contentions, who has wounds without cause, who has redness of eyes? They that
tarry long at the wine -- Not only the eyes are made red but the whole body is
enflamed, and greatly distempered by excessive drinking. Isa. 5.11. VVo to them
that follow strong drink, that continue till night till wine inflame them. Our
bodies should be the Temples of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6.19. What know ye not
that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you. And it is
dangerous defiling the Temple of God with excess of wine or strong drink. 1
Cor. 3.17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. 3. It
brings ruin upon a man's estate. Prove. 23.21. The drunkard and the glutton
shall come to poverty. Many persons by their drunken and sottish courses wast
fair estates, that were left them by their Parents, others that have been
brought up to callings, spend all they gain by their callings in excessive
drinking, whereby it comes to pass that they make no provision for their
Families, but their Wives and Children are brought into great want and straits,
such as these are as bad, yea worse than Infidels. 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any
provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has
denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. 4. It blasts a man's reputation;
It is a shame for a man to have the brand of a drunkard set upon him, even
children will hour and deride a drunken man when they see him reel and stagger
as he goes in the streets.
. Drunkenness is the cause of many other sins.

IV. The greatness of the sin of drunkenness will appear from hence, that it
disposes a man to many other great and crying sins, as for instance.

1. Drunkenness disposes men to commit uncleanness. Prove. 23.31, 33. Look not
thou upon the wine, when it is red -- Thine eyes shall behold strange women.
When men are overcome with wine they are easily drawn to commit the worst sort
of uncleanness. Lot though a Righteous man, being overtaken with drunkenness
committed incest twice. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess.
The Greek word is (...) that is as Beza observes, omnis profusio eaque summa
cum turpitudine conjuncta. All excess of riot even that which is joined with
the greatest filthiness. No filthiness comes amiss to a drunken man, who is
shameless whilst he is overcome with strong drink. The Jews who were much
addicted to Drunkenness, were greatly addicted to Whoredom also. Hos. 4.11.18.
Whoredom and wine take away the heart -- Their drink is sour, they have
committed whoredom continually. Their drink is sour, some interpret of the sour
belches drunkards have after their cups, and another effect of immoderate
drinking wine, besides the souring of it in the stomach is, that it provokes
men to Whoredom. Hierom has a smart passage to this effect; Nunquam ego
ebrium castum putabo. I shall never think a drunkard can be a chaste man. 2.
Drunkards are easily persuaded to be idolaters, for they making their belly
their God, Phil. 3.19. will easily be persuaded to bow down their bodies to an
Idol, and comply with any Religion, which will suit best with their interest.
Hos. 3.1. -- The children of Israel, who look to other Gods, and love flagons
of wine. Dan. 5.4. They drunk wine and praised the Gods of Gold, and of Silver,
of Brass, of Iron, of Wood, and of Stone. 3. Drunkenness is accompanied with
abundance of vain bablings, and foolish and idle talk, which men have together
when they are in their cups. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has bablings -- They that
tarry long at the wine. And if any think there is no great hurt in those
bablings and foolish talking that drunkards have, when they sit together at
Iuns or Alehouses; Let such consider. (1.) That vain bablings harden the heart,
and dispose a man to ungodly practices. 2 Timothy 2.16. But shun profane and vain
bablings, for they will increase unto more ungodliness. (2.) Though foolish
talking and jesting is made light of, and accounted by many a matter of mirth,
yet it is a sin brings down Gods wrath. Ephesians. 5.4, 6. Neither filthiness nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient -- Let no man deceive
you with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. (3.) Men must give an account for every idle word
at the day of judgment, and without Repentance, they shall be condemned for
their idle words as well as their other sins. Mat. 12.36, 37. But I say unto
you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof
in the day of judgment; For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned.
4. There are fevv drunkards but they will mock and scoff, and rail at the
Ministers and Servants of Christ, and sing Songs of them, especially when they
are in their cups. Prove. 20.1. Wine is a mocker, that is, it makes men mockers.
Mercer's note upon that Text is, Vini potor derisor Dei hominumque esse solet.
P. drunkard is wont to be a derider of God and men. It has been usual with
drunkards in former as well as these days, to sing Songs of the people of God.
Psalm. 69.12. I am the song of drunkards. Now this mocking the Ministers and
people of God is a grievous sin, it brings down wrath without remedy. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. They mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and mis-used
his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till there
was no remedy. Mockers bring upon themselves mighty and unavoidable judgments.
Isa. 28.24. Now therefore be ye not mockers, least your bands be made strong.
Forty and Two little Children were torn in pieces by two She bares, for
mocking a Prophet, and calling him baldhead. 2 King. 2.23, 24. And if God was
so offended with little children for this sin of mocking a Prophet, that he
sent two bears which rent in pieces 42 Children, how offensive is it to the
Lord to hear those that are come to man's estate, knowing and understanding men,
mock and scoff at his servants? Though no judgment come upon them in this World
for their sin, yet without Repentance a worse thing will come unto them, they
shall be rent and torn, that is, they shall be tormented in the other World for
ever, by the Devil who is a roaring Lion, a far more dreadful enemy than the
Bears that tore the little children in pieces. 5. Drunkards are usually
swearers, and some of them will swear dreadful Oaths, such as would make a man
tremble to hear them; And swearing, profane swearing is an abominable sin, and
brings a man in danger of hell fire. Jam. 5.12. But above all things my
brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any
other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, least ye fall into
condemnation. 6. Drunkards are often times persecutors and smiters of their
fellow servants. Matthew. 24.48, 49. If that evil servant shall say in his heart,
my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
to eat and drink with the drunken. They are such as eat and drink with the
drunken that smite their fellow servants; And smiteing and persecuting the
servants of Christ is an heinous sin, he takes it as ill, when his servants are
persecuted, as if he himself were persecuted. Act. 9.4. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Saul did not persecute Christ in his own person, for he
was in Heaven, setting at his Fathers Right Hand, but he persecuted Christ's
Servants, and Christ was as much offended at the persecution of his Members, as
if he himself had been persecuted. 7. Drunkenness casts men into a deep
sleep, and makes them dreadfully secure under those judgments that hang over
their heads. Prove. 23.34. Yea thou shall be as one that lies down in the midst
of the Sea, or as he that lies on the top of the Mast. Solomon speaking of
such as tarry long at the wine, sets out their danger, by one that lies
sleeping upon the top of a Mast in the midst of the Sea, who is in danger every
moment to fall into the Sea, and to be drowned, yet fears nothing while he is a
sleep; Such is the case of drunkards, they are in danger of falling into Hell
every day, and yet they fear nothing, till God awakens their Consciences, and
shows them their sin and misery. When the Prophet calls, Awake ye drunkards --
Joel 2.5. It implies that they are in a deep sleep, and that it is no easy
matter to awake them. 8. Sometimes drunkards commit murder in their
drunkenness, and quarrel with, and kill their best friends. It is reported of
Alexander, that when he was drunk he killed his Beloved Friend Clytus. Yea
there is no sin so horrid, but a drunkard may fall into it, if he has an
occasion and temptation to commit it.
. Drunkenness brings national judgments.

V. Drunkenness is such an abominable sin, that it brings down National
Judgments. Whole Nations are punished for this sin of drunkenness; The Earth is
weary of bearing drunkards, and often spueth out its inhabitants. We read of
the inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, that their Land spued them out for their
defiling it, and the Israelites are warned not to defile their Land least they
also be spued out. Lev. 18.28. That the Land spue not you out also, when ye
defile it, as it spued out the Nations that were before you. And when the
Israelites did defile their Land by drunkenness and other sins, they were a
burden to the Land, it was weary with bearing them, it spued them out, and they
were carried captive into a strange Land. Isa. 5.11.13. Woe to them that rise up
early to follow strong drink, and continue until night, till wine inflame them
-- Therefore my people are gone into captivity. The Lord threatened to send a
mighty adversary against Ephraim for their pride and drunkenness, which came
upon them as furiously as a tempest of hail, and a destroying storm, and as a
mighty flood of waters that should overflow all places, and bear down all
before it. Isa. 28.1, 2. Woe to the crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim --
Behold the Lord has a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail, and a
destroying sterm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to
the earth with the hand. So that drunkards are the plague of a Nation, that
bring down Gods judgments on themselves, and the places where they live. And
when an overflowing scourge comes on a Nation, usually drunkards have the
speediest and deepest share in the judgments of God. Amos 6.1, 3, 6, 7. Woe to
them that are at ease in Zion -- that put far away the evil day -- that drink
wine in bowls -- Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go
captive -- When the King of Assyria invaded the Land of Israel, the drunkards
were trod under feet like mire in the streets. Isa. 28.2, 3. Behold the Lord
has a mighty and strong one, etc. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim
shall be trod under foot.

. Drunkards often times dye in the act of sin.

VI. Drunkenness appears to be a great sin, because often times it is punished
with sudden death, and sometimes drunkards are cut off in the very act of sin;
They are very frequently cut off, suddenly and unexpectedly. Nah. 1.10. While
they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.
Stubble that is fully dry is consumed in a moment, so are many drunkards cut
off suddenly, when they have no thoughts, no expectations of death. Luke 12.45,
46. If that servant shall begin to eat and drink, and to be drunken. The Lord
of that Servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an hour
when he is not aware, and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion
with the unbelievers. We see here the woeful condition of drunkards, both in
their death and after their death. Their death is often times sudden and
unexpected, they have not a day, not an hours warning; Their Lord comes in a
day that they did not look for him, and in an hour that they were not aware of,
and shall cut them in sunder, that is, separate their souls from their bodies
by death, and after death give them their portion with unbelievers, that is, in
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Rev. 21.8. Drunkards are ost times
cut off in the very act of sin, which is a dreadful token of Gods displeasure,
when he will not vouchsafe a sinner space for Repentance, but cuts him off in
the very act of sin. Elah a King, a King in israel, was cut off in the very act
of sin, while he was drinking himself drunk in his Stewards house. 1 King.
16.9, 10. His servant Zimri conspired against him as he was in Tirzah, drinking
himself drunk in the house of Arza, Steward of his house in Tirzah; And Zimri
went in, and smote him, and killed him. This is recorded to the terrors of all
drunkards in all Ages, to the end of the World. As Christ said to deterr us
from looking back, remember Lots wife: So may I say to deter you from
drunkenness; Remember Elah, who was killed whilst he was drinking himself
drunk; And if God did not spare a King in Israel, take heed least he do not
spare you. Besides Elah's example, Amnon one of David's Sons was killed whilst
his heart was merry with wine. 2 Samuel 13.28. When Belshazzar had been drinking
wine with a thousand of his Lords in the day time, he was slain in the night.
Dan. 5.1, 30. Belshazzar the King made a great feast to a Thousand of his
Lords, and drank wine before the Thousand -- In that night was Belshazzar the
King of the Caldeans slain. Besides these examples we have known or heard of
several others, some that have dyed dead drunk, and never came to life again,
others that have fallen off their horses in their drunkenness, and broke their
necks, others that have fallen into the water and been drowned, and others cut
off by other means.

. It unfits a man for the service of God, and his Generation, and for Death and
Judgment.

VII. Drunkenness makes a man unfit for any good work, unfit for the service of
God and Men, unfit for Death and Judgment; It makes a man unfit for Prayer, and
all other Religious Duties. 1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand, be ye
therefore sober, and watch unto Prayer. No men are fit for Prayer but sober
men; It is probable Nadab and Abihu had distempered themselves with wine or
strong drink, when they presumed to offer up strange fire, and fire went out
from the Lord, and devoured them, for immediately after the relation of their
sin and punishment, there is a strict charge given to Aaron and his Sons, that
they should not drink wine or strong drink when they went into the Tabernacle
of the Congregation upon pain of death, that they might be fit for their
employment. Lev. 10.8, 9, 10, 11. It also unfits a man for the service of his
Generation, especially for a place of public trust. Many Armies have been
ruined, Towns and Kingdoms lost by the drunkenness of the Commanders. A small
Army of the Israelites, not exceeding 7000, setting upon the Syrians, when
Benhadad their King was drinking himself drunk with his Confederates, put the
Syrians to flight, and slew them with a great slaughter, although besides his
own great army, he had Thirty and Two Kings that came to his assistance. 1
King. 20.16, 17, 20. And as this sin renders us unfit for the service of God
and Men, so also it makes us unfit for the day of death and judgment. Luke
21.34. And take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares.

. It will exclude a man out of Heaven.

VIII. Drunkenness is such an odious sin, that the Lord has told us expressly
that he will not admit any drunkards into the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. Know y not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be
not deceived, Neither Fornicators -- nor Drunkards -- shall inherit the Kingdom
of God. If a man be a drunkard, and think to go to Heaven when he dies, he
deceives his own Soul. Drunkenness is a manifest work of the flesh, and the
Scripture tells us plainly, that they that live in drunkenness and such like
sins shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Now the works of
the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness -- Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Drunkards may know their doom before they
come to the judgment seat of Christ, I tell you before -- that is, before the
day of judgment come, before the sentence be past upon you, that they which do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. The Apostle knew drunkards
were dull of hearing, and slow of heart to believe, and therefore he tells them
over and over, that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and what folly
and madness is this to part with a Kingdom, an Everlasting Kingdom, the Kingdom
of Heaven for a pot of drink, or a cup of wine. It was a foolish act in Esau,
and argued him to be a profane man; to sell his Birthright for a morsel of
meat. Heb. 12.16. Least there be any fornicator or profane person, as Esau,
who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. Drunkards are guilty of worse
profaneness than Esau, for they part with a better blessing than a
Birthright, namely with the Kingdom of Heaven, for a pot of drink or a cup of
wine, which does them no good, but much hurt. It is not drinking wine or strong
drink, but excess of drinking excludes us from the Kingdom of Heaven, and
excess of wine does a man no good, but much hurt.

. It is a damnable sin

IX. Drunkenness is a damnable sin, a sin for which men shall be condemned to
the torments of Hell for ever. The drunkard shall be cut asunder, and have his
portion appointed with unbelievers. Luke 12.45, 46. If that servant shall begin
to eat and drink, and be drunken, the Lord of that servant will cut him
asunder, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers. But what is it
to have our portion appointed with the unbelievers? It is to be damned, and to
be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. Mark 16.16. He that
believes not shall be damned. Rev. 21.8. The unbelieving shall have their part
in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Hell is full of drunkards.
Isa. 5.11, 14. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them.
Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure,
and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoices
shall descend into it. There is scarce any sin fills Hell like drunkenness,
following of wine and strong drink sends great multitudes to Hell. The glory,
and pomp, and jollity of drunkards, shall be no security to drunkards to keep
them from the bottomless pit. The drunken Gentleman and drunken Prince,
notwithstanding all his bravery, shall descend into Hell as well as the drunken
beggar. They that inflame themselves with wine and strong drink, shall be
tormented in flames of fire for ever; And then they that drunk wine in bowls,
and filled themselves with strong drink, shall not with all their entreaties
get so much as one drop of water to cool their tongues.

. It is a bewitching sin, very hardly left by those that are addicted to it.

X. Drunkenness is an enticing, bewitching sin, which is very hardly left by
those that are addicted to it. Neither the word nor rod of God prevails with
men to leave this sin, but they go on sinning against light, sinning against
the counsels and reproofs, and tears of friends, against the checks of their
own Consciences, though the Lord afflict them in their bodies, estates, good
names, yet still they persevere in this sin. Though when upon sick beds they
are under terrors of Conscience, and feel as it were some flashes of Hell Fire,
and make great vows, and solemn protestations, that if God will spare their
lives, and raise them up again, they will leave off their drunkenness, yet when
they are restored to health, they return to their old courses again. Prove.
23.35. They have stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick, they have
beaten me, and I felt it not; When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.
Solomon speaks here of drunkards who are not disheartened by all the
difficulties, and troubles, and blows that they meet with in following after
strong drink, but resolve to seek yet again, and to persist in their dissolute
courses. Drunkards are wont to encourage themselves, and one another to persist
in their drunken courses, under all discouragements. Isa. 56.12. Come ye, say
they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. In stead of desisting,
they grow more resolved in their way; And the reason why this sin is hardly
left, and so few recovered from it, may be partly from the strength this
sinful habit gets in the soul, by the many repeated acts of this sin, and also
from the pleasingness of this sin to corrupt nature, for the more pleasing any
sin is, the more hardly it is left, and chiefly from the just and righteous
judgment of God, who gives up men, who go on sinning against light, unto their
own hearts lusts, saying to them, he that is filthy, let him be filthy still.
Drunkenness is called by some, vitium maximae adhaerentiae, a sin that sticks
closer and faster to a man than any other sin.

Sect. 5. Several aggravations of the sin of drunkenness.

We have seen the greatness of this sin of drunkenness, now let us consider the
aggravations of this sin; It is worse in some men than others, and worse at
sometimes than others.

. It is worse in Magistrates than in other persons.

I. It is a great sin for any man to be overcome with drink, but it is worse for
Magistrates than for other persons. The greater and more eminent the person is
that commits the offense, the more heinous is the offense.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major, qui peccat, habetur.
The Scripture speaks of it as an odious sin in Kings and Princes, that are
Rulers over others, to be addicted to this sin of drunkenness. Prove. 31.4. It
is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes
strong drink. It is not the use, but the excess of wine and strong drink that
is forbidden to Kings and Princes; And there may be several reasons why
Magistrates should above others, avoid this sin of drunkenness.

1. They are God's Vicegerents on earth, they are in the place, and in the
stead of God among men. Exodus 4.10. Thou shall be to him instead of God. They
that are Rulers and Judges do not, or at least ought not to rule and judge for
themselves, but for the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. And he said to the Judges, take
heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord. And what a
dishonor is it to the Holy and Blessed God, that his Vicegerents, that they
that rule and judge (...) stead on earth, should be tainted and (...) with such
a beastly sin as drunkenness? 2. When Magistrates are pious, prudent, sober and
temperate, they are blessin^ (...) the places over which God has set the (...)
but when they are like children, and cannot govern themselves, but eat and drink
unseasonably and excessively, they bring woe and misery not only on themselves,
but on others also, even on the whole Land where they live. Eccl. 10.17. Woe to
thee O Land, when thy King is a child, and thy Princes eat in the morning!
Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat
in due season, for strength and not for drunkenness. 3. When Magistrates are
given to excess of wine or strong drink, it unfits them for their employments,
it makes them forget God, and the duty of their places, and to pervert
judgment. Prove. 31.4, 5. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to
drink wine, nor Princes strong drink, least they drink and forget the law, and
pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. And those Magistrates do
wickedly, and are altogether unlike God, that through carelessness, or taking
bribes, or affection, or any other account pervert judgment. Job 34.12. Yea
surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment. It
is the opinion of all men that they deserve the curse of God, who pervert
judgment, though in the cause of the meanest persons, such as strangers,
widows and fatherless. Deuteronomy. 27.19. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment
of the stranger, fatherless and widow, and all the people shall say Amen. 4.
The Magistrates example has a great influence on the people. When Rulers are
just, and holy, and temperate, that will incline the people to the love and
practice of Justice, Temperance and Holiness. When Crispus the chief Ruler of
the Synagogue believed, many of the Corinthians embraced the faith of Christ.
Act. 18.8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord
with all his house, and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were
baptized. While Joshua ruled Israel, who was a pious person that served the
Lord, Israel served the Lord also. Josh. 24, 15, 31. As for me and my house we
will serve the Lord; And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua.
Manassah's evil example made Judah and Jerusalem to sin at an high rate, and to
do worse than the Heathen. 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 5. 5. Magistrates dishonor
themselves exceedingly in the sight of the people, by excess of wine, and
render themselves contemptible, by giving themselves over to vicious courses.
Hab. 2.15, 16. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, and makes him
drunken, that thou may look on his nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for
glory, drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered, the cup of the Lords
Right Hand shall be on thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. The
Babylonians were much addicted to the sin of drunkenness, for which as well as
for other sins, the Lord denounces Gods judgments against them, because they
were given to drinking themselves, and would make others drunk also, and among
other punishments which they should receive from the Lord for this sin, this
was one, that they should be filled with shame instead of Glory. Thou art
filled with shame for Glory -- and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.
They that understand this place Metaphorically, grant that it may have a
litteral sense to this effect. Potest hoc ad Regem Babylonium referri quod
vomet ipse, cum magno dedecore, quod ante intemperanter hauserat. They are
Calvin's words upon the place; This may have reference to the King of Babylon,
that he should vomit with great shame, what he had drunk in an excessive
manner. Though men be advanced to never such dignity and glory, yet if they be
given to excess of wine, if they will drink till they spew, if they will drink
till they lose their understandings, this stains their glory, their drunkenness
is a greater shame to them than their promotion to places of Government is a
glory to them.
. It is worse in Ministers than in any other men.

II. Drunkenness is a worse sin in a Minister of the Gospel, who should be a
pattern as well as a preacher of Righteousness, than in any other man. Under
the Mosaical Law the Priests were forbidden to drink wine or strong drink upon
pain of death, when they were to go into the Tabernacle of the Congregation.
Lev. 10.8, 9. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, saying, do not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thy Sons which thee, when ye go into the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, least ye dye, it shall be a statute for ever, throughout your
Generations. And the reason of this strict prohibition of wine and strong drink
to the Priests when they were to attend the service of the Lord, is added. ver.
10.11. And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between
clean and unclean, and that ye may teach the children of Israel all the
Statutes which the Lord has spoken to them, by the hand of Moses. The
prohibition of the Priests drinking wine when they were to attend the service
of the Lord, is renewed by Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 44.21. Neither shall any Priest drink
wine when they enter into the Inner Court. And as under the Law there was a
strict charge given to the Priests, not to drink wine or strong drink when they
were to be employed in serving the Lord, and teaching the people, so it is
required of all Ministers under the Gospel, that they be sober, and not given
to wine. 1 Timothy 3.2, 3. A Bishop must be blameless -- vigilant, sober -- not
given to wine. Tit. 1.5. For a Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God,
-- not given to wine -- What the Apostle says in his Epistle to Timothy and
Titus concerning the qualifications of a Bishop, concerns all the Ministers
of the Gospel, which are called to preach God's Holy word, and take the care
and oversight of men's souls, and it is twice mentioned concerning them, that
they must not be given to wine. The use of wine is not wholly forbidden to the
Ministers of the Gospel, for such as have weak stomachs may lawfully make use
of this good creature of God, but then it must be with very much moderation.
Timothy an Evangelist was allowed by the Apostle the use of wine, but it was in
a small measure, and sparingly, so far as his weak stomach had need of it. 1 Timothy 5.23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake,
and thine often infirmities. That drunkenness and other scandalous sins, are
far worse in Ministers of the Gospel, than in any other men, will appear
several ways.

1. Ministers of the Gospel are under greater obligations to Holiness than
other men. They are to be the light of the World, and the salt of Earth. Mat.
5.13, 14. Ye are the salt of the earth -- ye are the light of the world. They
are Christ's Ambassadors. 2 Cor. 5.20: And Gods Stewards. 1 Cor. 4.1. And what a
dishonor is it to God to have a drunken Steward, a drunken Ambassador! They
are styled Angels; Rev. 2.1. And what an uncomely sight is it to see one whose
office and dignity resembles him to an Angel, by his drunken and sottish
practices to make himself like a beast. Ministers of the Gospel ought to be
examples and patterns of Holiness to such as believe in Christ. 1 Timothy 4, 12.
Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity. Tit. 2.7. In all things showing thy self a pattern
of good works. And for a man that is to be an example of holiness to believers
to be given to drunkenness, which civil men, which sober Heathens detest, and
which makes a man worse than a beast is a most abominable sin. 2. The evil
example of Ministers of the Gospel will draw multitudes to that which is evil.
If Ministers frequent Taverns, and drink to excess, their example will
encourage and embolden their neighbors to follow wine and strong drink, a
profane Minister makes a profane people. Jer. 23.15. From the Prophets of
Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the Land. See also ver. 10.11.
The Land is full of adulterers -- For both the Prophet and the Priest are
profane. When those that are teachers of others depart from the ways of God,
their example makes many to stumble. Mal. 2.7, 8. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge -- But ye have departed out of the way, ye have caused many
to stumble at the law. 3. The same Sacrifice under the Law was required for the
sin of the Priest, which was required for the sin of the whole Congregation; As
we may see, Lev. 4.3, 13.14. When the Priest sinned he was to bring a young
Bullock for a sin offering, and this was the same offering which was appointed
for the sin of the whole Congregation. ver. 13.14. Whereas for the sin of the
Ruler, there was but a kid of the goats, a male without blemish. ver. 22.23.
And for the sin of any of the common people a kid of the goats, a female
without blemish, which is of less value than the male. ver. 27.28. From this
difference of the Sacrifices, there being less appointed for the common people,
than for the Ruler, and less for the Ruler than for the Priest, we may learn
that the sins of Rulers are greater than the sins of the common people, and the
sins of Ministers are greater than the sins of Rulers, and greater than the
sins of the common people, they may be counted equal of the sins of a whole
Congregation. 4. When such as are preachers of God's word, are drunkards, or
given to any other scandalous sins, they bring themselves, and their office,
and the worship and service of God into contempt among the people. Isa. 43.27,
28. Thy teachers have transgressed against me, therefore I have profaned the
Princes of the Sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to
reproaches. When Ministers of Gods word do not keep Gods ways, the Lord makes
them base and contemptible among the people. Mal. 2.9. Therefore have I made
you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept
my ways. This is spoken of the Priests, as we may see, ver. 1.7, 8. When they
proved vicious they brought their persons and office into contempt among the
people. It was the Apostles care to magnify his office, Romans 11.13. I magnify
mine office. and to walk circumspectly in all things, that his Ministry might
not suffer any blame. 2 Cor. 6.3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed. Yea they that are profane Ministers, do not only bring
their persons and office into contempt, but make the worship and service of the
Lord to be abhorred, and that is a mighty sin for Ministers by their evil
conversations, to give occasion to any men to abhor the service of the Lord. 1 Samuel 2.17. Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord,
for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. 5. When such as are preachers of
God's word, prove drunkards, or live in any other scandalous sins, though they
should be instrumental to save others, they themselves shall be shut out of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will say unto me at that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils,
and in thy name done many wonderful works; And then will I profess unto them,
I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. And what a sad
condition is this, to cast devils out of others, and yet we our selves to be
cast into the bottomless pit, to abide with the devil for ever. It was the
Apostles care to be temperate in all things, and keep under his body, least
while he endeavored to save others souls, he should lose his own. 1 Cor. 9.25,
26, 27. Everyone that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things -- I
therefore so run -- I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, least
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should become a
castaway. 6. Drunkenness is such an odious sin in Ministers of the Gospel,
that it has been by several counsels deemed scandalous in Ministers to
frequent Taverns, and diverse Canons have been at several councels, made against
this scandalous practice of Ministers being frequently at Taverns.
. It is worse in knowing men, that make a a profession of Religion, than in
ignorant and profane men.

III. Drunkenness is worse in knowing men, and such as make a profession of
Religion, than it is in ignorant and profane persons. Isa. 28.1. Woe to the
Crown of Pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim. Ephraim was a Tribe in Israel, and
the Israelites were a knowing people. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Surely this great Nation is a
wise and understanding people. The Israelites worshipped the true God, and
professed themselves to be the people of God, they enjoyed the means of grace,
and therefore a drunkard of Ephraim was in a worse condition then a drunkard of
Moab or Egypt. A drunken Israelite was worse than a drunken Heathen; That it is
far worse for men of knowledge, and eminent for profession of Religion, to be
addicted to this sin of drunkenness, than ignorant and profane men, may be
made out several ways. As, 1. When men of knowledge, and professors of
Religion, will frequent Taverns, and set tippling at Alehouses, till they are
enflamed with strong drink, their example will embolden ignorant and young
persons to do as they do, and may ruin them for ever. What the Apostle says of
knowing persons sitting and eating in the Idols Temple. 1 Cor. 8.10, 11. If any
man see thee, which have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not
the Conscience of him that is weak, be emboldned to eat those things which are
offered to Idols? And through thy knowledge shall thy weaker brother perish,
for whom Christ dyed. The same may I say of sitting at Taverns and Alehouses;
If any man see thee which have knowledge, sit and drink, and tipple at a Tavern
or an Alehouse, shall not he that is weak be emboldned to follow thy example,
and through thy knowledge thy weak brother may perish Eternally. What is said
of Achan, Josh. 22.20. That man perished not alone in his iniquity. The same
may be said of men of knowledge, they perish not alone in their iniquities,
their example draws multitudes to sin and destruction with them. 2. The
miscarriages of men of knowledge, and professors of Religion, cause the name
and Gospel of God to be blasphemed. Romans 2.17, 23, 24. Behold, thou art called
a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and know his
will -- Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the Law,
dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you. When such as are called and accounted the people of God, and know
his will, do break God's Laws, this causes God's name to be dishonored and
blasphemed. When David who had a great name for Religion, fell into scandalous
sins, his fall gave great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme his
name. 2 Samuel 12.14. Because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall
surely dye. As the Philistines rejoiced and triumphed when they heard that Saul
and his mighty men fell in the battle. 2 Samuel 1.19, 20. The beauty of Israel is
slain upon thy high places, now are the mighty fallen; Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askelon, least the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. So do
profane men rejoice and triumph when they hear of any persons eminent for
profession of Religion, that fall into any scandalous sins; As the Heathen
spoke scoffingly of the children of Israel, when they went into captivity.
Ezekiel. 36.20. These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his
Land. So are profane men ready to say when they see professors of Religion
overcome with wine or strong drink; These are the people of the Lord, and yet
they will drink and tipple, and be drunk as well as other men, and thereupon
make a scoff at Religion, and think by reason of some men's miscarriages, that
all Religion is nothing else but hypocrisy. 3. Sins against knowledge are far
greater than sins of ignorance. A sin committed against knowledge is so great,
that a sin of ignorance is as it were no sin compared with it. Joh. 9.41. Jesus
says unto them, if ye were blind, ye should have no sin, but now ye say we
see, therefore your sin remains. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. They
had not had sin, that is, not to be understood absolutely, for all men have
sinned. Heathens that never heard of the Gospel, as well as other men, Romans
3.23. but it is to be understood comparatively, their sin is so great being
committed against knowledge, against the light of my Gospel, that their sin had
been none at all, compared with their sin, as it is now aggravated by being
committed against light; Yet sins of ignorance are of that heinous nature that
they are not explated but by the blood of Christ; For there were Offerings and
Sacrifices for sins of ignorance under the Law, as we may see, Lev, 4.2, 3, 13,
14, 22, 23, 27, 28. Which did type out the expiation of our sins by Christ's
offering up himself a Sacrifice for us. Heb. 9.26. Ephesians. 5.2. And it is said
expressly. Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood is no remission. And if sins of
ignorance be not expiated but by the blood of Christ, and would have procured
our being cast into Hell torments for ever, what heinous sins, are sins against
knowledge, seeing sins of ignorance are as no sins, compared with sins against
light. 4. Such as sin against knowledge, and under a profession of Religion,
shall have far greater punishment in the other World than ignorant persons.
Luke 12.47. That servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. The
Pharisees who were knowing persons, being given to oppression and other sins,
and covering their sins with a profession of Religion, our Lord Jesus Christ
says to them, Matthew. 23.14. Therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
And as such as sin against light, and sin under a profession of Religion, shall
receive greater damnation in the other World, so they often times are punished
sooner and more severely in this World than other men. Amos 3.2. You only have
I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities. Ezekiel. 9.6. Slay utterly old and young -- and begin at my
Sanctuary. When God sends forth his judgments, he usually begins at his
Sanctuary. Attending upon God's Ordinances, will be so far from securing
impenitent sinners from God's judgments, that it will hasten their ruin.


. Drunkenness is worse in women than in men.

IV. It is a greater shame to see a drunken woman, than a drunken man. A
drunken woman was in old times accounted a daughter of Belial. 1 Samuel 1.13, 14,
15, 16. Eli thought she had been drunken, and Eli said unto her, how long will thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee! And Hannah answered and said, no
my Lord! I am a woman of a sorrowful Spirit, I have drunk neither wine nor
strong drink -- Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial -- Hannah's
answer to Eli, implies that drunken women were counted daughters of Belial.
But what is it to be a daughter of Belial.

A. The worst sort of men and women in Scripture, are called Sons and Daughters
of Belial; As we may see, 1 Samuel 2.12, 17, 22. Judge. 19.22, 23, 24. Deuteronomy.
13.13. A daughter of Belial is rendered by some, a very child of the devil, as
Willet observes on the place; This word Belial in some places signifies the
Devil. As, 2 Cor. 6.15. What concord has Christ with Belial. Peter Martyr in
his Comment on these words of Hannah, Count not thine handmaid a daughter of
Belial, has this passage; Turpis est profecto in viro quovis ebrietas, at in
Muliere multo est faedior, maxim in Levitae uxore. Verily drunkenness is a
filthy sin in any man, but it is much more filthy in a woman than in a man, and
most of all in a Ministers Wife. Chrysostom has a passage to this effect;
Ebria muliere nihil turpius; Nothing is more filthy than a drunken woman; And
the Son of Syrach speaking of a drunken woman says. Eccl. 26.8. A drunken
woman, and a gadder abroad causes great anger, and she will not cover her own
shame. Shame-faceness and Sobriety are an ornament to a man, and the Apostle
requires of all women that they should be thus adorned. 1 Timothy 2.9. In like
manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness
and sobriety. If shamefacedness and sobriety be an ornament to a woman, then
impudence and intemperance are a disgrace to her. Mr. Harris calls a drunken
woman, a swine with a woman's face.

. It is an aggravation of this sin, when a man persists in it under much means
used to reclaim him.

V. It is an aggravation of the sin of drunkenness, when a man persists in it,
after much means used by God and Men to reclaim him. As, 1. When a man has
been instructed and taught out of Gods word, and knows in his own Conscience
that drunkenness is an horrible sin, and yet will not leave it off, this does
greatly aggravate his sin. For it greatly heightens any sin, when a man is
clearly convinced of the evil of it, and his Conscience as it were flies in
his face, when he is about the commission of it, and yet he will not desist
from it. Hos. 7.10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do
not return to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this. 2. When a man
has met with various afflictions in his body or estate, or his employments, or
his relations, and his Conscience tells him, it is for his drunkenness, and yet
will not turn from his sin, this does increase his guilt, to persist in his
sin, under his afflictions. Amos. 4.9. I have smitten you -- yet ye have not
returned unto me says the Lord. The Prophet reckons up the several afflictions
that God had sent upon the Israelites, ver. 9. to the 12. As Famine, Drought,
Blasting, Pestilence, Sword, Fire, and under all lays this to their charge,
yet ye have not returned unto me, intimating that the more afflictions they had
been under, the more provoking their sin was, that they should still persist
therein. A sore destruction is threatened against those that persist in their
sins, under the correcting hand of God. Jer. 5.3, 6. Thou have stricken them,
but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them, but they received no
correction, they have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to
return -- Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of
the Evenings shall spoil them, a Leopard shall watch over their Cities, every
one that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces. That is, because they
continued impenitent under Gods judgments, they should be torn in pieces by
their enemies, that should be as fierce, and as strong as Lions, as cruel and
mercyless as Wolves, as vigilant and swift as Leopards. 3. When a man has
been often reproved for his drunkenness or other sins by his Friends and
Relations, or by God's Ministers, or by his own Conscience, or by remarkable
and startling providence of God, that have fallen out either while or soon
after he has been indulging himself in his lusts, and yet perseveres in his
sinful courses, this does greatly aggravate his sin, and ripen him for
destruction. Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. 4. When a man has received
eminent mercies, and signal deliverances from God, and yet goes on in this sin
of drunkenness, or any other sin, this increases his guilt, and greatly
provokes God to anger against him. Ezra 9.13, 14. After all this is come upon
us for our evil deeds, and thou have given us such a deliverance as this --
Should we again break thy Commandments, would thou not be angry with us, till
thou had consumed us. When the Jews had received a wonderful deliverance at
the Red Sea, and yet sinned against God, this was an high provocation. Psalm.
106.7. Our fathers provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea.


. It is an aggravation of this sin, to persist in it against vows and promises
of resormation.

VI. It is an aggravation of the sin of drunkenness, or of any other sin, when
a man has made many vows and promises either on a sick bed, or being in danger
of his life at Sea, or in any other distress, that if God would spare his life,
and deliver him out of his distress, he would leave off his sins, and become a
new man, and yet persists in his evil courses, this is a great provocation, and
does exceedingly aggravate his sin. Jer. 2.20, 22. Thou said I will not
transgress, when upon every high hill, and under every green tree, thou
wanderest playing the harlot, -- For though thou wash thee with Nitre, and take
thee much Soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me says the Lord God. Such
as make fair promises of reformation, and yet upon every temptation and
occasion are ready to return to their sins again, their iniquity is marked
before the Lord, and so marked, that no excuses, nothing that they can do,
nothing but the infinite mercy of God, and the merits of Christ, can take away
their sins. We had better not make any vows and promises unto God, than to
vow, and not to perform our vows. Eccl. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest a vow unto
God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools, pay that which thou
have vowed. Better it is that thou should not vow, than that thou should
vow and not pay. To make promises of reformation, and not to perform them, is
to flatter with God, and to tell God a lie. Psalm. 78.34, 36, 37. When he slew
them, then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God;
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with
their tongue; For their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. It is a sad thing to tell a lie unto men, but it is
worse to lie unto God. Ananias and Sapphira were both smitten with sudden
death, for lying unto God about the price of their Land. So many vows and
promises as we make to God to break off our sins, so many lies we tell him, if
we do not perform those promises. And therefore they that have told God many
lies of this nature, may wonder at God's patience that he suffers them to live,
and has not long since cast them into hell, when as he struck Ananias and
Sapphira dead for telling but one lie, and he has said, All liars shall have
their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Rev. 21.8.

. This sin is aggravated from the times when it is committed, as if on Sabbath
days, before or after the Lords Supper, when Gods Judgments are abroad.

VII. Drunkenness is a vile sin at all times, yet it is worse if committed at
some times than others; As for instance.

1. It is worse for a man to be drunk on a Sabbath day, than on other days; For
the Sabbath day is to be employed in Holy and Religious Exercises. Exodus 20.8.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy. And it is a double sin to be drunk on
the Sabbath day, for such to their drunkenness add profanation of the Sabbath.
2. It is worse to be drunk when a man comes to the Lord's Table to partake of
the Lord's Supper, or soon after a man has been at this Holy Ordinance, then
it is to be overcome with wine at other times. In the Church of Corinth, there
were some that did presume to come to the Lord's Table, when they were little
better than drunk. 1 Cor. 11.21. But such as are drunken a little before, or
soon after they come to the Lord's Table, eat and drink unworthyly of that Holy
Ordinance; And such as eat and drink unworthyly at the Lord's Table, are guilty
of a mighty great sin, for they are guilty of the body and blood of Christ. 1
Cor. 11.27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. That is,
(1.) He shall be deemed guilty of abusing and trampling under foot the body and
blood of Christ, and God shall deal with him as an abuser of the body and blood
of Christ. (2.) He shall be esteemed as a shedder of Christ's Blood, and
Crucifier of his Body, and God shall deal with him as with a Murderer of
Christ. It is a great Crime to be guilty of the blood of an innocent man, but
it is more to be guilty of the blood of Christ, than to be guilty of the blood
of all the men in the World. And as drunkards commit a great sin, so they bring
great judgment on themselves, by coming in their sins to the Lords Table, for
they eat and drink damnation to themselves. ver. 29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself.
3. It is worse to be drunk in a day of common calamity, when Gods judgments
hang over, or are come on the places where we live, than in a day of
prosperity, for they that do so, despise the judgments of God. The Lord expects
when he sends his judgments upon us, that we should break of our sins, and
learn Righteousness. Isa. 26.9. When thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness. There is a woe denounced
against those that are at ease, and are jovial, and give themselves to
drinking, and other pleasures, when evil days are coming. Amos 6.1, 3, 5, 6. Woe
to them that are at ease in Zion -- ye that put far away the evil day -- that
chaunt to the sound of the Viol, -- that drink wine in bowls. Days of common
calamity call for fasting and mourning, and instead of fasting and mourning at
such times, for a man to give over himself to riotous courses, is a most
provoking sin, as we may see. Isa. 22.5, 12, 13, 14. It is a day of trouble,
and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord of Hosts, in the valley of
vision -- And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to
mourning -- And behold joy and gladness -- Eating flesh and drinking wine, let
us eat and drink for to morrow we dye. And it was revealed in mine ears, by the
Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dye,
says the Lord God of Hosts. It is a very dreadful threatening, which is here
denounced against those, that in a day of common calamity give up themselves to
a voluptuous course of life, and will not leave off their riotous and drunken
courses; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till ye dye, says the Lord
God of Hosts. Here is God's word, and his oath (for that word surely is used to
express God's Oath. Heb. 6.13, 14.) to assure such contemners of God's word and
his judgments, that this iniquity shall not be purged till they dye -- That is,
(1.) God will plague men all the days of their lives, for this sin. And (2.)
Without Repentance will punish them to Eternity, for what sins are not pardoned
before we dye, shall never be forgiven.

. It aggravates this sin, to be eager and greedy of it.

VIII. The more eager and greedy men are of this sin of drunkenness, or of any
other sin, the more heinous it is, for it shows a man to be come to a great
degree of sin, when he commits it with greediness. Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past
feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to commit all
uncleanness with greediness; And they commit this sin with greediness.

1. Who rise early to follow after strong drink, and continue at it all day,
such are woeful drunkards, that will set from Morning to Night drinking and
tippling at Taverns and Alehouses. Isa. 5.11. Woe to them that rise up early in
the morning, that they may follow strong drink, and continue till night, till
wine inflame them. 2. They are greedy drunkards that use incentives to provoke
their thirst, that when they have a design to meet their Companions at a
Tavern, will eat salt meats in the Morning, that they may drink the more freely
and largely, contrary to that command of the Apostle. Romans 13.14. Make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. 3. They are greedy
drunkards whose minds hanker after Taverns and Alehouses, when they are at
their Callings, and do frequently leave their Callings to go to the Alehouse,
without being called out by their idle Companions, only as they are enticed by
their own hearts lusts. And such also as cannot walk the Streets, or travel on
the Road, but they must call in, and have a pot or two, almost at every
Alehouse, especially if it have a name for vending good drink. As they were
notorious Idolaters, who could not pass by a mountain or a grove where there
was an Idol, but they must bow themselves, and show respect to every Idol that
came in their way. Jer. 3.6. She is gone up upon every high mountain, and under
every green tree, and there has played the Harlot. So they are notorious
drunkards that cannot pass by any Tavern or Alehouse, but they must go in, and
tipple there. 4. They are greedy drunkards that can never have enough, but
drink till they are dead drunk, that they cannot go nor speak, but lie like dead
men; And if Friends send for them, there is no getting them away, or the Master
of the house would persuade them to forbear drinking, they fall into a rage,
and are like mad men; of such it may be said, what the Prophet speaks. Isa.
56.11. They are greedy dogs which cannot have enough. 5. They are greedy
drunkards, who do not only go themselves frequently to Taverns, but invite, and
entice others to go along with them. Isa. 56.11, 12. They are greedy dogs that
cannot have enough -- Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill
our selves with strong drink.
. It is an aggravation of this sin to boast, and glory of it.

IX. It is an aggravation of the sin of drunkenness, or any other sin, when a
man will glory and boast either of being drunk himself, or making others drunk;
All sin is matter of shame and blushing. Jer. 3.25. We lie down in our shame,
and our confusion does cover us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God.
Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God:
for our iniquities are increased -- And therefore they are impudent sinners
that will glory and boast of their sins; God will confound those that boast of
their sins. Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that boast themselves of Idols;
And as boasting of Idols, so boasting of any other sin will bring confusion
with it. Such as glory in those evil courses whereof they have cause to be
ashamed, their end will be destruction, not only in this life, but in the other
World for ever. Phil. 3.19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their
belly, whose glory is their shame.

. It is an aggravation of this sin, to continue long in it.

X. The sin of drunkenness, and all other sins are aggravated by long
continuance in them. Jerusalem's adultery was the greater, and more heinous,
because of its long continuance. Ezekiel. 23.43. I said unto her that was old in
adulteries -- And the hatred of the Philistines against the Jews was the more
displeasing to God, because they had hated the Jews a long time. Ezekiel. 25.15,
16. Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance
with a despitefull heart, to destroy it for the old hatred; Therefore thus
says the Lord God, I will stretch out mine hand against the Philistines --
When a man has been disobedient from his youth, this makes his disobedience
the greater sin. Jer. 22.21. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that
thou obeyest not my voice. All impenitent sinners are under the curse of God,
but more especially the old sinner. Isa. 65.20. The sinner being an hundred
years old is accursed.

Sect. 6. The pleas and excuses of drunkards, whereby they would excuse their
sin, answered and removed.

As it was with those that were invited to the supper, and did not go; They all
with one consent began to make excuse. Luke 14.18. So it is with this
Generation of men, they have all of them one excuse or other, whereby they
would excuse, or at least extenuate and lessen this abominable sin of
drunkenness. I will instance in several excuses, and show how vain and
frivolous they are.

. Though men of good fashion, and great parts, be addicted to this sin, we must
not follow their example.

Plea. 1. The greatest wits, the able'st Scholars, and the best sort of
Gentlemen are usually great drinkers: they are only a company of dull souls,
pitiful sneaking fellows, such as affect singularity, that speak against
drunkenness, and will not go to Taverns, and drink as freely as other men, and
therefore I cannot believe this is such an odious and abominable sin, as you
would represent it to be.

A. 1. There never were wiser and better men in the World, than the Prophets
and the Apostles, yet they all with one consent declaim against this sin of
drunkenness, as a most odious abominable sin, yea our Lord Jesus Christ
charge and commands us to take heed, least at any time our hearts be
overcharged with drunkenness. Luke 21.34. And take heed unto your selves, least
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. John
the Baptist was an eminent person for wisdom and piety, our Lord Jesus Christ
gives this Character of him. Mat. 11.11. Verily I say unto you, among them that
are born of women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist. He was
not only highly esteemed among men, but he was great in the sight of God, and
converted many Souls, and he never drunk any wine or strong drink. Luke 1.15,
16. He shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine
nor strong drink, and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his
Mothers Womb, and many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord
their God. And therefore to say none but dull souls, and sneaking fellows, and
such as affect singularity, speak against drunkenness, is a reproaching the
Prophets and the Apostles, and the best men that ever lived, yea our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, for they all preached against, and abhorred the sin of
drunkenness.

2. To say that all generous Spirited men, and great wits are great drinkers,
and that they that are not so, are a company of dull souls, and pityfull
sneaking fellows, is to reproach and condemn the generation of the righteous,
as if they were the basest fort of men, whereas they are the excellentest
persons that are upon the face of the earth. Psalm. 16.2, 3. My goodness
extends not unto thee. but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight. Prove. 12.20. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor. Those sober men whom drunkards call pityfull
sneaking fellows, shall lift up their heads with joy and boldness before Jesus
Christ at the day of judgment, when wine bibbers shall call to the Rocks and
Mountains to fall on them, and to hide them from the face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.

3. Though drunkards think themselves the only wise men, and cry up their
Companions as the only witty and brave men, yet in truth and reality they are
very fools, and there is not one wise man amongst them. Prove. 20.1. Wine is a
mocker, and strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not
wie. If Solomon be to be believed, who was one of the wisest men that ever
lived, yea if the Spirit of God which spoke by Solomon, who is the Spirit of
truth, be worthy to be believed, we must assent to it as a certain truth, that
whosoever is deceived by wine or strong drink is not a wise man. They may be
wise for managing worldly matters, but they have not that wisdom which comes
from above, which makes wise to Salvation, for that wisdom teaches men to be
pure and holy. Jam. 3.17. The wisdom that is from above is first pure -- And
therefore impure and filthy drunkards have none of this wisdom. They are so far
from being wise men, that in truth and reality they are very fools, for they
part with the glory and pleasures of Heaven for ever, for a pot of drink, or a
cup of wine, and for the enjoyment of the pleasures of sin, which are but for a
season, they plunge themselves into the torments of Hell for ever.

4. They are not the best sort of Gentlemen that are given to drinking and
other vices; Debauched Gentlemen are the reproach of the Gentry. The best sort
of Gentlemen are pious and virtuous Gentlemen, who hate and abhor vicious
courses, such as walk in the fear of God, and themselves, and families are
patterns of piety and virtue, such as love and seek the welfare of their
Country, and are rich in good works.

5. This will not excuse any man at the day of Judgment, to say many Gentlemen,
and men of great parts were addicted to drunkenness. For, (1.) Those Gentlemen
will be in as miserable a condition as the poorest beggars, at the Judgment
seat of Christ; Who have been vicious persons, their Riches will avail them
nothing at all at that day. Job. 36.19: Will he esteem thy Riches? No not gold,
nor all the forces of strength. Those Rich men that fared deliciously every
day, and drunk their fill of wine and strong drink, while on earth, shall not
get one drop of water to cool their tongues, when they are in Hell. Luke 16.19,
23. (2.) Vicious Gentlemen will be in a worse condition in the other world,
than the poorest and meanest beggar on the face of the earth, for they shall be
tormented for mispending their Estates, with which God entrusted them to do
good with all. Potentes potenter torquebuntur. What is said of Babylon, Rev.
18.7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her. The same measure shall be meeted out to vicious
Gentlemen, the greater pomp they have lived in on earth, and the more
deliciously they have fared, the more sorrow and torment they shall have
hereafter. (3.) Pious persons that have been so poor that they have begged
their bread, shall reign with Christ in Heaven, while vicious gentlemen
shallcry and roar in Hell, and beg for a drop of water to cool their tongues,
and be glad of it, though brought by the hand of a beggar, that has begged
Alms at their doors. Luke 16.20.21, 22, 23, 24, 26. Lazarus was a poor beggar
full of noysom running sores, which the dogs licked when he lay at the rich
man's gate, he would have been glad of any crumbs that fell from the rich man's
Table, but when he dyed, Angels carried his Soul into Abraham's Bosom, and when
the rich man dyed, he went to Hell, and there being in great torment, he begged
that Lazarus might dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool his tongue, but
he could not obtain that favor, to have so much as a drop of water to cool his
tongue, though he was a great man, and lived gallantly, while he was on earth.


. The example of such Ministers as are given to this sin; No excuse for
drunkards. The woeful condition of a drunken Minister.

Plea. 2. There are many Ministers will drink as hard as any other men, and we
hope we may do as our Ministers do, we have honorable thoughts of our
Ministers, and besides our Ministers are learned men, and if drunkenness were
such an horrible sin, as you would make us believe, surely they that are such
learned men would not be addicted to such a foul sin.

A. 1. To be a Minister of Christ is an high and honorable employment, and it
is a good thing that people should have honorable thoughts of the Ministers of
Christ, and esteem them very highly, for their work and office sake. 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
the mysteries of God. 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; And to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake.

2. We must not follow the example of any Minister, though he should be the
best Minister in the World, farther than he follows Jesus Christ. Who was a
better Minister than the Apostle Paul, yet he desired no man to follow his
example, farther than he himself followed Christ. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers
of me, even as I also am of Christ.

3. Did you know what a woeful condition drunken Ministers are in, you would
not be in their case for the whole World. The Prophet Jeremiah trembled Body
and Soul, and was amazed when he considered the woeful condition of drunken
Ministers. Jer. 23.9, 11. Mine heart within me is broken, because of the
Prophets, all my bones do shake -- For both Prophet and Priest are profane.
Profane Ministers are in Gods account as bad as Sodomites, Jer. 23.14. I have
seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery,
and walk in lies, they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none does
return from his wickedness, they are all unto me as Sodom; And we know that the
men of Sodom were such an abomination to the Lord, that he consumed them with
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. Profane Ministers are the worst sort of men,
and therefore in Scripture they are compared to the tail. Isa. 9.14, 15. The
prophet that tells lies he is the tail. There is a most bitter cup, as bitter
as wormwood and gall, prepared for drunken and profane Ministers. Jer. 23.15.
When Ministers are ignorant or negligent in their work, or profane in their
lives, their flock lies open for a prey to all that have a mind to devour
them. Isa. 56 9, 10, 11. And the blood of all those souls that perish either by
their negligence, or evil example, will be required at their hands.

4. It is no marvel to see some Ministers that have great parts, and much
learning, given to drunkenness and other scandalous sins. For, (1.) Knowledge
without Grace will not make a man an Holy man. The devils have great knowledge,
yet they are wicked Spirits, and do very wicked things. (2.) It was so under
the law, there were many wicked Priests, that lived in scandalous sins. Jer.
10.21. The pastors are become brutish. Jer. 23.11. Both prophet and priest are
profane. And it is foretold it would be so under the Gospel, that there would
be many preachers that would live wickedly. Mat. 7.23, 24.


5. If the example and practice of scandalous Ministers would make drunkenness
no sin, or but a very little one, then the greatest sins that ever were
committed might be excused, and be counted no sins, or but very small ones, for
they that have been teachers of the people have sometimes been guilty of the
greatest sins. What greater sins than Idolatry, Murder and Adultery? yet we
find many Priests under the Law, taxed with the guilt of these fins. Hos. 6.9.
As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder by
consent in the way, for they commit lewdness. Jer. 23.14. I have seen in the
Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit adultery, and walk in lies
-- 2 King. 23.5. He put down all the idolatrous Priests. What greater sin than
Crucifying Christ, yet the Priests had the principal hand in putting our Lord
Jesus Christ to death. Mat. 27.20. The chief priests and elders persuaded the
people that they should ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. And ver. 1. All the
chief priests, and elders of the people, took counsel to put Jesus to death.

. The plea of such as think drunkenness good fellowship, and the way to
preserve love and friendship, answered.

Plea. 3. My Neighbors are generally given this way, and I esteem it a piece
of good Fellowship to go to the Tavern with my Neighbors, and I look upon it
as a way to preserve love and friendship, to go now and then with my neighbors
to the alehouse, and to drink, and be merry, and when I am among my friends and
neighbors, I am overcome before I am aware, but in regard I have good ends in
what I do, I hope I may be excused.

A. 1. This is evil, and not good fellowship to keep company with drunkards,
and such fellowship as is condemned in Scripture, such as we ought to reprove,
and not to be partakers with them. Ephesians. 5.11. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

2. To call drunkenness good fellowship, is to call evil good, and there is a
woe denounced against those that call evil good. Isa. 5.22. Woe to them that call
evil good, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness. It is a strange
delusion, that men should think, that that fellowship which undoeth men both
Body and Soul, that ruins their Estates, beggars their Children, hinders their
Salvation, should be called good fellowship.

3. Such friendship as is got and maintained by drinking at Taverns, and
tippling at Alehouses, is woeful friendship, for it makes God an enemy to us,
and makes us enemies to God. Jam. 4.4. Know ye not that the friendship of the
world is enmity with God, whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is
the enemy of God. This is a weighty, dreadful sentence, and of large extent;
It is better to have all the great men, yea all creatures our enemies, than to
have God our enemy, yet it is an undoubted truth, that whosoever will be the
friend of the world, is the enemy of God.

4. Though this has a show of love and friendship, to go to the alehouse
among our neighbors, and to sit and tipple with them yet in reality there is
more of hatred than love in it. To suffer sin upon our neighbor, and not to
reprove him is to hate him in our hearts. Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. If they hate their neighbors in their hearts that suffer
them to live in sin, and do not rebuke him, how much more do they hate them
that countenance and encourage their drunken meetings, by their presence and
example.

5. Suppose that going to the Alehouse with your neighbors, and to tipple
there with them, were the way to preserve love and friendship, yet we must not
do any evil that good may come of it. Romans 3.8. And not rather as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say; Let us do evil that good
may come, whose damnation is just. This passage whose damnation is just, may
either relate to the slanders that were raised of the Apostle's Person and
Doctrine, and then the sense is this, it will be a just thing with God to damn
those men that raise or spread abroad slanderous reports of his Ministers,
either as to their persons or Doctrine, for they do a world of mischief, and
hinder the efficacy of their Ministry by filling men's minds with prejudice
against them; Or it may relate to the words immediately foregoing. Let us do
evil that good may come. And the sense is, that is just with God to damn those
men, who are of this opinion and practice: To do evil that good may come. A
good intention will not excuse, will not justify a bad action in the sight of
God, for he will condemn evil doers, and that justly: though they do evil that
good may come.

6. Tippling and drinking at alehouses begets quarrels and contentions, instead
of friends, and makes those that were friends before, often times to become
enemies one to another; for it often happens that when men are in their cups,
on some trifling occasion or other, they give provoking speeches each to other,
whence arise Lawsuits, which prove very chargeable, vexatious, and of long
continuance; And sometimes their quarrels are so great that they beat and wound
each other, and sometimes kill each other. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has sorrow?
who has contentions, who has wounds without cause -- They that tarry long at
the wine --

. The plea of such as are drunk but seldom, answered.

Plea. 4. If I were a common, or an old drunkard, I should look upon my self to
be in a woeful and miserable condition, but though I confess I am sometime
overcome with wine and strong drink, yet it is but lately that I begun this
practice, and I use it very seldom, when I light into company of my old
acquaintance, or at a fair, or at some other chance time, and therefore I hope
my crime is not so great but I may be excused.

A. 1. The oftener a man commits any sin, the more provoking his sins are in the
sight of God. Psalm. 78.40. How often did they provoke him in the Wilderness, and
grieve him in the desert? The frequency of the murmurings, and other sins of
the children of Israel in the Wilderness, did greatly greive the Lord, and
provoke him to anger. Hos. 12.1, 12. Ephraim daily increases lies, -- Ephraim
provoked him to anger most bitterly -- To tell lies daily, or to commit any
other heinous sin daily, provokes the Lord to anger most bitterly.

2. Though it be a great aggravation of drunkenness to be a common drunkard,
and to be daily tippling at alehouses, yet it is a vain thing for a man to think
to excuse himself by saying he is drunk but now and then, which he may be
convinced of, if he see how vain this excuse is in other sins. If a Murderer
should say, I do not make it my common practice to kill men, I do it but now
and then, when I meet with men to whom I have born a grudge a long time; Or an
adulterer should say, I do not commit adultery every day, it is but now and
than, when I have convenient opportunity. Or a Thief should say, I am no
highway man that makes a trade of robbing, I do steal only at some times,
when I can do it, and no body take notice of it: would not these excuses be
vain in the case of murder, adultery, theft, and such like sins? and if so, why
not in the case of drunkenness also.

3. Christians should be so careful of scandalous sins as not to commit them
so much as once. Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication, and all uncleanness or covetousness,
let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints. And particularly
concerning drunkenness, our Lord Jesus charge us to beware not only of being
drunken often, but least at any time our hearts are overcharged with
drunkenness. Luke 21.34. And take heed least at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. --

4. Once being drunk is enough to shut a man out of the Kingdom of Heaven for
ever, without Repentance. Gal. 5.21. Drunkenness, revellings -- they which do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. It is not said, they that do
such things often -- but they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven. Adam did eat but once of the forbidden fruit, and for that one
offense he was cast out of Paradise, and by that one offense judgment came upon
himself, and upon all men to condemnation. Romans 5.18. The Bethshemites looked
but once into the Ark, and for that one offense there dyed Fifty Thousand
Threescore and Ten men. 1 Samuel 6.19. David numbered the people but once, yet
for that one offense there came a Pestilence, which killed Seventy Thousand
men. 2 Samuel 24.10. to the 16.

5. Though you are but beginning to be a company keeper, and are overcome but
seldom, yet who knows that if at any time your heart be overcharged with
drunkenness, but that may be the time when God may call you out of the World.
Luke 21.34. Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged with
drunkenness -- and so that day come upon you unawares. God cuts off some men
when they do but begin to be company keepers, and gives them their portion in
eternal misery. Mat. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. If that evil Servant shall begin to
smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of
that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour
that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion
with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth..

6. Though at present you are drunk but seldom, yet unless you repent, and
break off this evil course of drinking, you will by degrees fall into it more
and more, and may in a little time prove as common, as notorious, as sottish a
drunkard as any other man; For it is ordinary for impenitent sinners to grow
more vile every day than other. 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax
worse and worse.

. Privacy in the commission of this sin is no excuse for it.

Plea. 5. If I were an open drunkard I should think my self to be in a sad
condition, but though I cannot deny but that I am sometime overtaken with the
sin of drunkenness, yet it is very privately, and therefore I hope God will be
merciful to me.

A. 1. The more open and impudent men are in the commission of their sins, the
greater their punishment shall be. Isa. 3.9. The show of their countenance does
witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woe
unto their Soul -- Those impudent sinners as are not ashamed to sin openly, and
seek not to hide their sins, are in a most woeful condition.

2. Drunkenness is such a shameful sin that in old times, men sought for
private times, and private places for the commission of this sin. They were
ashamed to be drunk in the day time, and took the opportunity of the dark night
to keep their drunken meetings. 1 These. 5.7. They that be drunken be drunken in
the night. When some persons that heard the Apostles speaking with tongues,
supposed them to be drunk, the Apostle refutes that supposition, not from the
piety of the men, that abhorred that vice, not from the rationality of their
discourse, but from the time of the day. Act. 2.15. These are not drunken as ye
suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. It was such an unusual
thing in those times, to see a man drunk in the day, that the Apostle thought
it sufficient proof that they were not drunken, because it was but the third
hour of the day. But alas, it is otherwise in these times, wherein we see men
frequently reeling and staggering at high noon day.

3. Although open drunkards are in a worse condition than such as are secretly
given to drunkenness, yet such as are secret drunkards shall not be excused by
their secrecy in their sins. For, (1.) All our secret sins are committed in
the sight of God. Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our sins before thee, our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance. David plotted Vriah's death, and defiled
Bathsheba with great secrecy. 2 Samuel 12.12. Thou did it secretly -- Yet he
confesses these sins were committed in the sight of God. Psalm. 51.4. Against
thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. (2.) What sins
we commit in secret without Repentance shall be punished openly. Eccl. 12.14.
God shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing, whether it be
good or bad; As it is with secret duties, they shall have an open reward. Math.
6.4. Thy Father which sees in secret, himself shall reward thee openly. So it
is also with secret sins.


. The plea of such as say they are good natured, and never go to alehouses but
when enticed, answered.

Plea. 6. I never go to Alehouses but when I am enticed, and I am so good
natured, that if any of my friends or acquaintance ask me to go with them to
the Alehouse I cannot deny them, and when I am there I am overtaken before I am
aware.

A. 1. What you call good nature is an evil nature, to be so flexible and easy
to yield to a temptation to sin. God commands us, when sinners entice us, not
to give our consent unto them Prove. 1.10. My son, if sinners entice thee
consent thou not. A good nature will teach us to obey God, and to refuse our
consent to the enticings of sinners. That is an evil nature that prompts us to
disobey God, to please and gratify a friend or neighbor.

2. If the dearest friends or nearest Relations we have in all the World,
should entice us to that which is evil, we must by no means consent unto them.
Deuteronomy. 13.6, 8. If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other Gods -- Thou shall not
consent unto him, nor hearken unto him.

3. It will not excuse us in the sight of God, to say we were enticed to this
or that sin, for it is an heinous offense to be drunk, or commit idolatry, or
any other such like sin, though we were enticed to these sins. Job. 31.26.27
28. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and
my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand. This also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God
that is above.

. The plea of being urged and importuned to drink more than is meet, is no
excuse for drunkenness.

Plea. 7. If I drink too much it is at such times as I am urged and importuned
thereto, by the company among whom I am, and I cannot tell how to withstand the
importunity of my friends, when they are very urgent with me to drink beyond
measure. I hope the urgency and importunity of friends will be my excuse, if I
now and then drink too much.

A. 1. The great God is more urgent and importunate with you to abstain from
excessive drinking, and all other sins, then any men can be. He calls to you,
he charge you to take heed that you be not at any time overcharged with
drunkenness. Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfitting and drunkenness. He commands you to
abstain from drunkenness. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine. He beseeches you
to abstain from fleshly lusts. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul;
And drunkenness is a lust and work of the flesh, as you may see. Gal. 5.19, 20,
21. He pleads with you to turn from those evil courses that will be your ruin.
Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye O house
of Israel. And shall not the importunity of the great God prevail with you,
above the importunity of all the men in the World; Though they be great men,
though near friends, though such as will be angry with you, if you yield not to
them, yet their importunity should not prevail with you to break the command of
the great God.

2. Brute beasts cannot be drawn by any urging, and importunity to drink more
than satisfies their natures, unless there be force used with them, and the
drink be powered down their throats, they will not take more than quenches
their thirst; And therefore it is below a man to say, I could not avoid
drinking to excess, for I was importuned and urged thereunto. Yea, they are
sunk a degree below beasts, that will be prevailed with by importunity to drink
more than is for their good.

3. If a man should urge you to cast your selves into a fiery furnace, would
you consent thereto, or if a man should importune you to part with a fair
Estate for a trifle, would you consent to it? Should importunity prevail with
you to do these things? When by importunity of any man you yield to drink unto
drunkenness, you yield to that which is more prejudicial to you than casting
your selves into a fiery Furnace, or parting with a great estate for a trifle;
For by drunkenness you provoke God to shut you out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and to cast you body and soul into that Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, there to remain for ever; And that is infinitely worse than to be
cast into any fiery Furnace on earth.

4. They are none of your friends that urge and importune you to drink more
than is for your good. They may be pretended friends, but are real enemies --
For they urge you to that which will be your ruin, to that which will undo you
Body and Soul for ever; And is he a friend or an enemy that urges you to that
which will be your ruin.

. The plea of such as say they are drawn to this sin by their Relations and
Friends, on whom they have their dependence.

Plea. 8. My Friends and Relations on whom I have my dependence are addicted to
this sin of drunkenness, and if I should not do as they do, they would cast me
off, they would disinherit me, they would leave me out of their Wills, and give
me nothing at their death, and therefore I am forced to comply with their way
and humor, and drink more than is meet, to please my Relations, from whom I
hope to be much advantaged at their death.

A. 1. You have a greater dependence on God than on any man upon the face of
the Earth. You depend upon God for your beings, your life, your motion, yea,
for all things. Act. 17.28. In him we live, and move and have our beings. And
therefore you had need be more careful to please, and more fearful to offend
God, than to please or offend any man on the face of the earth.

2. Suppose your Parents or Relations should cast you off for retaining your
integrity, and because you will not defile your self with their evil ways: the
Lord will be a friend to you, and will take the care of you. Psalm. 27.10. When
my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. But if we sin
against God to please our Relations, and forsake his ways, the Lord will cast
us off. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever. And
if the Lord cast us off, it is not all the men in the World can do us good.

3. What is the loss of an earthly inheritance to the loss of the Kingdom of
Heaven? Suppose you should lose a great inheritance on earth, for want of
complying with your Parents or Relations in sinful courses, yet that is
nothing in comparison of the loss of Heaven, which you will bring upon your
selves by excessive drinking, although it be to please your Relations, for
drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.10. If you sustain
loss for Righteousness sake, all such losses shall be made up with an hundred
sold advantage, both here and hereafter. Math. 19.29. But if you lose the
Kingdom of Heaven, you are a lost undone man for ever; Nothing is able to make
up that loss.

4. If you resolve to please God rather than to please your Friends: it may be
the Lord will turn the hearts of your Friends toward you; For the hearts of
all men are in his hands; And it is said, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please
the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. And if God can
incline the hearts of our enemies toward us, then much more the hearts of our
friends, when we do those things that are pleasing in his sight; However run
the hazard, rather adventure the displeasing your friends by obeying God, than
displease God by complying with the sinful humors and ways of your friends.

5. It is great folly to comply with friends or Relations in their evil ways,
in hope to get an Estate from them after their Death. For, (1.) Who can tell
but you may dye before your friends? And what will your sinful compliance do
you good, if you dye before your friends? Or who can tell but they may take a
disgust at you, though you strive to humor mour them in that which is sinful?
And what a sad case is that to lose the favor of God and your friends also.
(2.) If you should obtain that estate you hope for, your sinful compliance
will do your souls more hurt, than ever your Estate will be able to do you
good. (3.) Such an state as is gotten by a sinful compliance has not God's
Blessing going with it; And it is better being without an Estate than to have
it without the Blessing of God. For an estate without a blessing does a man
much hurt, of such an estate it may be said as Solomon does. Eccl. 5.13. There
is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely riches, kept for the
owners thereof to their hurt.


. The excellency of wine or strong drink is no excuse for drunkenness.

Plea. 9. I am not will not to be disguised with drinking, except it be at such
times as I light of excellent wine, and very pleasant liquors, and when I meet
with pure and pleasant wine, or other choice drink, I cannot refrain my self,
but I must drink to excess, and I hope in such a case I may be excused.

A. 1. This is a vain, frivolous, foolish excuse. If a thief should say I never
rob a man but when I meet with a rich and tempting prize. Or an adulterer
should say I never commit adultery but when I meet with a fair and beautiful
woman. Would such pleas excuse the thief and adulterer? No more will it excuse
a drunkard to say, I am never overcome with wine, but when I meet with pure,
rich, and generous wine.

2. There is no purer, clearer, pleasanter water, than Spring water, yet the
pleasantness and purity of the Spring water does not tempt the wild asses, or
other beasts, to drink more than will quench their thirst. Psalm. 104.10, 11. He
sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills, they give
drink to every beast of the field, the wild asses quench their thirst. And
shall man who was made after the Image of God, and who has a more excellent
Spirit than any of the beasts, drink to excess, because he meets with pure wine
and excellent drink?

3. The purest and most excellent wine, when drunk to excess will prove the
most deadly poison, for it destroys Body and Soul, whereas other poison
destroys the Body only. That passage of Moses may be applied. Deuteronomy. 32.33.
Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. And what wise
man would drink the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps, though it
should be made pleasant to the taste? Or would drink the sweetest and richest
wine under Heaven, if he knew there were the poison of dragons, or the cruel
venom of asps infused into it? The guilt of drunkenness is more destructive to
a man than the poison of dragons, or the cruel venom of asps, for the one kills
the Body only, the other will destroy Body and Soul for ever.

4. Whereas drunkards say they cannot for their hearts refrain from drinking to
excess, when they meet with choice and excellent wine, which is both pleasant
to the eye and and taste, they should consider with themselves that the
briskest, purest, most pleasant wine, if drunk to excess, will bite like a
serpent, and sting like an adder. Prove. 23.31, 32. Look not thou upon the wine
wh^ (...) is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it self
aright, at the last it biteth like a Serpent and stingeth like an adder. There
is scarce any drunkard so sottish that after he has drunk a glass of wine,
should espy a serpent at the bottom of his second or third glass that would
certainly bite him, if he proceeded to drink any more, and should discern an
adder under the table, that would surely sting him if he did not flee the room,
but would refrain drinking, though he had a bottle of the best and pleasantest
wine that ever was drunk, standing before him. What the Lord tells us in his
holy word, is as certainly true as what we see with our bodily eyes, and
therefore seeing the Lord tells us that such as are enticed by the pleasantness
of the look or taste of the wine that is before them, to drink to excess, shall
find their excess in drinking will bite them like a serpent, and sting like an
adder, this should make us refrain immoderate drinking, although we should meet
with pure and pleasant wine. If any say, I have been often drunk, but never
found the wine that I drunk biting me like a serpent, and stinging me like an
adder, if I had I would have broken off this course of drinking long ago.

A. Though you have not felt any biting or stinging from the sin of drunkenness
for the present, yet you may find it hereafter, and shall assuredly find it
without Repentance. At the last it bitcth like a Serpent -- Though for a while
this Serpent seems to be asleep, yet at the last it will bite more dreadfully
than any serpent, and it will sting worse than any adder.

(1.) It bites in this life many men with horrors of Conscience and sharp and
painful diseases in their bodies. (2.) It will sting terribly at the hour of
death. 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is sin. When a drunkard comes to dye,
then his frequent drunkenness, and all mad pranks that he committed when he was
drunk will come to his mind, and sting his Conscience when he lies upon his
deathbed. And the sting that sin puts into death, is worse than the sting of
an adder, or the biting of a serpent. (3.) At the day of judgment then
drunkenness will bite and sting worse then at the day of death, then drunkards
will be stung with their sin, that they will be desirous that the Rocks and
Mountains should fall on them, and cover them from the wrath of the Lord. Rev.
6.15, 16, 17. (4.) In Hell torments, when drunkards shall be cast to the old
Serpent the devil, then this sin of drunkenness will torment you worse than the
biting of any serpent, or the stinging of any adder.
. The plea of common tiplers, and of such as are strong to drink wine, answered.

Plea. 10. I acknowledge that I go often to Taverns, and drink freely when I am
there, but I am not like those weak headed men, that are disguised by a little
matter, and go reeling and staggering away, and are fit for no business; If I
did drink till I reeled and staggered, then I should deserve to be ranked among
the drunkards, but I hope I am not to be blamed, seeing I do not drink so long
as to lose my understanding, I hope you will not rank such as I am among the
drunkards.

A. 1. Wine-biblers, such as sit drinking and tippling at Taverns and
Alehouses, are an hateful Generation of men, whose company and practices are
to be shunned by sober men. Prove. 23.20. Be not amongst wine-biblers --
Wine-biblers and Tavern haunters are ranked amongst drunkards, as well as those
sorts that drink till they reel, and are drunkards in the account of the
Scriptures. Prove. 23.21, 22. Be not amongst wine-biblers, amongst riotous
eaters of flesh, for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty.
Solomon gives this reason why we should not be among wine biblers, for the
drunkard shall come to poverty, which plainly shows that a wine-bibber is
esteemed a drunkard. The Prophet Joel ranks drunkards and drinkers of wine
together. Joel 1.5. Awake ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of
wine. By drinkers of wine understand not such as drink wine for their health
sake with moderation, but out of wantonness, merely to gratify their sensual
lusts, these may be ranked with drunkards, although they do not drink to such a
degree as to be dead drunk, or to be like bruits without understanding.

2. There is a woe denounced against such as tarry long at the wine, as well as
against those that are overcome with wine, and against such as are haunters of
Taverns. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? -- They that tarry long at the wine,
they that go to seek mixed wine. By such as go to seek mixed wine, the Caldee
paraphrast understands such as frequent Taverns and Alehouses. Iis qui
vadunt and investigant domum mixtionis, id est, popinam and vini tabernam. And
therefore let not such as are haunters of Alehouses and Taverns, especially
such as tarry long there, think that they shall escape the judgments of God,
because they do not drink so much as they are not able to go without reeling.

3. A man may be inflamed with wine and strong drink, his body may be inflamed
with a praeternatural heat, and his lusts may be enflamed with his excessive
drinking, and yet a man may retain the use of his reason. Now there is a woe
denounced against such as continue drinking wine, till wine inflame them. Isa.
5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
strong drink, and continue till night, till wine inflame them. They that follow
strong drink, that is, haunters of Taverns and Alehouses, and such as continue
drinking and tippling till wine inflame them, have a woe denounced against them.

4. It is said of Benhadad that he was drinking himself drunk, and yet he had
not wholly lost the use of his reason, for he was able to give instructions to
his Commanders, and could speak very good sense, and was able to ride his
horse, and to flee from his enemies to save his life. 1 King. 20.16, 17, 18,
20. Benhadad was drinking himself drunk, -- And they told him there are men
come out of Samaria, and he said, whether they be come out for peace, take them
alive, or whether they be come out for war, take them alive; And Benhadad the
King of Syria escaped on an horse with the horsemen. Some men that are great
drinkers will not be convinced that they are guilty of drunkenness, because
when they come from Taverns, they can speak good sense, they can give
instructions for the carrying on of their Callings, they can escape the dangers
that occur to them as they go home. But did not Behadad do as much as these
things? Did not he give instructions to his Commanders, what to do with those
that came out against him? did not he speak very good sense? was he not so wise
as to escape from his enemies, by fleeing away on horse back? yet it is said of
him, when he did these things, He was drinking himself drunk.

5. There is a woe to them that are strong to drink wine and strong drink. Isa.
5.22. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle
strong drink. By such as are mighty to drink wine, understand such as can drink
a large quantity of wine, and yet not be overcome with it, but can bear it away
without staggering, or loss of their understandings, and this usually comes to
pass through a long habit of drinking, and the longer men have been addicted to
this sin, and the stronger they are to bear wine, the more woeful their
condition is.

6. To be full of wine, and to be drunken, signify the same thing in Scripture
Language. Act. 2.13, 14, 15. Others mocking said, these men are full of new
wine; But Peter said unto them -- These men are not drunken, as ye suppose.
When some mocked the Apostles, and said they are full of new wine, their
meaning was they were drunken, as Peter's answer to their calumny implies;
These are not drunken as ye suppose. When a man does frequent Taverns, and when
he is there, fills himself with wine or strong drink, though he do not lose his
understanding, because he has a stronger brain than other men, yet he is in
Scripture accounted a drunkard, as well as those sottish persons that drink
till they are not able to speak sense.

7. The sin of drunkenness lies more in the inordinacy of the affection to
wine and strong drink, and in the excessive use of strong drinks, than in the
loss of the understanding, which follows upon excessive drinking; For the loss
of the understanding has more of punishment than of sin. It is a peculiar
punishment which the Lord has annexed to this sin, that he for a season
deprives men of the use of their reason and understanding; The deprivation of
the understanding as inflicted by God is paenal, as contracted by man through
his voluntary drinking it is sinful. There are two things as Aquinas observes
in drunkenness.

(1.) The defect of the Understanding, which proceeds from the abundance of
wine, or other strong drink. (2.) The act by which a man contracts this defect
of his understanding, and this act is sinful, the defect is poenal, and lays
down this conclusion; Ebrietas quae est inordinat a vini concupiscentia vel
usus vitium judicatur magis quam illa quae in rationis privatione consistit.
The sin of drunkenness lies more in the inordinate affection or excessive use
of wine, than in the defect of the understanding.
. The Tradesmans plea for drunkenness answered.

Plea. 11. The world is now at that pass, that a man can hardly make a good
bargain, but he must go to a Tavern or Alehouse before he can conclude it, and
besides trading is so bad, that if a new Customer come, or a former Customer
lay out a considerable sum of money: to engage him to come again, I must go with
him to the Tavern, and give him a glass of wine, and when I am among my
Customers, or driving on a bargain, I forget my self, and am surprised before I
am aware, and I hope this will excuse me.

A. 1. It is an evil custom, and sinful practice of many men to leave their
Shops and Houses to make bargains at Alehouses and Taverns. But such as
profess themselves to be the servants of Christ must not conform to the sinful
customs and practices of the men of this world, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to
this World. They must break and reform, and not follow evil customs.

2. You may quickly lose more than you get by driving bargains at Taverns and
Alehouses. For, (1.) You will lose your reputation among sober persons, and
that is a greater loss to lose your good name, than to lose great riches. Prove.
22.1. A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches. If a man be counted
a tipler, a haunter of Taverns, this is a blemish to him, he has lost his good
name. (2.) By driving bargains at Alehouses, you will be in danger to debauch
your Conscience, and will lose the peace of your Conscience, you will get a
wound and a snare to your Soul. And if a man lose a good Conscience, that is a
greater loss than the loss of all Riches. (3.) If you contract a habit of
drunkenness by driving bargains at Alehouses, you will lofe your Souls, and
the loss of the Soul is such a great loss as cannot be made up by the gaining of
the whole World. Mark 8.36. For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his own Soul. (4.) If you get a habit of drunkenness by
frequenting Taverns, you will lose the favor of God. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate
all the workers of iniquity. And a man had better lose estate, liberty, life,
and all that he has in the World, than lose the favor of God.


3. You do, and get more hurt than you are aware of, by frequenting Taverns to
make bargains; For your example in frequenting Taverns to make bargains
encourages others to go thither, who go out of wantonness, and hardens them in
their evil practice. And you get much hurt, for by degrees your heart will be
hardened, and from sipping now and then, you will proceed to larger draughts,
and from thence to drunkenness.

4. There is a far better way to engage Customers than to go to taverns with
him, and that is, by affable carriage, by selling them good Commodities, by
dealing justly and truly with them, this would invite men to deal with you.
Prove. 24.26. Every man shall kiss his lips that gives a right answer. When a
man is known and proved to be a man of his word this does so engage men to him
that every one desires to deal with such a man. Prove. 28.20. A faithful man
shall abound with blessings. Diligence in a man's Calling that also engages
Customers; All men love to employ a diligent person. Prove. 22.29. See thou a
man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand
before mean men.

5. When your necessary occasions draw you to a Tavern or Alehouse, look upon
it as a place of temptation, and hasten away, be as one that sits on thorns,
be at no ease till you are gotten away.

6. It will not excuse your drunkenness, to say I was surprised before I was
aware, whilst I was drinking with a Friend or a Customer, for you ought to
watch over your selves, and it argues want of Wisdom, to be deceived or
surprised with wine or strong drink. Prove. 20.1. Wine is a mocker, and strong
drink is raging, whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.

. The plea of such as think drunkenness is no sin, because they have no trouble
of Conscience, neither meet with any affliction for their excess.

Plea. 12. If drunkenness were such a great sin as you would persuade us,
surely I should have terrors in my Conscience, or be followed with some sore
judgment for this sin, but I have no terrors in my Conscience, and I meet with
no afflictions or judgments from God, and therefore I cannot believe that
drunkenness is such an heinous and woeful sin as you have represented it to us.

A. 1. A man may be a greater sinner in the sight of God, and yet the Lord may
not set home his sin upon his Conscience, or inflict his judgments upon him in
this life, because he reserveth him to be punished at the day of Judgment. Job.
24.12. Yet he lays not folly to their charge. Job speaks here of abominable
sinners, that oppress the poor and needy, and fatherless, and take away their
lands and flocks, and their raiment, and their food, insomuch that they cause
men to groan and cry out like wounded men, yet God lays not folly to their
charge, that is, does not charge their sin upon their Consciences, nor punish
them for their sins. 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out
of temptations, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment, to be
punished.

2. It is probable that you had some gripes in your Consciences for this sin,
your hearts have smitten you at one time or another, though now you have by
your sottish courses stifled those checks of your Consciences, and your
Consciences be now fallen asleep; And it is very likely you have had many
rebukes from God since you went on in this way, but you not regarded them. It
is usual with those that are addicted to this sin, to be regardless of God's
dealings, both what God does to themselves and others. Isa. 5, 11, 12. -- They
follow strong drink -- they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the
Operation of his hands.

3. If you have no remorse of Conscience for this sin, this does not argue your
sin to be a small sin, but shows that you are an obdurate hardened sinner, and
so your condition is much worse than those drunkards that have trouble of
Conscience for what they have done. They are the worst sort of sinners, that
sin at an high rate, and yet feel no trouble in their minds for what they have
done. Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. It is a woeful
condition to be given up to an hard heart, and feared Conscience, and to have
no feeling of the evil of sin.

4. Suppose you have met with no judgments from God for your evil courses, you
have known or heard of others on whom God has sent his judgments for their sin
of drunkenness, some have broken their limbs, some have broken their necks,
others have had there sore judgments inflicted on them, all which are warnings
to you and others to repent of, and forsake this sin of drunkenness. If some
drunkards be cut of in the act of sin, while you are spared, you must not think
that they were greater sinners than you are, but by their example God calls you
to Repentance. Luke 13.4, 5. Those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell,
and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all that dwell in
Jerusalem, I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

5. Your prospering in a sinful course, and being free from trouble of
Conscience, and also your being free from the judgments of God, is a sure token
that God intends to destroy you for ever. Psalm. 94.7. When the wicked spring as
the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they may be
destroyed for ever. Some men's sins go before to judgment, and some men they
follow after. 1 Timothy 5.24. The less you meet with here for your sins, the more
you have to come in the other World.

6. If you be free from God's judgments on your outward man, yet it may be he
sends his plagues upon your heart. Exodus 9.14. I will at this time send all my
plagues upon thine heart. If the Lord give a man up to his own hearts lusts, or
to an hard and impenitent heart, this is a worse judgment than afflictions on
the Body or Estate.

. The plea of such as fear reproaches, if they should not drink to excess as
others do, answered.

Plea. 13. I would leave off this sin of drunkenness were it not that I feared
reproach and scorn, my companions with whom I have used to frequent Taverns and
Alehouses will call me a precise fool, and say I am turned Puritan, if I
should not do as they do, and besides my occasions do often times lead me into
the company of Gentlemen that are great drinkers, and if I should scruple
drinking in their company, they would reproach and scorn me, now I stand much
upon my honor, and to avoid reproaches, I am drawn to that which I am
convinced is a great evil, but I cannot avoid it unless I should make my self a
derision and scorn among my acquaintance.

A. 1. If you stand upon your honor, then whatever scoffs are put upon you,
hold fast your Sobriety, be not by any means drawn to excessive drinking, for
drunkenness is a great reproach to any man, be he a great or a mean man. Prove.
14.34. Sin is a reproach to any people. To be reproached for our temperance, or
any other branch of Righteousness, is a real honor. 1 Pet 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of
God rests upon you. Then we are reproached for the name of Christ, when we
are reproached for our obedience to any of the Commandments of Christ, of which
this is one. Take heed to your own selves, least at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfitting and drunkenness -- Luke 21.34. And therefore if any
man reproach you, because you will not overcharge your selves with drunkenness,
this is your happiness, this is your glory, for the Spirit of glory rests upon
those that are reproached for the name of Christ.

2. None but fools will mock at you for refusing to drink to excess. Prove.
14.9. Fools make a mock at sin. And who will regard what fools say? As for all
good men, if you live in the fear of God they will honor you. It is mentioned
as a Character of a good man, He honors them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 15.4.
Yea if you abstain from drunkenness out of Conscience to the command of Christ,
the Lord himself will honor you. Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my
Father honor.

3. If you are ashamed to keep your sobrietp, because of the scoffs and jears
of sottish men, the Lord Jesus Christ will disown you, and be ashamed of you
before the Holy Angels, and before his Heavenly Father. Mark 8.33. Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this sinful and
adulterous Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his father with the Holy Angels.

4. If you will not turn from your sottish courses at the call and command of
God, the Lord himself will laugh at you, and mock you in the day of your
calamity. Prove. 1.23, 24, 26. Turn ye at my reproof -- Because I have called,
and ye refused -- I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes. And that is very dreadful, to have God instead of helping us in our
distress, mock and laugh at us in our calamity. Yea the Devils also, who
tempted you to sin, will laugh at you in Hell for your folly, in parting with
Heaven for such a poor matter as a pot of drink.

5. You have slighty thoughts of sin, and low thoughts of your immortal souls,
and of the joys of Heaven, and the torments of Hell, if you will commit such an
horrible sin as drunkenness, and cast away your immortal souls, and deprive
your selves of the joys of Heaven, rather than bear the scoffs and jears of
foolish and sottish men.

. The plea of rich men, whereby they would excuse their drunkenness answered.

Plea. 14. If I were a poor laboring man, and should lie at the Alehouse, and
spend what I earned, and my Family be in want, I should be greatly to be
blamed, but I am a rich man, and have a great Estate, I can spend freely at
Taverns and Alehouses, and not feel any want of what I spend there, and
therefore I hope I may be excused.

A. 1. It is indeed a very great crime for laboring men, or any others, to
wast their Estates at Alehouses, whereby their Families are brought to want.
for such are worse than infidels. 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his own,
and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is
worse than an Infidel.

2. The rich drunkard shall find no more favor with God than the poor man,
yea, than the beggar; For the Lord is no respecter of persons, but will render
to every man according to his works. Riches avail nothing to keep off the wrath
of God. Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. Job 36.19. Will he
esteem thy riches? No not Gold, nor all the forces of strength. Yea it will go
worse with rich drunkards at the day of judgment, than with poor men that have
been addicted to this sin; For they sin against greater mercy, and abuse
greater Talents than poor men, What is said of the rust and canker, which is on
the Gold and Silver of rich men that are covetous, and hoard up their Riches,
and do no good with them. Jam. 5.3. Your Gold and your Silver is cankered, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire, ye have heaped treasure together for the last day. The like may be
said of what rich men spend lavishly at Taverns and Alehouses, your Gold and
your Silver, which you have consumed in a lavish manner upon your lusts, will
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, for at the
last day you must be accountable to God for all that treasure which you have
wasted upon your lusts.

3. Rich men are not Lords of their Estates, to spend them according to their
own will, they are but Stewards, and must emyloy them according to the will of
God. 1 Pet. 4.10. As every man has received the gift, even so Minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. Though the
Lord makes Rich his Stewards, yet he retains a propriety in all things that he
commits to their trust. He calls our corn and wine his corn and his wine, and
our wool and flax, his wool and his flax. Hos. 2.9. I will take away my corn --
and my wine -- and my wool, and my flax given to cover her nakedness. All our
cattle are his cattle. Psalm. 50.10. Every beast of the forest is mine, and the
cattle upon a thousand hills. Yea the Lord has a propriety in all things, that
all men have in all parts of the World. 1 Chronicles. 29.11. All that is in Heaven,
and all that is in the Earth is thine. Now seeing rich men are but the Lord's
Stewards, they must not spend their Estates upon their lusts, but must honor
the Lord with them. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance. What is
spent in excess of wine and strong drink, and riotous courses, is employed to
the dishonor of God.

4. What abundance of treasure might you have laid up in Heaven, if you had
given all that money to the poor members of Christ, which you have spent vainly
and sinfully at Taverns and Alehouses; Whereas all that is spent that way is
treasure laid up in Hell, that will torment you to Eternity.

. The plea of such as go to Alehouses out of idleness, answered.

Plea. 15. I go to Alehouses and Taverns only at such times as I have nothing
else to do, and I have found the pot and the pipe, and a merry companion,
delightful pastimes, methinks it is pleasant recreation to sit in an Alehouse,
and to hear and tell news, and talk of old stories over a pot of drink, or a
dish of Coffee, should I not do this, I should be at a loss how to spend away
my time, my spare hours would be a burden to me.

A. 1. Those men do not know the worth and preciousness of time, that go to
Coffeehouses, Alehouses and Taverns, merely out of an idle humor, to pass
away the time. Time is more precious than Silver and Gold, for all the Silver
and Gold in the World cannot purchase one day, one hour of that time which is
past, and has been misspent -- Upon this moment of time well improved or
misspent, depends our eternal happiness, or eternal misery. It is a great sin
for a man to spend his money idly and vainly, but it is a greater sin to spend
his time which is more precious than Money, in a vain and idle manner.

2. If you do not know how to prize your time, consider the doleful
lamentations of despairing souls, that think the day of Grace is past, and
listen to the sighs and groans of dying men, who have not made their peace with
God, and whose Consciences are troubled for their misspent time. And consider
what precious thoughts damned souls have of time? Oh what would dying men, and
damned souls give for so much time to repent, and make their peace with God, as
you spend idly in alehouses and taverns? They would give Millions of Silver
and Gold, yea the whole World, to gain but so much time as you mispend in
idleness.

3. To idle away precious time in coffeehouses and alehouses, which is the
common practice of many persons, is a great and provoking sin, and I shall give
one instance for the proof hereof. Idleness was one of the sins for which God
destroyed Sodom with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Behold
this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom; Pride, fullness of bread, and
abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters -- Therefore I took them
away as I saw good. Now that is an horrible sin which provoked God to rain down
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, upon such a famous City as Sodom, and consume
it with all its inhabitants to ashes. And if idleness were such a provoking sin
in a Sodomite, then it is far worse in a Christian. Anidle Christian is worse
thau an idle Sodomite, for Christianity teaches us better things than the
light of nature taught the Sodomites. It shall be more tolerable at the day of
judgment for the men of Sodom, than for such as profess the Christian Religion,
and yet spend their time in idleness.

4. Such as are Christians indeed, and live in the exercise of the power of
Godliness, have so much work to do for God, and for their own souls, and for
others, that they rather complain of want of time, than want of pastimes and
recreations. They do not complain that they have so much spare time, they cannot
tell how to spend their time, they rather wish they could live without eating
and drinking, and sleeping, that they might have more time to spend in the
service of God, and their Generation.

5. If that time which many spend vainly in alehouses, were spent in doing
good to their own souls and others, as in visiting the lick, comforting the
afflicted, etc. this would bring much glory to God. Joh. 15.8. Herein is my
father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. And this would redound to your
comfort and benefit in this life, and the life to come.

6. It is the command of Christ, that we should always abound in the work of
the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.59. Always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Is this to abound always
in the work of the Lord, to spend abundance of precious time in vain discourse
in alehouses, or such like places, this is rather abounding in idleness.

7. Would you be willing to be found in an alehouse, spending away your time
between the pot and the pipe, when Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment?
Christians should not be in those places, or do those things which they would
not be found in at the coming of Christ to Judgment. Jam. 2.12. So speak ye,
and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty. Calvin would not
desist from his employment, though advised to it for his health, and gave this
reason. Vultis ne ut Dominus cum venerit. etc. What would you that the Lord
when he comes should find me idle. If Calvin was unwilling when infirm to
desist from his studies for fear that the Lord should find him idle, had not
such as spend away much precious time at alehouses, need desist from this
course for fear that the Lord when he comes should find them idle.

. The plea of such as go to Taverns is drive away their sorrows and cares,
answered.

Plea. 16. I go to Taverns only at such times as I meet with crosses, and am
burdned with cares, and oppressed with grief and sorrow, and when I am there I
drink freely to ease my heart of my grief and cares, and I hope there is no
great hurt in this, though I now and then take a little more than is meet.

A. 1. It is true that wine and strong drink moderately taken, are useful for
such as are of a sorrowful spirit, for they are of a cheering nature, Psalm.
104.15. Wine that makes glad the heart of man. -- and are to be given chiefly
to such as are of a sorrowful spirit. Prove. 31.6, 7. Give strong drink unto
him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of an heavy heart. Let
him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his sorrow no more. But this
does not give a liberty to any person to drink wine or strong drink to excess.
And if you make use of time to cheer your hearts, why not at your own houses
rather than alehouses.

2. Wine and strong drink taken immoderately instead of driving away sorrows
bring much woe and sorrow. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? Who has sorrow? --
They that tarry long at the wine -- Drunkenness is wickedness, and wickedness
brings a multitude of sorrows along with it. Psalm. 32.10. Many sorrows shall
be to the wicked. And instead of easing a man of his burden and trouble, it
increases his burdens and troubles; For excess of wine burdens the soul with
the guilt of sin. It leaves a load upon the Conscience; And the burden that
arises from the guilt of sin is far greater than the burden of cares. Psalm.
38. 4. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me.

3. Wine and strong drink taken immoderately, instead of making men merry, do
make them mad; They swear and curse, and rage, and carry themselves like mad
men. Prove. 20.1. Strong drink is raging. What Festus said to Paul, Act. 26.24.
Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning has made thee mad. The like may
be said to such a man as is overcome with wine and strong drink; Thou art
beside thy self, much drinking has made thee mad.

4. The right way to get ease and comfort under our sorrows and cares, is not
to go to Taverns and Alehouses to drown our cares, and drive away our sorrows
with wine and strong drink, and merry company, which will prove bitterness in
the latter end, and increase our sorrows and burdens, but the right and ready
way to get ease and comfort when we are oppressed with sorrow, and burdened
with cares, is, (1.) To betake our selves to Prayer. Joh. 16.20, 24. Ye shall
weep and lament -- ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy -- Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. See here the way
for such as weep and lament, and are full of sorrow, to have their sorrow
turned into joy, and that is to betake our selves unto Prayer, for hereby we
shall be filled with joy. Hannah who was in great bitterness of spirit, before
she went to Prayer, got so much comfort by Prayer, that she went away, and was
no more sad. 1 Samuel 1.13. She was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the
Lord, and wept sore. And the woman went away, and did eat, and her countenance
was no more sad. (2.) The way to get ease under our burdens and sorrows, is to
cast our burdens and cares upon God, for if we do so, he will put under his
everlasting arms, and bear up our spirits. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon
the Lord, and he shall sustein thee --


. The plea of Young Drunkards, answered.

Plea. 17. I am a young man, and young men must have their pastimes and
recreations, and this is that which pleases me above other delights, to keep
jovial company, and to be merry with my companions at a Tavern, and I hope this
is allowable in a young man, and if it be not, I have time enough before me, I
will repent when I am old, and then God will be gracious unto me.

A. 1. Drunkenness is an abominable sin in any men, either young or old, and
therefore not to be allowed, not to be pleaded for in any. Psalm. 5.5. Thou
hate all workers of iniquity -- This will not exempt a man from the hatred of
God, that he is a young man, if he be a worker of iniquity; For all the
Generation of evil doers are hateful to God, the young as well as the old. It
is an aggravation of sin to be an old sinner. Isa. 65.20. The sinner being an
hundred years old, shall be accursed. Yet this will not excuse a man from
drunkenness, or any other sin, to say, I am a young man, I hope it is no great
offense for me now and then to be overcome with wine or strong drink.

2. Vain and lose young men, that give themselves to their pleasures, and will
not be reclaimed by the advice and counsel of Parents, Friends, Relations, or
God's Ministers, they may if they think good take their own course, and do
whatever their own hearts prompt them to, and is pleasing to their corrupt
natures, but yet let them know that the Lord will call them to judgment for all
their idle courses, and sinful pleasures, and misspent time. Eccl. 11.9.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes,
but know thou that for all these things, God will call thee to judgment.

3. It is very evil and dangerous for young men to allow themselves in
drunkenness, or other evil practices, with a purpose to repent, and to become
new men when they are old, in hope that God will be merciful to them,
whenever they repent of their sins; And that on several accounts, as, (1.)
Our young time is our choicest time, and our choicest is to be given to God,
and not to be spent in the service of sin. Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy
creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years
draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. The days of old age
are evil days, years wherein we have no pleasure, and shall we spend our good
days, our comfortable days in the service of sin, and spend our evil days only,
and the years wherein we have pleasure in the service of God. (2.) It is
dangerous to spend your young time in riotous courses, or other sins, and think
to repent when you are old, because you do not know whether you shall live to
be old, God cuts off some persons that are addicted to company keeping, when
they do but begin to follow after vain persons, and to eat and drink with the
drunken. Mat. 24.48.49, 50, 51. If that evil servant shall begin to smite his
sellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that
servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (3.) If you
should live till you are old, if you spend your young time in sin, who can tell
whether God will give you Repentance in your old age. It is a rare thing to see
a sinner converted in his old age. It is as hard for one that has been
accustomed to do evil, to do good, as it is for a Blackamore to become white,
or a Leopard to change his spots. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good that are accustomed to
do evil. (4.) If the Lord should give you Repentance, the sins of youth will
lie heavy upon you in your old age, and will cause much bitterness in your
soul. Job. 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth.


. The plea of such drunkards, as make a profession of Religion, answered.

Plea. 18. If I were a profane drunkard, that would curse and swear, I should
look upon my self as in a very sad condition; but though I am now and then
overcome with drink, I am a Religious person, I hear and write Sermons, I pray
in my Family, I will lay down my life for Christ, I will rather burn than turn
from the true Religion. And therefore I hope God will not take any notice of my
sin, though I do sometimes drink to excess.

A. 1. To be a drunkard, and yet to be a Religious person are inconsistent each
with other, as inconsistent as light and darkness, as Heaven and Hell. The
grace of God teaches a man to live soberly. Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God
that brings Salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us the denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live righteously, soberly and godly in
this present World. And therefore such as live intemperately, and have not
learned sobriety, are destitute of the grace of God. That man that makes
profession of Religion, and yet is a drunkard, his Religion is a vain Religion.

2. Our making a profession of Religion, and performing Holy duties, will be so
far from causing God to take no notice of our sins, that he will visit us
sooner, and punish us more severely than other men, if we live in drunkenness,
or such like sins. Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the
Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Such of the Jews as
made a profession of Religion, and yet lived sinful lives, the Lord tells them
he would punish them for their iniquities, even for all of them.

3. The prayers, and other Religious services of drunkards are an abomination
to God. Prove, 15.8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord.
Sacrifice was part of God's worship under the Law, and when offered up in a
right manner was very acceptable to God, yet when performed by a wicked man, it
was an abomination to the Lord. The services of impenitent sinners are a burden
and a weariness to the Lord. Isa. 1.13, 14. Incense is an abomination to me,
the new Moons and Sabbaths, and calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it
is iniquity, even the solemn meeting, your new moons, and your appointed feasts
my Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. Incense did
cast forth a sweet and delightful smell, yet when offered by impenitent sinner
it was an abomination to the Lord If impenitent sinners should have such gifts
in prayer, as that their prayers should be pleasing and delightful to those
that join with them, yet their prayers are an abomination to the Lord.

4. Such as make a profession of Religion, and yet live in drunkenness, are
worse, and in a more woeful condition than ignorant and profane drunkards. Isa.
28.1. Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim. Ephraim was a Tribe of Israel, and a
drunken Israelite is in a more woeful condition than a drunken Egyptian, or a
drunken Philistine. -- The sins of such as make a profession of Religion, do
bring more dishonor to God, and scandal to Religion, then the sins of other
men. Romans 2.17, 23, 24. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law,
and make thy boast of God -- Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through
breaking the Law dishonourest thou God; For the name of God is blasphemed
through you, among the Gentiles.

5. They deceive their own hearts, that think they could lay down their lives
for Christ, who will not, who cannot lay down a swinish and sottish lust for
Christ, which is prejudicial both to their Bodies and Souls.

. The plea of such as drink to excess to avoid envy and hatred of their
neighbors, and for fear of having ill offices done them, answered.

Plea. 19. I live in a drunken sottish place, where my neighbors are generally
given to drinking, and if I should not do as my neighbors do, I shall be
envied and hated, and they will put troublesome offices upon me, or raise me in
the rates, or do me some ill turn, and therefore though I approve not of
drinking and tippling, yet I am necessitated to do as they do, else I should not
live a quiet life amongst them. I do this only to avoid trouble, and therefore
I hope I may be excused.

A. 1. If you will not live soberly, and temperately, and righteously in this
present evil world for fear of hatred and envy, and trouble, then it is not
possible that you should be a true Christian, and lead a holy and righteous
life, or do any good works, for no man can be a Christian indeed, but wicked
men will hate him. Luke 21.19. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake.
No man can lead a Godly Life, but he shall meet with trouble. 2 Timothy, 3.12. Yea,
and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. No man
can do any good work but some or other will envy him. Eccl. 4.4. I considered
all navel, and every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbor.

2. If you live righteously and soberly God will love you. Psalm. 146.8. The
Lord loves the righteous. But if you be a worker of iniquity, the Lord will
hate you. Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. And if the Lord love
you, you need not be troubled though all your neighbors, and all the men in
the World hate you. And if the Lord hate you, it is not the love of your
neighbors will comfort you under the hatred of God.

3. If you be hated of your Neighbors, and have ill Offices done you, because
you will not break the Commandments of God, as other men do, this is matter of
joy rather than of sorrow, such hatred makes you happy rather than miserable.
Luke 6.22, 23. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name
as evil, for the Son of Man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day. and leap for joy,
for behold great is your reward in Heaven.

4. It is far better being troubled and hated, and envyed of men, raised in
your rates, and to have all the ill Offices done that you can think of, than to
have troubles in your own Consciences, and be shut out of Heaven, and be
tormented in Hell for ever, which will be the certain effect and consequence of
drunkenness. What petty, inconsiderable things are being envied of neighbors,
raised in your rates, and the like, to the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the suffering of the torments of Hell.

5. If you cannot withstand the temptation of drunkenness, by reason of your
living among sottish neighbors, remove your habitation, and choose a dwelling
among more sober and pious persons, whose Godly example may excite and
encourage you to lead a Godly Life.

. The plea of such as will not believe that God will shut them out of Heaven
for such a small sin as drunkenness, answered.

Plea. 20. If I thought God would shut me out of Heaven for excessive drinking,
I would forthwith leave off my going to Alehouses and Taverns, and would never
be drunk any more, for I am not such a fool, as to cast away my immortal Soul,
and deprive my self of the glory and joys of Heaven for ever, for so small a
matter as wine or strong drink, but it cannot enter into my heart to believe
that God will shut men out of Heaven, and cast them into Hell, for such a small
sin as drunkenness, for such a small matter as drinking a little too much wine
or strong drink, and therefore I will take my liberty to eat and drink, and be
merry, and hope to go to Heaven as well as the most precise, and abstemious
persons in the World

A. 1. Do thou call drunkenness a small sin? It is a great, abominable, a
monstrous, most loathsome and beastly sin. It is a sin against the light of
nature, and a sin against the light of Scripture. It makes a man like a beast
yea worse than a beast, for there are many beasts will not drink more than
satisfies nature. It makes a man like a devil, some men when they are in their
cups will rage and swear, and curse at that dreadful rate, that they seem
rather to be incarnate devils than men. Yea some drunka ds are worse than
devils, for the devils are afraid of being tormented, and pray that they may
not be tormented before their time. Mat. 8.29. Art thou come hither to torment
us before the time. Luke 8.28. What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of
God most high; I beseech thee torment me not. But many drunkards do frequently
in their cups call out to God to damn them, as if they longed to be in Hell,
and dared the most high God to damn them. And shall any man then be so far
deluded, as to think or say, that drunkenness is but a small sin.

2. The Lord foresaw that many drunkards would flatter themselves with vain
hopes of Salvation, and therefore he has given a caution to drunkards, that
they would not deceive themselves with vain and groundless hopes of enjoying
the Kingdom of Heaven; For he has plainly declared that no drunkards shall
enter into his Kingdom. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived -- Nor drunkards shall inherit
the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.19, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are these, Adultery, Fornication, -- Drunkenness, Revellings, and such
like, of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past,
that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. By these,
and such like Scriptures, it is plain and evident that drunkards shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, and that drunkenness is a sin that will certainly
shut a man out of Heaven. And therefore whether you believe it, or believe it
not, it is most sure, that if you do not repent of, and forsake this sin of
drunkenness, you shall not, you cannot be saved.

3. The Lord is a very merciful and gracious God, and his tender mercies are
over all his works, but yet he will not show mercy to any contrary to his Word;
He is faithful and true, as well as merciful. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of
the Lord are Mercy and Truth. -- Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together.
It was never known that the Lord did show mercy to any in a way contrary to his
truth, or that mercy and truth crossed each other. If the Lord should save
drunkards he should not be true to his word, for he has said in his Holy Word,
that drunkards shall not inherit his Kingdom. And therefore it is vanity and
folly to hope for Salvation contrary to the word of God, which is in effect to
hope that God will break his word, that he may save our souls.

4. Such drunkards as will not believe that God will shut men out of Heaven for
the sin of drunkenness, do add unbelief to their drunkenness, and do thereby go
about to make God a liar. 1 John 5.10. He that believes not, has made God a
liar.

5. It is an horrible provocation for drunkards, or other sinners, when they
hear or read of God's judgments, that he will shut them out of Heaven, and cast
them into Hell, etc. To bless themselves, and think that they shall have peace,
and that God will be merciful to them, and spare them, though they go on in
their sins. Hear how dreadfully God threatens such persons. Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19,
20, 21. Least there should be among you man or woman, or family, or tribe --
And it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, he bless himself
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of
my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but then
the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all
the curses that are written in this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord
shall blot out his name from under Heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto
evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the
Covenant, that are written in this book of the Law. Here are several judgments
denounced against all such persons whether men or women, of what Family or
Nation soever they be, that bless themselves in their sinful courses, and say
in their hearts they shall have peace, though they go on, to add sin to sin.

(1.) The Lord will not spare him. -- No excuses, no pleas, no entreaties, no
tears shall prevail with God to spare such a man. The Lord will not spare him,
that is, the Lord will show him no mercy, he will not spare him from
destruction here. Jer. 13.14. I will not spare but destroy them -- Nor spare
him from eternal torments in the other world; Not sparing implies a casting
down to Hell. 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them
down to Hell. (2.) The anger of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke
against that man. If the Lord's anger be kindled but a little, they are happy
that are secured from it. Psalm. 2.12. And therefore that man is in a woeful
condition, against whom God's anger and his jealousy waxes hot, and
sinoaketh. The jealousies of a man is dreadsull. Prove. 6.34, 35. But the
jealousy of God is far more dreadful, that burns like fire. Psalm. 79.5. Shall
thy jealousy burn like fire. (3.) All the curses that are written in this book
shall lie upon him. The curses written in this book, that is, the curses of God
denounced in the Scripture, and they are more dreadful than the curses of any
men, they shall not only come and fall, but they shall lie upon that man that
adds drunkenness to thirst, and that not only some, but all of them. To have
any one of the curses of God come upon a man is dreadful, but to have them
all, not only to fall, but to lie upon a man, is unspeakable misery. (4.) And
the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven; That is, the Lord shall
give him no part, no portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Lord shall root
out his posterity, and leave him no name of Son or Daughter, and shall cause
his name, the memory and remembrance of him to perish. (5.) The Lord shall
separate unto evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel, according to all the
curses that are written in the book of this Law. As much as to say, God will
separate such a man from the rest of mankind, to make him an object of his
wrath, and a monument of his displeasure, to pour out all his wrath upon him,
and to bring upon him all the plagues, and all the curses threatened in his word
against impenitent sinners. Let such drunkards, and other impenitent sinners,
as go on still in their sins, and yet hope for Salvation when they dye,
consider, and lay to heart what dreadful judgments are here denounced against
such as add drunkenness to thirst, and yet bless themselves in their hearts,
and say they shall have peace.
. The plea of such as have a secret hope God will spare them, either because of
some excellency, or because Christ dyed for sinners, or because they confess
their sin.

Plea. 21. I do verily believe that some, yea many drunkards shall be shut out
of Heaven, but I have a secret hope that God will spare me, because of those
excellencies he has put upon me, and because Christ dyed to save sinners, and
when ever I am drunk, as soon as I am come to my self, I confess my sin, and
make vows and promises to leave my sin.

A. 1. It is folly and self-flattery makes thee think God should spare thee for
that sin, for which God will condemn others; For God is no respecter of
persons, but will execute vengeance upon every impenitent sinner, of what
Nation, rank or condition soever they be, upon the rich as well as the poor,
the honorable as well as the base, the great as well as the mean man. Act
10.34. Of a truth I perceive God is no respecter of persons. Romans 2.6, 9 Who
will render to every man according to his deeds, -- Tribulation and anguish,
upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Centile.

2. Let such as fancy that God will spare them, and not cast them to hell for
their drunkenness, and their other sins, because of some excellency they have
above others, as because they are great men, or Learned men, honorable men, or
the like; consider that God did not spare the Angels when they sinned, but cast
them into Hell. 2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast
them down to Hell. Yet the Angels are wiser than the greatest Scholars and most
Learned Men in the World, and more glorious Creatures than the greatest
Gentlemen, Knights, Noblemen, yea, more glorious than Kings and Princes. And if
God did not spare the Angels when they sinned against him, but cast them down
to Hell, why should thou think that he will spare thee, and not cast thee to
Hell for thy drunkenness, because thou art a Learned, or an Honorable man,
seeing all thine Excellencies, whatever, are inferior to the Excellency of
Angels.

Obj. But Christ died to save Sinners, but he did not dye to save Angels, and
therefore I hope God will save me, though I go on still in my Sins.

A 1. Jesus Christ who came into the World to save sinners, came also to call
sinners to Repentance. Luke 5.32. I came not to call the Righteous, but sinners
to Repentance. He came not to save Sinners in their sins, I mean to let Sinners
live as they list, and yet to save their Souls, but he came to save sinners
from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save
his people from their sins.

2. Jesus Christ, who came to save Sinners, tells us expressly, that he will not
save one sinner without Rrepentance, but that all, who do not repent, shall
perish, and that he will shut out of Heaven at the day of Judgment all workers
of Iniquity. Luke 13.3.5. I tell you nay, but except you repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. He speaks the same words twice that they may sink the deeper into our
hearts. See also Luke 13.27. Depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity.

Obj. I do believe, may some say, such as do not repent of their sins, shall
not be saved by the death of Christ, but I repent of my Drunkenness, when I
have been overcome with Wine or strong Drink one day, the next day when I am
sober, I am grieved for my sin, and I confess my sin to God, and make vows that
I will not be drunk any more, and therefore I hope God will spare and pardon
me, though he condemn other Drunkards.

A. 1. If you so repent of, are grieved for, and confess your sin, as to
forsake your Drunkenness, you shall find mercy with God, and he will pardon
your sin, though you have been a very vile and wicked person, and have
committed abundance of sin, Isa. 55.7. Let the^ wicked for sake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

2. If you only confess your sin, but soon commit it again, and make vows and
promises of Reformation, but break them as often as you make them, this is not
true Repentance, this is but dissembling with God, and a kind of mocking God,
when you confess your sin, and yet are not resolved to leave your sin, and to
make vows and Promises, when you do not mean to perform them. The promise of
pardon is to such as confess and forsake their sins, not to such as confess and
commit them again. Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes, shall find
mercy. When men make Vows and Promises to God to reform their lives, and their
Hearts are not real, neither are they steadfast to what they promise, God
accounts all our vows and promises but flattery, and telling him so many lies.
Ps. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was the
(...) rock, and the high God their Redeemer, Nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue. For their heart was
not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.

. Noah and Lot's Drunkenness will not excuse Drunkards.

Plea. 22. Noah and Lot were good men, and there is no doubt but they are gone
to Heaven, yet they were both drunk with Wine, and that in as fearful and
shameful manner as ever we were, Noah was so drunk, that he lay uncovered
within his Tent, and one of his Sons saw his Nakedness. Lot was so overcome
with some, that he knew not what he did, but committed Incest with both his
Daughters, and why may not we be good men, and go to Heaven as well as Lot and
Noah, though we be now and then overcome with Drink.

A. 1. Though Noah was once overtaken with Drunkenness, and Lot was surprised
twice, yet they were no Drunkards. A Drunkard is one that is addicted and given
to the sin of drunkenness, one that is frequently overcome with Wine and
strong drink. A good man may be overtaken with a fault, and may fall into sin,
but they are wicked men that lie and continue in their sins. A Sheep may fall
into the Mire, but they are Swine that love to wallow in the mire.

2. Noah and Lot repented of their drunkenness, and so obtained Mercy, but
impenitent Sinners, such as instead of repenting, go on still in their
trespasses, instead of Mercy shall receive vengeance from God. Psalm. 68.21. But
God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as
goes on still in his trespasses.

3. The falls of the Saints, the sins of Lot and Noah, and other Servants of
God are recorded into Scripture, not to justify or encourage any man in his
sins, but as warnings to all that think they stand to take heed lest they fall,
1 Cor. 10.12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall. The Apostle had spoke in the foregoing verses, of the murmurings, and
several other sins of the Israelites, and of God's judgments against them for
their sins, and tells us that these things are recorded that such as think they
stand, should take heed lest they fall. And therefore they that make this use
of the fall of the Saints, to encourage themselves in their sinful practices,
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

4. Lot's sin was punished in his posterity, for the Children which he begat of
his Daughters in his drunkenness, namely, Moab and Ammon, brought forth a
cursed Generation of Men that proved great Enemies to the Church of God. For
Moab who was Lot's eldest Daughters Son, was the Father of the Moabites. And
Ben-ammi, that was the Son of the younger Daughter, was the Father of the
Ammonites. Genesis 9.37, 38. And the Lord had such an indignation against the
Moabites and Ammonites, that he made a special Law against them above other
Nations to exclude them from coming into the Congregation of the Lord. Deuteronomy.
23.3. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord,
even to their tenth Generation they shall not enter into the Congregation of
the Lord for ever.

. The Plea of such as say, Drunkenness is their infirmity.

Plea. 23. There is no man perfect in this World, but all men have their
infirmities and failings, one in one kind, and another in another kind, and
this is my infirmity that I love a Cup of good drink too well, and when I am
amongst my Companions, I cannot for my heart forbear drinking over much, and I
hope that seeing this is mine infirmity, God will be gracious unto me, and not
shut me out of Heaven for a sin of infirmity.

A. 1. It is true all men have their infirmities and failings whilst they are
in this World. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon Earth that does
good and sins not. The holiest men in the world have acknowledged themselves
to be imperfect. There was not a holier man on Earth than Job, if perfection be
taken for integrity and uprightness, in that sense he was a perfect man. Job.
1.10. Yet Job was conscious to himself of his infirmities, and durst not stand
upon his own justification in the sight of God and say that he was perfect.
Job. 9.20. If I justify my self, my own Mouth shall condemn me, if I say I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. The Apostle Paul acknowledges
himself imperfect. Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect. But although the Servants of God have their infirmities,
they do not live in such beastly sins as Drunkenness. What Moses says of the
degenerate Jews, Deuteronomy. 32.5. may be applied to Drunkards. They have corrupted
themselves, their spot is not the spot of his Children, they are a perverse and
a crooked generation. They flatter and delude themselves, who live in such
vicious courses as drunkenness, and call their sins their infirmities.

2. Such as are frequently overcome with wine and strong drink, their
drunkenness is not a sin of infirmity, but a wilful and presumptuous sin, as
will appear in these respects.

1. A man that sins through infirmity, is willing and desirous to be freed
from his sins, Matthew. 26.40, 41. What could ye not watch with me one hour. The
Spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. The sleepiness of the
Disciples was their infirmity, their Spirits were willing to have watched, but
their flesh was weak. And such a man as sins through infirmity, uses means
to be freed of his sins. Psalm. 77.10. And I said, This i^^^y infirmity, but I
will remember the years of the right hand of the most high. The Psalmist having
through infirmity called in question the love and mercy of God, calls to mind
his former experiences of God's gracious dealings with his soul, he used means
to get out of that sin which he fell into through infirmity. But this is not
the case of drunkards, they do not use means to avoid drunkenness, they may
keep at home, and not go to taverns and alehouses, and when they are there,
they may forbear drinking, and seeing they do not use means to shun this sin,
as avoid going to Taverns, and avoid such company as draws them to this sin,
their sin of drunkenness is not an infirmity, but a presumptuous sin. 2. Then a
man sins presumptuously, when he knows this or the other thing to be a sin,
and to be expressly against the command of God, and yet will go on to commit
that sin. When God commanded the Israelites that they should not go up against
the Amorites, and yet they would go contrary to the command of God, they are
charged with rebellion and presumptuous sinning against God. Deuteronomy. 1.42, 43.
And the Lord said unto me, say unto them, go not up, neither fight -- So I
spoke unto you, and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the Commandment of
the Lord, and went presumptuously up into the Hill. The case is the same with
drunkards, they are rebels against God, and presumptuous sinners; The Lord
says unto them; Be not drunk with wine -- Ephesians. 5.18. Take heed unto your
selves, least at any time your hearts be overcharged with drunkenness. Luke
21.34. But they will not hear, but rebel against the command of God, and go on
presumptuously, and will drink wine and strong drink till they are drunk, they
are so far from taking heed least any time their hearts be overcharged with
drunkenness, that they are often times overcharged with this sin. When God
commanded the Israelites to cast away the Idols of Egypt, and they would not
hearken to him, this is called rebelling against God. Ezekiel 20.7, 8. Then said
I, cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not your
selves with the Idols of Egypt, I am the Lord your God; But they rebelled
against me, and would not hearken unto me, they did not every man cast away the
abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt. The
case is the same here, God commands every one to leave off the sin of
drunkenness, but when men will not hearken to the Lord, but will be drunk
still, this is rebellion against God. 3. When men plot and contrive how to
carry on their sins, they do not sin by surprise, but with deliberation, this
is presumptuous sinning against God. As it is in killing a man, when a man
plotteth and designs his death, this is a presumptuous sin. Exodus 21.14. If a
man come presumptuously on his neighbor, to slay him with guile -- So it is
with other sins, when they are plotted and contrived sins, they are
presumptuous sins. When David plotted and contrived the death of Vriah, his
killing Vriah was not a sin of infirmity, but a presumptuous sin and a
despiseing the Commandment of God. 2 Samuel 11.14, 15. David wrote a Letter to
Joab -- saying, set ye Vriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire
ye from him, that he may be smitten and dye -- Compared with 2 Samuel 12.9.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight, thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the Sword. This is the case of
many drunkards, they sin with deliberation, they have their stated and set
bouts for drinking such a day, at such a tavern, or such a private house, and
at another time at another place. Others forecast their business, and the
receiving their money, that they may be provided to meet their Companions at
the Alehouse. 4. When a man yields willing obedience to the lusts of his own
heart, his sins are not sins of infirmity, but reigning sins, Romans 6.12. Let
not sin therefore Reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the
lusts of it. And he himself is the servant of sin. ver. 16. Know ye not that to
whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye
obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Now this
is the case of many drunkards, if a sensual lust arise in their hearts, and
incline them to go to the Alehouse, or if one of their companions call them to
go with them, they yield present and willing obedience, they leave their
callings and families, and all their business to gratify their sensual lusts,
which shows that drunkenness is a reigning sin in them, and that they are the
servants of sin.
. The plea of such as say they cannot leave their drunken courses, because they
find much pleasure and delight in them.

Plea. 24. I am convinced that drunkenness, is a vile sin, but I find so much
pleasure and delight in it, that I cannot leave it, the Songs, and Music, and
merry company that I have at Taverns, and the delight I have in drinking wine
and strong drink, are the chiefest joy I have in this World, and therefore I
cannot be persuaded to leave them.

A. 1. There is more true and real pleasure in Temperance and Godliness than
there is in Gluttony and Drunkenness, or Music, or Songs, or merry company.
For, (1.) Intemperance disorders the body, and clouds, and disturbs the mind,
and brings pains and aches, and sicknesses. Hos. 7.5. In the day of our King,
the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine; Whereas temperance is
ordinarily attended with a healthful constitution of body, and freedom and
serenity of mind, and temperate persons eat and drink with greater delight than
gluttons and drunkards, though they have no better fare than bread and water.
(2.) The pleasures that drunkards have in their cups, their songs, their
music, their merry company, is not comparable to those pleasures that
temperate men find in an Holy Life; For the drunkards pleasures are mere vanity
and vexation of Spirit. Eccl. 2.2.3, 8.17. I said of laughter it is mad, and of
mirth what does it? I sought in my heart to give my self unto wine. I gat me
men-singers and women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men as Musical
Instrumens, and that of all sorts -- All is vanity and vexation of Spirit. They
leave the heart sad, and end in heaviness. Prove. 14.13. Even in laughter the
heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. But the pleasure
and peace, and delight which temperate men find in the ways of God is
exceeding great, solid and abiding pleasure. Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have
they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Psalm. 21.6. Thou have
made him exceeding glad with thy countenance. Psalm. 138.5. Yea they shall sing
in the ways of the Lord. We see here there is peace, great peace, gladness,
exceeding gladness to be found in the ways of God, yea such as will make the
heart sing for joy; Yea all the ways of God bring pleasure and peace. Prove.
3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. The
pleasure of drunkards is only a corporeal transient pleasure, but the joy and
delight which temperate men find in the ways of God, are spiritual pleasures,
the joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost; Act. 9.31. Walking in the fear of the
Lord, and the comfort of the Holy Ghost. And there are no pleasures in this
world to be compared with the comforts of the Holy Ghost.


2. The pleasures of drunkenness bring dreadful pains along with them. And
those after pains are of that afflicting nature, that no wise man would
purchase those vain imaginary pleasures at so dear rate, as to have all those
pains that they bring with them. For, (1.) Drunkenness causes sharp and
painful sicknesses, which sometimes are of long continuance. And what good
will a man's pleasures that are vanished away do him when he is on his
sickbed. (2.) Drunkards meet with many sharp rebukes and sore afflictions,
which vex and pierce them like Thorns. Prove. 26.9. As a Thorn goes up into
the hand of a drunkard, -- And if there be a Thorn in the hand, there can be
but little joy in the heart. (3.) There are pains in the Conscience, that
follow the drunkard's pleasures; The guilt of his sins will one day sting the
drunkard like a serpent, and bite him like an adder, though for the present it
seems a pleasing thing to be among drunken companions. Prove. 23.31, 32. Look
not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup,
when it moves it self aright. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder. (4.) The worst pains that follow drunkards, are the
pains of Hell, for they are eternal, intolerable, unspeakable pains, Then all
their mirth and jollity shall cease for ever. What is said of Israel in the
day of their calamity. Amos 8.3. The Songs of the Temples shall be howlings in
that day. The like may I say of drunkards when they are in Hell; The Songs of
the Taverns shall be howlings in that day. Then those that were styled roaring
boys, that were wont to sing, shall howl and roar in Hell through grief and
anguish of heart. And what the Prophet Isaiah says of the calamities that were
coming on the Jews. Isa. 24.7, 8, 9. All the merry hearted do sigh, the mirth
of Tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends, the joy of the Harp
cease, they shall not drink wine with a Song, strong drink shall be bitter to
them that drink it. The same shall be verified of drunkards that were full of
mirth while they lived, when God shall cast them into Hell, all the merry
hearted shall sigh and mourn for ever, there are no Musical Instruments, no
pleasant Songs, there the noise of them that rejoice ends, there shall be no
drinking of wine or strong drink, no not one drop of water to cool their
tongues, their strong drink shall be bitter to them that took most pleasure in
it.


3. Are wine and strong drink thy chiefest joy and delight thou have in this
world? then thou make thy belly thy God; For that which is our chiefest joy,
that we make our God. Ps. 43.4. I will go unto the altar of God, of God my
exceeding joy. And such as make their Belly their God, their end will be
destruction. Phil. 3.19. Whose end is his destruction, whose God is their belly.

4. The pleasure men take in drunkenness is sinful pleasure, and the pleasures
of sin are so dangerous, so destructive to Body and Soul, that a wise and
gracious person will choose rather to suffer any kind of Affliction, than to
embrace the pleasures of Sin. Moses was a wise man, and he chose rather to
undergo an afflicted condition in the Wilderness, than enjoy all the Pleasures
of Pharaoh's Court, because he could not enjoy them without sin. Heb. 11.25.
Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.

5. If the pleasantest and most delightful Wine in the World were presented to
you, if you saw a Spider or a Toad, or some other poisonous Creature in the
Cup, would you not throw it away? Drunkenness will do you more hurt than any
poison. For poison only kills the Body, but drunkenness kills and destroys both
Body and Soul for ever. If any man should say to you when you are in your Cups,
as they cried to the Prophet. 2 King. 4.40. O thou man of God, there is death
in the Pot. As if one should say to you, O thou Drunkard, there is death in the
Cup, and were sure what he said was true, would you not throw away your Cup:
There is a worse thing than death in the drunkards Cup, there is damnation in
the Cup. And shall the pleasantness of the Liquor entice you to drink your own
damnation?

6. The more pleasure men take in their sin, the greater is their sin, and the
greater will be their punishment. It is a damnable sin not only to do
unrighteous actions, but to take pleasure therein. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. That they
all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. The more voluptuously men live here, the greater sorrow and
torments they shall have hereafter. Rev. 18.7. How much she has glorified her
self, and lived deliciously, so much torment give her.

. The obstinate Drunkard's Plea that is resolved to take his course, though he
go to Hell when he die.

Plea. 25. You may spare your pains, for I am resolved I will go on in my way,
if I must be damned for this sin of drinking, I will bear it as well as I can,
I shall have good store of Company with me in Hell, and shall have Neighbors
sure, and therefore let God have his will on me hereafter, and I will have my
will while I am here.

A. 1. Do thou consider what thou say; Thou art a Heaven daring, a God
provoking Sinner. Do thou contemn God? Who has hardened himself against him,
and prospered. Job. 9.4. Do thou make a light matter of Hell Torments? The
Devils who have not their full torment till the day of Judgment, are afraid of
those Torments that they must undergo when that day is come. Matthew. 8.29. Art
thou come hither to torment us before the time. And they begged of Christ they
might not be tormented. Luke 8.28. I beseech thee torment me not. And art thou
more hard-hearted than a Devil to make a light matter of Hell Torments.

2. Can thou bear a fit of the stone in extremity, or other racking pains,
when thou have all manner of helps that love or money can procure to assuage thy
pains, and give thee ease, and when thou have thy Friends about thee to comfort
thee, and a soft Bed to lie on? How then will thou bear the Torments of Hell,
where there is no bed to lie on, but flaming fire, no Friends to comfort thee,
but Devils that will mock and laugh at thee, no Cordials to bear up thy
fainting Spirits, not so much as a drop of water to cool thy tongue. All the
pains that were ever felt by any men in this world, are but flea-bites compared
with the Torments of Hell. Can thou hold thine hand one hour in the fire? If
not, how will thou be able to lie Body and Soul in Hellfire for ever. The fire
of Hell is seven times hotter than any fire on Earth.

3. How troubled was Jesus Christ when our sins were only imputed to him? He
was so full of sorrow, that he was ready to die with grief, Matthew. 26.38. He
was in such an Agony, that his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling to the ground. Luke 22.44 And if our Lord Jesus Christ found it so
difficult to bear the punishment of our sins, when they were only imputed to
him, how will thou be able to undergo the punishment of thy own sins in the
other world for ever?

4. It will be no mitigation, but an addition to thy torments in Hell, that
thou shall have many of thy Neighbors and Companions with thee. Their hideous
cries, and their roarings will add to thy sorrows, especially such as thou have
been instrumental to draw to sin. The rich man when he was in Hell torments,
was very solicitous to have means used that his five Brethreen might not come
into the same place of torment. Luke 16.28. Which he did not out of love to his
Brethren's Souls, for there is no true love among the damned in Hell, but for
fear of increasing his own Torments. It would terrify a Drunkard, and almost
put him out of his wits whilst he is on Earth; if the Ghost of one of his
sottish Companions that died in his sins, and is damned for his sins, should
appear to him and where ever he goes haunt him But it will be a far greater
trouble to be with them, and haunted with them in Hell, and to have them cry
out against them, had it not been for you, had not you enticed me, encouraged
me by your example, I had repented, and had not come into this place of torment.

. The Atheistical Drunkard's Plea, who does not believe there is a God, or Life
to come answered.

Plea. 26. As for those that believe there is a God, to whom an account must be
given for what is done whilst we live in this world, and a Heaven for the
righteous, and a Hell for the wicked, and yet live in drunkenness, and such
like sins, they are vile wretches that will act so contrary to their
Consciences and their profession, but for my part I believe none of these
things, but do look upon them as Stories and Fables, I do not think that there
is a God, a Heaven or an Hell, or a future life, but am of opinion that when a
man dies, there is an end of him, even as there is of a Beast, and therefore I
will take all the pleasure I can while I live, and do approve of that saying,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we must die.

A. 1. Drunken sottish Atheists that do not believe there is a God, are the
greatest Foo^s in the whole world. For there is nothing more evident and plain
than that there is a God. What we see with our Eyes, and hear with our Ears,
and feel with our Hands, is not more ^ure than this truth, that there is a God,
For 1. All Creatures in Heaven and Earth proclaim the being of God with a loud
voice. Thregular Motions of the Heavens, and the fir mament which is beset with
an innumerable company of Stars, and the constant succession of day and night,
declare that there is a God, and that this God is a glorious God, for no
Creature was able to frame such a glorious work as the Heavens which are
adorned with Sun, Moon, and Stars, these are the work of none but a God.
neither can any but a God guide and order their motions. Ps. 19.1, 2. The
Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work. Day
unto day utters Speech, and night unto night shows knowledge. Yea, if thou
go to the Birds or Beasts of the Earth, or Fishes of the Earth, and they
will convince thee of thy folly, and tell thee that he is a very ignorant and
blind Creature that does not see the Workmanship of a God in all these things.
For none of these Creatures made themselves, neither could any man make them,
none but a God was able to make, maintain, and govern all these Creatures. Job.
12.7, 8, 9. But ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the Fowls of
the air, and they shall tell thee, or speak to the Earth, and it shall teach
thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Who knows not in all
these that the hand of the Lord has wrought all this. All Creatures in the
Air, on the Earth, and in the Sea, do proclaim with a loud voice that there is
a God, and own the Workmanship of God in every Creature. 3. They are more
foolish than the Ox and the Ass, that will not believe there is a God. For the
Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, Isa. 1.3. And seeing all
men live and are maintained by the Providence of God. Act. 17.28. For in him we
live and move and have our being. It is greater folly than is found in the Ox
or the Ass; for a man to deny his Master, yea, his God that made him, and
maintains him, and to say there is no God. 4. The Being of God is so evident,
that all people in all places and all ages of the World do own that there is a
God, none but very Fools ever said or thought otherwise. Mich. 5.5. For all
people will walk, every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the
name of the Lord our God for ever, and for ever: We see here that all people do
own a God, though many of them are ignorant of the true God, and Worship Idols
instead of God. And therefore they deserve to be chronicled for the veryest
Fools that ever lived, who think, or say in their hearts there is no God. Ps.
14.1. The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God.

2. Thou that think there is no God, were once of another mind, before thou
had debauched thy Conscience by thy sottish courses, thou did believe the
being of God as well as other men: See therefore into what a woeful condition
thou have brought thy self by thy drunken and sottish courses, thou art fallen
into a worse condition than a Devil, and art more blind and hardened than a
Devil. For the Devils believe there is a God, and tremble at the apprehensions
of the Torments that he will inflict on them. Jam. 2.19. Thou believe that
there is one God, thou do well. The Devils believe also and tremble. And
therefore such as neither tremble at Gods judgments, nor believe that there is
a God, are greater Infidels, and more hardened than the Devils.

3. Thou that say there is no God, see whither thou do speak against thine
own conscience. It is most likely that thou rather wishest there were, than
really think in thy heart that there is no God. For this truth is so deeply
graven upon man's heart, that there is a God, that it is hardly possible to
root it totally and constantly out of our minds, but Conscience will some time
or other discover that there are some Notions of a Diety remaining in the worst
of men. What mean those accusations of Conscience, which even such as profess
themselves Atheists, feel for secret sins, which none know but themselves,
especially in times of distress, and when they are in danger of death? They are
intimations that there are apprehension, there is a God to whom men must be
accountable even for their secret sins. Why do Atheistical persons fear and
tremble when it Thunders and Lightens in a dreadful manner. Why did Caligula
the Emperor, who feared no man on Earth, show so much timerousness when it
Thundered and Lightened, that he got under his Bed? Their fears of God's
judgments show that there are some impressions of the Being of God remaining in
the Minds and Consciences of the most professed Atheists.

4. If you will not be convinced of your folly in being of this singular and
wicked Opinion, that there is no God, enjoy your Opinion to your self, and
please your self in your own delusion, and take your fill of sin, but know
whither you will believe it, or will not, that there is a righteous God, who
will call thee to judgment for all these things, and will without repentance
cast you into Hellfire for your sins, and when you feel his vengeance in the
other world, you shall never doubt any more whither there be a God to Eternity.
For whatever Atheistical Opinions men hold on Earth, they shall cease to be
Atheists when they come in Hell.

. The despairing Drunkard's Plea, who thinks there is no hope of mercy for him,
and therefore resolves still to go on in his sins.

Plea. 27. I have been such a vile and wretched sinner, and have lived so ^^ng
in this sin of drunkenness, that I am af^^^ there is no Mercy for me. And
therefore I had as good enjoy what delight and pleasure I can whilst I live,
seeing I must perish when I die, If I did apprehend there was any hope of Mercy
for me, I would speedily break off my evil courses, and reform my life.

A. 1. Despair does harden men's hearts to go on still in their trespasses. Jer.
18.12. And they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices,
and we will every one do the Imagination of his own evil heart. And therefore
we should be careful that we do not give way to despairing thoughts concerning
the mercy of God.

2. Though your case should be hopeless, yet you had better break of your evil
courses, than go on to add sin to sin, for that will lessen your torments in
the other world.

3. There is hope upon your Repentance, that you may obtain mercy from God,
though you have been as vile a Drunkard as any that lives upon the face of the
Earth, For 1. The blood of Christ is of sufficient virtue to wash away the
greatest sins of the greatest sinners in the world. Joh. 1.23. Behold the Lamb
of God, which takes away the sins of the world. All sins though never so many
for number, and never so heinous for nature are cleansed away by the blood of
Christ, from such as repent and believe in him. Joh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. 2. The Lord for Christ his sake has
promised remission of sins upon their repentance to the chiefest of sinners,
and such as have continued so long in their sins, that they have even wearied
the patience of God to bear with them. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well -- Come
now let us reason together, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, though they be red as Crimson, they shall be as wool. The most
heinous sins, such as are like scarlet and crimson of a deep die, shall be
forgiven to such as cease to do evil. Isa. 43.24, 25. Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine Iniquities. I, even I, am
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Though a man has been a very wicked man, and led an evil
Life, and committed abundance of sin, yet upon his Repentance, God will pardon
all his sins, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. 3. Abominable Drunkards,
and other vile sinners have obtained pardon of sin through the blood of Christ,
and Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Such were some of you, that
is, such as are mentioned in the foregoing verses, Drunkards, Idolaters,
Adulterers, abusers of themselves with Mankind, Theives, Revilers,
Extortioners. And yet though some of them had been such abominable sinners,
they were pardoned by the blood, and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. And
therefore let no man though a great sinner, though the chiefest of sinners, say
his case is desperate, for there is mercy for him upon his Repentance. Prove.
28.13. Who so confesses and forsakes shall have mercy.

Sect. 7, And Exhortation to such as are addicted to this sin of drunkenness to
break off their sin.

If drunkenness be such a woeful sin, then let me exhort all persons that are
addicted to this sin of drunkenness, whether they be rich or poor, young or
old, speedily to break of their sin, and to leave of their drunken courses and
companions. I entreat, and beseech you for God's sake, whose name is
dishonored by this beastly sin, and for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, who shed
his most precious blood to redeem you from this and your other sins, and for
the Holy Ghost's sake, who is greived and vexed by your sensual courses, and
for the Gospel's sake, which is scandalized by your lose Conversations, and for
your own sake, that you would not ruin your selves Body and Soul for ever, and
for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake, that you would not deprive your selves of the
unspeakable glory and joys of Heaven, rather than to leave off this swinish
sin, and for your Families that you would not ruin and corrupt your Families,
and entail God's Judgments on your Posterity, and for the Nation's sake, that
you would not pull down God's wrath upon the Land of your Nativity, leave off
your drunkenness and company-keeping. If you have any regard to the honor of
God, if you have any love to Jesus Christ, if you have any respect to the
Blessed Spirit of God, if you have any respect to your own welfare, either in
this or the World to come, if you have any love to your Families, or to the
Nation in which you live, break off this beastly, this sottish, this
bewitching, this abominable, this damnable sin of drunkenness. To press on this
Exhortation the more effectually, consider, 1. If you will turn from this
loathsome sin of drunkenness, there will be exceeding great joy both in Heaven
and Earth at your Conversion. Your Parents, and Godly Relations, that have
prayed for you, and wept for your disorderly courses, they will rejoice at your
Conversion. Prove. 10.1. A wise Son makes a glad Father. The Ministers of God
will rejoice exceedingly at your Conversion, for they have no greater joy in
this World, than to see the fruit of their labors in the Conversion, Holy
Conversation and Salvation of those to whom they preach. Joh. 3d. Epist. 3.4. I
rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in
thee, even as thou walk in the truth; I haveno greater joy than to hear that
my children walk in truth. The Apostle Paul had such joy in the Conversion of
the Thessalonians, that he was not able to express his joy, and his
thankfulness to God for their Conversion. 1 These. 3.9. What thanks can we
render to God again for you, for all the joy, wherewith we joy for your sakes
before our God. And the Saints and Servants of God will joy to hear of your
Conversion. Act. 15.3. Declaring the Conversion of the Gentiles -- they caused
great joy unto all the brethren. Yea more if you repent of your sins, and turn
from drunkenness, you will cause joy among all the Angels of Heaven. Luke 15.7,
10. 2. If you neglect or refuse to break off this sin of drunkenness, you will
be grief to God and Men, and bring grief and sorrow to your own Soul. You will
grieve God that made you, and maintains you, that God in whom you live, and
move, and have your being. Genesis 6.5, 6. God saw that the wickedness of man was
great on the Earth -- And it grieved him at his heart. And by your hardness of
heart, and persisting still in your sins, you will grieve Jesus Christ, who
shed his blood to save lost man. Mark. 3.5. -- Being grieved for the hardness
of their hearts. Your going on in this sin in a rebellious manner will grieve
the Holy Spirit of God. Isa. 63.10. They rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit.
You will be a grief to your Parents, Prove. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity
of his Father. Prove. 17.25. A foolish son is a grief to his Father, and
bitterness to her that bare him. You will be a great grief to God's Ministers,
and to all Godly People. Psalm. 119.136, 158. Rivers of tears run down mine
eyes, because they keep not thy Law. I bebeld the Transgressors, and was
grieved, because they kept not thy Word. And you will bring great sorrows to
your own Soul. Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has sorrow -- They that tarry long at the
wine -- See also Prove. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. And will you grieve God, and grieve
your Parents, and grieve God's Ministers, and all God's Servants, and pierce
your own Soul through with many sorrows, rather than leave off this grievous
sin of drunkenness?


What shall I say more to persuade you to leave off this vile sin of
drunkenness? If tears would prevail with you, I would say with the Prophet, Oh
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might weep
day and night before you, till I had prevailed with you to leave this
abominable, this Soul destroying sin of drunkenness. If the mercies of God
would make any impression upon your hearts, I would beseech you by all the
mercies of God, that ever you received, or hope to receive, either in this
World, or in the World to come, to break off this beastly sin. If God's
promises would do any thing to lead you to Repentance, I might tell you what
great things God has promised to do for you, if you will leave of this, and
your other sins; He will give you a free, full and eternal pardon of all your
Transgressions, he will give you his Heavenly Kingdom, where you shall have
unspeakable glory, fullness of joy, and Rivers of pleasure for evermore, he
will withhold no good thing from you. If you have any fear of God's judgments,
I might tell you of the Worm that dies not, of the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone, of blackness, of darkness, of being sent from Christ's
Judgment Seat, with a curse into Everlasting Fire, to have your abode with the
Devil and his Angels, all which things, and more than the tongue of man can
express, will be your portion, if you break not off this damnable sin of
drunkenness. If any words or arguments will prevail with you, I could wish I
had the tongue of Men and Angels, to speak to you in the most persuasive
manner, to leave off this Soul destroying sin.

. The convinced sinner's case considered, that is almost persuaded to leave off
this sin.

It may be some will say, my heart begins to relent, methinks I am almost
persuaded to leave off my drunkenness, and to become a new man, I am of the
mind to bind my self with a vow, and to make a solemn promise never to be drunk
any more, what counsel would you give to one in my condition.

A. 1. Do not only almost, but altogether resolve to leave off this sin, else
you will be but almost saved. If you be double minded, sometimes of the mind to
leave your sins, and sometimes of the mind to keep them still, you will be
unstable in all your ways. Jam. 1.8.

2. Do not only resolve, and promise, and vow to forsake this sin, but perform
your vows and promises; As that man's Son dealt with his Father, whom his
Father bid go and work in his Vineyard, he said I go Sir, but he went not.
Matthew. 21.30. So many men deal with God, they make promises to God to leave
their sins, but they perform them not. Now it is better not to make any vows or
promises of Reformation, than after we have made them, not to perform them.
Eccl. 5.5. Better it is that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow
and not pay.

3. Take heed of leaving this sin for a time, and then returning to it again,
as the dog does to his vomit, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire, for the latter end of such persons is worse than the beginning. 2
Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.

4. Turn from all your other sins as well as drunkenness, if you would find
favor with God, and obtain the remission of your sins. It is not sufficient to
cast away some of our sins, but if we would escape Eternal Death, we must cast
them all away, and not allow our selves in any known sin. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast
away from you all your Transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make
you a new heart, and a new Spirit, for why will ye dye O house of Israel?

. The lingering sinner's plea answered.

I am convinced I must leave off my drunken courses, or else there is no
Salvation for me, and I am purposed to do so, but I am desirous to have a few
merry bouts more at drinking, and then I will become a new man.

A. 1. Sinful lusts are insatiable, it is not once or twice gratifying our
sinful lusts that will give satisfaction to our corrupt natures, but the oftener
we fulfill the lusts and desires of the flesh, the more strongly our hearts will
be carried out after sin. It is here as it is with the fire, the laying on new
fuel makes the fire rage and burn more furiously, the adding of new acts of
sin, makes our lusts to rage and crave the more furiously for farther
opportunities of sin. Ezekiel. 16.28, 29. As Idolaters and Adulterers are
insatiable in their lusts, so are drunkards, and other sinners also. The
sluggard, the longer he lies in his bed, the lother he is to rise. Prove. 6.9,
10. So it is with the drunkard, the longer he lies in his drunkenness, the
more unwilling he will be to leave it.

2. The time past is sufficient, and too much which you have already spent in
sin, 2 Pet. 4.3. and therefore you should not wast any more precious time in
such sottish courses.

3. Thy own heart, and the Devil deceive thee, in suggesting such thoughts as
these, I will have but a merry bout or two more in drinking, and then I will
leave this course; For it is likely thou have thought and resolved so many
times heretofore, and yet nothing is done. When a Sermon has come home to thy
Conscience, or when thou have been near unto death, or have met with some
startling providence, have thou not thought with thy self, I will leave of my
drunkenness, and what set a time for thy Repentance, and yet thou art fallen to
it a fresh again. Sin is of a deceitful hardening nature, if it can but prevail
with us to defer our Repentance, it will harden our hearts. Heb. 3.13.

4. Who can tell but the next merry bout which thou have with thy companions,
thou may be taken out of the World. While Job's children were eating and
drinking wine in their Eldest Brother's house, they were all slain by a great
wind that blew down the house, Job 1.18, 19. Why may not sudden death come
upon thee when thou art drinking wine, and making merry, as well as on Job's
children. They were the children of a Godly man, their mirth was innocent
mirth, yet were they cut off while they were drinking wine; And why may it not
be so with thee also? The Rich man that said to his Soul, eat drink, be merry,
had his soul taken from him that very night. Luke 12.19, 20.

. The presumptuous sinner's Plea answered, who goes on in his sin, presuming
that at what time soever he repents God will be merciful to him, and presuming
that he may live long.

If any say, God is a merciful and gracious God, and at what time soever a
sinner repents of his sins, God will pardon him, and therefore I will repent of
my evil ways, but not yet, I will enjoy my sinful delights a while longer, and
then I will repent, and I doubt not but God will be merciful to me, and that I
shall go to Heaven as well as other men.

A. 1. It is an horrible abuse of God's mercy, to take occasion from God's
mercy to continue in sin. Gods goodness should lead us to Repentance, and
therefore they that presume upon God's mercy, to continue and go on in their
sins, are guilty of despising the riches of God's grace. Romans 2.4.

2. It is true that God has promised to forgive penitent sinners at what time
soever they repent truly of their sins, but he has not promised to give
Repentance to such as refuse to turn at his call, and go on in their sins,
presuming that God will be gracious to them. True Repentance is never too late,
but late Repentance is seldom true.

3. Though you be young and strong, and like to live many years, yet it is
dangerous to defer your Repentance on many accounts, as 1. Life is uncertain,
some die in their full strength, and the height of their prosperity, when they
are at greatest ease, they go down in a moment into the grave. Job. 21.13, 23.
Such as promise themselves many years in this World, may not have one days
continuance. Luke 12.19, 20. And if sudden Death take you away before you have
repented of your sin, you are lost for ever. 2. If your life should be
continued, God may take away the use of your understanding, and give you up to
distraction, and persons under distraction are not apprehensive, what need they
have of Repentance. 3. If you should enjoy Life, and have the use of your
understanding, yet who can tell whither God will give you repentance for your
sin, it may be he will give you up to your hearts lusts, instead of giving you
repentance, and because you refused to repent in the day that he offered you
mercy, possibly he may swear in his Wrath, that you shall never enter into his
rest, as he did to the Jews, Heb. 3.7, 8, 11. 4. If you should repent, it may
be it will be as Judas did repent, he grew desperate, and hanged himself, he
was so burdned and troubled in his Conscience for his sin, that he could not
bear his burden, but went away and hung himself, Matthew. 27.3, 5. Judas repented
himself, saying I have sinned, and went and hanged himself.

4. Let such as put off their repentance because they are young and strong, and
like to live many years, or on any other account, consider this, that if they
do not repent now, it is most likely they will not repent, nor leave off their
sins as long as they live. For, 1. The longer you live in sin, the less able
you will be to repent, for continuance in sin strengthens sin, and weakens the
Soul. Jer. 13.23. Custom in sin does give sin such rooting in the heart, that
it will be as hard a matter for such as have got a custom of sinning to leave
their sins, as it will be for a Blackamore to change his skin, or the Leopard
his Spots. 2. The longer any man lives in his sins, the less willing he will be
to repent, for his inclinations to sin will be strong, and his aversness to
holiness greater, and his heart will be more hardened in sin. Heb. 3.12. 3. The
longer a man continues to provoke God, the less hope there is of his
assistance, and giving us his grace, and the more ground for fear, that he
should say his Spirit shall no more strive with us. 4. The World and the Flesh
and the Devil will be as tempting hereafter as they are now, and our hearts as
ready, and more ready to yield than they are now.

. The plea of such as say they would leave off their drunkenness, but they
cannot. Helps against this sin of drunkenness.

If any say, I am abundantly convinced that Drunkenness is an abominable sin,
and I would leave it, but I cannot, I find it has got such power over me as
that I cannot withstand it, What shall I do, that I may be able to leave this
sin?

A. It is no easy matter for a man that is accustomed to this sin to leave it,
it is of such an enticing bewitching nature, and therefore having set out the
greatness of this sin, and answered the Pleas that are made use of to excuse
this sin, I shall now propose some helps against this sin.

. Prayer is a special help against Drunkenness, and all other sins.

1. Pray to God to give you his Holy Spirit to sanctify your hearts, and to
turn you from this, and from all your other sins. When the Apostle had
cautioned the Ephesians against Drunkenness, as a means and help against this
sin, he exhorts them to be filled with the Spirit. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with
Wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit. Now the way to get the
Spirit of God is to pray for it. Luke 11.13. Your heavenly Father will give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask him. By Prayer to God we may obtain help against
all our sins, such as are strongest, and of longest continuance. Psalm. 119, 2,
3. Blessed are they that seek him with the whole heart, they do no iniquity.
Such sins as we are most inclined to, that have dwelt in us a long time, and
are become natural to us, may be overcome by the grace of God. Jam. 4.5, 6. The
Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy, but he gives more grace. That is,
God's grace is sufficient for the subduing our strongest Corruptions, and if we
do seek to him with humble hearts, he will give us more strength of grace, than
there is strength of sin in us, whereby we shall overcome those sins that have
dwelt longest in us, and to which our Hearts and Spirits are most strongly
inclined. But here some may say by way of discouragement.

Obj. 1. It is true, Prayer will do great things with God, but it is said, Joh.
9.31. We know that God hears not sinners, and therefore to what purpose
should I that am a sinner pray to God to give me his grace to leave and forsake
my sins, seeing God will not hear me.

A. 1. When it is said God hears not sinners, it is to be understood of
impenitent sinners, of such as love and delight in their sins, and hate to be
reformed, and turn a deaf Ear to the word of God, Prove. 28.9. He that turns
away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be an abomination.

2. As for such sinners as are desirous to leave and forsake their sins, there
is hope for them if they pray to God for his grace, that he will hear them. The
Woman of Samaria that discoursed with Christ at Jacob's Well, was a great
sinner; she lived with a man that was not her Husband, and so was an Adultress.
Joh. 4.16, 17, 18. She was a Samaritan, ver. 4. and the Samaritans were
Idolaters, and did did not know what they worshipped ver. 22. Ye worship ye
know not what. See also 2 King. 17.24, 28, 29, 41. The Samaritans were a people
of ill fame among the Jews. Joh. 8.48. Say we not well, thou art a Samaritan,
and have a Devil. This Woman of Samaria had carried her self unkindly to
Christ, yet when he asked for a draught of water, though she knew the Well was
deep, and that he had nothing to draw with, ver. 11. She did not grant him his
request, but instead of giving him water, she gave him a check, ver. 9. How is
it that thou being a Jew, asks drink of me which am a Woman of Samaria, for
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Yet our Lord Jesus Christ
incourageth this Woman to pray, though a Samaritan, though one that lived with
a man as her Husband, that was not her Husband; though she had carried her self
unkindly to Christ, he incourageth her to pray, and tells her if she had asked,
he would have given her living water. Joh. 4.10. Jesus said unto her if thou
know the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink,
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.
Oppressors and Unrighteous persons are great sinners, yet they are exhorted to
seek the Lord, and have a promise, that if they seek God, they shall live. Amos
5.6, 7. Seek ye the Lord, and ye shall live -- ye that turn judgment to
Wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the Earth.

Obj. 2. But I have such inclinations to drinking, and have been so long
addicted to this sin, and am so enslaved to it, that I think it is in vain to
pray for help against it, for I fear there is no hope that I should ever be
made able to leave off this sin.

A. 1. There is nothing too hard for God. Jer. 32.17. He that formed the
Heavens and the Earth out of nothing, that brought light out of darkness, there
is nothing too hard for him. He can enlighten those that are under the greatest
ignorance and blindness, he can make those that have carnal and vile hearts to
become Heavenly and Spiritual. He can make the chief of sinners to become the
greatest Saints. There is a possibility, yea, a probability that God may give
repentance to such as are the greatest Slaves to Sin and Satan, that Satan
leads them Captive at his pleasure, and does with them, even what he will, and
oppose the means of their recovery; yet such as these may be recovered out of
the Devil's snare. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging
of the Truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

2. We have examples of God's Mercy and Grace in recovering other sinners that
have been as much enslaved to their sins as you are, and their hearts have been
as much glued to their sins as yours are, and have continued as long in their
evil courses as you have done. The Apostle tells us of some that were Servants
to their sins, and served diverse Lusts and Pleasures, that were saved by the
washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.3, 5. The
Israelites were exceedingly given and addicted to the sin of Idolatry. Their
hearts went after their Idols, and were glued to them. Ezekiel. 20.16. Their heart
went after their Idols. Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols. Yet when they
bemoaned their sins, and prayed to God to turn them from their sins, God gave
them grace to forsake their Idols. Jer. 31.18, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself -- Turn thou me and I shall be turned -- I will surely have
mercy upon him -- compared with Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do
any more with Idols.

Obj. 3. I have prayed to God often to give me Grace to leave off this sin of
drunkenness, but God does not regard my prayers, this sin prevails over me as
ever it did, I find no help against this sin by praying to God.

1. Do you not dissemble in your hearts with God, when you pray for grace to
leave this sin; though you pray against this sin, yet possibly you have no
desire, no mind, no intention to leave it, and this is a dissembling with God.
As the Jews dissembled in their hearts when they sent to the Prophet Jeremiah
to pray for them, when they had no mind to do that which they desired him to
pray for. Jer. 42.20. Ye dissembled in your hearts when ye sent me unto the
Lord your God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, and according unto
all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it. So
men may pray for themselves, they may pray against their sins, as if they had a
mind to leave their sins, and yet but dissemble in their hearts with God, and
not be really willing to break off their sins. The Lord is nigh to all them
that call upon him in truth. Ps. 145.18. If you would obtain what you pray for,
you must heartily desire what you pray for, else you do not pray in truth. 2.
Do you watch against the Temptations and Occasions that may draw you to this
sin? This you must do as well as pray against it, if you would have God keep
you from it. Matthew. 26.41. Watch and Pray that you enter not into temptation.
To pray against drunkenness, and yet to run your selves needlessly upon
temptations, to go into idle and vain company, and to Taverns and Alehouses
this is but a mocking of God. 3. Do you strive against this sin, and use means
to avoid it, as well as pray against it. If not, that may be the reason why the
Lord does not answer your prayers. For we must strive against sin, as well as
pray against it. Heb. 12.4. Striving against sin. When any evil Motions or evil
Lusts arise into our hearts, and solicit us to gratify them, we must not yield
to them, but must deny the solicitations of sin. Tit. 2.12. Denying
ungodliness and worldly Lusts. 1. Pet. 2.11. I beseech you abstain from fleshly
Lusts. 4. You must wait as well as pray, if you would have your prayers
answered. Psalm. 40.1, 2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined his
Ear and heard my cry, He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the
miry Clay. By the horrible Pit and miry Clay out of which the Lord brought
David upon his crying and waiting on the Lord, some understand his exceeding
great afflictions and troubles out of which he obtained deliverance by Prayer.
de profundo iniquitatum, ex vitijs carnalibus, Aug.
Others interpret this Pit and miry Clay out of which David was delivered of
his sins, that defiled him like the mire, and cleaved and stuck fast to him as
the Clay; And to warrant this interpretation we shall find, that sinful Lusts
are compared to a pit. Prove. 22.14. Prove. 23, 27. And to the mire, Isa. 57, 20.
2 Pet. 2.22. Such as find their feet stick fast in the miry Clay of their sins,
if they cry unto the Lord, and wait patiently upon him, he will bring them out
of the miry Clay, and establish their goings in his ways, so as they shall not
return to their sins again.
. Consideration of the evil and danger of this sin, will help us to forsake it.

2. Consider seriously with your selves the evil and horrible Nature of this
sin of drunkenness, and what the latter end of it will be. It offends and
displeases God, it is a trampling under foot the blood of Christ, who shed his
blood to redeem us from our vain conversations, it makes a man like a Beast,
yea, worse than a beast, it ruins your Bodies, destroys your Souls, wastes your
Estates, blemisheth your reputations, will undo your Families, it is the
Nursery of all manner of wickedness, though it be pleasant for a while, at the
last it will bite like an Addar, and sting like a Serpent, It will most
certainly shut you out of Heaven, and plunge you in the depths of Hell. A
serious consideration of their ways is useful and beneficial for all sorts of
persons. Good men by pondering their ways, may reform what is amiss in them.
Ps. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. And
such as are wicked, and graceless persons, by considering their ways, may be
led and brought to repentance. Ezekiel. 18.27, 28. When the wicked man turns
away from his wickedness that he has committed -- he shall save his soul
alive. Because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions that
he has committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Mark those words,
because he considers and turns away from all his transgressions. A serious
consideration of our ways will help us to turn from all our transgressions.
The want of a due consideration of our ways, is the reason why men commit and
continue in abominable impieties. Hos. 7.1, 2. They commit falsehood, and the
Thief comes in, and the troop of Robbers spoileth without, and they consider
not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness.

. Reading, Hearing, and Meditating on God's word, a great help against
Drunkenness, and all other sins.

3, Read the Scriptures diligently, attend on the Preaching of God's word,
Meditate on what you read and hear, this will be a means to reclaim you from
drunkenness, and all other sinful and destructive courses. The Word of God
has a converting power in it, and when it is set home by the Spirit of God, it
will convert a sinner from the error of his ways. Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the
Lord is perfect converting the Soul. It was by God's word that David was kept
from sinning against God. Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in mineheart that I
might not sin against thee. It was by God's word that he was kept from sinful
and destructive courses. Psalm. 17.4. By the word of thy lips, I have kept me
from the paths of the destroyer. The reading of the Scriptures is a great help
to bring men to the knowledge and the fear of the Lord, and to make them leave
and forsake their sins. Deuteronomy. 31.11.12. Thou shall read this Law before all
Israel in their hearing, -- that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God,
and observe to do all the words of this Law. And as reading the Scriptures, so
hearing the word of God preached is a powerful means to reclaim men from their
sins, and bringing them to Salvation. 1 Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Rom 10.17. So then Faith
comes by hearing. Meditation also on what we read and hear out of God's Word,
is a special means to incline our hearts to shun those ways that are
forbidden, and walk in those ways that are commanded in God's Word. Psalm.
119.15. I will meditate in thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.

. The belief of the truth of those things which the Scriptures speak concerning
this sin, is an help to our forsaking it.

4. Lay to heart and believe the truth of those things which the Scriptures
speak concerning drunkards and drunkenness. As namely, that drunkenness is a
manifest work of the flesh, concerning which the Lord tells again and again,
that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.19,
20.21. It will as certainly exclude a man out of Heaven as Murder and Adultery,
or any other sin. We are told plainly in God's word, that drunkards shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And that Hell is
prepared for drunkards, and does as it were open its mouth to receive them, and
that such as follow after strong drink, and inflame themselves with wine,
though there be multitudes of them, and some of them very jolly men, and live
in great pomp and splendour, their pomp and their multitude, and their glory,
shall descend into Hell. Isa. 5.11, 14. The Scriptures tell us plainly, that
such as drink till they are drunken, the Lord will cut them asunder, and give
them their portion with unbelievers. Luke 12.45, 46. And where shall
unbelievers have their portion? In Hell fire. Rev. 21.8. The unbelieving shall
have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. So that it is
evident from the Scriptures, that drunkards shall most certainly be shut out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and be cast into Hell fire; For nothing is more
certainly true than what God has revealed in the Scriptures; And therefore let
me reason a little with all those drunkards, into whose hands this discourse
shall come, about the certainty of their damnation, if they persist in their
drunken and sottish courses.

Suppose all the Ministers that are this day upon the face of the earth, and
all the knowing and wise men in the World, should come to thee, and tell thee
if thou do not leave off thy drunkenness, thou will certainly be shut out of
Heaven, and be cast into Hell, would this startle thee? That which the Lord
tells us in his Holy Word, is more certainly true than what is told us by all
the men of the world: For all men are fallible and subject to mistakes, and may
be overtaken with a lie, but God is infallible, and is a God that cannot lie.
Romans 3.4. Let God be true, and every man a liar.

Suppose one of thy drunken companions that dyed in his sins, and is now in
Hell, should be permitted to come from the dead, and should tell thee, Hell
fire is an intolerable torment, for I have been in it, and I am sent by God to
thee, to tell thee except thou do repent of thy sins, and leave of thy
drunkenness, thou shall as certainly go to Hell as I, or any other sinner,
would this make thee leave thy sin? Or suppose one of thy Godly Friends or
Acquaintance that is now in Heaven, should come to thee from Heaven and say, I
am sent from God to tell thee, that except thou do repent and leave off thy
drunkenness, thou shall surely be cast into Hell; would this startle thee?
would thou believe this Message, would this make thee repent: God's word is
more to be credited, and a more forcible means to persuade men to repent, than
a message brought by a Saint or Sinner risen from the dead. Luke 16.30, 31. If
one went from the dead, they will repent; And he said unto him, if they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
from the dead.

Suppose an Angel should call to thee out of Heaven, when thou art at a Tavern
or an Alehouse, and say, O thou drunkard, except thou do repent thou shall
surely go to Hell! Or suppose an Angel should bring thee a List of the names of
those that shall be condemned at the day of judgment, would this startle thee
to see thy name in that List? When the Scripture tells thee that no drunkard
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, but they shall all without Repentance be cast
into Hellfire, that is more certain, than if thou heardest a voice from
Heaven, telling thee thou art a damned creature, or then if thou saw thy
name in the List of those that are to be damned, for there is as great, or a
greater certainty in what we read in the Scriptures, than in what we hear
spoken by a voice from Heaven. 2 Pet. 1.18.19. And this voice which came from
Heaven we heard -- We have also a more sure word of Prophesy.

Suppose the Lord himself should come and speak to thee in a dream, as he did
to Abimelech. Genesis 20.3. God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said
unto him, behold thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou have taken,
for she is a man's wife, Suppose I say, the Lord himself should say to thee in a
dream, or a vision: Behold thou art a damned creature, for the evil courses
that thou take, if thou do not break off thy drunkenness, I will cast thee
into Hellfire; would not this make thee leave off thy drunkenness? The Lord
tells thee in his Word, that drunkards shall not inherit his Kingdom, but shall
be cast into that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone; And what God
says to thee in the Scriptures is as much to be regarded, is as true and
certain as what he says to us in a dream or vision; or by an audible voice
from Heaven.

What the Scripture says, God says, for the Scriptures are God's Word, and
therefore what the Scripiure says shall be, is as certain to come to pass as
if it were already done. What the Scripture says is more sure and certain than
what we see with our eyes, or hear with our ears, or feel with our hands, for
our senses are fallible. When Isaac's eyes were dim, he mistook Jacob for Esau,
though he heard him speak, and felt him with his hands, but what the Scripture
says is infallible -- For all Scripture was given by inspiration of God, and
God is an infallible God. And therefore know O drunkard, whosoever thou art
that read these lines, that if thou do not leave off thy drunkenness, thy
damnation is more certain than any thing that thou see with thy eyes, or
hear with thy ears, or feel with thy hands. Thou art as sure to go into
Hellfire, as if thou were there already; Thou art as sure to be shut out of
Heaven, and cast into Hell, as if thou heardest a voice from Heaven, telling
thee thou art a damned creature.

As the Apostle said to the Galathians. Gal. 3.1. O foolish Galathians, who
has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth, Crucified among you; In like manner may I
speak to drunkards; Oh foolish drunkards, who has bewitched you that ye should
not obey the Commandment of God, who commands you to leave off your
drunkenness, when as it is evidently set forth in the Scriptures, that no
drunkards shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Surely drunkards either do not read
the Scriptures, or if they do read them, they do not believe what they read, or
if they believe the truth of the Scriptures, they slip out of their minds, and
they do not lay them to heart, for if they did really believe that their
drunkenness would shut them out of Heaven, and cast them into Hell, they would
break of this damnable sin. And this may be one reason, why Drunkards shall
have their portion with Unbelievers. Luke 12.45, 46. Because whatever they may
profess outwardly, they are inwardly, and in heart Unbelievers.

. They that would avoid drunkenness, must shun the occasions of this sin.

5. They that would get rid of this sin of drunkenness must avoid and shun the
occasions of this sin. What is said of the wild ass, Jer. 2.24. In her occasion
who can turn her away? may be applied to the vile and sinful heart of man. It
is an hard matter to turn the heart away from sin, when a man has a fit,
convenient, and enticing occasion for the commission of sin. We must be careful
that we do not put an occasion of falling in our Brothers way, Romans 14.13.
Judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way. And if we must not put an occasion of falling in our Brothers
way, then surely we must remove all occasions of falling into sin out of our
own way. If any say, what are the occasions of this sin of drunkenness which
you would have us to avoid.

A. 1. Do not keep Company with drunkards, be not amongst them when they have
their drinking bouts, for the being in their company when they are drinking
together, may prove a snare to you, and occasions your being overtaken with the
sin of drunkenness. There is so much evil and danger in being among drunkards,
that sober men that have any regard to the Commandments of God, and to their
own welfare, should avoid as much as they can coming into their company. Prove.
23.20, 21. Be not amongst Winebibbers -- For the Drunkard shall come to
poverty. Here are two things observable, 1. A Command from God not to come
amongst VVine-bibbers. 2. The reason of this command, for a drunkard shall come
to poverty -- As much as to say, To be amongst VVinebibbers is the way to
become drunkards, and by becoming Drunkards, Men are brought to poverty. As
keeping company with angry and furious men, we shall learn their ways, and
become furious like unto them. Prove. 22.24, 25. Make no Friendship with an
angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways,
and get a snare to thy Soul. So by keeping Company with Drunkards, we are in
danger to learn their ways, and to get a snare to our Souls.

2. Avoid going to Alehouses and Taverns, if you would avoid drunkenness. For
by being in such Places you are under a temptation to sin by excess of wine and
strong Drink. Solomon advises those that would shun the sin of uncleanness,
not to come near the door of an Harlots house, lest being near her door, they
should be drawn to go into her house, and bring dishonor to them by committing
that shameful sin of uncleanness, Prove. 5.8, 9. Remove thy way far from her,
and come not nigh the door of her house, lest thou give thine honor unto
others, and thy years unto the cruel. The like a dvice may I give to such as
are inclined to the sin of drunkenness. Keep from Taverns and Alehouses, come
not near such Places, lest you be tempted by Satan and your own hearts, to go
in and be overcome with Wine and strong drink.

3. Avoid laying VVagers, or playing at Cards or Dice, or any such like Games
for Wine or strong Drink, for this is an occasion of much evil, and very
frequently draws persons to drink unto uncess.

4. Avoid drinking healths, which though it be a common practice amongst many
persons, yet it is condemned by many soled and judicious persons for a great
evil; See Voetius. Tom. 3. p. 1217. who gives several reasons against this
practice. If any say, I can refuse any health, but the King's, and if the
King's health be put upon me, my loyalty shall be questioned. It was a wise
Speech of a Lord Chancellor often noted by Mr. Harris. I will pray for the Kings
Health, and drink for my own. This can be no test of loyalty, for prohibited by
the Kings Proclamation.

. Temptations to this sin to be watched and resisted.

6. If you would not be overcome with wine or strong drink, watch and pray
against, and resist the temptations that you meet with to this Sin. It is our
blessed Savior's counsel. Watch and Pray that you enter not into temptation.
Matthew. 26.41. And we had need watch and pray that we enter not into temptation,
because our corrupt natures are easily drawn to sin when we meet with
temptations to sin. And therefore we had need watch and strive, and resist
temptations, and besides, our own endeavors to pray for God's Grace to assist
us. I will instance in some times of temptation, wherein we had need be very
watchful that we fall not into this sin.

1. When we are at Feasts, or in the Houses, or in the Company of great
persons, where there is great plenty of Wine and strong Drink, that a man may
take his fill of free cost and he is called upon to eat and drink abundantly,
if a man be not very watchful and careful of himself at such a time, he is in
danger to fall into excess. Prove. 23.1, 2. When thou sit to eat with a
Ruler, consider diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat,
if thou be a man given to thy appetite. Rulers Tables are furnished with
variety of the choicest meats, and plenty of all sorts of wine. Neh. 5.18. And
therefore such as eat with Rulers, should consider diligently what is before
them, that is, they should consider, and that diligently what snares and
temptations are before them, and what danger they are in to offend God by
excess of eating and drinking, when they have such variety and plenty before
them of those things that may entice them to excess. And besides that caution,
consider diligently what is before thee. There is another awakening expression.
Put a knife to thy Throat, if thou be a man given to thine appetite, that is,
1. Stand in as much awe, and be in as great fear of offending God by thine
excess in eating or drinking, as a man is in fear of offending that has a
knife put to his Throat 2. Look upon thy Soul to be in as great danger of
perishing by intemperance when thou art at a great man's table, as thy body is
in danger of perishing when thou have a knife at thy Throat. Or, 3. Put a knife
to thy Throat, that is, use all means possible to mortify and restrain thine
inordinate appetite, it is like the expression, Ps. 39.1. I will keep my Mouth
with a bridle. that is, I will force my self to be silent, I will refrain from
speaking, I will keep in such words as are unseemly, though they would be
breaking out. So put a knife to thy Throat, that is, restrain thine inordinate
affections, force thy self to be temperate in eating and drinking. Many think
that it is a desirable thing to be invited to feasts with great men, to eat at
a Rulers Table, and they have a longing mind after such things, but let them
hear what Solomon says in this case. Prove. 23.3. Be not desirous of his
dainties, for they are deceitful meat. The greater dainties are on the Table,
the greater is the danger. The Daintier our Meat and Drink is, the more
deceitful. For while dainties please the Palate, if they allure us to
intemperance, they kill the Soul. And is not that deceitful, that comes with an
appearance of pleasure, and destroys both Body and Soul. 2. You are under a
temptation to this sin, when sensual Lusts arise in your hearts, or evil
motions are put into your minds by Satan, whereby you are enticed and inclined
to go to Taverns and Alehouses, to be merry among your jovial Companions.
James. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his lust, and
enticed. Now when such Lusts or inordinate desires after wine or strong drink
arise in your hearts, do not gratify them, do not make any provision for their
satisfaction. Romans 13.14. Make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. But withstand, resist, and deny their solicitations, hearken not to
their enticings, but list your heart to God to subdue your evil inclinations,
and attend the the works of your callings. When the lusts of our hearts solicit
us to evil, we may give a double reply to them, Non licet. How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God. And Non vacat. I am not at leisure. We
may reply as Nehemiah, Neh. 6.3. When we are employed and diligent in our
callings, we have a great advantage against the lusts of our own heart, and the
temptations of Satan by not being at leisure to attend their motions. When we
are idle, and out of employment, our own sins, and Satan's temptations have a
great advantage on us, and will easily prevail over us. 3. You are under a
temptation to this sin, when your drunken companions entice and call you to go
to the Alehouse, or when being there they urge and importune you to drink more
than is meet. In this case remember what the Lord says, Prove. 1.10, 15, 18. My
Son if sinners entice thee consent not -- my son walk not thou in the way with
them, refrain thy foot from their path. They lay wait for their own blood, they
lurk privily for their own lives. If one should entice you to an Alehouse, to
murder you when he comes there, if you knew this before hand, would you go with
him. They that entice you to Alehouses, and make you drunk when you come there,
do a worse thing than murder your Bodies, for they draw you to that sin which
will damn your Body and Soul for ever, and that is a worse hurt than murder.
What Solomon says of such as yield to the enticing of an Harlot. Prove. 7.21,
22, 23. With much fair speech she caused him to yield. -- He goes after her
strait-way, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of
the stocks, till a Dart strikes through his Liver, as a bird hastes to the
snare, and knows not that it is for his Life. The same is applicable to those
that yield to the enticing of drunkards, or other sins. When they yield to
their enticings, and go along with them, they go as an Ox to the slaughter,
that they follow them to their own destruction, as surely, though they consider
it as little, as the Ox that goes to the slaughter; they go as a Fool to the
correction of the stocks, when once they are got in, they can as hardly get
out, as a man can get his feet out of the Stocks. Till a dart strike through
his Liver; that is, till he be certainly ruined, body, and Soul. If a dart go
through the Arm or Thigh, that wound may be cured, but if it strike through the
Liver, it is certain death, there is no cure for such a wound. As a bird
hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life. A snare takes
suddenly, and holds surely. Such is the case of those that follow the
enticing of Sinners, they as little consider that they are doing that which
will destroy their Souls, that their lives lie at stake, as the bird does that
hastneth to the snare, she looks for meat, but loses her life, so does the
Drunkard that is taken in the snare of evil Company, he looks for pleasure,
but loses his Soul. 4. You are under a temptation to excess of drinking, when
you meet with brisk and pleasant Wine, or other pleasant drink, that which is
pleasant to the Eye, or pleasant to the Taste. The most pleasing Wine, or other
drink it taken excessively, will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Addar,
Prove. 23.31, 32.
. Inordinate affection to Wine and strong drink, to be mortifyed by such as
would avoid drunkenness.

7. Let such as would avoid drunkenness, mortify their inordinate affection to
Wine and strong Drink. This is necessary, because the inordinacy of the
affections to Wine, or strong Drink, is is sinful and offensive to God, as
well as the act of Drunkenness. It is evil to have the mind and heart hanging
after Taverns and Alehouses, as well as to be a frequenter of those places. He
is a Drunkard in his heart, that has an inordinate Affection to Wine or strong
Drink, as well as he commits Adultery with a Woman in his heart, that
lusts after her in his heart. Besides this inordinate affection to Wine or
strong Drink is the root of this sin of drunkenness. We do not lay the Ax to
the root of Drunkenness, if we only endeavor to forbear the actual Commission
of this sin, and do not endeavor to mortify our inordinate affections. A man
may purpose, and make vows, and use other means to break off this sin, but if
there be in his heart an inordinate affection to Wine or strong drink, he will
not be able to leave off his drunkenness. But here some may say,

How shall we get our inordinate affections to wine and strong drink mortifyed.

1, Seek after Union with Jesus Christ. It is through Union with Christ that we
receive virtue from him for the crucifying of our sinful Lusts, and inordinate
affections, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with
the affections and Lusts. The affections cleave so fast to sin, and are carried
out so inordinately after the Creatures, that nothing less than Grace given to
us from Jesus Christ, can turn the heart from sin, and place the affections on
right objects. We may think our selves free, but we shall never be free indeed
from the slavery of sin and inordinate affections, till Jesus Christ makes us
free. John. 8.36. If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed.
2. Be convinced and persuaded in your judgments of the great evil that is in
setting your Affections inordinately on Wine, or strong Drink, or any other
Creature. When man was in his state of Innocence, his judgments ruled his
affections, and when God recovers man out of his fallen Estate, he works upon
and regulates his affections, by enlightening, and renewing the Mind. Col. 3.10.
And have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge. Knowledge has a
great influence on renewing the Man, that is, all the Faculties of the Soul.
Understand therefore, and be persuaded in your Judgments and Consciences, that
there is much evil in setting your affections inordinately on Wine and strong
Drink, or any other Creatures. I will instance in some of those evils. 1. Such
as love wine or strong drink inordinately make not the Lord their God, but make
Bacchus their God. What a man loves most and best, that is his God. They that
have such a love for wine and strong drink, that they value not the
transgressing of the Command of God to take their fill of their drink, they
love their drink more and better than they love God, and so make their drink
their God. 2. Sinful Lusts, and inordinate affections tend to the Soul's ruin
and destruction. They are the banes, the poison of our immortal Souls. 1 Pet.
2.11. Abstain from fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul. By fleshly lusts,
understand all the evil desires and inordinate affections of our corrupt
natures. And shall we cherish and embrace that which is and will be the
destruction of our Souls? 3. Weigh well the evils and mischiefs that arise
from the love and following after strong drink, and from excessive drinking,
which are set down Sect. 4. 3. The way to mortify inordinate affections to
Earthly things, is to set our affections on things which be above, and to get a
well-grounded hope of our enjoying the Glory and Pleasures of the World to
come. Col. 3.2, 4, 5. Set your affections on things above -- When Christ who is
our Life shall appear, then shall ye appear with him in glory. Mortify
therefore your Members which are upon the Earth -- inordinate affection. As it
is in case of excessive bleeding, by opening a Vein, the course of the blood is
turned, and thereby immoderate bleeding at the Nose is stayed. So here when our
affections run out inordinately to Earthly things, the setting our affections
on things above, will turn the stream of our affections, that they will not as
formerly run out after the world. We shall taste such sweetness in Heavenly
things by setting our affections on them, that we shall not desire the delights
and vanities of the world; Psalm. 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness -- When I remember thee on my bed, and meditate on thee in
the night watches. The Psalmist found such sweetness and delight in God, that
he had what he could desire, he was satisfied, and did not desire the delights
and pleasures of the world, he was abundantly pleased and satisfied in his
enjoyment of God.
. The right use of eating and drinking, a means to prevent drunkenness.

8. Learn the right use of eating and drinking, for that will be a means to
prevent the abusing your selves, and abusing God's good creatures by surfeiting
and drunkenness, and to this end observe these Rules.

1. Eat and Drink to the glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Eat and drink as in
God's sight, seeking his Blessing, and giving him praise, being careful that
you do not offend or displease him in eating or drinking. 2. Eat and drink for
strength, to fit you for the service of God and your Generation. Eccl. 10.17.
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and
not for drunkenness. 3. Eat and drink for the preservation of your health, not
to the prejudice of your health. Act. 27.34. I pray you to take some meat, for
this is for your health. 4. There is a Lawful delight in eating and drinking,
so it be used with moderation. Judge. 19.5. Comfort thine heart with a morsel of
bread, Psalm. 104.15. Wine that makes glad the heart of man. Eccl. 9.7. Go thy
way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now
accepts thy work. Only here be careful, that your delight in eating and
drinking do not transport you to excess therein, either to the dishonor of
God, or the unfitting your selves for the service of God, or the service of
your Generation, or the prejudice of health, for then it is sinful.
The observing these Rules will prevent your being overcharged with surfitting
and drunkenness.

. Being filled with the Spirit will prevent drunkenness; How we may be filled
with the Spirit?

9. Seek to be filled with the Holy Spirit, that will be a special help to keep
you from this sin of drunkenness. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine wherein is
excess, but be filled with the Spirit. The Apostle gives this direction to
prevent drunkenness, to be filled with the Spirit; Whereas he might have said,
thou bidst us not to be drunk with wine, but how shall we help it, he adds, be
ye filled with the Spirit. Temperance is a fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22.23.
The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Meekness, Temperance. -- Such as are filled
with the spirit, the spirit will teach and help them to be very temperate in
eating and drinking. Intemperance and other sins stick so close to us, and have
gotten such power over us, that they cannot be mortified but by the spirit of
God. Romans 8.13. If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body ye
shall live. There is no mortifying any sin but by the help of the spirit, and
with the help of the spirit we may be able to mortify all sin. Gal. 5.16. This
I say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.
Some might enquire what course shall we take that we may subdue the lusts of
the flesh, the Apostle directs to a ready way for getting power over all lusts,
and it is this, that we get and walk in the spirit; But some may say,

How shall we come to be filled with the spirit?

A. 1. By earnest longings, and servent Prayers to God to give us, yea to fill
us with his Holy Spirit. Luke 11.13. Your Heavenly Father will give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him. Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth, and I will fill it.
Psalm. 107.9. He satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry with
goodness.

2. By acting Faith on God's Promises, where he has promised to give his
spirit in an abundant and plentiful measure to us. The more full we are of
Faith, the greater fullness we shall have of the spirit. Act. 6, 5. They choose
Stephen, a man full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost. Now we have diverse
promises, wherein the Lord has promised to pour out his spirit richly and
abundantly upon us. Isa. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground. By water and floods, we are to understand a
plentiful effusion of the spirit, as the words following show us. I will pour
my spirit on thy seed -- See also Joh. 7.38, 39.

3. Be careful you do not quench nor grieve the Holy Spirit, after the Lord
has given any measure of it to you, either by the Omission of known duties, or
the Commission of known sins; For thereby you will hinder farther
Communications of the spirit.

But some may say, I am afraid God will not fill me with his Holy Spirit,
because I have been such a vile and sinful creature, though I should seek unto
him.

A. God through, and for the sake of Jesus Christ, will shed abroad his spirit
abundantly on those that have been vile and great sinners, if they turn to the
Lord, and make their supplication to him. Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof,
behold I will pour out my spirit unto you. This promise is made to such as have
been very great sinners, to such as loved simplicity, hated knowledge,
delighted in scorning, as we may see in the foregoing verse, yet even to these
upon their turning, God promises to pour out his spirit. See also Tit. 3.5, 6.
According to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior. These persons on whom God through Jesus Christ, did shed
abroad his spirit abundantly, had been great sinners, as we may see, ver. 3.
They were sometime foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another, yet on them for
Christ's sake the Lord did shed abroad his spirit abundantly.

. Putting on the Lord Jesus is a special help against drunkenness, and all
other sins; How we are to put on Christ.

10. If you would cast off this sin of drunkenness, put on the Lord Jesus
Christ for the putting on Christ, will help you to put off your drunkenness and
all your other sins. Romans 13.12, 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle does not bid us put
on temperance that we escape rioting and drunkenness, or put on chastity as a
remedy against wantonness, or put on love and peace as a remedy against strife
and envying, but as a remedy against drunkenness, and all the other sins, he
bids us put on the Lord Jesus Christ. The putting on Christ will help us to put
off drunkenness and all other vicious courses. But some may say what is it to
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and how and when may we be said to put on Christ?

Ans. 1. We put on Christ by faith, when we put on a garment we apply it to our
bodies, So we put on the Lord Jesus Christ, when we make application of him,
and his saving benefits to our souls Christ is to be put on not only for
justification from the guilt, but also for sanctification from the filth and
power of sin. For he has righteousness and holiness, merit and spirit for
sinners; wherein all that believe in him do communicate with him. This is
absolutely necessary for the mortification of this and all other sins, the
power of sin can never be subdued but by the power of Christ. Our old man must
be crucified with him, Romans 6.6. and through the spirit we must mortify the
deeds of the body, Romans 8.13. To him therefore must we look, and upon him we
must rely by faith for grace and help, to enable us to forsake and mortify our
sins. It is through faith in Christ that we obtain victory over our corruption,
1 John 5.4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. By
the world which is overcome by faith understand not only the men of the world,
but the lusts and corruptions which we are liable to, whilst we are in the
world. Now we have good encouragement to look to Christ and rely on him for
grace to help us against our lusts. For, 1. Jesus Christ was sent into the
world by the Father on purpose to bless us in turning us from our iniquities,
Act. 3.26. And we may warrantably rely on Christ for the giving us those
blessings which his Father sent him to beslow upon us. 2. Our Lord Jesus gave
himself to death for us that he might redeem us from the guilt and power of all
our sins, Tit. 2.14. who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And
we may warrantably rely on Christ for that blessing, which he has purchased
for us with his own blood. 3. Trusting and hoping in Christ is the way to be
redeemed from all our iniquities, Psalm. 130.7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord
-- And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

2. We put on Christ by imitation, when we make him our pattern and example,
resolving and endeavoring by the help of his grace to walk as he walked while
he was in the world, 1 John 2.6. It was one end of God's sending Christ into
the world to set us an example even in our own humane nature, Romans 8.29. Whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his
Son. And it is our duty to be followers of Christ, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me
for I am meek and lowly in heart, Joh. 13.15. I have given you an example that
ye should do as I have done, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me even as I also
am of Christ. Now Christ did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps; who did no sin. The
wicked Jews indeed maliciously slandered him, and said, Math. 11.19. Behold a
man gluttonous and a wine-bibber. But they laid to his charge things that he
knew not. And Christ challenged any of them to prove their charge. Joh. 8.46.
Which of you convinces me of sin? If then we thus put on Jesus Christ by
imitation, and warrant our practice by his example, we shall not make provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof which is the last direction.

Now the Lord (in whose hand the hearts of all men are) turn the eyes of
concerned sinners upon these lines, convince the guilty of the evil,
aggravations, and danger of this shameful, woeful, destroying, damning yet
abounding sin, stop the mouth of all pleas in excuse, or extenuation thereof;
and effectually persuade to a serious compliance with the counsel of God by
speedy repentance, and through reformation, that they may never-feel the
dreadful execution of the woe denounced.

[It appears by the Authors manuscript that he designed, had not death
prevented him, to have added hereto a narrative of the remarkable judgments of
God upon drunkards, with the use that ought to be made thereof.]

FINIS.

