Friends, and all People,
CConsider: Grieve not Gods Spirit, nor limit the Holy One; hurt not his
Anointed Prophets, do his People no harm; destroy not the Inheritance of God;
Afflict not the Righteous, neither stop your Ears at the Cry of the Oppressed;
neither root out the Saints of the Most High; take not away the Lives of the
Innocent and Just from the Earth; neither destroy the Inheritance of God; For
the Righteous that suffer, are blessed: Neither oppress the Meek of the Earth,
nor such as would live peaceably in the Land. Oh! be not a praise to the
evildoers, but a terror: Divide Justice and Judgment a-right; turn not
against them that fear the Lords Name; neither let the rude people break up
the Meetings of the Faithful, whose delight is in Virtue and Piety, and serving
the Lord. Think not to secure your selves by compelling the Lambs of Christ to
transgress his Commands, and so forcing them into Sin, Evil, and Condemnation;
and if you cast the Lambs of Christ into Prison, Christ says, They must go
into everlasting Flames of Fire that did not visit him in Prison; So consider
whither you must go in the end, that cast him into prison that wishes your
good: This we know, the wicked are sealed to perdition, and decreed for
Condemnation, Wrath, Woe, Plagues and Judgments.

Therefore let all men fear and tremble before the Most High God, for the
Righteous are sealed by the Spirit of Promise, to life everlasting. And this we
know, the Scriture says, That no Liar, Adulterer, Covetous, Idolater, has any
part or inheritance in the Kingdom of G^^ that is everlasting; and that all
Dogs, Liars, and unrighteous ones, and Wicked ones, have their part and portion
in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

And take heed again, because God has given you plenty, ease, fullness, and
blessings of the outward Creation and Creatures, if you turn these Mercies not
to a right End, the Mighty God of Heaven by his Arm and Power, may bring
Sickness, Plagues, and strange distempers amongst you; it cannot be otherwise
looked for: For what Swearing, Cursing, Wickedness, Violence, Pleasures,
Vanities, people are running into, which carries them to forget Gods Mercies;
Therefore they may look for the Plague. For look into both City and Country,
and see what strange Diseases and Distempers are falling among people, which
astonishes them that love God and goodness, who are always prepared for the
hand of Lord; and of it takes notice; and for the good of all people are their
desires and prayers.

Remember when you are on your Sick-beds, and Deathbeds, when torments,
miseries, and troubles, and anguish takes hold upon you for what you do, and
did against them that desire to live godly and righteously, and would offend no
one in truth and righteousness, but would do the Will of God, that is pleasing
in his sight, and keep in the Commands of Christ: And for this Cause do they
suffer by you (that be in prosperity) and the rude people.

And look how the Prisons are filled with the righteous and harmless ones; and
look how your streets are filled with Violence, and unprofitable talkers, and
fruits of Unrighteousness, that it is almost an hard thing for a sober man that
loves God and goodness, to walk them.

Oh how is Modesty banished, and Sobriety banished, and Virrue, and Goodness,
and Piety, out of the hearts of people! And how are they filled with derision,
scorn, mocks, threats, and reproaches, with which they load the innocent! Where
is the terror to Evildoers? Oh how is that wanting (to wit) Righteousness
running down the streets like streams! Oh where is the place now for the
Innocent, the Lambs of Christ, the Anointed ones to be found, but in Goals and
Houses of Corrections, Holes, Dungeons, lying on boards and straw, men and
women put together without the bounds of modesty; nor the liberty granted to
(several of) them, as to Murderers and Felons: Does this show the power of
Godliness that was amongst the Apostles in the primitive times? But oh! our
hearts are broken for you, that you might see your selves, and that you might
prise your time while you have it; and do say, The Lord lay not these things to
your Charge, which against us you have acted; And can say, Father forgive them,
they know not what they do: And can bear you record, You have a Zeal, but not
according to true knowledge: For the Apostles, and Christ, and the Churches in
the primitive times, their Zeal never led them to persecute any, as the Jews
and Cain did, amongst whom Christ's entertainment was in the Stable and Manger,
as ours is now in the Prisons and Dungeons; but we can suffer all these things
patiently. So the Lord lay not these things to your charge in the end, which if
he do, they will be heavy; for as it is said, It were better a Millstone were
hanged about their necks, and they cast into the Sea, then to offend one of
these little ones. We are friends to all your souls, and your eternal good, and
desire the everlasting good and happiness of all men upon the Earth, and would
that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

Amort Stodart, Bryan Wilkinson, John Feilder, Ellis Hooks.


DId not the Council of the Jews give heed unto Gamaliel's Counsel concerning
the Apostles, whose counsel was, If they were of God, they would stand; if not,
it would come to naught; and bid them take heed, lest they were found fighters
against God; And if it were of God, they could not overthrow it? And to this
moderate Gamaliel they all agreed, and set the Apostles at liberty. And
Gamaliel instanced to the Council, Theudeas and Judas of Galilee, which had
come to naught; therefore if the Apostles were not of God, they would not
stand. Oh that therewere such a Moderate spirit among the Christian Rulers, (so
called) and such a distinction as there was in this Gamaliel, who will rise up
in judgment against many that have not his Moderation and Patience; yet in
words profess themselves beyond Gamaliel; but of his life short, Acts 4.

Paul when he was questioned by the chief Captain, whether he was not that
Egyptian that led out into the wilderness the 4000. men that were Murderers,
then Paul declared he was a Jew; and the Captain did not hastily number him
among the Egyptian murderers, but suffered him to speak to the people; which
showed a Noble and Moderate Spirit, Acts 21.28. Oh that there was such a spirit
in them that call themselves Christians, who think themselves beyond this
Captain in words, but are short of his Moderation. Ananias, with the Elders,
and Tertullus the Orator, told Foelix, that they had found Paula pestilent
fellow, a mover of sedition; and yet the moderation of Faelix did not deliver
Paul into the Jews hands; and he found more moderation among the Heathen, then
he did of the great professing Jews; for the Jews could not prove those things
they accused Paul of; Neither can these things be proved against us, that we
are Plotters: and if we had but the Liberty that Paul had. All that are
Prisoners, and all our Accusers brought face to face before the Rulers, and let
us see what any one has against us; for it is below an English man and a
Christian, that so many should lie in Prison for the worship of God: And we
believe it is contrary to Law that so many should be sent to Prison, and kept
in Prison, without any Warrant or Mittimus, as there are now about two thousand
in prison, taken up out of their houses, streets and beds, many sober people
that desires to live godly and peaceably, whose lives and examples the world
cannot bear, though Religion they hold up by the same words that declare the
same life that we live in.

And as concerning Meetings, the Pharisees, the Sadduces, and the very Heathen
suffered the Christians in the primitive Times, to meet upon Hills, Mountains,
Highways, by the Rivers and Ships, as Paul did at Rome, where the Emperors
Seat was; he was suffered to preach two years together in his own hired house
among the Heathen; and Christ and the Apostles were suffered to meet from House
to House, and preach in Jerusalem among the Jews, though they met by thousands.
And the Church was in Aquila and Priscilla's House. And the Christians now,
that think themselves wiser, fuller grown, and of a greater age then the
Churches in the primitive times, cannot suffer the tender people of God to meet
in Houses now, but call it Heresy: Will not they rise up in judgment against
you, that suffered the Apostles to meet in that time, beyond whom you profess
your selves to be in words, but are short of their life?

And concerning Swearing, our yea is yea, and nay, nay; and if we be found
breakers of that, then let us suffer as for breaking an Oath; now it is
evident, that it is for Conscience Sake that we cannot swear at all: For many
hundreds of our Friends have been imprisoned, and suffered other wrongs,
because they could not swear in Oliver's days, and the other changeable Powers
since him, several Oaths being put to them: and what we promise unto the King,
he will find us more faithful to perform, then many that out of fear turn
under every Power, and swear to every Power.

Is now the Preachers preaching up Artaxerxes Decree (a Heathen King) for a
Gospel-Command among Christians, which was only to the Jews, for the building
their outward Temple: Oh that men should not blush to hear it! What, to banish!
What, to take away goods and lives from them that do not obey Artaxerxes
Decree! Might not Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles convince you? Did he not
rebuke the Zeal of such who would have fire to come down from Heaven to
consume such as were contrary-minded to him? And did not the Apostle say, they
wrestled not with flesh and blood? And did not Christ say, the Temple should be
thrown down that was set up by Artaxerxes Decree, and not one stone left upon
another? And did not the Apostles go into the Temple to bring people off from
the Temple, and tell them that the Most High dwelt not in Temples made with men's
hands, and that their bodies were the Temples of God? And was not Stephen
stoned to death for denying the Temple, and witnessing Christ the Substance,
Act. 7? Yea that Temple which was set up by Artaxerxes Decree, and them that
did not obey it, were to be hanged or banished, or goods taken away. So all
people may see that this was to the Jews from the Heathen, and not to the
Christians; and by this Doctrine you may justify that the Apostles did ill in
preaching the Name of Christ when the Council forbad them. And we do challenge
all the Priests in Christendom for to make it good, and give us an Example
where ever the Apostles, that came before Emperors, Kings, and Powers, that
preached up this for Gospel or Doctrine, or preached it among themselves that
were gathered into one body, into the faith and belief of Truth as it was in
Jesus, who came to save men's lives and give liberty, and not to spoil men's
goods; that was never preached up by Christ and the Apostles, but such as are
Ministers of the Law, and Heathens Decrees, and builders of the Jews Temples,
which the Apostles and Christ brought them off from Heathens Decrees, and the
Law, and the Jews Temples, and Types, and brought them to the substance
(Christ) and ended them.

And why do you not go and do the Jews work, if you be Jews, and build the
Temple; which thing does not belong to Christians, but to you that preach
Artaxerxes Decree; and you that preach that for Gospel, knows not what it is;
and preach from him, and not from Christ; and that people that are led by you,
are led into Heathenism; who build up that which Christ and the Apostle throw
down.

THE END.
London, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1660.


