Deceivers Deceived: OR, The Mistakes of Wickedness In Sundry Erroneous and
Deceitful Principles, practiced in our late fatal Times, and suspected still in
the Reasonings of unquiet Spirits.

Delivered in a SERMON At St. PAVL'S, October 20th 1661.

Before the Right Honorable ^ir Richard Brown Knight and Baronet, Lord Mayor
of the City of London; and the Aldermen his Brethren.

Being the Initial also of the Reverend Dr. John Berwick Dean of the said
Church: At the first Celebrity of Divine Service with the Organ and Choristers,
which the Lord Mayor himself Solemnized with his Personal presence from the
very beginning.

2 Timothy 3. 13. (...) evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived. LONDON: ^rinted for Henry Brom at the Gun in
Ivy-lane, 1661.

To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Brown Knight. and Baronet, Lord Mayor of the
City of London: with the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren. Grace,
Honor, and Peace, be multiplied.
Right Honorable and Worshipful,
THe nature of your Order for the pnblication in Print of this imperfect Piece
following, puts your subscribed in mind of a passage from Augustus to the Poet
Ausonius, Scribere me Augustus jubet and mea carmina poscit, Poene rogans. Your
Order might have been as well a Postulation or Demand, as a Desire; but you
seem therein like the most excellent Augustus, who expressed, in a like case,
more humanity and condescension, than Power toward his Poet, as you have done
unto your small Prophet or Preacher; he shall therefore humbly take leave to
presume (as the Emperor took the Poet and his Poem into Protection, it being a
product of his own favor and importunity) that your Lordship and Brethren also
will do the like unto your Preacher, and his Sermon, unto which your Honors
have given this Publick-being. Eadem est causa producens and conservans, is a
true rule of the great Mistress of Reason, Logic, That which gives Being,
conserves it; not but that the work of it self, as the Author humbly conceives,
is very much (...), or self-potestative, (...), or self-sufficient to warrant
is self, in the whole import thereof; it aiming at the preservation of our far
more excellent Augustus, and this his Royal City, and your Honorable persons,
and his and your dearest interests, Civil, Sacred, and Natural, together with
the whole Church and Nation, as it lays open (how weakly soever) those wicked
deceits of ungodly Godly men, which have and may again, by the same slights and
advantages of delusion, ruin all: but for that there can be no such natural
reciprocation of interest, as when a grateful issue in its dependence of
existence throws it self upon the principal Cause for patronage and countenance.

Your Preacher has observed the Order of your Hororable Court punctually in
the substance of the whole Discourse, and every part thereof, though not in
every word possibly, having not written it in order, form, or method; in which
respect, as he was fain to vary expression often in the delivery, so it must be
excusable in the Copy, but he is sure nevertheless this draught in Print
answers almost adequately the main exemplar in your memory, except, as afor
said, and a word or two sometimes of Transition perhaps, or Apology, or the
like; with an addition of one false Position, or deceitful Principle of sin
more, to complete the number of seven, that he might give you a perfect number,
at least of Particulars, though a number of Imperfections; and an Appendix
moreover unto the sixth. Which as to him it was not grievous, as St. Paul's
language is in another case, Phil. 3. 1. so to You and the Reader, he hopes, it
shall be both safe and profitable; the Deceit therein mentioned, communicating
to the advantages of Sin in all the seven, and may be a furtherance to any
fallacious imagination or deceitful practice proceeding from the corrupt heart
of men, viz. Spiritual senses and meanings of Scripture* contrary unto or
diverse from the Letter; whereby the Law of God it self therein written, which
is only transgrest, is wrested to justify transgression.

Both which Additionals had been spoken in the Solemn Audience, had not the
Preachers civility to your Honorable selves, and pity to the laborious crowd
below, time being spent, prevented him, and therefore he does not scruple your
acceptance thereof now, it being frequently exemplated in impressions of other
Sermons; Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim: and it is but like some
afterbirth or superfoetation that intellective Nature would be discharged of.

If any man shall scruple peradventure, that some passages of the Discourse
were too smart, he may remember that St. Paul was once upon the question,
Whether to come with a rod or no, 1 Cor. 4. v. last; and St. Jude advises a
way of saving some men by pulling them out of the fire, ver. 23. with terrors
or denunciations, or otherwise, as you may conceive, exprobations, And I know
not what sons of thunder should serve for in the Church, but to shoot
thunderbolts: and it is the barking dog, and that sometimes pincheth a little,
which drives straying sheep into their fold, and worries the Dogs of the
concision, i. e. evil workers of Schisms and Divisions.

Neither is any part of the style so severe and pungent, except against the
most monstrous and prodigious abominations and such actors thereof as we have,
to the affrightment of our memories, so deeply smarted by; or, such who are
still obdurate and impenitent in their disobedience, whom the Indemnity it self
favors not, and one passage of the Sermon has distinctly marked out, making a
difference of others according to St. Jude's counsel loco dicto. And of the
former sort, either there remain some, or not; if not, Who should complain? if
so, Who shall be displeased at the Authority of the Ministry, which is, to
rebuke sin before all, that others may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20?

The drift of he whole endevor in short was only this, Whereas many Deceivers
are entered into the World, 2 John 7. and many Delusions and Deceptions with
them, to the experimental woe of this Church and Nation, King and People; and
the same perilous principles of Deceivings, are by strong observation
discovered or much suspected amongst persons still disaffected, so as abundant
caution scarce suffices against them; but, according to the Drammatist in
Aulularia, Qui cavet ne decipiatur, vix cavet cum etiam cavet, He that takes
heed that he be not deceived, scarce takes heed enough when he takes the most;
That therefore, by a loyal Subject, and dutiful Son of the Church, the
fallacies might be retexed, and the people undeceived, the guilt of their
former horrible commissons lying still upon their souls before God without
Repentance, and by fresh actings will be more aggravate and accumulate even to
the endangering of their salvation which no temporal pardon or oblivion can
help them in.

It Is confessed much has been spoken by many worthy Pens and Preachers, to this
purpose before; but interspersly only and occasionally from mixtures of other
discourses, not in one method together as this, and therefore, you Right
Honorable especially have the greatest challenge of this Dedication for your
uncessant diligence and pains to your great peril also often, in discovering
and suppressing the practices and actors of these pernicious Deceits, as your
Epistler has done them in their Principles, who therefore makes bold to
conjecture that your Lordship had a Noble and Honorable ambition of enmity
against such deceitful wickedness, in taking an advantage even at the
expiration of your Government to check it for future, by making public to
posterity this draught of Arguments against it; as if you had a mind to combat
it by any kind of opposition though ne' re so weak as doubtless this little
Pamphlet must needs prove) when you can no longer rebuke it with the sword of
your Office which you now lay down.

Ever Honorable, to cease your further trouble by prolixity, as your Lordship
is remarkable by your unwearyed vigilance and prospection acted for the safety
of our King and Laws, Church and Nation, your humbly obliged shall leave you
and your Honorable Brethren with this only passage of Miltiades and
Themistocles in Plutarch: Miltiades had done excellenly for the good of his
City and Common-weath, for which he was rewarded with so many trephies of
Honor, as Themistocles afterward his successor could not sleep or rest
perfectly for dreaming, and continual incumbency of his thoughts and fancy,
upon the glorious Achievements of Miltiades, which at last he matched with his
own, May it so fall out 'twixt your Honorable self and Brethren, both your
present and your future successors, that they may never rest without thoughts,
and noble emulations of your famous acting for our King and Nation, and at last
add another parallel to Plutarchs, in becoming every one of them successively
as glorious in the peoples observation as your Noble self. And so may Wisdoms
blessing, Prove. 3. 16, 17. rest upon you all, Length of days be on your right
hands, and on your left hands Riches and Honor; your ways be ways of
Pleasantness, and all your paths be Peace. Which is the prayer of

Your Lordships and Honorable Assistants humble Servant in Jesus Christ, Sam.
Stone*

Deceivers Deceived: OR, The Mistakes of Wickedness.
PROVE. XIV. the latter part of the 8th Verse. -- But the folly of Fools is
Deceit.
THis particle [But] being discretive and so conjunctive, might occasion me to
take some notice of the connection; but, because that is not very usual in the
Proverbs, and the words themselves will afford us matter enough for our present
Exercise, I shall therefore consider them only absolutely without relation, The
folly of Fools is Deceit.

Folly and Fools are denominatives re and voce, the name and quality of the
one, derived from the other; every fool so called by his folly, and all folly
the quality of fools, and the meaning of this quality, wickedness; the Wisemans
fool here is a wicked man; he that knows not this, may very well be both. So
'twas in his Father David's language too, Psa. 14. 1. The fool that said in his
heart, There was no God, is presently expressed by corrupt and abominable works.
And in St. Paul's likewise, Tit. 3. 3. the disobedient and slaves to lust and
malicious, etc. are all prefac't by [fools]; We our selves were also foolish
and disobedient, etc.

Now if folly be sin, and fools sinners, the words afford us these two parts, a
Supposition, and a Proposition.

First, A Supposition in the denomination of the subject, Sin is folly, and
sinners are fools.

Secondly, A Proposition, by an attribution of a praedicate to this subject,
that is, Deceit; Sin or folly is deceit.

The Supposition, that sin is folly, and sinners fools, would afford us ample
meditation for this time: but because Deceit is a causal attribute unto sin,
and antecedent to folly; our first Parents being first deceived themselves,
before they became fools or sinners, and conveyed that appellation to
posterity; Deceit therefore shall first step forth, leading Sin in her hand:
Sin is deceit, and sinners are deceived, that is our Observation.

Sin is deceit, and sinners are deceived. So speaks Divine Wisdom here, and
it is seconded with Humane: Wisd. 4. 11. Lest wickedness should alier his
understanding, and deceit beguile his soul. Wickedness and Deceit are so
intrinsecal and complicate one with another, as they serve mutually to express
each other: or, if you would rather that the Divine voice should echo to its
self again, ye may have it in the forementioned of Titus 3. 3. where the
foolish and disobedient are rendered also deceived; We our selves were sometimes
foolish and disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, etc. the service of
lusts set off with deceit.

I shall proceed upon it for this present occasion only in two steps or degrees
of method.

1. In the manner of sins acting.

2. In the principles or reasonings of sin, whereby the slaves or servants
thereof are deceived.

First, that in the manner of sins acting, it is deceit. (...), said Clemens
Alexandrinus, The shadow or likeness is one thing, the reality and substance is
another. Now sin takes the shadow for the substance, the likeness for the
reality, and so commits her deceit.

Mendacique diu pietatis imagine fallor, Said the wanton Sister in the Poet.
She complained that she was deceived a long time under the lying likeness of
Piety. Thus does the Prodigal deceive himself under the show of Liberality, and
the Covetous man of Thrift, and the Intemperate in the free use of the
Creature, and the Proud man under a color of Magnanimity, and the foolish
Dueller in a mistake of Valor: and thus through this nearness of likeness in
appearance betwixt good and evil, Christian Liberty is turned into
Licentiousness; Christian Affability and Courtesy, into base prostitute
Flattery; Laudable Ceremony, into Superstition; Love into Lust, Recreation into
Voluptuousness, Feasting into Luxury, Decency of Apparel into Gaudery, Dominion
into Tyranny, Subjection into Slavery, Faith into Fancy, Hope into
Presumption, Zeal into Fury, Godly sorrow into worldly, and necessary Humility
into voluntary; thus says Clemens again, (...), speaking of Virtue and
Goodness; They are deprived, says he, (meaning Erroneous sinners) thereof,
being robbed, or gulled, and cheated, as if bewitched, and so deceived. If I
have walked with vanity, or my feet have hasted after deceit, Job 31. 5. Deceit
and Vanity so near together, that the same Stride gathers them both. And so
much for the manner of the deceit of sin.

Secondly, Sin is deceit in the Principles, or Reasonings, or Imaginations in
the hearts of sinners, which the power of the spiritual Militia casts down, 2
Cor. 10. 5. That such deceitful reasonings were always in the thoughts and
communications of the sons of men, appears not only by the Prophet Jeremiah,
Chap. 17. 9. The heart of man is deceitful above all things: but, by the many
caveats St. Paul gives in sundry places, Be not deceived; and particularly in
the 2d Chap. of the Colossians, ver. 4. Let no man beguile you with enticing
words, which is expressed, ver. 8. by Philosophy or vatn deceit. Philosophy, you
know, is a form of reasoning; but, whereas it is expressed by deceit, we are not
to understand thereby (by the way) those good habits of the mind, which serve
as Handmaids to dress up their Mistres Divinity, and set her off with a more
comely aad affecting beauty, but as Clemens again, (...), (...), etc. The
Apostle, says he, means not all Philosophy, in that place, but only the
Epicurean, that destroyed Providence, and deifyed Pleasure, making that a God;
denying the Resurrection, and any future state of Being, etc. Which divination
of the Fathers, I am the more inclinable unto, as most probable, by comparing
with 1 Cor. 15. 32, 33. ver. where giving the same Caveat, Be not deceived, he
presently infers, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; which being
a Principle once brought to communication, was evil and deceitful, and
corrupted good manners. But this Principle being not, as I hope, familiar in
the thoughts and practices of men of our times, I shall not insist upon, nor
yet others leading unto sin more generally; my whole business therefore shall
be at this time, to evince the deceit of such Principles or Reasonings only as
have deceived the Foolish and Disobedient of our late dismal Times, when as
wickedness broke out like fire, in the Prophet Isaiahs phrase, Chapter 9. 18. and
devoured not only the shrubs and Cedars of our Lebanon, but even the Royal Oak
himself. For prevention of which, and the like mischiefs hereafter,
occasionable possibly by the same deceitfulness of men's thoughts through such
dangerous Principles, which are shrewdly suspected to lie latent in the hearts
of discontented parties, as may seem by the daily jealousies of plotts and
rumors of plotts: how true though I leave to Authority to find out, yet not
knowing how to conceal my fears, have made it my work for the remainder of my
hour to retexe the fallacies, or mistakes of most of their destructive
reasonings, lest wickedness should afresh conceive, and pregnate, and break
forth, and bring forth more swords, and firebrarnds amongst us. Wherein,
howbeit, I cannot but preface this serious protestation that I mean not any
upbraidment or insulting over men's weaknesses, or ignorances; but to convince
their Consciences and tender the good of their Souls, as well as the safety of
our dear and precious King and Nation. To proceed then,

1. The first false position, or principle of deceit whereby Wickedness has
been much heightened, and improved, and may be again, is good Meanings, or good
Intentions, as you may remember that scandal of the Law, who prepared for the
Kings Trial Cook.
and Murder: said at his Execution, he had good Intentions; And so may we
believe of those last vile, ignorant, and public Murderers, who pretended
that their business was to prepare the way for the coming of Christ in his
Kingdom; Thus if men have caught but a good Meaning by the end, as, for the
Glory of God, the reformation of Religion and Laws, the suppression of Vice and
Tyranny, or the like, they think that then their actions are lawful and
righteous though never so cross to the Laws both of God and Man.

But such men I desire to take notice of that good meaning, John 16. 2. Where
Christ foretold, That some should murder his Apostles with a thought of doing
God service. See what a fair meaning here was in a most ugly hellish Sin! Could
that meaning think you excuse them? Let them observe also the meaning of St.
Peter, Matthew. 16. 22. Where ye may read, That Peter would by no means consent
that his Master should dye: this was seemingly as fair a good meaning as can be
imagined, for an honest loving Servant to wish the life, and well-being of his
dear good Master; But, mark ye, the Devil himself could not have wished us a
greater mischief than that Christ should not have dyed, for then we and all the
World besides had been damned in Hell. What a monstrous wicked good meaning was
this; Christ calling his chief Disciple Devil-for't? And let them consider one
good Meaning more, to wit, of the Jews, who crucified the Lord of Life, under a
good meaning of zeal for the Law of Moses, and their ancient customs, Sub zelo
legis odium latebat Legislatoris, Here was the greatest wickedness that ever
was acted in the World, carried on, under a good meaning for the Law.

Now this being well remarked, I would ask of all those who were guilty of the
late Defection, or rather Rebellion indeed (for howsoever policy covers it with
a term of indulgence, and calls it only inconvenience, yet the Pulpit may not
so, we are bid Cry aloud and spare not, and lift up our voices like Trumpets,
and tell the House of Juda their transgressions, and Israel their sins: Which
we cannot do unless we call every thing by it is own distinctive name, a spade
a spade, Rebellion Rebellion, a Rebel a Rebel; except those in whom the Grace
of Repentance is visible by their contrary actings and retractations (for all
whom there is both joy in Heaven, and that, and honor also upon earth): but as
for others who retain their old guilt before God, having never repented their
abominations, but nourish their old principles of impiety under phansied good
meaning so as to be ready to act over the same wickedness again; of those I
say I would demand; Suppose they had lived in the time of the Jews, and had
concurred with them to the murdering of Christ, and his Apostles with the same
good meanings also that the Jews had, whether they could think themselves any
whit excusable by those good meanings more then the Jews? if not (as we are
sure, they can not, they having equally concurred in the sin, by the
supposition, and therefore are equally liable in guilt, for which the Jews are
punished in their posterity to this day) the question then will be, How; or why,
they should conceive themselves excusable, or justifiable by their good
meanings now, in or after the commission of such horrible iniquities as Heaven
and Earth blush at, being in their whole latitude of circumstantial
aggravations of as great, or rather greater criminableness than the crucifixion
of Christ himself (setting aside the disproportion of the Object as Christ was
God, and therein infinite) and more intensely, and accumulately wronged? What?
Can it enter the heart of any knowing Christian to believe, that so slight a
thing as good meanings should justify such abominations, as all the Miseries
and Impieties of a voluntary; unnatural, and rebellious War, which swept away
Myriads of innocent Christians, and good Subjects, and afterward One, like
David, worth ten or a 100000 thousand of them, the dear and precious anointed
of the Lord himself?

No, beloved, good meanings avail nothing, in such prodigious Wickedness at
least: Though a bad meaning may make a good action bad; yet, good meanings can
never make a bad action, good Quid, furemur divitibus ut demus pauperibus?
says St. Augustine, Shall we steal from the Rich to give unto the Poor?
There Is a Meaning good enough, but a Means every whit as bad. St. Bernard
therefore teaches us better, As there must be Charitas in intention; so there
must be Veritas in electione, says he, A choice of true and proper means, for
every true and genuine end. Because we creatures are not immediate and
complicate with our end, as God is, who himself is his own End; but we are at a
distance from our end, and therefore must consult and deliberate upon the
choice of our means in order thereunto, which are most proper, suitable, and
lawful for attainment: He that thinks, in the use of unlawful means or actions,
with them to attain the scope of righteousness, and happiness therewith, is
like one, as a late Writer wittily similizeth, That rowles himself upon a bed
of thorns to sleep easily; or, that sets his face to the East to go to bed with
the Sun in the West; which are mere impossibilities and repugnances. Beloved,
Good works will be in heaven, to the eternal glory of their Author; when as
evil works, for all their good meanings, will be in hell, without Repentance,
to the eternal shame of their Actors. To conclude this, as he cannot well be
thought to mean ill, who does well; so, nor he likely so much as to mean well,
who resolves and continues to do ill.

And therefore, my brethren, since good meanings are so slight an excuse for
wicked actions, no better than the ignorance of the Law, whence they proceed,
and justifies no man; let all those that have followed the sin of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, not only in the calves of Bethel, but
also in dividing from the Crown of Juda; let them all seriously bethink
themselves, and repent betwixt God and their souls, and strive to become
pricked in their hearts with remorse, as were the Jews, notwithstanding all
their good meanings, lest, under the security they have by the indemnity
temporal of their Lives and Estates, they hazard the salvation of their souls,
being no power temporary can indemnifie a soul.

And let all such beware further, who are still feeding upon the old leaven of
Malice and Wickedness, whereby they nourish unto themselves discontents and
murmurings in their Tents against Moses and Aaron because they are whipped a
little while longer with the rods of their own making, and stung with the tails
of those Scorpions hatched by their own Cockatrice Eggs: Let them, I say, beware
how they adventure upon such odious and perilous actions again, under a conceit
of doing lawfully by their good Meanings; for, believe it, they will prove no
better then that in Daniel, Mean mean tekel upharzin: being weighed, they will be
found too light, when the handwriting of judgment is upon the wall against
them.

A second deceitful Principle is, Following a godly party; whereof I take
occasion to speak, from a passage of mine own experience; for being consulted
once in point of conscience, by a person of a considerable quality, a little
after the beginning of the late Miseries, Whether he might lawfully and with a
safe conscience, take one of the Rebellious Oaths or Protestations? And I
having answered him in the Negative, that he might not do it with a safe
conscience; He replied, That he would hold with the godly and praying Party;
and so took it. And indeed this was the vulgar Error of England, at that time,
to follow those who had the most plausible shows of godliness in outward
appearance beyond others, and by advantage thereof, gave the Conduct and
Clarigation to the fatal War.

Now to this I shall discourse, that however Religion be indeed the best
practice in the world, and to follow a Godly or Religious party, be the best
also for a man's imitation, caeteris paribus, all things equally considered, Be
ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, says St. Paul; but nevertheless,
without much heedfulness and circumspection, there may be great deceit in it.

For first, I would know of such people, who Godly party it is they would fain
follow? If they mean, by the Godly party, such as place their Religion in
Whimzies, and Humors, and Singularities, and Curiosities, and Phansies, and
Affectarions, in Mimick mouths, and Antic faces, in Canting phrases, and
Affected Graces, in Twinkling of the eyes, and Ronching of the nose, in long
Prayer, and short hair, which ye know was the guise before the Troubles; though
now, it is but the character of a Quaker, or scarce that; in flashes of Zeal, and
mazes of the Spirit, in length and quantity, rather than in quality and
perfection of Duty, in rude anhelous pantings, and interrupt breathings at
Devotion, in passionate interjections, and extempore imperfections, and as many
Ah Lord's, as the Papists have Ah Lady's at their Ave Mary's; in outside
austerity and abstinence from Indifferencies; as, from the Lot in Recreation,
and from Ceremony in Religion; in taking down a stone-bason, and setting up a
pewter-bason; or, taking it from the Church door, and setting it at the
Ministers Pew door; in taking down a Saint-holyday, and setting up a
Parliament-holyday; in ceasing to feast for the Birth of Christ, and feasting
rather for the dea h of Christians, and many such like. If such be the Godly
Party, whom any people would follow, we all know that this is the Party who
have deceived this poor Church and Nation, into all the mischief and ruin it
has suffered: this is a Godly Party with an amusement, enough to make Religion
and Godliness it self ridiculous and contemptible, in the observation of wise
and indifferent men, even Pagans themselves; and therefore, to follow such a
Godly Party must needs be deceit.

Secondly, Put case the Godly Party, to be followed, deceit; because the spirit
of Error is apt to insinuate and creep into the best Societies of men in the
World. Fas ergo est aliqua, Coelestia pectora fatli. There was folly found in
the Angels, and chafe in the first floor Christ ever laid, which if he with
his fan inhis hand, had not purged out of their hearts, Satan himself would
have winowed them as wheat. So shall you see the cleerest streams, stained with
a vein of puddle; the purest pupil moated; the most radiant Stars dimmed with
the steams of Terrene vapors; so the most eminent in place of action found of
Error; the very Pillars of the Church sometimes chinckt in with some stones of
offense. Errare p^ssum, says St. Augustine, he might Err, he confessed; only
would not be an Heretic. The High Priest may have the Urim and Thummim on his
breast, but neither the one in his head, nor the other in his heart. I know no
promise of Infallibility universal, except to the Churchuniversal, as
comprehending all Persons, Times, and Places, as Chillingworth gives it; or,
unless to the Apostles themselves, and that too, as they acted their Supreme
Apostolic Commission, not otherwise; for St. Peter and St. Paul were at a
contradiction, and both parties could not have the right; and Paul and Barnabas
were at a contention. The Spirit of truth shall guide you into all truth, was
the Promise of Christ; He that said it, is as true as his Word, but well
understood, not in the whole circumference of the Terms, but in the limitation
of the Sense; All truths fundamental, the essential constituents of a Church,
the Spirit of Christ has promised to lead his Church into. And so he does, for
the Church is the Pillar of Truth, and the foundation of God stands sure; but
as for other truth's of analogy, inference and remote consequence, that like
backer houses, show not at first sight, in the building of faith; into such
truth's as these, the Spirit of Truth, has not promised to lead us: but
sometimes leaves us to the spirit of Error, who does his best to do his worst,
and deceive those that believe. Instance whereof you may take in the most
glorious Church of Christendom, this of England, whom the old Dragon, according
to his use of persecuting the Woman into the Wilderness, has endeavored to
bring (in our late days of Tribulation) into contempt and disgrace, in the
view of the whole World; and to that end had insinuated such mischievous
Delusions, into the two chief Parties of her most considerable interest, after
once divided, as the most remarkable in their own thoughts, and their Disciples
admiration; for strictness and severity of life, were grossly misled into the
foulest miscarriage imaginable, as to their Politics in the case of Subjection
and Government. On the other side, they which were most regular and best
principled in understanding of Government and Learning, were not altogether,
some of them, in men's observation, so perfect in their Morals as they should
have been; and therefore, to conclude, in both respects aforesaid, to follow a
Godly Party may be deceitful, although caeteris paribas, all things equally
considered, A Godly party, especially truly godly, is best imitable with Wisdom
and Circumspection, but not simply and absolutely. So much for the second
deceitful Reasoning whereby Wickedness has been much improved.

A third Principle of deceit, whereby wickedness a reasoning from contraries;
as in case some person or persons do act wickedly in their way, that therefore
others acting the quite contrary, shall be allowed and warranted as righteous
in what they do, because contrary. Which seems indeed to carry some
reasonableness and probability with it, it being backed with a show of Logic,
Contrariorum contraria sunt consequentia, Of contraries there are contrary
consequences. And so in Physic, Contraria contrariis curantur, Evils in men's
bodies are remedied by their contraries. And in Philosophy likewise, Contraria
mutuo se pellunt, Contraries expel one the other. But nevertheless, this kind
of Reasoning is most deceitful without wary distinguishing.

To which purpose we must distinguish; there is a contrariety natural, and
contrariety moral.

The contrariety natural, is first betwixt the Elements, as Fire and Water,
which are mutually destructive one of the other; and much like are the extremes
of Virtue, as Avarice and Prodigality, to instance in no more, which are as
inconsistent and expellent of each other, as Fire and Water, and therefore I
call them Contraries natural; for though as they stand in opposition to the
mean which is Virtue, they are morally contrary; yet as in contra-distinction
of one to the other, they are but natural Contraries.

There is also another contrariety called moral, as before; that is, betwixt
the Extremes and the Mean, alias Virtue, which I call Contraries being
opposite, as Good and Evil moral, they differing as much as Wisdom and Folly,
which we all know to be contrary; the mean, which is Virtue, being acted by
Wisdom, according to Aristotle in his his Ethics, (...), and the extreme by
Folly.

Now to apply this Distinction.

If men shall reason the lawfulness of their actions, by practicing the sense
of Contraries natural or exteme, or running from one extreme to another, they
are foully deceived.

In vitium ducit culpae fuga, si caret Art: (says the Poet) The declining of
one Vice incurs another, if done without Prudence, which governs all virtuous
actions; howbeit to decline one Contrariy in a moral sense, and turn to the
other; that is, from Vice to Virture, from Evil to Good, from Sin to
Righteousness, is a rational and wise practice, otherwise false and deceitful;
As for instance: some men are lewd and vicious in their lives and
conversations, breaking all the rules of virtue; others therefore presuming to
themselves safety and lawfulness in their actions by running into an extreme
distance from them, desire to avoid them in whatsoever they do, although they
are as good politically as to the government and laws of a Nation (according to
Aristotle that Malus vir, may be Bonus Civis, an evil man in manners may be a
good Subject o his Prince) as they are bad morally; whence follows separations,
divisions, and contentions betwixt them, and thereupon occasionally civil
dissentions and war too even against the Prince himself, because the contrary
in vice is for the Prince in Loyalty, Sic vitant stulti vitia; This is the
contrariety of fools, and practisers of extremes.

The Church of Rome maintains good works as causall and meritorious in the
point of Justification, others therefore French, and Germane Divines, thinking
truth on their side, by a quite contrary judgment, have gone so far from them
into the extreme, as not to allow any good work at all before Justification,
albeit so confessedly necessary for the qualification of Faith itself, in her
existence and operation. Sic vitant stulti vitia. This is the contrariety of
extremes.

The Church of Rome setts forth so many Ceremonies, as amount to Superstition:
some therefore of our side, to avoid that, would have no Ceremony at all; and
so dis-robe the Church of all her external decentials, and badges of
Antiquity. Sic vitant Stulti vitia; This is the contrariety of Fools.

The Church of Rome establishes as many Holydaies almost as days, and
therefore our wise Assemblers and Religionists of late would have no Holydaies
besides the Sabbath at all; not so much as for the Celebration of the Nativity
of Christ himself. Sic vitant stulti vitia. This is the contrariety of Fools.

The Church of Rome patter over their forms, of Pater Noster, and Ave-Maries,
and so many empty slight Collects, as a wise Christian can sense it no better
then mere superfluity: others therefore would have no form of Prayer at all, no
not so much as the Common Prayer it self, though it be the very Characteristick
of our Church of England, to distinguish it from other Protestant Churches. Sic
vitant stul^i vitia; This is the contrariety of Extremes.

Some practice the Sabbath as not keeping it at all, without any observation of
duty all the day long; others therefore would be seem in declining this
extremity to keep it without any intermission of duty from morning, until deep
at night: as if the Lords day which by the practice of all the Churches is a
festival, a day of joy, and to be called our delight, says the prophet Isai,
c. 58. 13. Exodus 31. 17. and a refreshment says Moses, explayning rest as if
such a day should be more onerous or burdensome then a Fast, or as if the
perfection of holiness should consist in length, and quantity, which is a known
property of imperfection; or as if purity of reformation (whereof this of the
sabbath they most ostentate) should be seen chiefly in a likeness unto Jews in
their Devotion, as they were too much like them in the late Kings, The Lords
anointed, decollation, Sic vitant stulti vitia; This is the contrariety of
extremes. Which together with the premises shows, the Principle of reasoning
from contraries, to be foolish, and deceitful.

A fourth deceitful Principle of wickedness, whence Prosperum Scelus Virtus
Vocetur. Wickedness must be new Christened, and called a Virtue; As the late
Rebellion was called the Good old Cause; nay God himself was invited to be the
Godfather to it and 'twas called the Cause of God: for the promotion whereof,
Religion it self deformed by policy was fain to play the Hypocrite and mocked
God with Thanksgivings for his blessing upon the Enterprise, and his wonderful
mercy in the Success; and Prayer, and Fasting too, did take their turn to
implore divine assistance for the further carrying on, and maintenance of the
Prodigy. God himself being thus entitled both Father and Author thereof. The
deceitfulness of which reasoning appears sufficiently in this, That the very
Turks themselves from the same Argument may plead the cause of Mahomet, and
justify their Tyranny, and Usurpation over half the World almost; and so ye
know had Popery spread over all Christendom for many hundred years, and is yet
successful over a great part thereof: Yea sin it self after it had once
entered, prevailed over all the World; which I hope no man will be so wretched as
to impute to God as the Author thereof, howbeit it had success enough as to it
self as well as Mahometism and Popery. He that rates the righteousness and
lawfulness of actions by their coming to effect, or their success by men's
prospering in them, may very well allow the Atheists Argument in Martial,
Calius byname, who would prove there was neither God, nor Heaven, Quod se
videt, dum negat haec, beatum, because he prospered in that opinion. But what
virtue soever there might supposedly have been in this Argument of success
during the time of Wickedness, what strength has it, now that Monster of
Iniquity, which gave being to so much fatal success is quite cut off, Branch,
and Root, head and tail, Carcass and Rump, and those Vermin that crawled out
from her poysonons bowels are left to rot in their own stanch and contagion?
The memory of the wicked shall rot, says Solomon; I and their members too, say
I. And may they rot and repent in misery, and shame if they could the
impudence, and ignorance of such lewd reasoning, as from the Event and a little
temporary Success to justify the greatest abominations that ever were done
(one only excepted) upon the face of the earth: the Poet's curse therefore is
now upon them; Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu fact^ notanda putet,
For arguing so wickedly, and deceitfully from success, never to have success
more; for what success do they deserve who make void the Law of God, which
should be the rule of all actions, and measure them by events or effects, as
results of Gods Will in Decree, in the bringing whereof to pass, their hands
and counsels chiefly being instrumental, they think they have done well, and
are the only Servants of the Almighty; not considering that men slighting the
revealed Will of God in his written Word, which they are only bound to observe;
for, Vivendum secundum Precepta, non secundum decreta; The will of Gods
Commandments must be our rule, not of his Decrees, which are unknown, Things
revealed belong to us and our children, that we may do all the wards of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 29. ult. whereas secret things belong unto the Lord only, verse the
same; not considering this, I say, but presuming into the secrets of the
Almighty, to unravel and measure out the mysteries of his Decrees, and resolve
them by their own phansies, they little think, that whereas good men do the
known will of God to their Salvation, wicked men, such as themselves, may
perform the secret will of God to their Damnation, as the wretched Jews
crucified the Lord of Life to their everlasting confusion, albeit he was
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, Act 2. 23. And
as the Assyrian was the Rod of Gods indignation to punish a hypocritical
Nation, but afterward thrown into fire, Isa. 10. And Pharaoh's obstinacy
served for the magnification of Gods Name and Power over all the Earth, Romans 9.
17. whiles himself was therefore drowned in the Red Sea, and became a Type of
Reprobates in Hell: Let no man therefore hereafter deceive himself with this
false imagination of lawfulness in his action, because eventually it is or may
be successful, and being brought to pass, may seem to answer unto the Purpose
and Decree of God, that God would so have it. For there is no more warrant of
lawfulness from such a plea, than for a Sons wishing his Fathers death,
because, it so falling out, his wish concurred with the secret will of God who
had determined the Fathers days.

So much for discovery of the fourth Deceit.

Joseph into Egypt, brought upon themselves a necessity of concealing their
wickedness from Jacob, with the shift of a lie; the like did Gehezi to his
Master Elisha; so when the conspiracy of Achitophel and Absalom had broken out
into open rebellion, their counsel found it no less than necessary to make
short work on it, and murder good King David; and not long afterward, Jeroboam
to make good the defection of the ten Tribes of Juda, saw a necessity of
changing the true Worship of God into Idolatry, setting up a new mode of
Worship and Priesthood at Bethel for the Peoples resort thereunto, lest holding
the same uniformity of Religion, they might return again to the same unity of
Government and affection at their anniversary meetings in their Royal City
Jerusalem: Such was that Doctrine of Devils taught by our English Regicides,
who conscious to themselves of that inexpiable wrong they had done unto their
good King, and that his displeasure therefore might be implacable, dispairing
also least every one of his friends where they met them should fall upon and
kill them, concluded to make a short work of it, with the Mode necesse to cut
off his head, and for their better security in this dismal wickedness, they
found it further necessary to destroy the very foundations of the Righteous,
turning all things topsie turvie, and trampling under foot all Laws both of God
and Man, and changeing the whole Fabric of Government both Ecclesiastic and
Civil.

But now what a pitiful and wretched deception is this, as if there were any
necessity of sinning; belike then according to the Modal Aequipollence in
Logic, Quod necesse est esse, impossible est non esse, If it be necessary to
sin, by consequence it is impossible not to sin; and so God should command his
creatures impossibilities in commanding them to abstain from sin, which grossly
imposes upon his infinite Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness; for we all know, and
are well assured of, a necessity of repentance in case of sin committed; Go thy
ways, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee, was the counsel of
Christ himself: and David's likewise, God shall wound the hairy scalp of such
as go on still in their wickedness, as he has wounded the hairy scalp of many
of them to your knowledge already, and mounted them aloft to be spectacles
ofhis indignation to the world, notwithstanding their pretended necessities for
what they so impiously acted; and therefore whosoever hereafter being warned by
such examples, shall embolden themselves under the same conceit or confidence
of necessitatelawfulness in their wicked proceedings, I shall leave them under
the Apostles curse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. They shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived, from one degree of vileness they shall grow to another, sin
being of a progressive and propagating nature, till at last they come to
induration and occaecation, their hearts will be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. and so after their hardness and impenitency
of hearts treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.
5. And therefore again, Let not the man of violence that has oppressed and
taken away a house which he builded not, Job 20. 19. deceive his soul with a
pretense of lawfulness, under conceited necessity of keeping what he has
extortingly gotten for his necessary maintenance; for, in such a case, Non
minus est vitium, quam quaerere, parta tueri, he sins as much in keeping, as in
getting unjustly, or rather more: Zachaeus his practice would better become
him, to restore fourfold; or else for his covetousness he may gain Gehezi's
advantage to boot, a Leprosy both upon Body and Soul: and what a sad cozenage
and deceit does he therein put upon himself in gaining the World to lose his
Soul?

A Sixth deceitful principle or erroneous reasoning and vain imagination of
wicked men is a persuasion grounded only upon a conceit of being led forth and
forward in their actions by the Spirit, which they phansy betwixt a good
meaning perhaps and a pang ofblind zeal, and an abhorrence also of some
external vices, and a show of outward austerity, and a devotion of their own
way, that looks much like holiness it self, and whereby they conceit
themselves to be the only beloved, accepted, and acquainted with God, and
consequently all the stirrings and imaginations of their vain deceitful
hearts, to be the very motions and impulses of Gods holy Spirit himself, the
conduct whereof they do and will follow, not only without the warrant but
contrary unto the express letter of Scripture, and so commit the greatest
enormities in the World, Murder, Treason, Perjury, Sacriledg, Persecution of
the Lords anointed, his Princes and Nobles, his Priests and Prophets, and the
most wise and righteous of his people; and justify themselves therein, as
doing God service, and furthering his Glory, by seeonding the secret movings
and impulses of his Spirit; Counting it also their Calling extraordinary, as
the wretched Murderers reasoned for their fearful execution of our late Lord
and King, deceiving their perverse minds, by not distinguishing the motive and
directive part of every moral and humane action; There is the directive part
of the actions of man as well as the motive and impulsive, otherwise mere motion
and impulse might serve the turn, but not as direction is also required; Now
for the direction of a man in any action of his life to be accounted for, there
is no other Rule but the Word of God, Psalm* 119. 195. Thy Word is as a Lamp
unto my feet, and a light unto my paths, and verse 130. The entrance of thy
Word gives light, and Psalm. 19. 8. The Commandments of the Lord are pure,
enlightening the eyes, and by them is thy Servant warned, verse 11. So Isa. 8.
20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them; no light, no direction, no
instruction, no warrant, measure, or rule for what they do or speak if done or
said contrary to this written Word, which is the abstract or summary of the
whole Law of God both natural and reveald, and necessary for direction in all
cases of action moral, both natural, and supernatural; either in terms,
analogy, or inference: and therefore for any man to pretend an impulse, or
motion, from some spirit only, however fancied, or conceited to be of God
himself, yet without allowance of this his word, he acts but by half a
principle, to wit without the guiding and directive part, and so has no help
or conduct at all of the good Spirit; Who moves no man contrary to the rule of
his own word, more then the Penman does the hand of his Scholar contrary to
his own Copy, but altogether according, for else the Learner shall never write
up to it. And no more can any man whatsoever answer the form of Righteousness,
or Lawfulness, in any of his actions that forsakes his copy, or rule, he
should be guided by; That is, the written word of truth, which is the only
trial of every Spirit, and of every motion, and impulse, whether of God or no.
He that knows God hears us, says St. John, 1 Epist. 4. 6. And he that is
not of God hears not us; and hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the
Spirit of error; That is, by their agreement, or disagreement unto the words
preached by St. John and the rest of the Apostles, which were spoken and
written for our instructions, and delivered down unto us, and now with the
other books of Holy Oracle are called Scripture or the written Word of God; The
light and guidance whereof whosoever refuses, to follow the conduct of some
pretended Spirit only diverse or contrary to it; Instead of being led by the
Spirit of God, doubtless he is led by the Spirit of the Devil, as I make no
question those late wretched public Murderers were (whom the Right Honorable
the present Lord Mayor had the Lot under Gods grace and providence to
suppress, to his monumental honor; the trophie whereof be his unto all
posterity), I say, they were not led by the Spirit of God, but by the Spirit of
the Devil, as indeed some said, They fought like Devils, Men had as good
follow those spirits the Prophet Isa. speaks of in the forementioned Chapter,
oppositely unto the Law, and the Testimony: Spirits that peep and mutter, that
is, spirits of witches, and wizards, with whom it may be doubted that these
spirit-people are too familiar. I shall superadd to this particular but one
plain Similie of a blind metled horse let loose, which by reason of his metal
will be ever prauncing, and frisking up and down, till at length he getts upon
the top of a steep bank or precipice, and from thence for want of his sight,
down he tumbles and breaks his neck; And such verily will be the end of all
blind zealots who shut their eyes against the light, and direction of Gods
word, and right Reason, to follow, in the heat and metal of their zeal, bare
motions and impulses as pretended from some Spirit; However in their conceits
and imaginations divine, they will certainly, before they are aware, fall at
last upon some lewd unreasonable wicked practice or other, that will break the
neck of all their reputation both in Christianity, and Civility, and without
mercy upon their repentance, throw them down headlong the precipice of Hell;
St. Paul therefore shall conclude, Let no man hereafter deceive you neither by
Word, nor Letter, nor Spirit, 2 These. 2. 2.

Which two words of the Apostle [Letter and Spirit] mind me of the Appendix
mentioned in the Dedication; Letter and Spirit having in the terms, a very fair
connection with the literal and spiritual sense of Scripture; whereby,
notwithstanding what has been said against the blind motion and impulse of a
Spirit, some Mistakers conceiving themselves wiser and more defensible than the
former, do warrant themselves in their wicked actions, not only in Politics,
but Morals also, from the sense and spiritual meaning of the Word of God
itself; as if upon conviction, by the former Reasoning, what they may not do by
a bare impulse or motion, they may nevertheless do in their thoughts by a
spiritual meaning of the written Word, the rule whereof they seem not to
refuse. But this also, Beloved, is a very fallacious imagination, which I shall
desire to Discourse by way of reduciblenesse as an Appendix unto the great
deceit of Conduct by the Spirit last confuted; and to that purpose do observe
that a spiritual Meaning or sense of Scripture opposite unto, or diverse from,
the sense of the Letter, is very destructive, and deceptive of foolish sinners,
such as St. Peter calls unstable and unlearned, such as are apt to wrest the
Scriptures, not only to their own, but others destruction also, even whole
Churches, Nations, and Kingdoms, as well Kings as their People; may whereof
there are, who taking upon them a boldness, through this persuasion, to wave
the sense of the Letter of the written Word, where the Commands of God agree
not to their humors, engagements, and inclinations, they adventure to sense
the text only to their own thoughts and purposes, though never so contrary to
the most righteous laws both of God and Man; and, in a policy of avoiding
discovery herein (it sounding harsh unto the most ingenuous sort of Christians,
that the plain meaning of the World should be slighted and baffled) they boast
most of all in their Spiritual Light, of an easy and clear understanding, and
thereafter expound it of the most mysterious hidden and intricate places of the
whole book of God, as the Revelation, and other the dark Prophetical passages,
which neither Time nor Learning has yet sufficiently unridled or unclasped;
and in these they ostentate a familiar, though wonderful, Knowledge; because
they would be the readyer believed by foolish admirers in their abusings and
wrestings of the plainer letter of other Scriptures.

Now, beloved, this fallacious Reasoning grounds upon a mistaken understanding
of some texts of Scripture, where you shall read an opposition betwixt the
Letter and the Spirit. As

First, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Who has made us able Ministers, not of the Letter only,
but also of the Spirit. Therefore say they, There is a Litteral and a Spiritual
sense of the New Testament. But how false that consequence is, may appear by
observing, that the word Sense or Meaning, is not in the text read, nor in the
whole context; but only Letter and Spirit in the Ministry or Ministration of
the New Testament or Gospel, there is the Letter or bare Word spoken, and the
Spirit of Grace that quickneth or gives life unto the Letter or Word spoken or
written, making it fruitful and effectual, opening the mind to receive it,
and working the heart and affections to submit unto it; which puts the great
difference betwixt the Gospel and the Law, the Law being only a bare or dead
Letter engraven in stony tables, without any assistance of the Spirit of Grace
to quicken it, and so the ministration thereof is of death and condemnation
unto all mankind that hear it, there being no promise or concurrence of spirit
with it to work it upon the heart unto obedience: man under the Covenant of the
Law being left to his own self, and strength, which was become utter weakness
through the corruption of the flesh, and unable to perform; whereas the
Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel has the promise or assistance of the Holy
Spirit, to work the Heavenly words of life upon the Soul or Spirit of the
hearers unto Life and Righteousness; not by whispering or privately
insinuating, or insufing any other sense or meaning above or diverse from the
literal: but by seconding, and backing the same meaning of the words imported
in the letter with power and efficacy, whereupon I infer that by Spirit here
as opposite to Letter is not meant an opposition of a Spiritual sense in the
Gospel, or any other part of Gods word different or above the sense of the
Letter, but only a lively concurrence of the Spirit of Grace with the ordinance
of Gods word, in the Letter of the words clauses, and propositions of it, to
make it effectual in the hearts of the hearers for their Salvation, without
which work of the Spirit, the Gospel it self would be as dead and killing a
letter as the very Law.

Secondly, Another opposition of Letter and Spirit is, Romans 2. the three last
verses, about the Jew and one of his Marks, and Cognizances; viz. Circumsion
which the Apostle distinguishes into outward and inward, or in the flesh, or
in the heart and spirit verse the last, resembling the outward circumcision in
opposition to circumcision that is inward and spiritual, of the heart, by the
term or simily of a Letter which whether one or more in the composition of a
word pronounced or written, is but the mere outside of that word compared with
its sense and signification, and so it may well be put to resemble the outward
circumcision of the flesh, as contrary to the inward or spiritual circumcision
of the heart; or as the bare empty Letter of the Law is contrary to the
quickening spirit of the Gospel, as dead to living, or old to new. Romans 7. 6.
But from thence to reason a double and contrary sense or signification, the one
Literal the other spiritual, either of the words of institution of Circumcision
it self, which expressly declares both Mystery and Ceremony, or outward and
inward of that Ordinance, or of any other text of Scripture, is a most
fallacious and pitiful non concludence; Circumcision is outward and inward
expressed by the opposition of Letter and Spirit, therefore there are two
different senses in Scriptures, Literal, and Spiritual of the same words or
sentence, is a most absurd consequence.

The third Text, occasioning this deception, is, John 6. 63. My words, says
Christ, are spirit, the words that I speak they are Spirit, and they are life,
therefore, say the mistakers, Christ's words must be understood spiritually, or
in a spiritual sense not litterall. Nay, but my Brethren what an inconsequence
is this? For what were the words that Christ then spoke, they were verse 53,
54, 56. of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood in order to eternal life*
the mystery whereof they not understanding because he spoke in a figure, he
explaines himself in the verse mentioned by a distinction of flesh and spirit,
the flesh profits nothing, says he, but the spirit quickneth, and my words
are spirit; as if he had said, think not therefore, that I mean you should eat
my flesh, and drink my blood, after a carnal or corporal manner, for that would
not profit you, The flesh profits not; but feed upon me in communion with my
spirit by faith, and so shall ye be quickened unto eternal life. It Is a
spiritual eating of my flesh that my words mean, my words are spirit. But
nevertheless beloved) not to be understood of a diverse or contrary meaning
from the Letter, for the Letter, as of all Scripture, so of this, is twofold,
Proper and Tropical.

First Proper, which expresses the thing by a word signifying, a meaning
plainly answering the nature of the thing.

Secondly Tropicall, which expresses the thing by way of allusion, or
similitude, or types and parables, conversively putting a word of similitude or
parable, for a word proper to the nature of the thing it self; Now the eating
Christ speaks of here, is not proper of fleshly eating, but in the Trope and
Similitude, that is, spiritual eating; for as Corporal eating nourifheth the
body unto life Natural, so does Spiritual feeding upon Christ by faith, nourish
and quicken the soul unto life eternal; and so though Christ's words here are
spirit, as he faith [my words are Spirit] that is, import a spiritual eating,
yet the sense of them is never the more spiritual, as if different from the
Letter, for the Letter of this word [Spirit] gives the sense of the Trope,
denoting Spiritual eating; yet with the help of a little Logic too, the
Abstract put for the Concrete, Spirit for Spiritual; and in the Concretion, the
adject Spiritual, connoting its subject Eating, is as much as Spiritual eating;
and so the sense being Tropical, is, in that respect, nevertheless, Literal;
the sense of Scripture, with this amongst the rest, being of two kinds, Proper
and Tropical, as aforesaid, and both Literal.

You will wonder, it may be, I should say, There is no sense of Scripture but
only Literal; and thereupon Object, What Divines should mean, by observing a
distinction of the Letter from some other thing differing in the meaning of the
words besides it?

To which I answer, It Is true, as I said at the first of this passage, many
wise and good Christians generally mistaking these oppositions of Letter and
Spirit; which I have but now opened, and are the only to that purpose,
throughout the whole book of God, and all professing a Literal sense. That for
want of a term contra-distinct unto Literal, have in that necessity allowed a
sense Spiritual; but, unsatisfied therewith, I conceive, upon further
disquisition, have been found to understand themselves only in a sense of a
Rhetorism or a Trope; which, not knowing what to oppose unto the Letter, under
the said mistakes they have called Spiritual, though indeed it be in true
understanding only Literal, according to the common manner of speaking by
Tropes and Figures, which bear their part in expression of the mind in all
Languages, and together with Grammar make up the whole business of Utterance,
or the (...), the word discovering the sense of the mind, bearing a
signification either plain and proper, and so has been taken for the Letter;
or Tropical, and more mysterious, and so has been taken for Spiritual; but in
true judgment, the literal word is common to both, Proper and Tropical: the
Trope and Rhetorism both in word and sense, being in the letter of the
Scripture also, as well as the Proper, though not so frequent as the Proper and
Grammatical; yet so, of a meaning literal as well as the other, and in that
respect all senses of words Typical, Parabolical, or otherwise Tropological (as
I humbly conceive with submission to better judgments) can be thought no more
then Literal, and the mystery of them to be understood, by endeavoring to find
the extent of the Letter only.

Away therefore with that deception of a Spiritual sense of Scripture, whereby
the safety of Divine Truths, has been, and may be still, much in hazard. And
let us conceive of Gods meaning in his Word, speaking to us, as we speak to one
another, according to the use of sensing the words in the practice of Nations,
without which we can never be supposed to understand him; and if we cannot yet
teach the mystery of every letter, let us be content till God in the seasons of
his Grace and Wisdom, shall afford us helps of a further discovery, by his
blessing upon the labors of Pious and Learned men, whom God has set forth
hitherto, and doubtless will hereafter, during the being of his Church upon
Earth, as lights in his Candlestick for the further manifestation of the hidden
Truths of his Word every day; and let us beware of our own Phanatical conceits
of Spiritual meanings through Revelation and Infusion, which will vary the rule
and standard of Truth, and make Gods own Word no better than a Leaden Rule and
a Nose of Wax.

A Seventh deceitful Principle, is, That of a mere Moral man in the Church of
Christ, and allowed indeed by the profound mistakes of wise and learned
Christians of many ages and professions, especially of late, but of a dangerous
and destructive use in the practice thereof by the weaker sort of deceivable
and factious people; who acting the Annimal part of Religion, more than the
Rational; Passion, Zeal, and Humor, more than Reason; and mistaking Pharisaical
niceness, for Godliness; and for Purity, Singularity and preciseness* and for
hatred of Evil, avoidance only of Indifferences both Civil and Religious; and
true pious heavenly Affection, for Fancy and Affectation; they presume
themselves in their erroneous and proud conceits, to be the only true sraelites
of God, the only holy and separate from the rest of men in the love of Gods
Election, the only pecultar, regenerate, and spiritual above all others, though
of the same Church in Faith, Baptism, and Worship, accompting the rest only
mere Moral men, of no more interest in Christ and his Graces, than the mere
civil Pagans, Greeks, and Barbarians, that denied him as a point of
foolishness: whereupon follows a proud contempt of all but those of their own
Society, and consequently Separations, Schisms, and Divisions in the Church,
and thereafter Seditions and Commotions in the State civil, even Rebellions
against Kings and Princes; all Persons whatsoever, in comparison with the Sect,
being slighted and undervalued as mere Moral men; like empty Chaff or fruitless
trees, fit fuel for the fire of unruly furious Zeal; though in impartial and
right understanding, the despised prove in plain terms, no other than the most
wise, and regular, and righteous of a whole Church and Nation. This Divinity
has been a long time Oracular, both in Press and Pulpit, though so pernicious
in the use of it, as an occasion of so much evil, but yet most false and
deceitful.

For either the person supposed for a mere Moral man in the Church, professes
Christ in Communion of Faith and Worship with the rest of the Church, or not;
if not, then he is no Christian, and no member of a Church; for no Church
allows any such as profess not Christ, and so no subject of the question, which
was of a mere Moral man in the Church: If he does profess Christ with belief
and duty, he goes beyond a mere Moral man; for a mere Moral man that practices
nothing but civil Virtue, as the wise Grecians that disputed St. Paul against
Christ, he goes not so far as to acknowledge him, but denies him, and so is of
no Church, he is no Christian, no subject of the question. The enquiry would
rather be, Whether the man professing Christ, does it really, inwardly from his
heart, or not? if not, he is in right speaking, a mere Formallist, a Hypocrite
in his proper and distinctive denomination; not a mere Moral man properly, he is
a Hypocrite, I say, whom God only can discover and pronounce absolutely, not
we, who see no further than by fruits and effects, which are Moral and Civil
Virtues, duties only of the Second Table; those of the First Table being
employed by the supposition of the persons profession of Christ: whereupon the
question will further be, Whether the supposed mere Moral man professing Christ
does practice these Virtues, or not? if he does practice them, either he does
practice them in such a degree as becomes a perfect sound Christian, and so he
is no Moral man, nor subject of the question; or else, not so perfectly, but
with often recidivations and backslidings, failings and weaknesses, but not
quite relinquishing his Profession, and so he is not yet a mere Moral man, but
only a weak Christian, needing Church Discipline to restore and strengthen him,
and so yet, no subject of the question. Or if he does not practice the said
Virtues or Duties of the Second Table at all, but lives altogether lewdly,
wickedly, and incorrigibly; so he is not so good as a Moral man, nor therefore a
mere one, but a scandal, a leaven of Wickedness to be purged out, and not to be
suffered in the Church, and so still no subject of the question, but a
repugnance in the Adjection. Whereupon I conclude, that there is no mere Moral
man in Christian Society, but a gross fallacy tending only to deceive you of
your Peace, Order, Unity, and Charity, and to encourage distances and
distinctions of some men, who conceit themselves in their Spirituals more
excellent than their Brethren, and thereupon proud oppositions and contentions
in assertion of each Parties respective Excellencies above others, and
consequent'y Factions and Divisions, Tumults and Seditions, and lastly,
Rebellion it self.

Thus we have reasoned so many fallacious Principles of sin, whereby it
deceives the foolish and ignorant into their wicked mistakes: Let us now come
to one word of Application, and so to an end.

If Sin and Deceit be so intrinsecal and complicate one with the other, we
should all then seriously consider and examine, the great passages and chief
moments of all the Actions of our lives, and by a true reflection and inquiry,
if possible, make a discovery unto our selves, whether we have not in many
things been very much deceived, and thereupon suspect and jealous our selves,
lest we we have very much sinned also, and consequently to prepare for sound
Repentance.

That the greatest part of our Israel have been pityfully deceived, and erred
in the ways of their own Inventions, may easily appear by observing the sad
Passages of our late troublesome Times; Men looked for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry: (...), says Oecumenius, It Is
the very proper and genuine quality of deceit, that men looking for one thing
should find another; They looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for
Righteousness, but behold a Cry; They looked for a blessed Reformation, but
behold an ugly Deformation; they looked for a glorious King, but behold up
stepped a monstrous Tyrant; they looked for a free priviledg'd Parliament, but
behold a pack of insolent Theives and Murderers, who turned the Sons of Justice
out of her Temple, and shut her Gates against them; they looked for a pure
Religion and undefiled, but behold the Widows and Fatherless devoured, the
Levite despised, the Temples profaned, demollished, some in part, some whole;
Unity, Charity, Verity, exiled; the Sacraments by some suspended, by others
neglected, and by the generallity quite slighted; the Word of God wrested, and
baffled, the holy Law trampled, Order, Dec ney, Maintenance, Government, and
every other property of a Regular Church, quite outed; and instead thereof,
crept in Schism, Heresy, Perjury, Blasphemy, Sacrilege, Ataxy, and every
other quality of Disformity; in a word, our whole Church and Nation were so
strangely disfigured and metamorphos'd, as we became both a shame to our
selves, and an obloquie to the world.

And thus have we found Deceit enough, and in all likelihood as much Sin. What
remains then, but that every man gulity as aforesaid, should betake himself to
Repentance, and in Repentance to confess, there being no one act in the work of
Repentance, does so much glorify God as Confession; in regard that the
Creature in assuming shame to himself, transfers all the glory to his Creator:
accordingly St. John speaks in 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive; and this was the counsel of Joshua to Achan,
Confess my son, and give glory to God; and this was the practice of the
Penitentiaries in Ezra's time, who confessed publicly the very particular sin
they were Nationally guilty of, their strange wives* and St. Paul also comes to
particulars, confessing, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, and
Injurious; and so indeed should all the offending and deceived Party in
England, confess their sins one unto another, and say, Oh my beloved Brother,
or Brethren, it has pleased God to give you his Grace of conduct in the ways
of Truth and Peace, and Loyalty; ^ut we have sadly erred and been deceived, Oh
favor us with your Christian Indulgence. But how long shall I endeavor to
persuade this, and obtain nothing; Disloalty, as they say, being impudent and
brazen faced as ever, and like the Whore in the Prophet Jeremy, refuses to be
ashamed: Instance not only in the case of the first and last executed, who
instead of satisfying Justice by their blood, for so much Innocent and Precious
Blood shed by them, seemed rather to justify themselves in what they had done,
as if they would have sealed to it with their blood, and dyed Martyrs for
wickedness; but also the survivers of that Confederacy, who are still chewing
upon the Leeks and Garlic of Egypt, and their breath stinks so much thereof,
as the very words they speak, smell strong of a Captain to conduct them thither
again; and not only those, but some of another Interest who led the Van of the
late armed wickedness, and yet instead of Confessions, Deprecations, and
Submissions, they seem to justify themselves in what they have done, by
insisting their Covenant, that Engine of Wickedness, and so wipe their mouths,
as if they had neither done nor spoke any thing amiss, and fall to
Expostulations and Complainings, and would fain insimulate, as if very much
wrong were done them, whilst they detain other men's rights, (whom I speak of
with a reserve, nevertheless, of Christian respect unto those of that
Denomination in general, who we hope are better thew'd, for their own
particular, as considerable worth has manifested them by some contrary
actions) which they defend and assert with much eagerness and mordacity, though
they are no other than the wages of unrighteousness, given them by the late
Rebellious Power, as a reward of their faithfulness to the Good Old Gause; for
which they might as well have perished in the gainsaying of Corah, as those
that did. Beloved, This is not the way to obtain Peace with God or Men; I could
wish rather that I might hear them, and all others of their Engagement, say,
with Saul to David, Behold I have played the Fool and erred exceedingly, but
blessed be then my Son David; Behold my good Brother or Brethren, we have
played the Fools and erred exceedingly against our King, Church and Laws,
whereas you by the grace of God, have been led in Peace and Loyal
Righteousness, blessed be you therein, and impact the comfort thereof unto us
also, by favoring us with your Christian compassion; or that I might hear them
say, with David himself, I have gone astray like a sheep, O seek thy servant,
for I do not forget thy Commandments; then should we receive them into the
Arms of our Christian and Brotherly embraces, and pray for them in the
Language of our holy Letany, That it may please thee, O Lord, to bring into the
way of Truth, all such as have erred and are deceived.

FINIS.
If, through haste, any faults have happened, in letters or syllables of words,
the Readers favor is desired in excusing them, as this one particular, World,
page 29. line the last, for Word.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
(...) on the Major Prophers, in folio.

The History of Portugal.

Cases of Conscience in the late Reb^llion, by Mr. Lyford.

Mr. Grenfields Loyal Sermon before the Parliament.

Dr. Browns Sepulchal Urns and Garden of Cyrus, in 8.

The Royal Exchange, a Comedy, in 4. by R. Brom.

Poems by the Wits of both Universities, in 8.

A Treatise of Moderation, by Mr. Gaul, in 8.

St. Bonaventure's Soliloquies, in 24.

Mr. Baxters Treatise of Conversion, in 4.

The Common Law Epiromiz'd with Directions how to prosecute and defend persenal
actions very useful for all Gentlemen, to which is ann^xed the nature of a
Writ of Error and the General proceedings there* upon, in 8.

Golden Remains in the most Learned R. Stuart D. D. Dean of Westminster and
Clerk of the Closet to King Charles the first, being the last and best
Monuments that are likely to made public, in 12.

Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4.

Jews in America, by Mr. Thorowgood, in 4

The Royal Buckler or a Lecture for Traitors, in 8.

The Pourtracture of his sacred Majesty King Charles the Second, from his Birth
1630. till this present year 1661. being the whole story (...) escape at
Worcester, his travels and troubles.

The Covenant discharged, by John Russell, in 4.

The Comple^t Art of Water-drawing, in 4.

Mr. Boys his translation of the Sixth Book of Virgil, in 4.

Mr. Walwin's Sermon on the happy return of King Charles the Second.

A perfect Discovery of Witchcraft, very profitable to be read of all (...) of
people, especially Judges of Assize before they pass sentence on condemned
persons for Witches, in 4.

A short view of the lives of the Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of
Gl^^cester, and Mary Princes of Orange deceased, by T. M. Esquire in 8.

Aeneas his Voyage from Troy to Italy, an Essay upon the third Book (...)
Virgil, by J. Boys Esquire in 8.

The alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Litergies of the Church of
Engl. since the Reformation, by Hamon L'estrange Esquire in fol.

Books written by R. L'estrange Esquire
A view of some late Remarkable Transactions, leading to the happy Government
under our gracious Sovereign King Charles II. in 4.

The Holy Cheat, proving from the undeniable practices of the Presby^^rians,
that the whole design of that party is to enslave both King (...) People under
the color of Religion.

A Caveat to the Cavaliers.

A Modest Plea both for the Author and Caveat.


