A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, At St. MARGARETS
WESTMINSTER October. 10. 1666. being the Fast Day appointed for the late
dreadful Fire in the City of LONDON. By Edward Stillingfleet, B. D. Rector of
St. Andrews Holborn, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary. Published
by Order of the said House.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock, and (...) sold at his
Shop, at the Sign of the White (...) in Westminster Hall. 1666.

AMOS 4. 11. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Soodom and
Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord.
IT is but a very little time since you met together in this place to lament
the remainders of a raging pestilence, which the last year destroyed so many
thousand inhabitants of the late great and famous City: and now God has given
us another sad occasion for our fasting and humiliation, by suffering a
devouring fire to break forth and consume so many of her habitations. As though
the infected air had been too kind and partial, and like Saul to the
Amalekites, had only destroyed the vile and refuse, and spared the greatest of
the people; as though the grave had surfeited with the bodies of the dead, and
were loath to go on in the execution of Gods displeasure; he has employed a
more furious Element, which by its merciless and devouring flames might in a
more lively manner represent unto us the kindling of his wrath against us. And
that by a Fire, which began with that violence, and spread with that horror,
and raged with that fury, and continued for so long a time with that
irresistible force; that it might justly fill the beholders with confusion, the
hearers of it with amazement, and all of us with a deep and humble sense of
those sins which have brought down the judgments of God in so severe a manner
in the midst of us.

For whatever arguments or reasons we can imagine, that should compose the
minds of men to a sense of their own or others calamities, or excite them to an
apprehension of the wrath of God as the cause of them, or quicken them to an
earnest supplication to him for mercy, they do all eminently concur in the sad
occasion of this days solemnity. For if either compassion would move, or fear
awaken, or interest engage us to any of these, it is hard to conceive there
should be an instance of a more efficacious nature, than that is which we this
day bewail; For who can behold the ruins of so great a City, and not have his
bowels of compassion moved toward it? Who can have any sense of the anger of
God discovered in it, and not have his fear awakened by it? Who can (as we
ought all) look upon it as a judgment of universal influence on the whole
Nation, and not think himself concerned to implore the mercy of Heaven toward
us? For certainly, howsoever we may vainly flatter and deceive our selves,
these are no common indications of the frowns of heaven; nor are they merely
intended as the expressions of Gods severity toward that City which has
suffered so much by them; but the strokes which fall upon the head (though they
light upon that only) are designed for the punishment of the whole body.

Were there nothing else but a bare permission of Divine Providence as to these
things, we could not reasonably think, but that G^d must needs be very angry
with us, when he suffers two such dreadful calamities to tread almost upon each
others heels; that no sooner had death taken away such multitudes of our
inhabitants, but a Fire follows it to consume our habitations. A Fire, so
dreadful in its appearance, in its rage and fury, and in all the dismal
consequences of it (which we cannot yet be sufficiently apprehensive of) that
on that very account we may justly lie down in our shame, and our confusion
cover us: because God has covered the daughter of Sion with a Lam. 2. 1.
cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven to earth the beauty of Israel,
and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger. For such was the
violence and fury of the flames, that they have not only defaced the beauty of
the City, and humbled the pride and grandeur of it; not only stained its glory,
and consumed its palaces; but have made the Houses of God themselves a heap of
ruins, and a spectacle of desolation.

And what then can we propose to our selves as arguments of Gods severe
displeasure against us, which we have not either already felt, or have just
cause to fear are coming upon us without a speedy and sincere amendment? If a
Sword abroad and Pestilence at home, if Fire in our Houses and Death in our
Streets, if Foreign Wars and Domestic Factions, if a languishing State and a
discontented People, if the ruins of the City and poverty of the Country, may
make us sensible how sad our condition at present is, how much worse it may be
(if God in his mercy prevent it not) we shall all surely think we have reason
enough this day to lay to heart the evil of our doings which have brought all
these things upon us, and abhor our selves, repenting in dust and ashes. That
would seem indeed to bear some analogy with the present ruins of the City, and
the calamities we lie under at this time; but God will more easily dispense
with the pompous shows, and solemn garbs of our humiliation; if our hearts
bleed within for our former impieties, and our repentance discovers its
sin^erity, by bringing us to that temper; that, though we have done iniquity,
we will do so no more. That is the true and proper end, which Almighty God aims
at, in all his Judgments: he takes no delight in hurling the world into
confusions, and turning Cities into ruinous heaps, and making whole Countries a
desolation: but when he sees it necessary to vindicate the honor of his
Justice to the world, he does it with that severity that may make us apprehend
his displeasure, and yet with that mercy which may encourage us to repent and
return unto the Lord. Thus we find in the instances recorded in the Text, when
some Cities were consumed by him; so that as far as concerned them, they were
made like to Sodom and Gomorrah: yet he does it with that kindness to the
Inhabitants, that they are plucked as firebrands out of the burning: and
therefore he looks upon it as a frustrating the design both of his Justice, and
of his Mercy, when he is fain to conclude with that sad reflection on their
incorrigibleness; Yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Thus ye see
what the design and scope of the words is, which I have read unto you, wherein
we may consider,

1. The severity of the Judgment which God was pleased to execute upon them. I
have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

2. The mixture of his mercy in the midst of his severity, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning.

3. The incorrigibleness of the people notwithstanding both. Yet have ye not,
etc. In the first we have Gods Rod lifted up to strike, in the second we have
Gods Hand stretched out to save, yet neither of these would make them sensible
of their disobedience; though their Cities were overthrown for their sakes,
though they themselves escaped not for their own sakes, but for his mercies
sake only whom they had so highly provoked; yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. I am sure I may say of the two former parts of the Text, as our
Savior does in another case, This day has this Scripture been fulfilled among
you: we have seen a sad instance of Gods severity, a City almost wholly
consumed as Sodom and Gomorrah, and a great expression of his kindness, the
Inhabitants saved, as firebrands plucked out of the burning: O let it never be
said that the last part of the words is fulfilled too, Yet have ye not returned
unto me, etc. which, that it may not be, I shall first consider the severity of
God in his judgment this day, and then discover the mixture of his kindness
with it, and the result of both will be the unreasonableness of obstinate
disobedience after them.

1. The severity of the Judgment here expressed: which though we take it not
in reference to the persons of men, but to the Cities wherein they dwelt: as it
seems to be understood not only by the Original, wherein the words relating to
persons are left out: but by the following clause, expressing their
preservation: yet we shall find the Judgment to be severe enough, in regard 1.
Of the nature and kind of it. 2. The series and order of it. 3. The causes
moving to it. 4. The Author of it. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew, etc.

1. The nature and kind of it: We can imagine nothing more severe when we
consider what it is set forth by, the most unparalleld Judgment we read of,
viz. the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by a fire from Heaven. Although in
all circumstances the instance might not come up to the parallel, yet in
several respects there might be so sad a desolation, that any other example but
that might fall beneath the greatness and severity of it. And we may better
understand of how sad and dreadful a nature such a Judgment must be, if we
consider it with relation to the suddenness and unexpectedness of it, to the
force and violence of it, and to all that sad train of circumstances which
attend and follow it.

1. The suddenness and unexpectedness of it; as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, i. e. when they least of all looked for such a desolation. For thus
it was in the Luke 17. 28, 29.
days of Lot (as our Savior tells us) they did eat, they drank, they bought,
they sold, they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of
Sodom, it rained fire and brimstome from Heaven, and destroyed them all. They
were all immersed either in their pleasures or in their business, they little
thought of destruction being so near them as it proved to be; Thus it was with
the Jews in their first and latter destruction both of their City and Country;
they were as high and as confident of the contrary as might be to the very
last; nothing could persuade them that their Temple or their City should be
burnt with Fire, till they saw them flaming before their eyes. Thus Josephus
(...). de bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 14.
observes of his Contrymen, that in the midst of all their miseries they had
no kind of sense at all of their sins, but were as proud, presumptuous and
arrogant, as if all things went well with them; and were like to do so. They
thought God could not possibly punish such a people as they were in such a
manner; they could easily have believed it of any other people but themselves:
but that God should punish his own people in Covenant with him, that Judgment
should begin at the house of God, that they who had loved to be called by his
name, should be made examples to all other Nations; this seemed so harsh and
incredible that by no means could they entertain it. But God and Wise men too
thought otherwise of them than they did of themselves: they could not but see
an outward show of Religion joined with a deep and subtle hypocrisy; there
being among them an heap of pride and luxury, of fraud and injustice, of
sedition and faction gilded over with a fair show of greater zeal for God and
his Glory: which that impartial Historian (as one who knew them well) has
described at large: and although they could not believe that such heavy
Judgments should befall them, yet others did not only believe, but tremble at
the apprehensions of them.

Who among all the Citizens of London could have been persuaded, but the day
before the Fire brake out, nay when they saw the flames for near a day
together, that ever in four days time, not a fourth part of the City should be
left standing? For when were they ever more secure and inapprehensive of their
danger than at this time? they had not been long returned to their Houses,
which the Plague had driven them from, and now they hoped to make some amends
for the loss of their Trade before; but they returned home with the same sins
they carried away with them; like new Moons, they had a new face and
appearance, but the same spots remained still: or it may be, increased by that
scumm they had gathered in the Countries where they had been. Like Beasts of
prey that had been chained up so long till they were hunger-bitten, when they
once got loose they ran with that violence and greediness to their ways of
gain, as though nothing could ever satisfy them. But that which betrayed them
to so much security, was their late deliverance from so sweeping a Judgment as
the Plague had been to the City and Suburbs of it: they could by no means
think, when they had all so lately escaped the Grave, that the City it self
should be so near being buried in its own ruins; that the fire which had
missed their blood should seize upon their houses; that there should be no
other way to purge the infected air, but by the flames of the whole City. Thus
when the Mariners have newly escaped a wreck at Sea, the fears of which have a
long time deprived them of their wonted rest, they think they may securely lie
down and sleep, till it may be another storm overtake and sink them. We see
then there is neither piety nor wisdom in so much security when a great danger
is over, for we know not but that very security it self may provoke God to send
a greater. And no kind of judgments are so dreadful and amazing, as those
which come most unexpectedly upon men; for these betray the succors which
reason offers, they infatuate men's councils, weaken their courage, and deprive
them of that presence of mind which is necessary at such a time for their own
and the public interest. And there needs no more to let us know how severe
such a Judgment must be when it comes upon men in so sudden and unexpected a
manner; but that is not all, for the severity of it lies further,

2. In the force and violence of it: and surely that was very great which
consumed four Cities to nothing in so short a time, when God did pluere
Gehennam de coelo as one expresses it, rained down hellfire upon Sodom and
Gomorrah. And this is that which some think is called the vengeance of eternal
fire, which all those in Sodom and Gomorrah are said to suffer; i. e. a Fire
which consumed, till there was nothing left to Jude 7.
be consumed by it. Not but that those wicked persons did justly suffer the
vengeance of an eternal fire in another life, but the Apostle seems to set out
and paint forth to us that in the life to come, by the force and violence of
that fire which destroyed those Cities; and it would be harsh to say, that all
who were involved in that common calamity (who yet were innocent as to the
great abominations of those places, viz. the Infants there destroyed) must be
immediately sentenced to eternal misery. But although God since that perpetual
monument of his justice in the destruction of those Cities has not by such an
immediate fire from Heaven consumed and razed out the very foundations of other
Cities; yet at some times there are fires which break out and rage with a more
than ordinary violence, and will not yield to those attempts for quenching
them, which at other times may be attended with great success. Such might that
great fire in Rome be in Nero's time, which whether begun casually, or by
design (which was disputed then, as it has been about others since) did
presently spread it self with greater speed over the Cirque (as the Historian
Tacit. An. 15.
tells us) than the Wind it self, and never left burning, till of fourteen
Regions in Rome, but four were left entire. Such might that be in the Emperor
Titus his time, which lasted three days and nights, and was so irresistible in
its fury, that the Historian tells us, it was certainly more than an ordinary
(...). X^phil. in Epit. Dion. in Tito. p. 227.
fire. Such might that be in the same City in the time of Commodus, which
though all the art and industry imaginable were used for the quenching it, yet
it burnt, till it had consumed besides the Temple of Peace, the fairest Houses
and Palaces of the City, which on that account, the Historians (...). Herod. an
in Commod. hist. l. 1. p. 22. v. X^phil. ad fin. Commodi.
attribute to more than natural causes. Such might that be (which comes the
nearest of any I have met with, to that fire we this day lament the effects of)
I mean that at Constantinople, which happened A. D. 465. in the beginning of
September; it brake forth by the water side, and raged with that horrible fury
for four days Nic^p^. l. 15. c. 21
together, that it burnt down the greatest part of the City, and was so little
capable of resistance, that as Evagrius tells us, the strongest Houses were but
Evagr. l. 2. cap. 13.
(...), like so much dried stubble before it; by which means the whole City
was, as he calls it, (...), a most miserable and doleful spectacle; so that as
Baronius expresses it, that City which before was Baron. Tom. 5. A. 465. 1
accounted the wonder of the world, was made like to Sodom and Gomorrah. Such
likewise might those two great fires have been which have formerly burnt down
great part of the then City of London; but neither of them come near the
dreadfulness of this, considering how much bigger the habitations of the City
were now, and how much greater the riches of it then could be imagined at those
times. How great must we conceive the force of this Fire to have been, which
having at first gotten a head where there was little means of resisting it, and
much fuel to increase it; from thence it spread it self both with and against
the wind; till it had gained so considerable a force, that it despised all the
resistance could be made by the strength of the buildings which stood in its
way; and when it had once subdued the strongest and the tallest of them, it
then roared like the waves of the sea, and made its way through all the lesser
obstacles, and might have gone on so far, till it had laid this City level
with the ruins of the other, had not he who sets the bounds to the Ocean, and
says, thus far shall thou go and no further, put a stop to it in those places
which were as ready to have yielded up themselves to the rage of it, as any
which had been consumed before.

3. The severity of it will yet more appear from all the dreadful circumstances
which attend and follow it. Could you suppose your selves in the midst of those
Cities which were consumed by Fire from heaven, when it had seized upon their
dwellings, O what cries and lamentations, what yellings and shriekings might ye
then have heard among them! We may well think how dreadful those were, when we
do but consider how sad the circumstances were of the fire we mourn for this
day. When it began like Sampson to break in pieces all the means of resisting
it, and carried before it not only the Gates, but the Churches and most
magnificent structures of the City, what horror and confusion may we then
imagine had seized upon the spirits of the Citizens; what distraction in their
councils, what paleness in their countenances, what pantings at their hearts,
what an universal consternation might have been then seen upon the minds of
men? But O the sighs and tears, the frights and amazements, the miscarriages,
nay the deaths of some of the weaker Sex at the terror and apprehension of it!
O the hurry and useless pains, the alarms and tumults, the mutual hindrances
of each other that were among men at the beholding the rage and fury of it!
There we might have seen Women weeping for their children, for fear of their
being trod down in the press, or lost in the crowd of people, or exposed to the
violence of the flames; Husbands more solicitous for the safety of their Wives
and Children, than their own; the Soldiers running to their swords, when there
was more need of Buckets; the Tradesmen loading their backs with that which had
gotten possession of their hearts before. Then we might have heard some
complaining thus of themselves: O that I had been as careful of laying up
treasures in Heaven as I have been upon Earth, I had not been under such fears
of losing them as now I am! If I had served God as faithfully as I have done
the world, he would never have left me as now that is like to do. What a fool
have I been which have spent all my precious time for the gaining of that which
may be now lost in an hours time! If these flames be so dreadful, what are
those which are reserved for them who love the world more than God! If none can
come near the heat of this Fire, who can dwell with everlasting burnings! O
what madness then will it be to sin any more wilfully against that God who is a
consuming fire, infinitely more dreadful than this can be! Farewell then all ye
deceitful vanities: now I understand thee and my self better, O bewitching
world, then to fix my happiness in thee any more. I will henceforth learn so
much wisdom to lay up my treasures there where neither moths can corrupt them,
nor Thieves steal them, nor Fire consume them. O how happy would London be, if
this were the effect of her flames on the minds of all her inhabitants! She
might then rise with a greater glory, and her inward beauty would outshine her
outward splendor, let it be as great as we can wish or imagine.

But in the mean time who can behold her present ruins, without paying some
tears as due to the sadness of the spectacle, and more to the sins which caused
them? If that City were able to speak out of its ruins, what sad complaints
would it make of all those impieties which have made her so miserable. If it
had not been (might she say) for the pride and luxury, the ease and delicacy of
some of my inhabitants, the covetousness, the fraud, the injustice of others,
the debaucheries of the profane, the open factions and secret hypocrisy of
too many pretending to greater sanctity, my beauty had not been thus turned
into ashes, nor my glory into those ruins which make my enemies rejoice, my
friends to mourn, and all stand amazed at the beholding of them. Look now upon
me, you who so lately admired the greatness of my trade, the riches of my
Merchants, the number of my people, the convenience of my Churches, the
multitude of my Streets, and see what desolations sin has made in the earth.
Look upon me, and then tell me whether it be nothing to dally with Heaven, to
make a mock at sin, to slight the judgments of God, and abuse his mercies, and
after all the attempts of Heaven to reclaim a people from their sins, to remain
still the same that ever they were? Was there no way to expiate your guilt but
by my misery? Had the Leprosy of your sins so fretted into my Walls, that
there was no cleansing them, but by the flames which consume them? Must I mourn
in my dust and ashes for your iniquities, while you are so ready to return to
the practice of them? Have I suffered so much by reason of them, and do you
think to escape your selves? Can you then look upon my ruins with hearts as
hard and unconcerned as the stones which lie in them? If you have any kindness
for me, or for your selves, if you ever hope to see my breaches repaired, my
beauty restored, my glory advanced, look on Londons ruins and repent. Thus
would she bid her inhabitants not weep for her miseries, but for their own
sins; for if never any sorrow were like to her sorrow, it is because never any
sins were like to their sins. Not as though they were only the sins of the
City, which have brought this evil upon her; no, but as far as the judgment
reaches, so great has the compass of the sins been, which have provoked God to
make her an example of his justice. And I fear the effects of Londons calamity
will be felt all the Nation over. For, considering the present languishing
condition of this Nation, it will be no easy matter to recover the blood and
spirits which have been lost by this Fire. So that whether we consider the
sadness of those circumstances which accompanied the rage of the fire, or those
which respect the present miseries of the City, or the general influence those
will have upon the Nation, we cannot easily conceive what judgment could in so
critical a time have befallen us, which had been more severe for the kind and
nature of it, than this has been.

2. We consider it in the series and order of it. We see by the Text, this
comes in the last place, as a reserve, when nothing else would do any good upon
them: It is extrema medicina, as St. Hierom says, the last attempt Hieron. in
lo^.
that God uses to reclaim a people by, and if these Causticks will not do, it
is to be feared he looks on the wounds as incurable. He had sent a famine
before, v. 6. a drought, v. 7, 8. blasting and mildew, v. 9. the Pestilence
after the manner of Egypt, v. 10. the miseries of War in the same verse. And
when none of these would work that effect upon them, which they were designed
for, then he comes to this last way of punishing before a final destruction, be
overthrew some of their Cities as he had overthrown Sodom and Gomorrah. God
forbid, we should be so near a final subversion, and utter desolation, as the
ten Tribes were, when none of these things would bring them to repentance; but
yet the method God has used with us seems to bode very ill in case we do not
at last return to the Lord. For it is not only agreeable to what is here
delivered as the course God used to reclaim the Israelites, but to what is
reported by the most faithful Historian of those times of the degrees and
steps that God made before the ruins of the British Nation. For Gildas de
^xcid. Brit.
Gildas tells us the decay of it began by Civil Wars among themselves, and high
discontents remaining as the consequents of them, after this an universal decay
and poverty among them, after that, nay during the continuannce of it, Wars
with the Picts and Scots their inveterate enemies; but no sooner had they a
little breathing space, but they return to their luxury and other sins again;
then God sends among them a consuming Pestilence, which destroyed an incredible
number of people. When all this would not do, those whom they trusted most to,
betrayed them, and rebelled against them, by whose means, not only the Cities
were burnt with Fire, but the whole Island was turned almost into one continued
flame. The issue of all which at last was, that their Country was turned to a
desolation, the ancient Inhabitants driven out, or destroyed, and their former
servants, but now their bitter enemies, possessing their habitations. May God
avert the Omen from us at this day. We have smarted by Civil Wars, and the
dreadful effects of them; we yet complain of great discontents and poverty as
great as them, we have inveterate enemies combined abroad against us, we have
very lately suffered under a Pestilence as great almost as any we read of, and
now the great City of our Nation burnt down by a dreadful Fire. And what do all
these things mean? and what will the issue of them be? though that be locked up
in the Councils of Heaven, yet we have just cause to fear, if it be not our
speedy amendment, it may be our ruin. And they who think that incredible, let
them tell me whether two years since, they did not think it altogether as
improbable, that in the compass of the two succeeding years, above a hundred
thousand persons should be destroyed by the Plague in London and other places,
and the City it self should be burnt to the Ground? And if our fears do not, I
am sure our sins may tell us, that these are but the forerunners of greater
calamities, in case there be not a timely reformation of our selves. And
although God may give us some intermissions of punishments, yet at last he may,
as the Roman Consul expressed it, pay us intercalatae poenae usuram, that which
may make amends for all his abatements, and give us full measure according to
that of our sins, pressed down, shaken together, and running over. Which leads
to the third particular.

3. The causes moving God to so much severity in his Judgments, which are the
greatness of the sins committed against him. So this Prophet tells us, that the
true account of all Gods punishments is to be fetched from the sins of the
people, Amos 1. 3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four I will
not turn away the punishment thereof: so it is said of Gaza, v. 6. of Tyrus, v.
9. of Edom, v. 11. of Ammon, v. 13. Moab, chapter 2. 1. Judah, v. 4. and at last
Israel, v. 6. And it is observable of every one of these, that when God
threatens to punish them for the greatness of their iniquities, and the
multitude of their transgressions, (which is generally supposed to be meant by
the three transgressions and the four) he does particularly threaten to send a
fire among them to consume the Houses and the Palaces of their Cities. So to
Damascus, chap. 1. 4. to Gaza, v. 7. to Tyrus, v. 10. to Edom, v. 12. to Ammon,
v. 14. to Moab, chapter 2. v. 2. to Judah, v. 5. I will send a fire upon Judah, and
it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem: and Israel in the words of the text.
This is a judgment then, which when it comes in its fury, gives us notice to
how great a height our sins are risen; especially when it has so many dreadful
forerunners, as it had in Israel, and has had among our selves. When the red
horse has marched furiously before it all bloody with the effects of a Civil
War, and the pale horse has followed after the other with Death upon his back,
and the Grave at his heels, and after both these, those come, out of whose
mouth issues fire, and smoke, and brimstone, it is then time for the
inhabitants of the earth, to repent of the work of their hands. But it is our
great unhappiness that we are apt to impute these great calamities to any thing
rather than to our sins; and thereby we hinder our selves from the true remedy,
because we will not understand the cause of our distemper. Though God has not
sent Prophets among us, to tell us for such and such sins, I will send such and
such judgments upon you, yet where we observe the parallel between the sins
and the punishments agreeable with what we find recorded in Scripture, we have
reason to say that those sins were not only the antecedents, but the causes of
those punishments which followed after them. And that because the reason of
punishment was not built upon any particular relation between God and the
people of Israel, but upon reasons common to all mankind; yet with this
difference, that the greater the mercies were which any people enjoyed, the
sooner was the measure of their iniquities filled up, and the severer were the
judgments when they came upon them. This our Prophet gives an account of,
Chap. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Nations of the earth, therefore
will I punish you for your iniquities. So did God punish Tire and Damascus, as
well as Israel and Judah; but his meaning is, he would punish them sooner, he
would punish them more severely. I wish we could be brought once to consider
what influence piety and virtue has upon the good of a Nation, if we did, we
should not only live better our selves, but our Kingdom and Nation might
flourish more than otherwise we are like to see it do. Which is a truth has
been so universally received among the wise Men of all ages, that one of the
Roman Historians, though of no very severe life himself, yet imputes the decay
of the Roman State, not to Chance or Fortune, or some unhidden causes (which
the Atheism of our age would presently do) but to the general looseness of men's
lives, and corruption of their manners. And it was the grave Observation of one
of the bravest Captains ever the Roman State had, that it was impossible for
any State to be happy, stantibus moenibus, ruentibus moribus, though their
Scipio apud Ang. de Civ. D. l. 1. c. 33.
walls were firm, if their manners were decayed. But it is our misery, that our
walls and our manners are fallen together, or rather the latter undermined the
former. They are our sins which have drawn so much of our blood, and infected
our air, and added the greatest fuel to our flames.

But it is not enough in general to declaim against our sins, but we must
search out particularly those predominant vices, which by their boldness and
frequency have provoked God thus to punish us; and as we have hitherto observed
a parallel between the Judgments of Israel in this Chapter, and our own: So I
am afraid we shall find too sad a parallel between their sins and ours too.
Three sorts of sins are here spoken of in a peculiar manner, as the causes of
their severe punishments, Their luxury and intemperance, their covetousness and
oppression, and their contempt of God and his Laws, and I doubt we need not
make a very exact scrutiny to find out these in a high degree among our selves:
and I wish it were as easy to reform them, as to find them out.

1. Luxury and intemperance; that we meet with in the first verse, both in the
compellation, Ye Kine of Bashan, and in their behavior, which say to their
Masters, bring, and let us drink. Ye Kine of Bashan, Loquitur ad principes
Israel and optimates quosque december Tribuum, says St. Hierom, he speaks to the
Princes of Israel, and the chief of all the ten Tribes; Those which are fed in
the richest pastures, such as those of Bashan were. Who are more fully
described by the Prophet in his sixth chapter. They are the men who are at ease
in Sion, v. 1. they put far away from them the evil day, v. 3. they lie upon
beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the Lambs out
of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, v. 4. they chaunt
to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves instruments of music like
David, v. 5. they drink Wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. The meaning
of all which is, they minded nothing but ease, softness, and pleasure, but
could not endure to hear of the calamities which were so near them. Nothing but
mirth, and jollity, and riot, and feasting, and the evil consequences of these
were to be seen or heard among them. Their delicate souls were presently
ruffled and disturbed at the discourse of any thing but matters of Courtship,
address and entertainment. Any thing that was grave and serious, though never
so necessary, and of the greatest importance, was put off, as Felix put off St.
Paul to a more convenient time: especially if it threatened miseries to them,
and appeared with a countenance sadder than their own. These were the Kine of
Bashan, who were full of ease and wantonness, and never thought of the day of
slaughter, which the other were the certain forerunners of. Symmachus renders
it, (...), which others apply to the rich Citizens of Samaria, I am afraid we
may take it in either sense without a Soloecism. Bring and let us drink, which
as St. Hierom goes on, ebrietatem significat in vino and luxuria quae statum
mentis evertunt, it implies the height of their luxury and intemperance. It is
observed by some, that our Prophet retatins still the language of his education
in the bluntness of his expressions, the great men that lived wholly at their
ease, in wantonness and luxury, he styles like the heardsman of Tekoa, the Kine
of Bashan. That he thought was title good enough for such who seemed to have
souls for no other end, than the other had. And has not that delicata insania,
as St. Austin calls it, that soft and effeminate kind of madness taken
possession of too many among us, whose birth and education designed them for
more manly employments? yea, what an age of Luxury do we live in, when instead
of those noble characters of men from their virtue, and wisdom, and courage, it
is looked on among some as a mighty character of a person, that he eats and
drinks well: a character that becomes none so much as the Kine of Bashan in the
literal sense, for surely they did so, or else they had never been in so much
esteem among the heardsmen of Tokoa. A character which those Philosophers would
have been ashamed of, who looked upon no other end of humane life but pleasure;
but in order to that, they thought nothing more necessary than temperance and
sobriety; but whatever esteem they had then, they have lost all their
reputation among our modern Epicures, who know of no such things as pleasures
of the mind, and would not much value whether they had any faculties of the
mind or no, unless it were for the contrivance of new oaths and debaucheries.
But if this were only among some few persons, we hope the whole Nation would
not suffer for their madness: for scarce any age has been so happy, but it
has had some monsters in Morality as well as Nature. But I am afraid these
vices are grown too Epidemical; not only in the City, but the Countries too;
what mean else those frequent complaints (and I hope more general then the
causes of them) that the houses of great men in too many places are so near
being public schools of debauchery, rather than of piety and virtue, where men
shall not want instructers to teach them to forget both God and themselves;
wherein sobriety is so far from being accounted a matter of honor, that the
rules of the Persian civility are quite forgotten, and men are forced to unman
themselves. I know nothing would tend more to the honor of our Nation, or the
advantage of it, then if once these public excesses were severely restrained,
I do not mean so much by making new Laws, (for those generally do but exercise
peoples Wits by finding out new evasions) but by executing old ones.

2. Covetousness and oppression. You see what these great men in Samaria did
when they had any respite from their excesses and intemperance, then woe be to
the poor who come in their way; Which oppress the poor, and crush the needy:
V. I. either by the hands of violence, or by those arts and devices which
either their honesty or poverty have kept them from the knowledge of. And if
there be not so much of open violence in our days, the thanks are due to the
care of our Magistrates, and the severity of our Laws, but it is hard to say
whether ever any age produced more studious and skilful to pervert the design
of Laws, without breaking the letter of them, than this of ours has done.
Fraud and injustice is now managed with a great deal of artifice and cunning;
and he thinks himself no body in the understanding of the world, that cannot
overreach his Brother, and not be discovered: or however in the multiplicity
and obscurity of our Laws cannot find out something in pretense at least to
justify his actions by. But if appeal be made to the Courts of Judicature,
what arts are then used either for concealing or hiring witnesses, so that if
their Purses be not equal, the adverse party may overswear him by so much as
his Purse is weightier than the others. I heartily wish it may never be said of
us, what the Orator once said of the Greeks, quibus jusjurandum jocus,
testimonium ludus, they made it a matter of jest and drollery to for swear
themselves, Cicer. pro Flacco.
and give false testimonies. But supposing men keep within the bounds of
justice and common honesty, yet how unsatiable are the desires of men? they are
for adding house to house, and land to land, never contented with what either
their Ancestors have left them, or the bountiful hand of Heaven has bestowed
upon them. Till at last it may be in the Prophets expression for their
covetousness, the stone cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
answer it; i. e. provoke God to Hab. 2. 11.
give a severe check to the exorbitant and boundless desires of men, as he has
done by this days calamity. Thus while the City thought with Babylon to sit as
Is^. 47. 7, 8, 11.
a Lady for ever, while she dwelt carelessly, and said I am, and there is none
else besides me; evil is come upon her, and she knows not from whence it comes,
and mischief is fallen upon her, and she has not been able to put it off, and
desolation is come upon her suddenly, which she did not foresee.

3. Contempt of God and his Laws. That we read of v 4. where the Prophet speaks
by an Irony to them, Come to Bethel and transgress, etc. he knew well enough
they were resolved to do it, let God or the Prophet say what they pleased. For
these Kine of Bashan were all for the Calves of Dan and Bethel, and some think
that is the reason of the title that is given them. These great men of Samaria
thought it beneath them to own Religion any further than it was subservient to
their civil interests. They were all of Jeroboams Religion, who looked on it as
a mere politic thing, and fit to advance his own designs by. I am afraid there
are too many at this day who are secretly of his mind, and think it a piece of
wisdom to be so: Blessed God, that men should be so wise to deceive themselves,
and go down with so much discretion to Hell! These are the Grave and retired
Atheists, who, though they secretly love not Religion, yet their caution
hinders them from talking much against it. But there is a sort of men much more
common than the other; the faculties of whose minds are so thin and aerie, that
they will not bear the consideration of any thing, much less of Religion; these
throw out their bitter scoffs, and profane jests against it. A thing never
permitted that I know of in any civilized Nation in the world; whatsoever their
Religion was, the reputation of Religion was always preserved sacred: God
himself would not suffer the Jews to speak evil of other Gods though they were
to destroy all those who tempted them to the worship of them. And shall we
suffer the most excellent and reasonable Religion in the world, viz. the
Christian, to be profaned by the unhallowed mouths of any who will venture to
be damned, to be accounted witty? If their enquiries were deeper, their reason
stronger, or their arguments more persuasive, than of those who have made it
their utmost care and business to search into these things, they ought to be
allowed a fair hearing; but for men who pretend to none of these things, yet
still to make Religion the object of their scoffs and raillery, does not become
the gravity of a Nation professing wisdom to permit it, much less the sobriety
of a people professing Christianity. In the mean time such persons may know
that wise men may be argued out of a Religion they own, but none but Fools and
mad men will be droll'd out of it. Let them first try whether they can laugh
men out of their Estates, before they attempt to do it out of their hopes of an
eternal happiness. And I am sure it will be no comfort to them in another
world, that they were accounted Wits for deriding those miseries which they
then feel and smart under the severity of: it will be no mitigation of their
flames that they go laughing into them; nor will they endure them the better
because they would not believe them. But while this is so prevailing a humor
among the vain men of this Age and Nation, what can we expect but that God
should by remarkable and severe judgments, seek to make men more serious in
Religion, or else make their hearts to ache, and their joints to tremble, as he
did Belshazzars, when he could find nothing else to carouse in but the vessels
of the Temple. And when men said in the Prophet Zephany, Zeph. 1. 13, 14, 15.
chap. 1. 12. that God neither did good nor evil, presently it follows,
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: the
day of the Lord is near, a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wasteness and desolation; as it is with us at this time. Thus we see how sad
the parallel has been not only in the judgments of Israel, but in the sins
likewise which have made those judgments so severe.

4. The severity of the judgment appears not only from the Causes, but from
the Author of it. I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah. God challenges the execution of his justice to himself, not only in
the great day, but in his judgment here in the world. Shall there be evil in a
Amos 3 6.
City, and the Lord has not done it? When God is pleased to punish men for
their sins, the execution of his justice is as agreeable to his nature now, as
it will be at the end of the world. We all know that he may do it if he please,
and he has told us, that he does and will do it; and we know withal, that
without such remarkable severities, the world will hardly be kept in any a we
of him. We do not find that love does so much in the world as fear does, there
being so very few persons of tractable and ingenuous spirits. It is true of too
many, what Lactantius Lact. l. 2. c. 11.
observes of the Romans, Nunquam Dei meminerunt, nisi dum in malis sunt, they
seldom think of God, but when they are afraid of him. And there is not only
this reason as to particular persons why God should punish them, but there is a
greater as to communities, and bodies of men; for although God suffers wicked
men to escape punishment here, as he often does; yet he is sure not to do it in
the life to come; but communities of men can never be punished but in this
world; and therefore the justice of God does often discover it selr in these
common calamities, to keep the world in subjection to him, and to let men see
that neither the multitude of their associates, nor the depth of their designs,
nor the subtilty of their Councils can secure them from the omnipotent arm of
Divine Justice, when he has determined to visit their transgressions with
rods, and their iniquities with stripes. But when he does all this, yet his
loving kindness does he not utterly take from them: for in the midst of all his
judgments he is pleased to remember mercy; of which we have a remarkable
instance in the Text, for when God was overthrowing Cities, yet he plucked the
inhabitants as firebrands out of the burning: and so I come from the severity
of God,

2. To the mixture of his mercy in it. And ye were as a firebrand plucked out
of the burning. That notes two things, the nearness they were in to the danger,
and the unexpectedness of their deliverance out of it.

1. The nearness they were in to the danger, quasi torris, cujus jam magna pars
absumpta est, as some Paraphrase it; like a brand, the greatest part of which
is already consumed by Fire; which shows the difficulty of their escaping. So
Joshua is said to be a brand plucked out of the fire, Zech. 3. 2. And to this
St. Hierom upon this place, applies that difficult passage, 1 Cor. 3. 15. they
shall be saved, but so as by Fire, nothing the greatness of the danger they
were in, and how hardly they should escape. And are not all the inhabitants of
this City, and all of us in the suburbs of the other, whose houses escaped so
near the flames, as Firebrands plucked out of the burning? When the fire came on
in its rage and fury, as though it would in a short time have devoured all
before it, that not only this whole City, but so great a part of the Suburbs of
the other should escape untouched, is (all circumstances considered) a
wonderful expression of the kindness of God to us in the midst of so much
severity. If he had suffered the Fire to go on to have consumed the remainder
of our Churches and Houses, and laid this City even with the other in one
continued heap of ruins, we must have said, Just art thou O Lord, and
righteous in all thy judgments. We ought rather to have admired his patience
in sparing us so long; then complain of this rigor of his justice in punishing
us at last; but instead of that he has given us occasion this day with the
three Children in the fiery furnace to praise him in the midst of the flames.
For even the Inhabitants of London themselves who have suffered most in this
calamity, have cause to acknowledge the mercy of God toward them, that they
are escaped themselves; though it be (as the Jews report of Joshua, the High
Priest, when thrown into the fire by the Chaldeans) with their clothes burnt
about them. Though their habitations be consumed, and their losses otherwise
may be too great, yet that in the midst of so much danger by the flames, and
the press of people so very few should suffer the loss of their lives, ought to
be owned by them and us as a miraculous Providence of God toward them. And
therefore not unto us, not unto us, but to his holy name be the praise of so
great a preservation in the midst of so heavy a Judgment.

2. The unexpectedness of such a deliverance; they are not saved by their own
skill and counsel, nor by their strength and industry, but by him who by his
mighty hand did pluck them as firebrands out of the burning. Though we own the
justice of God in the calamities of this day, let us not forget his mercy in
what he has unexpectedly rescued from the fury of the flames; that the Royal
Palaces of our Gracious Sovereign, the residence of the Nobility, the Houses of
Parliament, the Courts of Judicature, the place where we are now assembled and
several others of the same nature, with other places and habitations to receive
those who were burnt out of their own, stand at this day untouched with the
fire (and long may they continue so) ought chiefly to be ascribed to the power
and goodness of that God, who not only commands the raging of the Sea, and the
madness of the people, but whom the winds and the flames obey. Although enough
in a due subordination to Divine Providence can never be attributed to the
mighty care and industry of our most Gracious Sovereign, and his Royal
Highness, who by their presence and encouragement inspired a new life and
vigor into the sinking spirits of the Citizens, whereby God was pleased so far
to succeed their endeavors, that a stop was put to the fury of the fire in
such places where it was as likely to have prevailed, as in any parts of the
City consumed by it.

O let us not then frustrate the design of so much severity mixed with so great
mercy: let it never be said, that neither judgments nor kindness will work
upon us: that neither our deliverance from the Pestilence which walks in
darkness, nor from the flames which shine as the noonday, will awaken us from
that Lethargy and security we are in by our sins: but let God take what course
he pleases with us, we are the same incorrigible people still that ever we
were. For we have cause enough for our mourning and lamentation this day, (if
God had not sent new calamities upon us) that we were no better for those we
had undergone before. We have surfetted with mercies, and grown sick of the
kindness of Heaven to us, and when God has made us smart for our fullness and
wantonness, then we grew sullen and murmured and disputed against Providence,
and were willing to do any thing but repent of our sins and reform our lives.
It is not many years since God blessed us with great and undeserved blessings,
which we then thought our selves very thankful for; but if we had been really
so, we should never have provoked him who bestowed those favors upon us in so
great a degree as we have done since. Was this our requital to him for
restoring our Sovereign, to rebel the more against Heaven? Was this our
thankfulness, for removing the disorders of Church and State, to bring them
into our lives? Had we no other way of trying the continuance of Gods goodness
to us, but by exercising his patience by our greater provocations? As though we
had resolved to let the world see, there could be a more unthankful and
disobedient people than the Jews had been. Thus we sinned with as much security
and confidence, as though we had blinded the eyes, or bribed the justice, or
commanded the power of Heaven: When God of a sudden like one highly provoked
drew forth the sword of his destroying Angel, and by it cut off so many
thousands in the midst of us. Then we fell upon our knees, and begged the mercy
of Heaven that our lives might be spared, that we might have time to amend
them: but no sooner did our fears abate, but our devotion did so too, we had
soon forgotten the promises we made in the day of our distress, and I am afraid
it is at this day too true of us which is said in the Revelations of those who
had escaped the several plagues which so many had been destroyed by. And the
rest of the Rev. 9. 20.
men which were not killed by these Plagues, yet repented not of the work of
their hands. For if we had not greedily sucked in again the poison we had only
laid down while we were begging for our lives, if we had not returned with as
great fury and violence as ever to our former lusts, the removing of one
judgment had not been as it were only to make way for the coming on of
another. For the grave seemed to close up her mouth, and death by degrees to
withdraw himself, that the Fire might come upon the Stage, to act its part too
in the Tragoedy our sins have made among us: and I pray God this may be the
last Act of it. Let us not then provoke God to find out new methods of
vengeance, and make experiments upon us of what other unheard of severities may
do for our cure. But let us rather meet God now by our repentance, and
returning to him, by our serious humiliation for our former sins, and our
steadfast resolutions to return no more to the practice of them. That, that much
more dangerous infection of our souls may be cured as well as that of our
bodies, that the impure flames which burn within may be extinguished, that all
our luxuries may be retrenched, our debaucheries punished, our vanities taken
away, our careless indifferency in Religion turned into a greater seriousness
both in the profession and the practice of it. So will God make us a happy and
prosperous, when he finds us a more righteous and holy Nation. So will God
succeed all your endeavors for the honor and interest of that people whom you
represent. So may he add that other Title to the rest of those you have
deserved for your Countries good, to make you Repairers of the breaches of the
City as well as of the Nation, and restorers of paths to dwell in: So may that
City which now sits solitary like a Widow, have her tears wiped off, and her
beauty and comeliness restored unto her. Yea so may her present ruins, in
which she now lies buried, be only the forerunners of a more joyful
resurrection. In which though the body may remain the same, the qualities may
be so altered, that its present desolation may be only the putting off its
former inconveniences, weakness, and deformities, that it may rise with
greater glory, strength and proportion: and to all her other qualities, may
that of incorruption be added too, at least till the general conflagration. And
I know your great Wisdom and Justice will take care, that those who have
suffered by the ruins, may not likewise suffer by the rising of it, that the
glory of the City may not be laid upon the tears of the Orphans and Widows, but
that its foundations may be settled upon Justice and Piety. That there be no
complaining in the Streets for want of righteousness, nor in the City for want
of Churches, nor in the Churches for want of a settled maintenance. That those
who attend upon the service of God in them may never be tempted to betray their
Consciences to gain a livelihood, nor to comply with the factious humors of men
that they may be able to live among them. And thus when the City through the
blessing of Heaven shall be built again, may it be a habitation of Holiness
toward God, of Loyalty toward our Gracious King and his Successors, of
Justice and Righteousness toward men, of Sobriety, and Peace, and Unity among
all the Inhabitants, till not Cities and Countries only, but the World and time
it self shall be no more. Which God of his infinite mercy grant through the
merits and mediation of his Son, to whom with the Father and Eternal spirit, be
all Honor and Glory for evermore.

FINIS.

