A REBUKE TO THE INFORMERS: WITH A PLEA for the Ministers of the Gospel, CALLED
Nonconformists, AND THEIR MEETINGS. AND Advice to those to whom these INFORMERS
Address themselves for Assistance in their Undertakings.

Prove. 28.23. He that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, than he
that flattereth with his tongue.

Acts 28.30, 31. Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him.

Joh. 20.17. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week,
when the doors were shut, for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the
midst, and says unto thim, Peace be unto you.

Act. 9.4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou
Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1675.

To the READER.
THE Design of this ensuing Discourse, is to convince and convert from the evil
of their ways, those men that have taken upon them the work and office of
Informers; and also to keep others from being partakers of their sins. By
Informers, I mean such persons as under a pretense of suppressing seditious
Conventicles, do create much disturbance to men fearing God, causing their
Assemblies to be broken up, and the persons whom they find assembled together
to be fined; although they can prove no crime against them, but that they find
them praying to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and preaching and hearing Gods
holy word. Which practice of theirs seems to me, to be exceeding sinful, and
greatly prejudicial to their own and others eternal Salvation, of which I have
given several demonstrations, and have answered their most material Plea's that
did come to my thoughts, whereby they seek to excuse and extenuate their sin.

If any say, these Informers are so hardened in their sinful ways, that there is
no hope that they should be brought to repentance, and therefore you might have
spared your labor in endeavoring to reclaim them.

I answer, 1. There is hope that the worst of men may be brought to repentance,
even such as are slaves to Satan, and are taken and led captive by him at his
will; and therefore such as are grown to that height of sin, as to oppose the
truth, are to be instructed with meekness, as not knowing but God may give them
repentance unto life. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. In meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth. And that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

2. God can do great things by weak and unlikely means, to still and quiet
those that are enemies to, and afflicters of his people. Psalm. 8.2. Out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine
enemies, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger. Ultores vocat
illos, qui laedunt eos qui fidunt Deo. Vatabl.

3. If any one of these Informers, that are sprung up in any part of this
Nation, should be brought to repentance, though the rest should perish in their
evil courses; I should think my pains well bestowed, for the conversion of one
sinner from the error of his ways. For one soul is of more worth than the whole
world, Mark 8.36. And one sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.18. Not only
several persons, but Towns, yea Countries may enjoy peace by the conversion of
one Informer. For some of them are such turbulent persons, that they do not
only disquiet their neighbors that live in the same Towns with themselves, but
they go from one Town to another, and from one County to another, raising
persecution against those that meet together in a peaceable manner, to pray to
God in the name of Jesus Christ, and to preach and hear his holy word. When
Saul, who was a great persecutor of the servants of Christ, was converted;
several Churches had rest and peace thereby. Act. 9.31. Then had the Churches
rest through all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified; and walking
in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. What
great benefits accrued to several Churches by the conversion but of one
persecutor, who had been an active man in persecuting the members of Christ?
The rest, the edification, the multiplying, the spiritual comfort of the
Churches in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, followed upon the conversion of Saul.

4. If none that are actually engaged in this way of being Informers should be
reclaimed, yet by opening the horrible and dangerous nature of their sin,
others that are or may be hereafter under a temptation to turn Informers, being
tempted thereto by poverty, enticing of evil minded men, promise of a reward,
affrighted by threatenings, or any other way; may be prevented from following
their pernicious ways. They are more foolish than the birds, that will be
allured to take the bait, when they espy the net. Prove. 1.17. Surely in vain is
the net spread in the sight of any bird.

5. If none should receive any benefit by what I have written, yet by warning
those that are engaged in this sinful practice to turn from their evil ways,
and warning others not to be partakers of their evil deeds; I shall deliver my
own soul. Ezekiel. 3.19. If thou warn the wicked man, and he turn not from his
wickedness, nor from his wicked way; he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou
have delivered thy soul.

But some may say, These papers are not like to come into the Informers hands;
or if they should, they will not bestow the pains to read them; or if they
should, they will but make a scoff at them; or they will be but the more
enraged; and therefore it is to no effect that this means should be used to
reclaim them.

Ans. 1. We must do our duty, and leave the success to God. Eccl. 11.6. In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand; for thou
know not whether shall prosper, this, or the other; or both be alike good. I
leave it wholly to the providence of God, what success he will give to my
endeavors. It may be he will put it into the hearts of some persons that
compassionate the perishing condition of these Informers, to send these papers
to them; and it may be he will move their hearts to read them, and who can tell
but he may touch their hearts in reading them, and cause some of the arrows
drawn out of his quiver to stick so fast in their consciences, as they shall
not be able to shake them of.

2. Writing as well as preaching is a means to bring sinners to repentance.
Jer. 36.2. Take thee the roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I
have spoken unto thee, against Israel and against Judah, and against all the
nations. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I
purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from his evil way; that
I may forgive them their iniquity and their sin. I observe here;

1. Jeremiah had no assurance that the Jews would read or hear what he wrote;
there was only a probability of it, It may be the house of Judah will hear. Yet
he was commanded to write in a book the judgments of God that hung over their
heads for their sins.

2. When Jeremiah was hindered from preaching, as he formerly had done; ver. 5.
I am shut up, I cannot go into the house of the Lord. God prescribed this way
as the most likely means to bring them to repentance, for Jeremiah to write
unto the Jews, Write all these words, that I have spoken to thee against Judah.
It may be the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto
them, that they may return every man from his evil way.

3. Though these Informers should not hearken to the counsel that I have given
them; yet whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, it is the mind
and will of God, that sinners should be called to repentance. Ezekiel. 2.7. And
thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear, for they are most rebellious.

4. Scorning is a great sin, and brings down mighty judgments. Prove. 19 29.
Judgments are prepared for scorners, Jer. 22.28. Now therefore be ye not
mockers, lest your bands be made strong. Yet though these Informers should
prove scorners, we must not conclude their case desperate, but use means to
bring them to repentance; both reproving them for their sin, and letting them
see there is mercy for them, if they will turn when they are reproved for their
sins. Prove. 1.22, 23. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity; and
the scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge! Turn at my reproof;
behold I will pour out my spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you.
But if they will persist in their sins, and scorn those means that are used to
bring them to repentance, their scorning will not hurt me, but themselves.
Prove. 9.12. If thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it. And let such persons
consider what is said, Prove. 3.34. Surely he scorneth the scorners. And Prove.
1.24. to the 32.

5. If none of these Informers should vouchsafe to read what I have written for
the convincing them of their sin; yet it may fall into the hands of their
friends and relations, and they may hereby be put upon mourning and praying for
them, and endeavoring their conversion.

6. As for their being enraged at what I have written; I shall reply, 1. Our
Lord Jesus spoke nothing but the truth; yet many of the Jews were so incensed
against him, that they would have thrown him down headlong from an high hill.
Luke 4.28, 29. And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things,
were filled with wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of the City, and led him
unto the brow of the hill, whereon their City was built, that they might cast
him down headlong. Yet he did not forbear reproving them for their sins; though
he was hated by the world on this very account, for testifying that the deeds
thereof were evil. Joh. 7.7. The world cannot hate you; but me it hates,
because I testify of it, that the deeds thereof are evil. Yea, though their
hatred arose to such an height, as that they wont about to kill him, yet he
taught them and reproved them for their sins. v. 14, 19. Now about the midst of
the feast, Jesus went into the Temple, and taught, none of you keeps the law,
why go ye about to kill me? Joh. 8.40. And now ye seek to kill me, a man which
has told you the truth. 2. If God shall touch any one of their hearts, and
reclaim them from their evil ways, instead of being enraged, they will bless
God, and be thankful to them whom God makes instruments of keeping them from
sin. When David was kept by Abigails advice from shedding of blood, he was
thankful to God for putting it into Abigails heart to come to him, and thankful
to her for her good counsel. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. And David said to Abigail,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice; and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand. Nabal was a
son of Belial, who had requited David evil for good. To be kept from
persecuting the servants of God, is as great a favor as to be kept from
avenging a man's self on a son of Belial: And if David was so thankful to God
the author, and Abigail the instrument of his preservation from sin; why should
not these men, in stead of railing and fretting, say in their hearts, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, that sent this man to show us our sin, and blessed
be he, and blessed be his advice?

To prevent mistakes, and the uncharitable censures that some may be ready to
pass upon this ensuing discourse, I do freely and sincerely declare, that I
have no design to take off any Magistrate, Officer, or any other persons, from
using all due care and diligence to prevent tumults and Insurrections; but only
to lay open the greatness, and prevent the growth of their sin, who under a
pretense of preventing seditious Meetings, do suppress religious Exercises. The
discovery of the folly of these men and their practices, being a likely means
to put a stop to their sinful proceedings, as the Apostle speaks of those that
resist the truth. 2 Timothy 3.9. But they shall proceed no further, for their
folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.

CHAP. I.
THere are certain men risen up in this Nation, called INFORMERS, whose
trangression says within my heart, that they are wandered out of the path of
life, and are going on apace in the broad way that leads to destruction. I have
not only heard of them, but I have met with some of them in the very act of
their sin. When I had considered their ways, I thought my self obliged to
endeavor the turning them from their sinful courses. For I find in the Law of
Moses, a strict charge given to him that meets his Neighbors Ox or Ass
going astray, to bring it back, though his Neighbor be his enemy, Exodus 23.4.
If thou meetest thine enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again. It is a greater act of Charity to bring back a
sinner that is gone astray from God, than to bring back an Ox or an Ass of
our enemies, that was gone astray from him. And we are under stronger
obligations to endeavor the conversion of a sinner, than to bring back the
straying Ox or Ass of an enemy, on several accounts. For,

1. The Soul of a man is of more worth than all the Oxen and Asses upon the
face of the earth; yea the Soul of the meanest man is of greater value than the
whole world, Mark 8.36. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul.

2. It is far more dangerous for a sinner to go astray from God, than an Ox or
an Ass to go astray from his owner. For the Ox that goes from one Master,
may find another that may take care of it; or the Ox may get a subsistence by
ranging abroad, as well as abiding at home; or if the straying Ox should be
slain, its misery ends with its life: But the sinner that goes astray from
God, unless he be brought to repentance, will fall into the Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, and will perish eternally.

3. God has a greater right to the Souls of men, than any man has to his Oxen
or Asses, Ezekiel. 18.4. All souls are mine. They are the work of his hands, and
therefore he may claim a greater propriety in them, than any man can in those
things which he has bought with his money, or calls his own on the account of
any other title.

4. We are more obliged to bring unto God (who is our Sovereign Lord, our
heavenly Father, our dearest Friend) that which is his own, when gone astray
from him, than we are to bring back to our enemy his Ox or his Ass when we
meet it going astray. If then he that meets his enemies Ox or Ass going
astray, be under a strict charge to bring it back, Thou shait surely bring it
back to him again; how much more are we obliged to endeavor the conversion of
a sinner, when we meet him going astray from God, though he be one of the
greatest enemies we have in the-world?

When I had considered not only the swift destruction these Informers bring
upon their own Souls, but also what mischief they have already done, and may
further do unto men fearing God, if not reclaimed; how many they draw to be
partakers with them in their sin; what temptations needy and malicious men may
be under to follow their pernicious ways; what great guilt is brought upon the
Nation by their means; I thought with my self, that the leading these men to
repentance would conduce to a public good, as well as be an act of kindness to
their own Souls, and so was the more confirmed in my resolution to endeavor
the converting them from the error of their ways.

The most effectual way to reclaim these men from their evil ways seems to me
to be this; To demonstrate out of the word of God the greatness and the
dangerous nature of this sin, which I conceive they either know not, or at
least do not consider it. For that is the most powerful means that can be used
for converting a sinner, Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting
the soul. If the word of God will not prevail with them to turn from their evil
ways, though one should arise from the dead, either one of the Saints, that
has been in heaven, and should tell them what a glorious Kingdom they shall
lose, if they persist in their sins; or one of their fellow sinners should come
out of hell, and tell them what torments they have felt in that Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, and they will certainly come into that place
of torment, if they go on in their evil ways; yet this would not persuade them
to repent. Luke 16.29, 30, 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them. And he said, nay father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

For my more orderly proceeding with these men, I shall use this method: 1. I
shall show what Informers I mean and aim at in this Discourse. 2. I shall
premise something concerning the persons whom they molest, and the work for
which they molest them. 3. I shall by several arguments endeavor to convince
them of the greatness of their sin. 4. I shall answer their Plea's, whereby
they excuse their sin. 5. I shall draw some Inferences for their and others
instruction.


The Informers I design in this Discourse to convince of the evil of their
ways, are such as either for the love of money, or out of malice, or a blind
zeal, or any other evil principle, under a pretense of suppressing seditious
Conventicles, go to the Assemblies where those Ministers (commonly called
Nonconformists) do pray to God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and do read the
holy Scriptures, and preach the Gospel; and if they find them either Praying or
Preaching, they procure Officers to break up their Assemblies, or else they go
to the Magistrates, and by the Information they give against those present at
the foresaid Assemblies, they stir them up either to imprison the Minister, or
to fine him, or such of the people as they think good, in great sums of money.

The reason why I deal with these Informers only that come to, and raise up
trouble against these Assemblies, where those Ministers called Nonconformists,
pray to God, and instruct the people, are these: 1. I have observed, that their
chief design and endeavor has been to molest those Meetings. 2. I have no
knowledge what is said or done at other Meetings, as never to my remembrance
having been present at any of them, and therefore will not justify nor condemn
them; but shall leave that to those that are concerned therein.


In order to the conviction of these Informers of the evil of their ways, I
shall premise three Propositions: 1. Those Ministers whom they persecute, are
righteous men, and there are many righteous persons that frequent their
Assemblies. 2. Praying and preaching, which are the works for which they are
persecuted, are good works. 3. These Ministers that are persecuted by these
Informers for praying and preaching, are true Ministers of Jesus Christ, and
are called of God to preach the Gospel. I shall briefly prove these three
Propositions.


1. These Ministers whom these Informers persecute, are righteous men; to
evidence this, consider:

1. They are sound in the Faith, they believe all things that are written by
the Prophets and Apostles. They embrace that Faith which is professed in the
Protestant Churches; and particularly, they own the established Doctrine of the
Church of England, although they have different apprehensions about the
Discipline. Soundness in the Faith is requisite to make a man a righteous man
(although that alone be not sufficient); for Heresy is a work of the flesh,
which will shut a man out of the Kingdom of heaven, as well as Idolatry,
Adultery, Drunkenness, or such like sins, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

2. They are righteous men in Gods account, who walk in all his Ordinances, and
all his Commandments in a blameless manner, Luke 1.6. They were both righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless. That evidence which is given of the righteousness of Zacbarias and
Elizabeth, may be given of these men, they walk in all the Ordinances of God,
they have respect to all the Commandments of God, and are blameless in their
conversations. They are baptized, and baptize others in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; they often celebrate the Lords Supper; they praise God in
singing Psalms; they keep holy the Sabbath day; they pray to God in secret, and
pray in their Families, they worship God in public Assemblies, as well as
privately; they are just, sober, temperate, patient under afflictions, etc.

3. They visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and they keep
themselves unspotted of the world, and they that do so (being sound in the
Faith) are Religious men, and their Religion is pure and undefiled in the sight
of God, Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father is
this, To visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world. They endeavor according to their abilities
and their opportunities, to do good unto all men; And that is an argument, that
they are born of God, 2 John v. 11. He that does good is of God.

4. They train up their children and servants in the knowledge and the fear of
the Lord, and that is an evidence of a righteous man; when he does not only
serve God, and walk with God himself, but teaches his household to do so also,
Josh. 24.15. As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. Cornelius his piety
was evidenced by training up his house in the fear of God, Act. 10.2. A devout
man, and one that feared God with all his house. God takes special notice of
Abraham's piety, in that he was careful that his children and his whole house
should keep the ways of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. I know him, that he will command
his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that
which he has spoken of him.

If it be said, Some think and speak otherwise of these Ministers which are
called Nonconformists, as if they were deceivers of the people, and were not
good men.

I answer: 1. So did many among the Jews say of Christ and his Apostles.
Amongst the Jews there were differing thoughts concerning Jesus Christ, Joh.
7.12. Some said he is a good man; others said, nay, but he deceives the
people. There were as evil reports raised, and as dishonorable speeches given
out against the Apostles, as there are against these men, 2 Cor. 6.8. By honor
and dishonor, by evil and good report, as deceivers and yet true.

2. The Spirit of God foresaw that scandalous reports would be raised against
righteous men; and that they would be misrepresented in the world, whereby many
would be deceived, and be ready to condemn the innocent; and therefore he has
given us a sure rule to judge who is a righteous man; He that does
righteousness, he is a righteous man, 1 John 3.7. Little children, let no man
deceive you; he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.
These men approve themselves to be righteous men by their constant care to do
those things which are just and right in the sight of God and men.

3. Their adversaries that reproach them, would be glad to be in their
condition when they dye; then they will wish, that their last end may be like
theirs.

If any say, Do you know all those Ministers which are called Nonconformists,
that you know them to be righteous men?

I answer; 1. With some of them I have had intimate acquaintance for several
years, and have fully known their Doctrine and manner of life, and I am
abundantly satisfied in what I have asserted, that they are men of sound
judgments, of upright, holy, and exemplary conversations. And Charity obliges
me to believe and hope the like of the rest, although I have no personal
acquaintance with them.

2. If any Minister that goes under the name of a Nonconformist be not a
righteous man; I plead not his cause, but dislike and disown such a man as much
as the Conformists do.

And as these Ministers are righteous men, so there are many of those that come
to their Assemblies; I say not that they are all righteous that come to their
Meetings (for the Gospel is like a Net, which draws good and bad); but this I
say, there are many righteous persons come to their Assemblies, such as are of
an holy blameless conversation, well reported of for good works, who have no
other design in frequenting these Meetings, than the glorifying God and the
saving their own souls.

2. Praying to God in the Name of Jesus Christ for things agreeable to his
will, and Preaching and Hearing of Gods Word, are good works. Prayer is a good
work, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplication,
prayer, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and
for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior:

1. It is commanded of God, v. 8. I will therefore, that men pray everywhere,
lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. These words may relate to
verse 3, where the Apostle had told us, that praying for all men is good and
acceptable in the sight of God. And therefore commands that men pray
everywhere.

2. Prayer, when made by upright men, is delightful to God, Prove. 15.3. The
prayer of the upright is his delight.

3. God promises great blessings to them that pray to him, as eternal life,
Romans 10.13. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. The
giving of the Holy Ghost, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly Father will give the holy
Spirit to them that ask him. Yea all good things, Psalm. 31.10. They that seek
the Lord shall not want any good thing.

And as Praying, so Preaching of the Gospel is a good work: For,

1. It is commanded by God, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, preach the
Gospel to every creature.

2. It does great good to the souls of men. It turns them from darkness to
light, from the power of Satan to God. It is the great instrument of saving
men's souls, even that preaching which the world counts foolishness, 1 Cor.
1.20. It pleased God, by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

3. God promises to reward this work with a Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 4.
The Elders which are among you I exhort; Feed the flock of God, which is among
you. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of
glory, which fades not away.

As Preaching, so Hearing the Word is a good work: For,

1. It is commanded of God, Jam. 1.19. Let every one be swist to bear.

2. It has the promise of life and salvation annexed to it, Isa. 55.3. Hear
and your soul shall live.

3. By Hearing the Word of God we get great good for our souls. For hereby we
get faving faith, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing. And have the Holy Ghost
communicated to us, Act. 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy
Ghost fell on them that heard him; with many other precious blessings. And yet
for these things are Ministers that preach and pray, and people that hear them,
vexed and molested.

3. These Ministers are true Ministers of Jesus Christ; called of God to preach
the Gospel. To prove this, confider:

1. They have the internal call, which consists in bestowing Ministerial
abilities, and a willingness to serve the Lord in the work of the Ministry.
Gods distribution of abilities is one branch of this call, 1 Cor. 7.17. As God
has distributed, as God has called every man. Our Lord Jesus proves his Call
to the Ministry, by being anointed with the Spirit, Luke 4.18. The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor. These Ministers are endued with Ministerial abilities, and have those
qualifications required by the Apostle in a Minister of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.3,
4. They are blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no strikers, they rule their
houses well, etc. The internal Call consists also in a willingness and desire,
stirred up in the heart by the Spirit of God, to undertake this work and office
of preaching the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 18.5, 6, 7. In the 5th verse, Moses tells us,
that of all the Tribes, God had chosen Levi to minister to him; and v. 7. he
tells us which of the Sons of Levi were to be admitted to minister before the
Lord, namely, he that came with all the desire of his mind. This willing mind
to serve the Lord in the work of the Ministry, God has given unto these men.

2. They have given up themselves unto the Lord, to serve him in the Gospel of
his Son; and have been set apart for this work in a solemn manner by fasting
and prayer, and most of them also with imposition of hands. And they that
having the internal Call, are separated and set apart by fasting and prayer for
the work of the Ministry, are sent out by God to preach the Gospel, Act. 13.2,
3, 4. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work
whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away. So they being sent forth by the Holy
Ghost, departed.

3. They prove themselves to be true Ministers of Jesus Christ by preaching the
word of truth. There is nothing contrary to sound Doctrine in what they teach
and preach unto the people. This was the way by which the Apostle proved
himself a true Minister, by preaching the word of truth, 2 Cor. 6.4.7. But in
all things approving your selves as the Ministers of God, by the word of truth.
And thus John Baptist proved Christ to be sent of God, because he preached Gods
word, Joh. 3.34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God. Such as
being separated to the work of the Ministry, do teach the truth, and preach
sound Doctrine, are good Ministers of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4.6. If thou put the
Brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus
Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and good doctrine, whereunto thou
have attained.

4. God has given evidence to the truth of their Call to the Ministry by the
conversion of many souls. They have been instrumental to turn many souls from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; and also to edify and
build up such as are converted. When there were some that questioned, whether
Paul were a true Apostle; he proves himself to be a true Apostle, by the
success God had given his Ministry in the conversion of the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
9.1, 2. Am I not an Apostle? Are not you my work in the Lord? If I am not an
Apostle to others, yet doubtless am unto you, for the seal of mine Apostleship
are ye in the Lord.

5. The people that do feel the want of the word, and desire to be instructed
in the way to life and salvation, do call upon them to preach the word to them.
We read of Paul, that he concluded assuredly that God called him to preach the
Gospel in Macedonia, because he saw a man in a vision calling to him, Come over
into Macedonia and help us, Act. 16.9, 10. There are multitudes of people that
call out to these men, Come and help us. Why may they not thence assuredly
gather, that the Lord has called them to preach to them, being such as are
duly qualified, and have been set apart for the work of the Ministry.

Obj. These men were not ordained to the work of the Ministry by the Bishops,
and therefore are no true Ministers.

Answ. 1. The Ministers of the French and Dutch, and several other Reformed
Churches, have no other Ordination than by Presbyters; yet are their Churches
owned by most Protestants for true Churches, and their Ministers for true
Ministers of Jesus Christ.

2. Many of the Nonconformists were ordained by Bishops, yet these Informers
prosecute them with as great fury as they do others, making no distinction
between them.

3. Those whose cause I plead, that were not ordained by Bishops, were set
apart to the work of the Ministry with fasting and prayer by the Elders of
other Churches. And it is contrary to the judgment of many learned Bishops, and
great Assertors of Episcopacy, to deny those to be true Ministers that were
ordained by Presbyters, because they had not Episcopal Ordination. For diverse
instances might be given out of their Writings, whereby it appears they did
allow Ordination by Presbyters to be valid and lawful; especially in such cases
as Ordination could not be had by Bishops, and in Ecclesia turbata; which is
the case of several of these Ministers, they were set apart to the work of the
Ministry when Bishops were laid aside in the Nation, and when the Nation and
Church were in great troubles. I will mention two or three. Archbishop
Spotswood in his History of Scotland, lib. 7. p. 514. makes mention of three
Bishops that came out of Scotland to be Consecrated in England; when the time
and place for the Consecration was agreed on, a Question in the mean time was
moved by Dr. Andrews Bishop of Ely, touching the Consecration of the Scottish
Bishops, who as he said must first be ordained Presbyters, as having received
no Ordination from a Bishop. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Bancroft, who
was by, maintained that thereof there was no necessity, seeing where Bishops
could not be had, the Ordination given by the Presbyters must be esteemed
lawful: Otherwise that it might be doubted, if there were any lawful vocation
in most of the Reformed Churches. This applauded too by the other Bishops, Ely
acquiesced, and at the day, and in the place appointed, the three Scottish
Bishops were Confecrated. Dr. Prideaux who was Professor of Divinity in Oxford,
and afterward a Bishop, has this passage in his Disputations, De Disciplina
Ecclesiae; Presbyterum Presbyteros ordinare posse, presertim deficientibus
Episcopis concedit cum Sententiarum Magistro sanior Pars Scholasticorum. That a
Presbyter may Ordain Presbyters, especially where there are no Bishops, is
granted by the Master of Sentences, and the sounder part of the Schoolmen.

4. These Ministers were set apart to the work of the Ministry by the Elders of
other Churches; and in Scripture a Bishop and an Elder are all one; so that
they were Ordained by such as the Scripture calls Bishops, though not by
Diocesan Bishops. The clearing of this, that Bishops and Elders were all one in
Scripture account, will I conceive give a full answer to this Objection. To
this purpose let these Scriptures be well-weigh'd; Act. 20.17, 28. And from
Miletus he sent and called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus. And speaking to
these Elders he says, Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. The same persons whom he calls
(...) in the 17th verse, he calls (...) in the 28th verse; whence it may be
inferred, that Elders and Bishops are the same in Scripture-sense. So also,
Phil. 1. l. Paul and Timotheus the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints
in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with Bishops and Deacons. Pareus
observes in his Commentary on this place, That in the Apostles times, all the
Ministers of the Gospel were called Bishops; because the Apostle mentions
several Bishops as well as Deacons in one Church; and concludes, that though
after-ages made a distinction, yet by Divine right and Apostolical practice a
Bishop and Presbyter were all one. His words are these, Apparet hinc tempore
Apostolorum nomen Episcopi fuisse omnibus Evangelii doctoribus commune; quia
plures uni Ecclesiae Episcopos, uti and Diaconos tribuit Apostolus, Episcopos
igitur and Presbyter jure Divino and Apostolica consuetudine idem est. Tit.
1.5, 7. For this cause lest I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I appointed
thee; and then ver. 6. he gives qualifications of an Elder, and then adds, ver.
7. For a Bishop must be blameless. Whom he calls an Elder in ver. 5. he calls a
Bishop ver. 7. And if a Bishop and an Elder were not all one, what coherence
would there be in the Apostles Discourse, to tell him he left him to ordain
Elders in every City, and what manner of persons they must be; and then to add,
for a Bishop must be blameless. And that this is no novel interpretation, I may
produce several Authors. As judicious Calvin, Locus hic abunde docet; nullum
esse Presbyteri and Episcopi discrimen. Johan. Piscator. Schol. v. 7. En hic
nominat Episcopum, quem v. 5. nominaverat Presbyterum. Hierome also, who was
born about the year 342, and dyed about the year 420, gives in full and clear
evidence to this, that in the time of the Apostles a Bishop and a Presbyter
were all one. And Blondel has written a large and learned Treatise to defend
Hierome's assertion, De primitiva Episcopi and Presbyteri (...), seu verius
(...), concerning the equality, or more truly the identity of a Bishop and a
Presbyter in the primitive times; wherein he proves, that Hierome did neither
imprudently assert that which was inconsistent with truth; nor impudently
affirm that which was contrary to the practice of the Church, nor misled by
prejudice, affirm that which was contrary to the Scripture; by the testimony
and practice of very learned men in several Ages of the Church. To whose
elaborate Treatise, entitled, Apologia pro sententia Hieronomi de Episcopis and
Presbyteris; I refer the Reader for his further satisfaction. Besides the
testimonies of particular persons, I might mention the judgment of whole
Assemblies of learned and judicious men met together on purpose to debate
matters of Religion, who have asserted the equality of power and authority
between all the Ministers of the Gospel. As for instance; The confession of
Faith compiled by the National Synod of the Reformed Churches in France in the
year 1559. And confirmed by a National Synod, 1571. has this passage. Art. 30.
Credimus omnes veros pastores ubicunque locorum collocati fuerint, eadem and
aequali inter se potestate esse praeditos sub unico illo capite, summoque and
solo universali Episcopo Jesu Christo; ac proinde nulli Ecclesiae licere sibi
in aliam imperlum aut dominationem vindioare. The Synod of Dort in their
Confession of Faith, published 1619. Art. 31. Quantum vero attinet divini verbi
Ministros, ubicunque locorum sunt, eandem illi potestatem and authoritatem
habent; ut qui omnes sunt Christi unici illius Episcopi universalis, unicique
capitis Ecclesiae Ministri.

CHAP. II. Arguments drawn out of the Scriptures to convince the Informers and
their Adherents, of the evil of their ways.
THese things being premised, I shall now by several Arguments demonstrate the
greatness and horrible nature of their Sin, who go to the Assemblies where
these Ministers of Christ, called by the name of Non-consormists, do pray to
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and preach the Gospel to them that
are met together, and if they find them either praying or preaching, they
procure Officers to interupt them, while they are worshipping God, and cause
their Assemblies to be broken; or else go and make Oath against them, and cause
them to be fined in great sums of Money, and get out Warrants to Distrain and
take away their Goods from them.

1. These Informers are guilty of persecuting righteous men for righteousness
sake, and to persecute righteous men for righteousness sake, is an horrible
Sin; which will appear evidently from several Scripture. I will instance in
three or four, Matt. 23.34, 35. Behold, I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen
and Scribes, and some of them ye shall kill, and crucify, and some of them ye
shall scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City, that
upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood
of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, whom ye slew between the Porch
and the Altar. Observe here, Persecution involves a man in the guilt of
righteous blood, in the guilt of all the righteous blood that has been shed
upon the earth since the world stood, which, if it were well considered and
believed, and laid to heart, were enough to fill the heart of these men with
unspeakable horror. Ps. 69.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Let their Table become a
fear before them, and that which should have been for their welfare become a
trap. Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not, and make their loins
continually to shake. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy
wrathful anger take hold of them. Let their habitation be desolate, and let
none dwell in their tents. For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and
they talk to the grief of him, whom thou have wounded. Add iniquity to their
iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness. Let them be blotted out
of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous. Observe here,

1. A Catalogue of dreadful curses, such as may make a man's ears tingle to hear
of them.

2. The Persons against whom, and the cause for which they are denounced, and
they are such as persecute the people of God, for this very Sin of persecution,
v. 26. For they persecute him, etc.

3. The person that imprecates, or (as some) by a Spirit of Prophecy foretells
what should befall Persecutors, and that was David, who in this Psalm,
represents and personates our Lord Jesus: And so we may look upon it, as our
Lord Jesus cursing, and foretelling what curses should come upon those that
should persecute him and his members. Now let us consider what these curses
are, which David, or rather our Lord Jesus foretells, should come upon
Persecutors. Their blessings shall be cursed, their table shall be their snare,
and that which should have been their welfare become a trap, v. 22. Their eyes
shall be darkened, that is, they shall be smitten with spiritual blindness, and
their loins shall shake continually; that is, they shall be as unable for any
good work, as a man whose loins shake continually; or else a guilty Conscience
shall make them shake for fear, even where no fear is, v. 28. God will pour out
his indignation upon them; pouring out signifies the abundance of wrath, as
when the clouds are said to pour down rain, it implies abundance of rain; and
his wrathful anger shall take hold of them, it shall not only fall upon them
but abide, and take such hold as they shall not get from it, v. 24. God will
give them up to their hearts lusts, and punish this Sin by letting them go on
in their Sins, by adding one Sin to another, which is a sore judgment. And will
not let them come into his righteousness; that is, will let them dye in their
Sins, will not let them partake of his mercy and favor, will not let them have
any share of the righteousness of Christ, v. 26. They shall be cut off from the
land of the living, and have no part with the righteous in the world to come,
v. 27. God will visit their families and posterity with desolating judgments,
v, 25. This shall be the portion of them that persecute the members of the Lord
Jesus, if they continue in this Sin without repentance. See another Scripture,
Ps. 7.13. He ordains his arrows against the persecutors. And woe to those men
against whom the great God, the Lord of Hosts, ordains his arrows. And
whereas he says not his Arrow, but he ordains his arrows against the
Persecutors, it implies that God has several sorts of judgments in store for
Persecutors, both judgments in this life, and the life to come.

It may be you will say, we see Persecutors of righteous men are in a very
dreadful condition, but we hope we are not guilty of this great Sin of
persecution by our molesting these men in their meetings, and causing their
goods to be taken from them. Did we hale them to Prisons, or cause them to be
put to death, then we might justly be called Persecutors; but seeing we do not
take away their lives, but their goods, we hope we are no Persecutors.

Ans. 1. All injuries done wittingly to righteous men, either in word or deed,
especially when they are troubled for righteousness sake, are persecutions.
Ishmael did not offer any violence to the life, person, or estate of Isaac: He
did but mock him, Genesis 21.9. yet he is charged with persecuting Isaac. Gal.
4.29. But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit; even so it is non. Job's friends did not afflict his
body, nor touch his estate, nor disturb him at his devotion; only they grieved
his Spirit by their reproaches, and uncharitable censures of him, and they are
charged with the guilt of persecution. Job. 19.21, 22. Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, Oh ye my friends; for the hand of God has touched me, why do ye
persecute me, etc. David speaking of his Persecutors, tells us one way whereby
they persecuted him, was by talking and speaking those things which caused him
grief. Ps. 69 26, They persecute him whom thou have smitten, and talk to the
grief of them, whom thou have wounded. If uncharitable censures, reproaches,
scoffs, be a degree of persecution; how can you wash your hands from the guilt
of this Sin, who call their meeting to worship God by reproachful terms, who
disturb them in their devotions; carry them before Magistrates, and cause their
goods to be taken from them?

2. Though you do not take one drop of blood from these men, yet if you hate
them, and what you do to them proceed out of hatred; then are you Murderers in
God's account, and shall have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God, 1 Job.
3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer, and you know no murderer
has eternal life abiding in him. As unchaste lusts are adultery in God's
account, and he that lusts after a woman though he never touch her, has
committed adultery with her in his heart, Mat. 5.28. So malicious actions are
Murder, and he that hates his brother, though he offer no violence to his
life, has murdered him in his heart: I will not charge you with hatred, I
leave that to God, and your own Consciences; But this I will say, I cannot
understand how your actings are consistent with love: For love works no ill
to his Neighbor, Romans 13.10.

3. By taking away their livelihood whereby their lives are preserved, you are
guilty before God of taking away their lives; For a man's livelihood is in
Scripture accounted his life; else what means that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 24.6. No
man shall take the nether or the upper-milstone to pledge, for he takes a man's
life to pledge? Why is the taking the upper or nether millstone to pledge, the
taking a man's life to pledge; but because it is the taking that which is the
means of preserving his life by procuring him a livelihood?

4. By hindering them in the exercise of their Ministry, you take away that
which is as dear to them as their lives, Act 20.24. But none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear to my self; so that I might finish my
course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

5. You have cause to fear lest a worse Sin than blood be laid to your charge.
What Is that? what is worse than blood? The loss and ruin of immortal Souls,
who possibly might have obtained Salvation, had not you broken up the meetings
where they went to attend, when now they may become a prey to erroneous
persons, and be swallowed up of Satan, who goes about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour. Scattered sheep are in danger to be a prey to wild
beasts: Ezekiel. 34.4, 5. With force and with cruelty ye have ruled them. And they
were scattered, because there is no Shepherd, and they became meat to all the
beasts of the field, when they were scattered. And in the eighth and tenth
Verses: The Lord swears by his life, that seeing his Flock was become a prey
and meat to every beast of the field, he would require his Flock at their
hands, that had been the cause of their scattering.

Obj. 2. But we do not look upon these as righteous men, if we did we would not
molest them.

Ans. Though you do not, yet if God owns and accepts them as righteous, this
will not excuse your Sin. I have in part answered this already, and shall do it
more fully, Chapter 3. Plea 1st.

Obj. 3. We do not punish them for righteousness sake, but for keeping
Conventicles, which is a thing we hate.

Ans. 1. The work you find them at when you come to their meetings, is Praying
to God in the name of Jesus Christ, giving God thanks, Preaching and Hearing
God's holy Word; and for these things you go and inform against them, and raise
Persecution against them. What is, If this be not persecuting men for
righteousness sake? For Praying, Preaching and Hearing the Word of God are
Duties commanded by God, as was proved before. And God's commands are all
righteousness, Ps. 119.72. All thy Commandments are righteousness. So that when
men are persecuted for these things that are commanded of God, they are
persecuted for righteousness sake.

2. What do you mean by keeping Conventicles? If you take Conventicles as
Minshew describes a Conventicle when it is taken in an ill sense, Pro conventu
seditiosorum and sceleratorum; For a meeting of Seditious and wicked men; These
men whom you persecute, abhor Conventicles taken in this sense as much, and it
may be more than you do. And if you call the Assemblies of these men
Conventicles in this sense, you are guilty of reproaching the servants and the
ways of the living God; and so commit a double Sin, the one in reproaching, the
other in molesting them while they are serving the Lord. Remember there is a woe
to them that call good evil, Is. 5.20.

3. If the privacy of their meeting be that which you style a Conventicle, then
you will find the Disciples of Christ at a Conventicle, and Jesus Christ in the
midst of them speaking peace to them. Joh. 20.19. Then the same day at evening,
being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the Disciples
were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and
says unto them, Peace be unto you. Here is a private Assembly of the
Disciples, they met in the evening, their doors were shut for fear of the Jews,
And Christ Jesus honored this private meeting with his presence, he came to
them, he stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you. He did not
chide them, and say, Sirs, what do you here? why do you not meet in the
Synagogue? why do you shut the doors? But speaks peace unto them. Let those
consider whether they be led by the Spirit of Christ, who if they hear of the
servants of Christ met together, with the doors shut, for fear of their
Enemies; Cry out, a Conventicle, a Conventicle, and load them with reproaches,
and stir up trouble and persecution against them.

2. Arg. Those Informers do offend those little ones that believe in Jesus
Christ. And that is such a dangerous sin, that a man had better have a millstone
hang about his neck, and be cast into the depths of the Sea, than to offend the
least and meanest of all those that believe in Jesus Christ, Matt. 18.6. whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for
him that a millstone were hung about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea. Observe here,

1. What a dangerous sin it is to offend the meanest person that believes in
Jesus Christ; such a man had better have a millstone hung about his neck and be
drowned in the depths of the Sea. If a man were cast into the depth of the Sea,
though he had no weight upon him, though he had great skill in swimming, he
would certainly be drowned. But if a man had a great stone, a millstone tied
about his neck and were cast into the depths of the Sea, he would sink suddenly
and violently to the bottom of the Sea, and it would not be in the power of his
friends to recover him again. And who would be in this man's condition to gain
the whole world? Yet they that offend them that believe in Christ, are in a
worse condition than such a man as is drowned in the deepest place in the Sea
with a millstone about his neck; for it is not said, it were equally good, but
it were better for him to have a millstone hung about his neck, and be drowned
in the midst of the Sea, than offend those that believe in Jesus Christ.

2. The Nature of the sin; It is not said whosoever shall kill them, whosoever
shall imprison them, but whoever shall offend them.

3. The person offending that is put in this evil condition by his offense.
Every one whoever he be that shall offend, Whosoever shall offend. It reaches all
persons in all ages and generations, of all ranks and conditions.

4. The persons whom it is so dangerous to offend, and they are such as believe
in Jesus Christ, any one of them, even the least and meanest of them; Whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me. Now there are in
these Assemblies to which the Informers come, and against which they raise up
persecution, many that do believe in Jesus Christ. They do all of them profess
Faith in Jesus Christ, and many of them do by their works show forth their
Faith, and give good evidence that they do from their hearts believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ. It remains now to be proved that these Informers, and those
that join with them, are guilty of offending such as believe in Christ; which
will easily be manifested, if we do but understand what is meant here by
Offending one of these little ones which believe on Jesus Christ. By Offending,
we are here to understand, as I conceive, whosoever shall offer any wrong, do any
injury, whosoever shall afflict or trouble the least or meanest of those which
believe in Jesus Christ. And that this is the genuine sense and meaning of this
place may be proved.

1. From the coherence of the words with what goes before. To offend here is
opposed to receiving, ver. 5. Whosoever shall receive one such little child in my
name, receives me. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believes in me, etc. Now by receiving is meant, all kind of benefits that are
for Christ's sake bestowed on such persons, as Grotius well observes. Vox
(...), quae proprie hospitalitatem notat, hic pro omni beneficiorum genere
accipitur. And offending being brought in by way of opposition to receiving as
the particle But shows; implies all kind of wrongs and injuries that are done
to such as believe on Christ.

2. The Greek word (...), which is here rendered to Offend, is explained by
Learned Authors in this sense; namely, to offer wrong or injury to a man.
Varinus (...) exponit (...). And Maldonate observes out of Chrysostom upon
this place, Scandalizare hoc loco non est ut alias, malum praebere exemplum;
Sed injuria afficere. Our Lord Jesus using this word of his Disciples being
offended, interprets their being offended to be their being scattered from him,
when Judas came with Officers and Soldiers to apprehend him; they being afraid
they should suffer also, were scattered and dispersed one from another, Matt.
26.31. Then says Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this
night; for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered abroad. If Offending be taken for scattering abroad, how
does this fall in with the practice of these Informers, when they come with
Officers and Soldiers, and seize upon those that are Preaching the Word of God,
and scatter and disperse the sheep of the flock? are not they guilty of
offending those little ones that believe in Christ?

3. This Interpretation, that a man had better have a millstone hung about his
neck and be drowned in the depth of the Sea, than to offer any wrong or bring
trouble and affliction upon the meanest of those that believe in Jesus Christ,
is agreeable to other places of Scripture, which set out the greatness and
danger of their sin, who shall presume in their hearts to afflict or wrong any
person though never so mean, though a desolate widow, though a fatherless
child, such as cannot plead their own cause, and have none other to plead for
them. Exodus 22.22, 23, 24. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely
hear their cry. And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword,
and your wives shall be widows and your children fatherless. God is greatly
offended with such as afflict others. Mark the words, Ye shall not afflict any
widow or fatherless child. It Is not said widows and fatherless children; but
any widow or fatherless child. It is not said, if thou afflict them greatly,
but if thou afflict them in any wise. It is not said, if they cry mightily, but
if they cry at all unto me. It is not said, mine anger shall be kindled, but my
anger shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword. Now it is an
aggravation of our sin, when those whom we afflict are gracious persons, such
as believe in Jesus Christ; If Moses then told the Jews, that if they did in
any wise afflict any widow or fatherless child, God's anger would wax hot
against them, and he would kill them with the sword. Our Lord Jesus might well
say, whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hung about his neck, and he were drowned in
the depth of the Sea. Now these Informers, do not only offend and bring
affliction upon one or two; but upon whole Assemblies of those that believe in
Jesus Christ. And though they consider it not now, yet at the day of Judgment
when they must appear before Jesus Christ, to give him an account of all things
done in the body; they shall wish that at such times as they went to break up
and molest the Assemblies of the servants of Christ, a millstone had been hung
about their necks, and they had been drowned in the depth of the Sea.

If any one shall not acquiesce in this Interpretation, but shall contend for
another sense of the words; namely, that by offending is meant causing to
offend; though this seems not agreeable to the context; yet even this
Interpretation will reach the Informers also. For they cause many to offend by
their practice: As,

1. They bring down Officers, some of which are not satisfied in their
Consciences to molest these meetings; yet their Faith being not strong enough
to withstand the temptation, they are ensnared by these men to wound their own
Consciences by sinning against the light of their Consciences.

2. They lay a stumbling block before the weaker Christians that frequent those
Assemblies to say and do irregular things to preserve themselves from
sufferings.

3. By scattering and dissipating these Assemblies, they expose weak persons to
be led away by erroneous persons, who lie in wait for such occasions as these
are to draw them into their nets.

3 Arg. Forbidding those to preach the Gospel who are called of God to that
work, is an exceeding great sin both against God, and against man. The
greatness of this sin is set forth by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Forbidding us
to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always,
for wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. Here are several things in this,
and the former verse that aggravate the sin of these Jews, that did forbid the
Ministers of Christ to preach to the Gentiles.

1. They are ranked with those bloody persons that had killed the Lord Jesus,
and their own Prophets, as being of the same race and of the same Spirit. We do
not read of any Prophet killed by those Jews, that were then living; yet the
Apostle says, these Jews that forbade the preaching of the Gospel had killed
their own Prophets, because they were one Spirit with them, that killed Christ;
who both killed the Lord Jesus Christ, and their own Prophets.

2. These Jews who forbade the preaching of the Gospel, are branded with this
note, They please not God, and are contrary to all men. Erant vere (...), as
Grotius says on the place. They were right (...), as another says. They were
haters of God and men.

3. Their sin is further set out by the persons whom they forbade; Forbidding,
as Paul was called by Jesus Christ, to be a Minister of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. I
thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful putting me into the Ministry. Act. 26.13. I have appeared unto thee to
this purpose, to make thee a Minister. The persons whom they forbade Preaching,
were the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, who were called of God to preach
the Gospel.

4. Their sin in forbidding to preach the Gospel, is further aggravated by
this, that it hinders the Salvation of Immortal Souls. Forbidding us to
preach to the Gentiles that they might be saved. This is the greatest injury
and hurt that can be done by any man, to hinder his eternal Salvation. To kill
his body is a crying sin, which hastens the vengeance of God; yet it is not so
great a damage to a man as to hinder the saving of his Soul. I shall mention
some passages out of Dr. Slater's Comment on this Text: Forbidding us to speak,
that is, to preach unto the Gentiles, so proving themselves, Hosts humani
generis, contrariant, enemies to all men. So are they all to be reputed, that
hinder preaching of the Gospel, as capital enemies of mankind: Needs any proof?
They deprive us of the greatest good, are enemies in the things that nearliest
concern us. The Gospel is God's power to Salvation. And fides ex auditu, how
shall they believe without preaching? And how be saved without believing? Of
other Persecutors, said our Savior, they can but kill the body, these are
means to cast body and soul into hell; by keeping from them the means of
Salvation. And afterward draws this inference; If our Age and Nation have and
suffer any of this kind of enemies and opposites to the eternal good of men; of
whom we may say as Christ of the Pharisees, They have taken away the key of
knowledge, neither entering themselves, nor suffering those that would; let them
hear with whom St. Paul yokes them, even with the obstinate shedders of our
Savior's blood, who neither please God, nor love any man. What vengeance God
has in store for such; I had rather themselves should seriously consider, than
give us occasion to mention. But if the Lord would admit of no recompense for
the blood of the body, but the blood of the slayer; how much sorer vengeance
has he in store for those, that taint themselves with the blood of Souls! It
cries louder than the blood of Abel.

5. The forbidding to preach the Gospel did fill up the measure of their sins,
and so did ripen them for destruction; for when the measure of a persons or
nations sins are full, they are ripe for destruction, Genesis 15.16. Rev. 16.18.

6. These Jews that forbade the preaching of the Gospel brought upon themselves
the wrath of God in as dreadful a manner as ever came upon any people under
heaven; wrath is come upon them to the uttermost; (...) is rendered by Erasmus,
Ad extremum, hoc est, Implacabilis ira Dei. God was become implacably angry
with them; which agrees with what is said of those that misused his Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. The wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no
remedy. Vatablus renders it (...), in aeternum. And the Aethiopick Translation,
Pervenit ad tos poena aeterna. Eternal wrath is come upon them; God in his
wrath will punish them eternally. Estius gives this sense of the words, Hic
significatur Judaeorum tanquam a Deo reprobatorum justa derelictio in peccatis,
and futura damnatio. Here is signified God's righteous leaving the Jews in
their sins, and his damning them in the world to come.

We have seen that it is a grievous sin both against God and Man, a sin that
brings wrath to the uttermost, to forbid those that are called of God, to
preach the Gospel. Now let us see whether these Informers and their adherents
are guilty of this sin. That the Ministers, which are usually termed
Non-conformists, are true Ministers of Christ, called by him to Preach the
Gospel, has been proved before. Now that these Informers are guilty of
forbidding these Ministers to Preach the Gospel, is evident; For,

1. They do procure Officers to come down to their Assemblies, and to call to
them to desist from Preaching; and to make them by force and violence to leave
off their work, and to scatter and disperse their Assemblies.

2. The way by which the Jews forbade the preaching of the Gospel, was by
raising persecution against those that did dispense the Word: 1 Thessalonians. 2.15,
16. And have persecuted us, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved. Thus do these Informers, they go to the Magistrates and incense
them, and cause their Meetings to be dispersed, and the Preachers and Hearers
to be fined in great sums of Money.

3. The Greek (...), which the Apostle uses here, is rendered sometimes to
hinder, or let, or withstand and oppose; as Luke 11.52. Act. 8.32. Act. 11.17.
such as by their actions seek to hinder the Preaching of the Gospel, are under
the guilt of forbidding to Preach; although they do not or should not forbid it
in words. And thus these Informers forbid the Ministers of Christ preaching,
for they do what they can to hinder their Meetings, and some of them take great
pains to travail up and down to carry on their evil designs.

Though this sin of the Jews in forbidding the Ministers of Christ to Preach to
the Gentiles that they might be saved, was an odious sin; a sin that brought
down the wrath of God to the uttermost; yet they might have had many specious
pretenses for their sin, even as these Informers had for theirs (which I shall
answer afterward) which yet did not excuse them, nor keep off the wrath of God
from them. I will mention some of them. As,

1. We are not against Preaching, we have God's Word read and preached in our
Synagogues every Sabbath Day, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time has in every City
them that preach him; being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day. It is
those men's preaching only that we forbid, that conform not to the Rites and
Customs of Moses; Forbidding us to speak.

2. These men whom we forbid to speak, are men prohibited by our Rulers to
teach in the name of Christ, Act. 4.17, 58. Let us straightly threaten them that
they speak henceforth no more in this name. And they called them and commanded
them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. This strait charge
was given by the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, and the Highpriests met in Council
together, v. 5, 6. And consequently by Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical.

3. These men do not only transgress the Commandments of the Rulers, but of
Jesus Christ, whose Disciples they profess themselves to be, who forbad their
preaching to the Gentiles, Matt. 10.5, 6. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and
commanded them, saying, Go not in the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of
the Samaritans, enter ye not, but go rather to the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel.

4. Let the Gentiles come to us and be circumcised, after the manner of Moses,
and we will receive them, and then they may hear Preaching in our Synagogues
every Sabbath Day, and be sure of Salvation: For Salvation is of the Jews, Joh.
4.22.

5. The Church of the Jews has been a glorious Church; the only visible Church
in the world for some thousands of years, and these men preaching to the
Gentiles will diminish the glory of this famous Church. Their great Apostle
teaches us, that their riches will be our diminution, Romans 15.12.

6. Hitherto we have had but one Church, and now by their preaching to the
Gentiles, we are like to have many more Churches erected.

7. These men are cast out of the Synagogue by the general consent of the
Jewish Church, Joh. 9.22. The Jews bad agreed already, that if any man did
confess he was the Christ, he should be cast out of the Synagogue. And may we
not forbid an excommunicate person preaching?

8. Neither these men that preach, nor the Gentiles that hear them, do observe
the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law of Moses., which the Church of God has
observed ever since Moses gave them to us, Act. 21.21. They are informed of
thee, that thou teach all the Jews that are among the Gentiles, to forsake
Moses; saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to
walk after the customs. The Jews might have pleaded these and several other
excuses for their forbidding the Apostles preaching to the Gentiles; yet none
of these did keep off God's wrath from them. And therefore let not the
Informers shroud themselves, and seek to hide their sin under specious
pretenses (which shall be enquired into more particularly afterward); but lay
to heart the greatness of their sin in hindering these Ministers from preaching
the Gospel of Christ, whereby men may be saved.

4. Arg. They that do not receive Christ's Ministers, nor hear their words,
shall be in a worse condition than the men of Sodom at the day of Judgment:
Matt. 10.14, 15. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when
ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your seel; verily I
say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah at
the day of Judgment than for that city. The men of Sodom and Gomorrah will be
in a very miserable condition at the day of Judgment, for they were exceeding
great sinners: Genesis 13.13. The men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the
Lord exceedingly. They were such sinners as that the Lord rained down fire and
brimstone upon them. And that fire which consumed the men of Sodom, was a
forerunner, a declaration, and testimony to the world of the eternal fire,
which they and other impenitent sinners should suffer in the other world: Jude
v. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. And And yet our
Lord Jesus who best understood how every man's case shall go at the day of
Judgment, in regard he himself is the Judge of the world, asserts it for an
undoubted truth, (verily I say unto you) that it shall be more tolerable at the
day of Judgment, for the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, than for them that
do not receive those Ministers whom he sends, or do not hear the Word they
Preach. And if so, how dreadful will the condition of these Informers and their
Adherents be at the day of Judgment, who do not only not receive the Ministers
of Christ, nor hear the Word they Preach; but endeavor to suppress their
preaching, and will not suffer those that would hear and embrace them to attend
upon their Ministry, persecuting them that Preach from house to house, which
is a greater sin, than barely not to receive the Preachers of the Word?

Obj. We do receive Christ's Ministers, and do embrace his Gospel, although we
hear not these men, neither suffer others to hear them; but do what we can to
suppress them. And therefore the forementioned Scripture does not touch us.

1. Though you receive the Gospel of Christ with your ears, yet your opposition
that you make against the Ministers, shows you have not received the Gospel of
Christ into your hearts. For this makes the woolf lie down with the lamb, and
keeps the Asp and the Cockatrice from hurting the sucking child, Isai. 11. And
makes the briar to become a mirtle-tree, and the thorn a firr-tree, Isai.
55.11.13.

2. Persecuting those that preach and hear the Gospel, is a greater sin, than
not to receive the Ministers of Christ, nor hear their words; And if you be one
of those that persecute the Ministers of Christ, this Scripture will do more
than touch you; it will take hold of you, and fall heavier upon you than if all
the rocks and mountains were cast upon you.

5 Arg. The Judgments threatened and executed upon them that by their informing
against, and betraying the people of God into the hands of their enemies have
brought them into trouble, do plainly evince the greatness of the Informers
sin. I pass over the remarkable Judgments that have been executed on this
generation of men in our days; if any one would be at the pains to make a
collection of them, it might be a warning to others. But I shall wave these,
and mention only some examples out of the Scripture, the truth whereof is
questioned by no man, that believes the Scripture to be the Word of God. Doeg
turned Informer, and informed against Ahimelech the Priest, for entertaining
David at his house, and enquiring of God for him, and giving him Victuals, and
giving him the Sword of Goliath, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10. And by this information he so
incensed Saul, that he slew those Priests that had entertained David. But now
mark what a grievous curse fell upon this Informer, Ps. 52.5. God shall
likewise destroy thee for ever, be shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of
thy dewlling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. That this
curse is denounced against Doeg for informing against Ahimelech, for
entertaining David at his house, is evident from the title of the Psalm: A
Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him,
David is come to the house of Ahimelech. The curse denounced against Doeg is
very dreadful, consisting of these branches.

1. Eternal destruction; and that from the hands of God, God shall likewise
destroy thee for ever. As he had been the destruction of the Lord's Priests, so
God should destroy him, but with a more terrible destruction; they were
destroyed with a temporal destruction, but he shall destroy thee for ever.

2. God threatens to take him away, and pluck him from his dewlling place,
which words speak his anger, yea, hot displeasure, and that is very dreadful.
David was afraid that God should deal with him in his anger. O Lord rebuke me
not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. But as for Doeg,
the words speak God to be full of fury against him. He shall-take thee away,
and pluck thee out of thy dewlling place.

3. Destruction to him and all that belong to him. He shall root thee out of
the land of the living. He shall utterly ruinate thee and thine; leaving thee
neither root nor branch; or the rooting him out of the land of the living, may
refer to the depriving him of eternal life. Let then the Doegs of our age
consider this dreadful curse, who if they see, or can hear of an house where
the Ministers of Christ are praying to God, or giving the bread of life to
hungry Souls, they go and tell the Magistrates, and get Warrants to distrain
and get away their goods from them. What became of those Informers against
Daniel, who finding him at Prayer, went and accused him to the King as a
transgressour of the Law, and got him cast into the Den of Lions? By the just
judgment of God, these men and their wives and children were cast into the Den
of Lions, and rent a-pieces, Dan. 6.11.13.24. These Informers do the like in
our days, if they find the servants of God Praying and Preaching, they go and
accuse them to the Magistrate, and get them punished; and may they not justly
fear, that though they have no punishment here, the King of Kings will cast
them into a worse place than the Den of Lions at the day of Judgment; even into
the bottomless pit, where they shall be tormented of roaring Lions for ever and
ever? Haman who informed against the Jews, and got a decree to destroy them,
came to a miserable end, he dyed upon a pair of Gallows fifty foot high. But
above all other examples, I would have these Informers take notice what befell
Judas for informing against Christ. He fell into such a woeful condition, that
it had been good for him that he had never been born, Matt. 26.24. After he had
betrayed Christ, he was in such a distressed condition, that he was weary of
his life, and went away and hung himself, Matt. 27.5. After he had hung
himself, he fell down headlong and burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out,
Act. 1.18. And after he was dead, and his Soul was out of his body, it was
carried into hell torments, v. 25. See Pisc. Now what was it that this Judas
did to Jesus Christ? he did not accuse him to Pilat, he did not nail him to the
cross, he did not thrust a spear into his side; but this he did, he betrayed
him into his enemies hands by discovering who, and where he was. Therefore as
Christ to warn us of Apostasy, said, Remember Lot's wife. So may I say to
Informers, Remember Judas.

Obj. Why do you tell us of Judas? he was a damned wretch, we curse him to the
pit of hell, for betraying our Lord Jesus Christ; we would have been torn in
pieces, and suffered a thousand deaths, rather than we would have done such an
act as Judas did; we abhor Judas as much as any man upon the face of the earth.

Ans. 1. You do the same thing in effect, as Judas did, and in judging him you
condemn your selves, Romans 2.1. For our Lord Jesus accounts that they which
persecute his members, persecute him: Act. 9.4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? And he said, who art thou Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest. Saul did not persecute Jesus Christ in his own person, for he
was at God's right hand out of Readiness reach; but he persecuted the members of
Christ, and the Lord Jesus counted himself persecuted in the persecution of his
members; what is done to the least of his members, he takes as done to himself,
Matt. 25.40. Now as Judas did, he was guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16.
He knew the place where Christ was, and got Officers and Soldiers to go along
with him; so do ye.

2. You are in some respects worse than Judas; for Judas repented of what he
had done: He made an open confession of his sin, he made restitution of the
Money he had taken; you do none of these things. In stead of your repenting,
you glory in your sin, and are more and more hardened in your evil courses.
Judas did not bring Officers to take Christ whilst he was Preaching to the
people, or Praying to God: He did not disturb him in his worship; but you come
in the time of Prayer and Preaching the Word, as though you neither feared God,
nor regarded Man; and in a profane manner rush upon these men while they are
serving God.

3. Even thus the Scribes and Pharisees of old seemed to disdain their
Forefathers, killing the Prophets, and said, If they had lived in their days,
they would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, and
they builded their tombs, and garnished their Sepulchers, pretending to honor
them, Matt. 23.29, 30. Yet they killed our Lord Jesus, and the Apostles.

6 Arg. The very neglecting acts of mercy toward the Members of Christ, as not
feeding them when they are hungry, not clothing them when they are naked, the
not-visiting them when they are sick and in prison, will cause the Lord Jesus
to cast men among the devils, into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Matt. 25.41, 42, 43, 44, 45. To take away by violence the food and
the raiment of the Members of Christ, is a greater sin, than not to feed them
when they are hungry, and not to cloth them when they are naked. To throw them
into Prisons, and thereby to impair their health is a greater sin, than not to
visit them when sick or in prison. If they shall be cursed by Jesus Christ, and
be cast into everlasting fire among the Devils, who do not feed, cloth, and
visit the Members of Christ, when hungry, sick, and in prison, nor take them in
when strangers; of how much sorer punishment shall these Informers and their
Adherents be thought worthy of at the day of Judgment, who do take away the
food and raiment of the Members of Christ, and will not suffer them to dwell in
peace in their own houses, but thrust them into prison, and that for
righteousness sake?

7 Arg. These men have been several years under affliction, having suffered the
loss of their livelyhoods, and been exposed to other troubles; and it is
greatly displeasing unto God, that affliction should be added to his people
when they are under affliction, Zech. 1.15. I am very sore displeased with the
Heathen that are at ease; for I was but a little displeased, and they helped
forward the affliction. Had you a love to these men, you would pity them under
their affliction, Job. 6.14. To him that is afflicted pity should be showed
from his friend. Be it so that God has a controversy with them, it does not
become you to trample them under your feet, Is. 47.6.11.

8 Arg. As they are Ministers of the Gospel, your sin is exceeding great in
hindering them in the exercise of their Ministry, and persecuting them for
Preaching the Gospel. For,

1. To misuse the Lord's Messengers and his Prophets, is a sin that brings down
wrath without remedy: 2 Chr. 36.15, 16. And the Lord God of their fathers sent
to them by his messengers; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of God arose against these
men, until there was no remedy.

2e God will smite through the loins of those that rise up against his
Ministers, Deuteronomy. 33.12. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his
hands; smite through the loins of them that rise up against him, and of them
that hate him; that they never rise again. This is Moses his Prayer, which he
puts up for Levi, when he was blessing the Children of Israel before his death,
v. 1.8. The tribe of Levi was separated by the Lord to bear the Ark of the
Lord, and to Minister to him, and to bless in his name, Deuteronomy. 10.9. And
therefore what is here spoken of Levi, belongs to all the Ministers of the
Gospel; what Moses prays for in the behalf of Levi, that God will do to the
Ministers of the Gospel, and to them that rise up against them; He will bless
their substance, and accept their works, he will strike through the loins of
them that rise up against them. And what is that?

1. He will give them a fatal stroke, he will give them such a deadly wound,
that they shall never recover it, he will break in pieces their power and
strength. The loins may signify a man's strength, Joh. 40.16. Lo, now his
strength is in his loins.

2. He will not only punish themselves in a dreadful manner; but he will visit
this their sin upon their posterity, from generation to generation; persecuting
the Ministers of the Gospel, is a sin which God visits not openly upon the
fathers, but the children, and the childrens children unto the third and fourth
generation, Exodus 20.5. The loins does signify a man's posterity, 1 Kings.
8.19. Thy Son that shall come out of thy loins.

3. The loins signify sometimes the mind or understanding; as 1 Pet. 1.13.
Gird up the loins of your mind. And if loins be taken in this sense, the
meaning is, Lord give them up to a reprobate mind, and that is a sore judgment,
and a very dreadful token of the wrath of God, Romans 1.18.28. And it is usual
with the Lord to smite the enemies of his Ministers with this judgment. And
it is rare if ever such persons rise again, that are thus smitten of God. Now
those whose loins God will strike through that they rise not again, are such as
hate, and such as rise against the Sons of Levi: that is, the secret and the
open enemies of the Ministers of the Gospel. There are some that hate them, but
conceal their hatred, these are secret enemies; and there are some that
manifest their hatred by rising up against them, these are open enemies.

3. The Ministers of the Gospel are Christ's Ambassadors sent into the world to
treat of peace between God and men, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though he did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God. What injuries are done to an Ambassador of an earthly
Prince, he takes them as ill as if they were done to his own person: If the
Ambassador be reviled, plundered, imprisoned, interrupted in the delivery of
his message; the Prince takes this as ill, and will punish it as severely as if
it had been done to himself. So does the King of Heaven, who is King of Kings,
take all injuries done to his Ambassadors as done against himself, 1 Thessalonians.
4.8. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who has given us
his holy Spirit. And what is said of despising is true of all other affronts
and injuries which are offered to the Ministers of the Gospel, the Lord takes
them as done to himself.

Obj. If these men were Prophets, or Apostles, and could work miracles; if then
we should molest them; we should think our selves worthy of death. One might
fear the wrath of God should break forth upon us; but they are but ordinary
men, subject to the same passions and infirmities as other men are; and
therefore we cannot think there is such danger in opposing them.

Ans. 1. Ordinary Pastors and Teachers are of God's sending and appointing,
they are of divine institution, as well as Prophets and Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set some in the Church; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that Miracles: Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. It is God gives, and God sets
Pastors and Teachers in his Church, as well as Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists.

2. The Apostles and Prophets, though holy men of God, and guided by an
infallible Spirit; yet were but men subject to the like passions as we are.
Elias was an eminent Prophet; yet is said of him, Jam. 5.17. Elias was a man
subject to like passions as we are. Barnabas and Paul were eminent Apostles;
yet when the men of Lystra would have adored them as Gods, and done Sacrifice
to them; they cried out, Sirs, why do you these things? we also are men of like
passions with you, Act. 14.15. They that despise the Ministers of the Gospel in
those days, would have despised the Prophets and Apostles, had they lived in
their days; for they that were enemies to the power of Godliness despised the
Apostles and Prophets then, even as many do now the Ministers of Christ. Take
an instance of the Apostle Paul, who though he was full of the Holy Ghost, yet
some thought and spoke contemptibly of him, 2 Cor. 10.2. Some think of us, as
though we walked according to the flesh; v. 10. His letters say they are
weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech
contemptible. Many other vilifying expressions were given concerning this
Apostle, which I forbear to mention.

3. A man may be a true Minister of Jesus Christ, and yet be able to work no
miracles: John the Baptist was a true Minister, (and lived in the time when the
gift of miracles was frequently given) yet it is said of him, John did no
miracle, Joh. 11.41. And some that had the gift of miracles were destitute of
true Grace, Matt. 7.23, 24. And therefore we should not decry a man as no
Minister of Christ, because he cannot work miracles, especially seeing working
of miracles is now ceased.

4. Our Lord Jesus would have every one of his Ministers whom he sends to
Preach the Gospel received with love and honor, and all kindness shown to
them, as well as to his Apostles and Prophets. And to engage us to an
honorable, willing and cheerful reception of them; he tells us, that he will
take it all one, when we receive his Ministers, as if we received himself or
his Father: Joh. 13.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receives
whomsoever I send, receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that
sent me. It is not said, He that receives my Apostles, or he that receives my
Prophets; but he that receives whomsoever I send, receives me. And that we
may be assured thereof, he adds a double asseveration: Verily, verily, I say
unto you. Hence I argue, If he that receives whomsoever Christ sends,
receives the Lord Jesus Christ, then he that receives, or persecuteth any of
the Ministers of the Lord Jesus, whom he sends to preach his Gospel, receives
and persecuteth the Lord Jesus himself.

9 Arg. It is Satan that stirs up men to betray, persecute, imprison, and make
war against the servants of Christ; when Judas took up a resolution to betray
Jesus Christ, it was the Devil that put this motion into his heart, Joh. 13.2.
The Devil having put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot Simons son to betray
him. When there is trouble raised up against those that keep the Commandments
of God, it is the Devil that stirs up men to raise up persecution against them,
Rev. 12.17. And the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with
the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus. This action of betraying, imprisoning, and persecuting the
servants of Christ, is such a fulfilling of the Devils will, and has so much
of the Devils nature in it, that the Holy Ghost calls the betrayers and
persecutors of the people of God by the name of Devils, Joh. 6.70, 71. Have not
I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? He spoke of Judas Iscariot, the
son of Simon, for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.
Why was Judas called a Devil? It was for betraying the Lord Jesus: Rev. 2.10.
Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison. The Devil did not appear
in his own person, and hale these Saints into Prison; but he stirred up
evil-minded men to do his work, and they fulfilling his lusts, are called by
his name. Did the Informers consider that it was the Devil put it into their
hearts to disturb these Assemblies, where Prayer is made to God, and God's Word
is Preached, it would startle them, and make them draw back, unless they were
wonderfully hardened in their sin.

10 Arg. These men whom you afflict and molest are righteous men; as has been
before proved. And it is a mighty sin to afflict righteous and just men. There
are different degrees of sins, some are small sins, others great sins, others
mighty great sins. This sin of afflicting the just, is among those that are
mighty great sins, Amos 5.12. I know your manifold transgressions, and your
mighty sins, they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the
poor in the gate from their right. The Prophet having taxed Israel of being
guilty of mighty sins, and if any should ask, what mighty sins they were guilty
of? he presently adds, They afflict the just. See the greatness of this sin in
several particular?

1. All the wrongs and injuries done to righteous men, the Lord takes as ill as
if done against himself, Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye. The eye is the tenderest part of the body, and the apple of the eye
the tenderest part of the eye; a touch on the apple of the eye is more
grievous, more afflicting, than a blow on the back or hand; it is not said, he
that kills you, he that beats you with many stripes; but he that touches
you, touches the apple of mine eye; intimating that the smallest afflictions,
the least troubles that are brought upon righteous men, are exceeding grievous
to God, he counts what is done to them, as done to the apple of his eye. There
are no afflictions brought upon righteous men; but he esteems himself
afflicted in their affliction, Jer. 63.9. In all their affliction he was
afflicted: when they are in misery, their miseries are not only grievous to
them, but they grieve his Soul also, Judge. 10.6. His soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel. And what a monstrous sin is this, for a creature to presume
in his heart to do that which afflicts and grieves the Soul of God, in whom we
all live, and move, and have our being; and to strike at the apple of his eye!

2. Righteous men are nearly related to God; they are his servants. Ps. 116.6.
Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. They are his friends, Joh. 15.14. Ye
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. They are God's children,
Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by says in Jesus Christ. They are
members of Christ's body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular. And it must needs be an horrible sin to abuse, to
imprison, to fine, to hale out of their meetings, the servants, the friends,
the children of God, and the members of Christ; when they are about their
Masters work, when they are worshipping and serving their heavenly Father.

3. The Lord bears a great love to righteous men, Ps. 146.8. The Lord loves
the righteous. And how contrary is this to God's Will, that you should afflict
those whom he loves?

4. Righteous men are blessings to the places where they live, Prove. 11.11. By
the blessing of the upright, the city is exalted, what was promised to Abraham?
Genesis 12.2. I will bless thee, and thou shall be a blessing; belongs to all the
members of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.9. So then they which be of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. And therefore they that afflict and persecute righteous
men, are not only unthankful for, but they are enemies to their own good, for
they partake of many blessings for righteous men's sake. What Laban said to
Jacob, Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience that the Lord has blessed me
for thy sake. The same might those Villages, and Cities say, where righteous
men dwell, did they observe the dealings of God with them; we have learned by
experience that the Lord has blessed us for these righteous men's sake.

11 Arg. The practice of these men, who punish, or cause to be punished,
righteous men for praying to God, and for Preaching and Hearing God's holy
Word; is greatly prejudicial to the whole Kingdom, and that on several accounts.

1. As it brings down National Judgments; one man's sin may cause a whole
Nation to suffer. Achan's sin brought God's wrath upon all the Congregation of
Israel, Josh. 22.20. Did not Achan the son of Zera commit a trespass in the
accursed thing; and wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel, and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity? What was Achan's sin which brought wrath
upon all the Congregation of Israel? we find Achan himself confessing it to
Joshuah, Josh. 7.20, 21. Achan answered Joshuah and said, Indeed I have sinned
against the Lord God of Israel, and thus, and thus have I done. When I saw
among the spoils a goodly Babilonish garment, and two hundred shekles of
Silver, and a wedge of Gold of fifty shekles weight; then I covered them, and
took them, and behold they are hid in the earth, in the midst of my tent, and
the Silver under it. The sin of these Informers seems to me equal, if not
greater, and as likely to bring down wrath upon the Nation; as Achan's sin; and
that for these Reasons.

1. The men of Jericho were God's enemies, and they and their substance were
accursed of God, Josh. 6.17. The city shall be accursed, even it, and all that
are therein: But the righteous, and all they have, are blessed of the Lord, Ps.
3.8. Thy blessing is upon thy people; not only their persons are blessed, but
their substance also, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Bless, Lord, his substance. See also Deuteronomy.
8.4, 5. Now is it not as great a sin for these men to oppress God's friends who
are the blessed of the Lord, and to take away their substance which is under
the blessing of God; as it was for Achan to take away silver, and gold, and
raiment from the men of Jericho, which were God's enemies; and both they, and
all that they had, were under his curse.

2. Achan committed his sin secretly, he hid what he took in his tent. Behold,
they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent. He labored to cover his
sin; but these men declare their sin as Sodom: They are not afraid to sin
openly in the sight of all men. And the more openly and impudently a man's sin
is committed, the more provoking to God to send down his Judgments.

3. Achan confessed his sin, and thereby gave glory to the God of Israel, Josh.
7.20. These men glory in their shame, and will not be brought to acknowledge
their iniquity.

4. Achan was punished for his trespass, all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burnt his house with fire, Josh. 7.25. But these men are so far from being
punished, that they oft-times go away with a reward. Another instance of a
whole Nation suffering for the sin of one man, we have in David's case. David's
numbering the people, provoked God to send a Pestilence, which in three days
time, slew seventy-thousand men, 1 Chronicles. 21.2.7. And David said to Joab, and
to the Rulers of the People, Go number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and
bring the number unto me, that I may know it. And God was displeased with this
thing; therefore he smote Israel, v. 14. So the Lord sent Pestilence upon
Israel, and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men. Let it be considered
whether those Informers that go to the Assemblies of these men, to take the
names of those that worship God in order to the punishing them for their
serving God, do not sin in as high a degree, as David did in the numbering the
people: For,

1. The numbering of the people was not without a president; for it was done by
Moses at God's appointment in the second year after Israel came out of Egypt,
Number. 1, 2. But to number men's names in order to punish them for being present
then, and where Prayer is made to God in the name of Jesus Christ, and God's
Word preached, has not been practiced by any persons that have occurred to my
observation in reading the holy Scriptures.

2. David might have pretended better things to have excused his sin, than
these Informers have for their practice. As by numbering the people he might see
the accomplishment of God's promise, who promised Abraham a great and numerous
posterity, and all the Generations from Abraham to David, were but fourteen
Generations, Matt. 1.17. Now that there should be a thousand thousand, and a
hundred thousand men that drew sword, and four hundred threescore and ten
thousand in Judah, beside Levi and Benjamin that were not numbered, 2 Chronicles.
21.5.6. When David heard this great number, he might have made this use of it,
what a demonstration is here of God's faithfulness and power, that from one,
and him as good as dead, should spring so great a multitude of men, besides
women and children. Besides, he might have said, what cause have I to be
thankful to God that has put such honor upon me, to make me a King of such a
numerous people? For in the multitude of people is the Kings honor, Prove.
14.28. He might also judge it a point of prudence conducing to his credit and
his peoples safety, to know his strength, that having so many potent enemies on
every side, he might judge when and with whom to make War and Peace, as it
becomes a wise and wary Prince to do, Luke 14.31. But these things did not
excuse David from sin, God saw an irregularity in David, whether it were pride,
or curiosity, or neglecting the offering that was prescribed, when the people
was numbered, Number. 12.13, 14. I shall not determine.

3. David was troubled in conscience for his sin, and made an humble confession
of it to God, 2 Samuel 24.10. And David's heart smote him after that he had
numbered the people; and David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that
I have done; and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
servant, for I have done very foolishly. But we hear of no remorse from these
men.

4. David offended but once in this kind, but these men go on in their evil
way, and often renew their sin.

5. David when convinced of his sin, was willing to have suffered death, so
that God would not proceed to punish Israel for his sin, 2 Samuel 24.17. And
David spoke unto the Lord when he saw the Angel that smote the people; and
said, Lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly; but these sheep what have
they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father's
house. Whereby it is evident that he had no evil design upon the people, when
he caused them to be numbered. But these men that go to these Assemblies to take
names, and watch them as they come forth, in order to the getting them to be
punished, make it manifest that they have a design upon them to do evil to them.

2. The actings of these Informers are prejudicial to the whole Kingdom;
because righteous men are the strength of a Nation, and are blessings to the
places where they live, Zech. 12.5. The governors of Judah shall say in their
heart; The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts
their God, Prove. 11.11. By the blessing of the upright, the city is exalted.
When Elisha was dying, Joash the King of Israel wept over him, and said, My
Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 2 King.
13.14. Intimating that Elisha by his Prayers, was a greater security and
protection to Israel, than all the chariots and horsemen that were in Israel.
Now if righteous men are blessings to a Nation, if they are the strength and
security of a Nation; the persecuting and afflicting them, must needs be
prejudicial to a Nations welfare.

3. The persecuting these men, weakens the Protestant, and strengthens the
Popish interest in this Nation: For these men both in their Preaching and
Writing, have appeared eminently against the Popish Doctrine; and it is not long
since that we were called both by the King and Parliament to humble our selves
by fasting for the growth of Popery in the Nation. And that which weakens the
Protestant, and strengthens the Papal interest, must be acknowledged to be
prejudicial to the Nation, by all that are well affected to the Protestant
Religion.

12. The Informers are guilty of smiting their fellow servants, and that is a
provoking sin; when a man without just cause shall smite his fellow servants,
especially if he smite him for doing his Master's work, Matt. 24.48, 49, 50,
51. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with
the drunken. The Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he looks not
for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. I would mind the Informers of several things from this
Scripture, which do nearly concern them.

1. These are in God's account evil servants, that smite their fellow servants
without a cause. If that evil servant smite his fellow servants.

2. God usually gives up such as smite their fellow servants to sensuality,
that they prove sottish persons, companions of Drunkards. Smite his
fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken.

3. Smiting fellow servants brings swift and unexpected destruction. The
swiftness of the judgment is employed, in that God takes men oftimes in the
beginning of their sin. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants. The
unexpectedness of the Judgment in that sometime he does not give a days, no not
an hours warning: The Lord of that servant shall come in a day, that the
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of.

4. Utter destruction will be the portion of such as smite their
fellow servants, And shall cut him a-sunder. If a man be cut and slashed in his
body, he may be healed of his wounds, but if he be cut asunder, he is destroyed
without remedy.

5. Such as smite their fellow servants, shall have their portion among
hypocrites in the bottomless pit, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And shall appoint him his portion with hypocrites, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And why with hypocrites? It is, either because whatever
pretenses such may make of zeal, they are but hypocrites in God's account, that
smite their fellow servants; or it is, because of all men hypocrites shall have
the greatest portion of torment in the other world, as being the chiefest of
sinners, in Is. 33.14.

If they reply, This Scripture does not concern us Informers, but such as have
power in Church or State, and abuse their power to the vexing of their fellow
servants.

Ans. I grant that Grotius expounds this place of Pastors, who do either
themselves, or who stir up Magistrates to vex and deal cruelly with other
Ministers and Christians, for reproving them for their corrupt opinions or
sinful lives; or for differing from them in some circumstantial things.

2. If it be taken in this sense, yet it will reach the Informers; for like
sins shall have like judgments. If Superiors for abusing their power, shall be
so sorely punished, then these Informers, who are Inferior persons, must not
think to escape the Judgment of God, while they incense the Magistrate to vex
and molest those that are faithful and peaceable, only they differ from others
in some circumstantial and disputable things.

CHAP. III. The Informer's Pleas answered.
Plea 1.
IF we did know or think that these were righteous men, we would not persecute
them to gain the whole world, but we look upon them as Phanaticks, Factious
persons, Schismatics, Pestilent fellows, Seducers of the people, Troublers of
the Nation; yea, the very worst sort of men, and therefore we do think we well
to persecute them, and do what lies in our power to suppress them.

Ans. 1. This was the same way which the Jews used to persecute the Prophets,
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles; they said all manner of evil against them
falsely, and then persecuted them not as righteous men, but as evil doers,
Matt. 5.11.12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven: For so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. So persecuted they the Prophets; How? By
reviling them, and speaking all manner of evil against them falsely; and
persecuting them under the notion of evil doers, and not as righteous men. The
Jews would not own that they stoned Christ for righteousness sake, or any of
his good works; but gave out that he was a blasphemer, and they stoned him for
blasphemy, Joh. 10.33. The Jews answered him, and said; For a good work we
stone thee not, but for blasphemy, because thou being a man, make thy self
God.

2. When you have spoken all the evil you can of these Ministers, that are
called Non-conformists, you cannot say worse of them than the Jews spoke of the
Prophets, and the Apostles, and our Lord Jesus Christ himself; yet not only
Jesus Christ, but the Prophets and Apostles were righteous men. Do you look
upon these Ministers to be Phanaticks or Madmen? So Paul was censured as a
madman, Act. 26, 24. Paul thou art beside thy self, much learning has made
thee mad. Yea, the Jews thought and said Christ was mad, and gave out that the
Devil was in him, and wondered that any would go to hear him, Joh. 10.20. Many
of them said, He is mad and has a Devil, why hear ye him? Do you question the
authority of these Ministers to Preach the Gospel? So did the Jews question
Christ's Matt. 21.23. And when he was come into the Temple, the chief Priests
and Elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what
authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? Will you
not believe these men to be true Ministers of Christ? So it was with the Jews,
they would not believe Jeremiah to be a Prophet of the Lord, but thought he
made himself a Prophet. We find Shemaiah writing thus to Zephaniah, Jer. 29.26,
27. The Lord has made thee Priest instead of Jehoiada the Priest, that ye
should be officers in the house of the Lord; for every man that is mad, and
makes himself a Prophet, that thou should put him in Prison, and in the
Stocks. Now therefore, why have thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which
makes himself a Prophet to you? Do you give out that it is not the Lord that
stirs up these men to Preach the Gospel, but the people set them on out of evil
and seditious designs? So said they of Jeremiah, Jer. 43.2, 3. Then spoke
Azariah, and Johanan, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah; Thou
speak falsely, The Lord our God has not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt
to sojourn there: But Baruch the son of Neriah sets thee against us, to
deliver us into the hand of the Caldeans, that they might put us to death, and
carry us away captives into Babylon. Do you look upon these Ministers as
pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, ringleaders of the Sectaries? and do
you inform against them as such to the Governors? So did the Jews look upon
the Apostle Paul, Act. 24.1.5, 6. Tertullus informed the Governor against
Paul. We found this man a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition among all the
Jews through all the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, who
also has gone about to profane the Temple. Do you look upon these as the
troublers of the Nation? So did Ahab look upon Elijah, 1 Kings 18.17. When Ahab
saw Elijah, Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubles Israel? Are they
aspersed as though they were enemies to the King? So was Elijah represented to
Ahab, 1 Kings 21.20. Ahab said to Elijah, Have thou found me, Oh mine enemy?
Are they looked upon as none of the King's friends that show kindness to these
men, when they fall into their hands? Thus the Jews cried out to Pilat, that if
he released Christ, he would be looked upon as no friend to Caesar, Joh. 19.12.
From thenceforth Pilat sought to release him, but the Jews cried out. If thou
let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. Do you think these men are not
fit to live in the Nation, nor in any other part of the world, and that it
would do well if they were put to death? So the Jews thought and said of the
Apostle Paul, Act. 22.22. Away with such a fellow from the earth; for it is not
fit he should live. Not to instance in more particulars, when you have vilified
and reproached these Ministers as much as possibly you can; you cannot esteem
or speak worse of them, than the blessed Apostles were esteemed and spoken of
in the world, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. I think God has set forth us Apostles
last, as it were appointed unto death. For we are made a spectacle unto the
world, and to angels and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake, -- we are weak,
-- despised, -- persecuted, defamed. We are made as the filth of the world, and
are the off-scowring of all things unto this day. And therefore the reproaches
of the world can be no evidence against them, that they are not righteous men,
or true Ministers of Jesus Christ.

3. Your revileing and reproachful language that you give these men, is so far
from excusing your sin in persecuting them; that it is a great aggravation of
it. For reviling language will shut a man out of the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Be not deceived? Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers,
nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Revilers are in the
Catalogue of those that shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And if any think
he may be a reviler, and yet go to Heaven, he deceives himself. He that
calls his brother fool, is in danger of hellfire, Matt. 5.21. But I say unto
you, whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of
Judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of
the Counsel: But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hellfire. To call the servants of Christ factious, seditious persons, is as
bad or worse than to call them fools. And therefore they that use this
opprobrious language, are in danger of hellfire. And I may add this further,
if you would be partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven, you must not only your
selves forbear to reproach men that fear God; but you must not believe, nor
entertain the reproaches that you hear from others, Ps. 15.1. Lord, who shall
abide in thy tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that backbiteth
not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach
against his neighbor.

4. It bordereth upon the sin against the Holy Ghost, to speak evil of those
men out of envy and hatred, concerning whom we are persuaded and convinced in
our Consciences that they are righteous men, Mark. 3.28, 29, 30. Verily, I say
unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto men, and blasphemies wherewith soever
they blaspheme, but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost; has never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation; because they said he has
an unclean spirit. The occasion of Christ's telling the Scribes, that the sin
against the Holy Ghost, was a sin that should never have forgiveness, was this,
Because they said he had an unclean spirit: Whenas they could not but be
convinced by his Doctrine and his Works that he was a holy man. Hear what
Grotius says upon the place: Hac comminatione usus est Christus, quia videbat
illos agnoscere intra se vim divinam; sed invidia and odio comminisci
calumnias, ut plebem averterent atque ita quod Dei erat, diabolo ascribere.

5. Enquire into the lives and conversations of these men, before you pass such
hard censures upon them; and if you go to the places where they have lived, you
shall find them well reported of for good Works. In the Colleges where they
were Students, and many of them Fellows; you shall find they were sober,
peaceable, of good behavior, trained up Pupils that were committed to their
trust carefully and faithfully, and have left a good name behind them. If you
enquire in the places where they exercised their Ministry, you shall find they
Preached sound Doctrine, were of an exemplary conversation, lived peaceably
with all men, had the hearts and affections of their people; and in their
sufferings have exercised much patience and contentation: And what ground then
is there for your loading them with reproaches?

Plea. 2. These men are not obedient to authority, but meet together to Preach
and Pray contrary to the Laws of the Nation, and therefore we cannot look upon
them as righteous men; but we count them rebels, and think we ought to do what
we can to suppress them. We do not persecute them for Praying and Preaching,
God forbid we should be so wicked. But the reason why we are so eager in
persecuting them, is, because they break the Laws, and are not conformable to
the Service and Ceremonies of the Church.

Ans. 1. It has been an old device of Satan and his instruments, to raise up,
and cast slanders upon men fearing God; as though they were rebellious persons,
and disobedient to Laws, when they have been employed in the Service of God.
When Nehemiah went about to build the wall of Jerusalem; the adversaries of the
Jews gave out words, that he was about to rebel against the King, Neh. 2.19.
What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the King? So when the
Ministers Preach for no other end, but to convert Souls, and build up such as
are converted; their adversaries give out they are rebels against the King. The
like accusation was raised against the Apostles, when they Preached the Gospel
up and down the world; their enemies represented them, to be such as walked
contrary to to the decrees of Caesar, Act. 17.6, 7. Those that have turned the
world upside down, are come hither also; whom Jason has received, and these
all do contrary to the decrees of Casar. And more particularly against the
Apostle Paul, Act. 18.12, 13. The Jews made insurrection with one accord
against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat; saying, This fellow
persuades to worship God contrary to the Law. Act. 21.28. Men of Israel, help;
this is the man that teaches all men everywhere, against the people, and the
Law, and this place. Daniel was a man so eminent for Piety, that he is ranked
with Noah and Job, who had great power with God in Prayer, Ezekiel. 14.14. He had
an Angel sent to him from Heaven, who told him he was a man greatly beloved of
God, Dan. 10.11. He was so blameless, that his enemies that sought occasion
against him, could find no fault with him, Dan. 6.3. Yet this Daniel was
accused for not regarding the King, and his Laws, v. 13. Daniel regards not
thee, Oh King, nor the decree that thou have signed. This was the device Haman
made use of against the Jews. He accused them to the King for breaking the
Laws, Est. 3.8. Their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the
King's Laws; therefore it is not for the King's profit to suffer them.

2. The worst of men have had pretenses for their vilest practices. The Jews
that went about to stone Christ, would not own it, that they stoned him for a
good work, but pretended it was for blasphemy, Joh. 10.32, 33. Jesus answered
them, many good works have I showed you from my Father; for which of these
works do you stone me? The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone
thee not, but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make thy self
God. As the Jews ignorantly or maliciously called Christ's preaching blasphemy,
and pretended they would have stoned him; not for a good work, but for
blasphemy: So the Informers either ignorantly or maliciously call these men's
preaching rebellion, and say they do not persecute them for preaching, but for
rebellion against the Laws. They that cast out their brethren that trembled at
God's Word, pretended God's glory; but the Lord saw that action proceeded from
malice and hatred, Is. 66.5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
word; your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name sake, said,
the Lord be glorified. But he shall appear to your joy and their shame.

3. To represent these Ministers as disobedient to authority, and rebellious
persons, is a grievous calumny, and a great wrong to them: It is contrary to
their professed and declared principles, and contrary to their practice. For
they believe and teach that every Soul ought to be subject to the higher
Powers, and the Powers that be, are ordained of God. And therefore they obey
Magistrates not only to avoid their wrath, but for Conscience sake. And for
further evidence of the soundness of their judgment in this point of obeying
Magistrates, they do fully concur with, and are ready to subscribe, if called
to it, unto the seven and thirtieth Article of the Church of England, which
treats of the civil Magistrate. And if at any time it so fall out that the
command of the Magistrate be contrary to the commands of God, if in such a case
they choose to obey God rather than men, they are not upon this account to be
called rebels and contumacious persons. For,

1. This was the practice of the Apostles, to obey God rather than men, Act.
14.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to bearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye. And in so doing, they did no more than what was their duty
to do, Act. 5.29. We ought to obey God rather than men.

2. When the Midwives were commanded by Pharaoh to do that which was contrary
to the command of God; it was not rebellion in them to go against the command
of Pharaoh. But this action of theirs did proceed from the fear of God, Exodus
1.17. But the Midwives feared God, and did not as the King commanded.

3. The Magistrate is the Minister of God for good, Romans 13.4. He is but the
Minister of God, and the Minister of God for good; that is, all that he enjoins
must be for God's honor, and for a public good. If he command any thing
contrary to the command of Christ, and we obey him; we exalt him above God, we
prefer the Servant before the Master.

4. These men are more obedient to Authority, and truer Subjects than many of
their adversaries that reproach them with disloyalty, and rebellion. For many
of those men that cry out against these Ministers for their disobedience to the
Laws, make no scruple of breaking such Laws of God and men, as are contrary to
their lusts. There are good Laws established in this Nation, against Swearing,
Drunkenness, Symony, etc. yet many that are common Swearers, Drunkards, and
live in other vices condemned by the Laws of God, the Laws of the Nation, and
the light of their own Consciences, cry up themselves for obedient Subjects,
and cry out against Ministers for not conforming to such things as they are not
satisfied are lawful for them to do; which have been for many years, and still
are controverted among learned men, not only of this, but of other Nations; and
which they profess could they be satisfied in their Consciences of their
lawfulness they would yield obedience to them.

5. As for those that complain of these Ministers preaching contrary to the
command of the Magistrate; I would put them in mind of the strict command that
God has given to those whom he has called to the work and office of the
Ministry to Preach the Gospel as they will answer the neglect thereof to
himself, and his Son Jesus Christ at the day of Judgment, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I
charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Preach the Word, be
instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and patience. 1 Cor. 9.15. Yea, woe is unto me if I preach not
the Gospel. Now if men forbid that which God commands, whom are we to obey, God
or men? If any say this charge was given to Timothy, and that woe was pronounced
against Paul; and that is nothing to these men: if these men had a charge from
God to preach as Timothy and Paul had, we should not dare to oppose or hinder
their preaching. I answer, This charge that was given to Timothy to preach the
word, does and will concern all Ministers of the Gospel to the worlds end, as
well as it did him. As that promise given to Joshua, I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee, is interpreted by the Holy Ghost to be spoken to all
Christians, to the end of the world, Josh. 1.5. compared with Heb. 13.5. So
this command given to Timothy, who was a Minister of the Gospel, concerns all
the Ministers of the Gospel in all places, and all ages of the world. What was
spoken to the Apostles as they were Christians, belongs to all Christians, Mark
13.37. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch. And what was spoken to
them as Ministers of the Gospel belongs to all Ministers as well as unto them.

6. As for them that charge these men with sin, yea with rebellion for Praying
and Preaching contrary to Law, I would mind them of the examples of Daniel and
the Apostles. There was a royal Law made by all the Presidents of the Kingdom,
the Governors, the Princes, the Counselors, and Captains under a very great
penalty; That no man should ask a Petition of any God or Man, for the space of
thirty days, save of the King, and this decree was signed by Darius the King,
Dan. 6.7, 8, yet when Daniel knew this decree was signed, he prayed three times
a day, as his usual custom was, and did not omit the opening of the windows in
the time of Prayer, v. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he
went into his house, and his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day and prayed, and gave
thanks before his God as at other times. What think ye? Did Daniel sin against
God, and rebel against the King in praying contrary to the decree? If you think
Daniel sinned in giving such an example to after-ages, to pray contrary to a
decree made with such a penalty; or if you think he sinned that he kept his
wonted times, and would not so far comply with the decree, as to forbear for a
few days, or that he did not take other hours, or that he would not shut his
windows, or pray so secretly and privately as none but his own Family should
know of it; you may be convinced of your mistake from v. 22. My God has sent
his angel, and has shut the Lions mouth, that they have not hurt me; forasmuch
as before him innocence was found in me, and also before thee, O King, have I
done no hurt. It is evident from these words, that Daniel's Praying to God in
his usual manner, contrary to the decree, was no sin either against God, or the
King. And is not Prayer a Duty now as well as in Daniel's time? The Apostles
had a strict charge from the rulers of the Jews not to Preach in the name of
Jesus Christ, Act. 4.17, 18. Let us straightly threaten them, that they speak
henceforth to no man in this name. And they called them, and commanded them not
to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. That this command to forbear
Preaching, was given by the Rulers, we may see v. 5, 6. yet after this strict
charge and severe command given by the rulers to the Apostles to cease
Preaching, they were as diligent as before in Preaching of the Gospel, Act.
5.27, 28. And when they had brought them, they set them before the Council, and
the High Priest asked them, saying, Did not we straightly command you, that you
should not teach in this name, and behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your
Doctrine. And after they had been beaten for Preaching the Gospel, and had
received a new command, not to speak in the name of the Lord Jesus; They
continued to take all opportunities to teach and preach Jesus Christ, both in
the Temple and every House, ver. 40, 41, 42. When they had called the Apostles
and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of
Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from the presence of the council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name. And daily
in the Temple and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus
Christ. Did the Apostles sin against God, or rebel against their rulers, for
preaching the Gospel, when they were straightly charged by their rulers not to
Preach, and beaten because they did not obey the command, and another command
given them after that to leave Preaching, and yet they proceeded in their work?
If any shall say or think the Apostles did sin in so doing, all good Christians
will condemn their rash judgment, and they may easily be refuted from Act.
4.29. After they had been commanded to cease preaching, and threatened, they
Pray to to God to assist them to preach the word with boldness. And now, Lord,
behold their threatenings; and grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness,
they may speak thy Word. And they would not pray for assistance in that which
was sinful. And their boldness in preaching after their prohibition from the
rulers of the Jews, is ascribed to their being filled with the Holy Ghost, v.
31. They were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke the word with boldness.
And that man is a blasphemer, who shall say, the Apostles sinned in preaching
against the command of their rulers; whenas it was the Holy Ghost which gave
them boldness to preach the Word of God. Besides, they were encouraged to
preach, after their rulers had forbidden them, and had imprisoned them for
preaching contrary to their commands, by an Angel that was sent from Heaven,
that opened the Prison-doors, and said unto them, Go and stand, and speak in
the temple to the people all the words of this life, Act. 5.9, 20. And when
they were again brought before the rulers, and examined whether they did not
know of that strict charge they had given them, and were taxed with the
disobeying their command, Did not we straightly command you, that you should not
teach in this name, and behold you have filled Jerusalem with your Doctrine,
and intend to bring this man's blood upon us? They justified their preaching,
though they had disobeyed their rulers commands, v. 29. Then Peter, and the
other Apostles answered and said, we ought to obey God, rather than man.

Obj. Though the Apostles preached the Gospel when commanded by the rulers to
forbear preaching, these Ministers must not follow their example.

Ans. 1. If all Christians are not to imitate the Apostles, in what they did as
Christians; and the Ministers of the Gospel to imitate and follow their example
in what they did as Ministers; what is the meaning of those places in the
Epistle to the Pastors and Saints at Philippi? Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be ye
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an
example. And Chapter 4.9. These things which ye have both learned, received, and
heard and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with you. And of that
command 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

2. Dr. Sanderson brings in Daniel's praying against the Law, and the Apostles
preaching contrary to the command of the rulers to prove this conclusion, Leges
humanae injustae non obligant ad obediendum; Humane Laws if injust, oblige not
to obedience. And justifies Daniel's praying, and the Apostles preaching,
though both acted contrary to the Law with this reason, Nimirum, quia
utrobique, quae prohibabantur erant res necessariae; illic cultus very dei, hic
concredita ipsis Evangelii praedicatio: Because in both cases the things which
were forbidden, were necessary Duties; In Daniel's case, the worship of the
true God; in the Apostles case, the preaching of the Gospel, which was
committed to them. I conceive the same reason will justify the praying and
preaching of these men (if the Informers were able to prove there were Laws
forbidding the same) for praying and preaching are Res necessariae, now as well
as in Daniel's and the Apostles times. And it cannot be denied but their
worship is cultus very Dei, and that they being true Ministers of Jesus Christ,
Concredita est ipsis Evangelii praedicatio.

7. I would ask these clamorous persons that do cry out of these Ministers for
praying and preaching contrary to the Laws of the Nation; and thereupon charge
them with disobeying Magistrates, and rebellion against the Law, what they
judge of Dr. Taylor's assertion in his Ductor dubitantium, lib. 3. p. 32. Every
Law made against Religion, or any thing of divine Sanction and Commandment, is
void, and cannot oblige the Conscience. And page 34. All such things as are
against the good of the Subjects, the Law it self declares to be no Law, that
is, more than the Superior has right or leave to do. Now is there not a
divine Sanction for praying and preaching; is not praying to God in the Name of
Christ, and preaching the Gospel whereby men may be saved, for the good of the
subject? If these men do nothing but what is agreeable to the Laws of God, and
what is for a public good, they are not to be charged as transgressors of the
Laws. Hear also what Dr. Sanderson says concerning obedience to such Laws as
are cross to the Laws of God. Quicquid legi Dei, aut naturae lumine notae, and
cordibus inseriptae; aut in verbo Scripto revelatae adversatur, non est ob
quodcunque, vel detrimentum proprium, vel proximo scandalum, vel praelati sive
gratiam promovendam, vel declinandum odium, vere Christiano admittendum. Da
veniam, Imperator, lu carcerem, ille gehennam: Sic olim veteres illi
Christiani. Whatsoever is contrary to the Law of God, either manifest by the
light of Nature, and graven in the heart, or revealed in the Scriptures, a
Christian must not yield to, for avoiding any hurt whatsoever to himself, or
for preventing the scandal of others, or for the gaining the favor, or
avoiding the displeasure of his Superior. The Christians of old were wont to
say to the Emperor, when his command did cross the command of God; Excuse me,
Sir, you may cast us into Prison, but God can cast us into Hell. Both these
Authors were great casuists, and speak as highly for obeying Authority as most
men; they were both Bishops, the one in England, the other in Ireland, (neither
to be suspected of any favor to Non-conformists, that might in the least sway
them to speak in favor of their cause) yet both agree that such Laws as are
contrary to the Laws of God, or to the public good, do not oblige the
Conscience. But that praying to God in the name of Jesus Christ, for things
agreeable to the Will of God, and Preaching the Gospel, are Duties commanded in
the Word of God, and that they tend to a public good, is so plain in the Holy
Scriptures, that he that runs may read of.

8. In cases of necessity, the Ceremonial Law was dispensed with, and they that
transgressed the Law, were accounted guiltless. It was not lawful for any man
excepting the Priests to eat of the Shewbread, others were forbid to eat
thereof by the Law of Moses; yet in a case of necessity, David and they that
were with him, did eat of that bread contrary to the Law of Moses, and yet were
guiltless, Matt. 12.3, 4. Have ye not read what David did when he was an
hungered, and they that were with them; how he entered into the house of God, and
did eat the Shewbread which was not lawful for him to cat, neither for them
that were with him, but only for the Priests. Hence I would argue thus: If
David in the case of necessity transgressed the Ceremonial Law, which was a
divine Law, and yet was not charged with guilt; then if these men in a case of
greater necessity transgress an humane Law (about Ceremonies and Religious
Rites) they are no more culpable than David was. To clear this, let it be
considered,

1. The saving of lost Souls, and feeding hungry Souls with the bread of life
is a greater good, and a more necessary work than giving Shewbread to David,
and his companions when they were hungry.

2. The Ceremonial Law was of divine Institution, the Law that requires
conformity to the Ceremonies now in use, is but an humane Law: And there is
greater reverence due unto divine than humane Laws.

3. There was no dispute among the Jews whether the Ceremonial Law was to be
observed by them; they knew and did believe that Moses received it from God;
but the lawfulness of conformity has been of a long time, and still is a
disputable point; many Learned and Holy men are not satisfied therein.

Obj. But there is no necessity of these men's Preaching, (if their Preaching
were necessary, we should have nothing to say against it) but the people may
hear the Word Preached from conformable Ministers, and therefore their
Preaching is needless.

Ans. 1. The Preaching of these men is necessary in respect of the command of
God; which has laid a necessity upon those that are called to the office and
work of the Ministry to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. For necessity is laid
upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. Every man that has
received talents from the Lord must occupy these talents in the place and
station God has set him in; till the Lord takes him off from his work, Luke
19.13. He called his ten servants, and delivered unto them ten pounds, and said
unto them, occupy till I come.

2. The preaching of God's Word is of greater necessity than our necessary
food, and if we be of Job's mind, we shall esteem it so, Job. 23.12. I have
esteemed the word of thy mouth, more than my necessary food.

3. Ahimilech might have answered David in the like manner; David, though thou
art hungry, there is no necessity I should give thee the Shewbread, there are
houses enough, where there is bread enough, and to spare, whither thou may
go, and be welcome; and yet neither Ahimelech is reproved, nor David for
receiving the Shewbread.

4. The great ignorance, the growth of Atheism, Profaneness, Popery and other
dangerous errors in this Nation, shows a necessity of all the Ministers in
the Nation, both Conformists, and Non-conformists, (if there were twice as many
as there are) to lay out themselves to the utmost in preaching the Gospel.

9. Whereas the Informers plead they do not persecute these Ministers for
praying and preaching, but for breaking the Laws of the Nation; this is but a
vain excuse: For,

1. The work you find these men about, is no other work but praying to God in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for things agreeable to his Will; and preaching the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, or some other religious exercise, and for
these things you inform against them.

2. If you found these men assembled at a Tavern with Bottles of Wine eating
and drinking, and making merry, you would not molest them; or if you found them
at a playhouse, to see a Comedy Acted, you would not molest them; or if they
were at a Coffee-house reading a Gazette, hearing or telling of news; or if you
found them assembled at a Dancing-School, or at a Fair or Market to buy or
sell, you would let them alone; but if you find them praying or preaching, you
then make what have you can to suppress their Meetings, and to incense the
Magistrate against them. And yet will you say, you do not persecute these men
for praying and preaching?

3. If it be your zeal for the Law that carries you out; why do you not inform
against Whore-mongers, Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and other
profane Sinners, who break the Laws of God and men? yea, why do you not pull
the beam out of your own eyes (and inform the Magistrate your selves one of
another, for the crimes against the Law that you are well-known to be guilty
of) before you go to pluck the mote out of these men's eyes?

4. Whether those men break the Law in preaching and praying, as you pretend,
shall be enquired in answer to another of your Pleas.

Plea 3. If these men would conform or leave preaching we would not molest them.

Ans. 1. Though these men cannot conform to those things which are imposed and
required of such as enjoy Ecclesiastical promotions in this Nation; yet the
Informers ought not to persecute them for preaching the Gospel, though they be
such as have a great zeal for conformity: For several Reasons.

1. Preaching the Gospel is of greater necessity, than conformity to the
Ceremonies, which are acknowledged by the greatest Patrons of them to be but
indifferent things.

2. Following Christ and his Disciples was of greater consequence than
conformity to that which is imposed on such as enjoy Ecclesiastical promotions;
yet when John saw one casting out Devils, and out of his zeal to Christ forbade
him, Christ reproved him for it, Luke 9.49. And John answered and said, Master,
we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and we forbade him, because he
follows not with us; and Jesus said, Forbid him not; for he that is not
against us, is for us.

3. These men cannot conform to the Ceremonies, and those other things which
are imposed on public Ministers without sin. For suppose these men were under
a mistake, and there was nothing required, but what was lawful; yet they
judging these things unlawful, they cannot comply with them without sin, Romans
14.14. To him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean.

4. These men conform to the Law of God, and to the Doctrine of the Church;
though they do not conform to the Ceremonies of the Church, whereas many that
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church are of debauched conversations, and
live in the transgression of the Laws of God, and some are of corrupt
judgments. And the zeal of the Informers should carry them out rather against
such as corrupt the Doctrine, than those that scruple the Ceremonies of the
Church (for the Doctrine of the Church, is of more value than all the
Ceremonies, that being of a divine Revelation, these of humane invention; that
being of necessity to Salvation, these being as the chief Patrons of them
contend only for order and decency in the worship of God) and against such as
transgress the Laws of God, rather than those that transgress (as they say) the
Laws of men.

2. Whereas the Informers would have these men leave Preaching, they cannot do
so, unless they would bring upon themselves the curse of God and of men. There
is a woe from God against such as are called to preach the Gospel, and yet
neglect it, 1 Cor. 9.16. Yea, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. And men
would curse them also, Prove. 11.26. He that withholdeth corn, the people shall
curse him; But blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. The
mystical sense of this Proverb, several interpreters understand of such as
withhold the publishing of the Word, they will bring a curse upon themselves;
but they that dispense it faithfully, shall receive a blessing, De Doctrina and
cibo animorum intelligi potest juxta mysticum sensum, qui abscondit talentum,
and non pascit gregem sibi commissum; Maledictus est, R. Baynus. Samuel thought
he should sin, if he should cease praying for, and instructing the people, 1 Samuel 12.13. Moreover, as for me, God forbid, I should sin against the Lord in
ceasing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good and the right may; yet
the Elders of Israel had rejected Samael from bearing rule over them, 1 Samuel
8.5, 7. So these men though they have been cast out of their possessions, and
from their public places, they should sin against the Lord, if they should
cease praying for, and instructing the people, when the Providence of God puts
opportunities into their hands, of praying with them, and teaching them the
good ways of the Lord.

Plea 4. If these men cannot satisfy their Consciences without preaching, let
them preach in their Families, and to four or five more of their Neighbors;
and in so doing they shall fulfill the Law of God, and not transgress the Laws
of the Nation; and then we will not molest them, but we cannot bear their
numerous meetings.

Ans. Several Reasons may be given why these men do not content themselves, nor
can be satisfied in Conscience to preach only to their own Families, and four
or five more of their Neighbors. I will mention three or four.

1. Their commission runs to preach the Gospel to every creature that is
willing to hear them, Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature. Their commission is not limited to their Families,
but reaches every place, where God calls them; neither to a few persons, but
to every creature that is willing to be taught by them.

2. They are commanded as they have opportunity, to do good to all men, Gal.
6.10. As we have opportunity, let us do good to all men. And they account the
greatest good they are able to do for any persons, is to preach the Gospel to
them; Spiritual alms are to be extended as far as those which concern the
outward-man: And the command there to such as have ability, is, Give a portion
to seven, and also to eight. Luke 6.30. Give to every man that asks of thee.

3. Our Lord Jesus taught all that resorted to him; though they came in great
multitudes, Mark 2.13. All the multitude resorted to him, and he taught them:
Mark 10.1. And the people resort unto him again, and as he was wont he taught
them again. And when the Apostle Paul preached in his own hired house, he
received all that came to him, and forbade none, Act. 28.30. Paul dwelt two
whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came unto him, and
preached the Kingdom of God. And we are to imitate our Lord Jesus and his
Apostles. Our Lord Jesus was so far from forbidding multitudes resorting to
him, that the more people came to him, the more his bowels of compassion were
moved toward them, and the more pains he took to instruct them, Mark 6.31. And
Jesus when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward
them; because they were as sheep not having a shepherd, and he began to teach
them many things. Should these men shut up their bowels of compassion, and shut
their doors; when they see much people resorting to them, How should they be of
the same mind, and the same Spirit that was in Jesus Christ?

4. The more they preach to, the more Souls are like to be saved by their
Ministry. And it is the duty of a Minister of the Gospel to save as many Souls
as he can, from eternal destruction. The Apostle Paul was willing to preach to
all, and to carry himself as a Servant to all, that he might gain the more, 1
Cor. 9.19. Though I be free from all men, yet I have made my self a servant to
all, that I might gain the more.

Plea 5. We have a Law for what we do, when we inform against these men, and
cause them to be fined, and their Meetings to be broken up; we do nothing, but
what is according to the Law: And therefore we hope we do not do evil in
persecuting these men, and suppressing their Meetings.

Ans. 1. Suppose you had a Law for what you do, yet that would not justisie
your actings, nor excuse your sin. The Jews pretended they had a Law to put
Christ to death; and that by that Law, he not only might, but ought to be put
to death, Joh. 19.7. The Jews answered him, we have a Law, and by our Law he
ought to die; because he made himself the Son of God. Yet for putting Christ to
death, the vengeance of God fell upon them and has continued upon their
posterity in a most dreadful and amazing manner, above sixteen hundred years.
Paul had authority to disturb the Meetings of the Disciples, and imprison them;
he had a commission from the High Priest to imprison all of that way, which was
cried out against in those days, as much as Non-conformists are in these days,
Act. 9.1, 2. And Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, went unto the High Priest, aad desired of him Letters
unto the Synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether men or women, he
might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And v. 14. And here he has authority to
bind all that call upon thy name. And yet notwithstanding his Letters and
authority, Jesus Christ cries out of him as guilty of persecution, v. 4. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? The Israelites had Statutes of Omri to plead for
the worshipping the Golden Calves, yet that did not secure them from God's
Judgments, but he threatens them with desolation for their sin, Micah 6.13 16,
Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
in smiting thee. -- For the Statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the
house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee a
desolation; and the Inhabitants thereof an hissing. Ephraim had a Commandment
from Jeroboam to worship the Golden Calves, yet this did not excuse Ephraim's
Sin; but God wasted Ephraim with secret and open Judgments, for walking
willingly after that commandment; being both as a Moth and a Lion to Ephraim,
Hos. 4.11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment; because he willingly
walked after the commandment; Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and
to the house of Judah as rottenness. The commandment that Ephraim walked
willingly after, for which he is thus threatened, as also v. 14, is by most
interpreters, both ancient and modern, understood of the commandment that
Jeroboam gave the ten Tribes concerning the Golden Calves; as Rivet notes on
the place. Hebraei interpretes and nostrorum plaerique id referunt ad mandatum
Jeroboam de colendis vitulis, and altaribus nobis erigendis. The Papists that
burnt the Martyrs, plead Law for what they did; yet all Protestants abhor and
condemn their bloody practices.

2. A man may execute the Law, and yet be a sinner in the sight of God, if that
which he does, be done from an evil principle, or for an evil end: As for
instance; Though you should do nothing against these men, but what is according
to Law; yet if your actings against them proceed from malice or hatred, or from
a covetous principle to get their estates, or from enmity against Religion, or
any such like evil principle; your actings are abominable in the sight of God.
When Jehu destroyed the house of Ahab, he did that which was agreeable to the
Law of God, he did according to all that was in the heart of God, 1 King.
10.30. yet because Jehu's heart was not right in the sight of God, because he
sought his own ends, and not the glory of God in what he did, he was guilty of
blood in the sight of God; And God threatened to avenge the blood of the house
of Ahab, which was shed in Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, Hos. 1.4, I will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. By the blood of Jezreel
understand Ahab's 70 Sons, which were slain at Jehu's appointment by the Rulers
of Jezreel, and all the remainder of Ahab's house, whom Jehu slew in Jezreel, 2
K. 8.10.1, 7, 11. Now if a man may fulfill the Law of God, and yet fall under
the vengeance of God, for doing what God commands, for corrupt and sinful ends;
then much more may a man execute the Laws of men, and thereby incur displeasure
of Almighty God, for making use of, and prosecuting that Law from evil
principles, and for sinful and corrupt ends.

3. The Law which Informers make use of to persecute these men, is capable of
such an interpretation, as it will not touch these men or their Meetings. For,

1. If the body of the Act be to be interpreted by the title of the Act (as one
would think it should, the title representing the design and main purport of
the Act, as the Contents of a Chapter does set out the chief things in the
Chapter), These men are not at all concerned in this Act. For it is Entitled,
An Act to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles: For they come not at any
seditious Conventicles; they abhor such Conventicles as much as these
Informers, or any other men. For they know and teach according to the
Scripture, That sedition is a work of the flesh, which will exclude men from
the Kingdom of God, as well as envyings and murders, drunkenness and
revellings, or other such like sins, Gal. 5.20, 21. And if an Informer shall
call an Assembly of men fearing God, who meet together for no other end but to
pray to God, in the Name of Jesus Christ, or Preach and Hear the Word of God,
or other Religious exercises, a seditious Conventicle, he seems to me to be
either an ignorant or malicious man.

2. If the Law be to be interpreted by the Preface to the Act; neither will
that concern the Meetings of these men. The Preface is this, For providing
further and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practice of
seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive insurrections; as late
experience has shown. This Preface does not in any of its branches concern
these Ministers called Non-conformists: They are not seditious Sectaries, for
they are of the same Faith with the Church of England; and Preach peace, and
labor as much as in them lies to live peaceably with all men. They are no
disloyal persons, for they honor the King, and pray for him, both in their
Closets, Families, and Assemblies. There are no dangerous practices at their
Meetings; for when they meet together they pray to God, they read the Holy
Scriptures, they preach sound Doctrine, they praise God in singing Psalms, they
give Alms, these are no dangerous practices. They are none of those, that at
their Meetings contrive insurrections, as experience shows: For no instance
that I have heard of, has been of any such contrivance, for the long space of
time since they were cast out of their livings, a good proof of their
peaceableness; Besides, they have Women and Children at their Meetings, yea,
and persons they know not, and that is not the manner of them that meet to
contrive insurrections. Some may say, though neither the Title nor the Preface
do reach these men and their Meetings, yet the Act it self does; for it
concerns those that shall be present at any Assembly or Conventicle, or
Meeting, under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion in other manner
than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England. To which I
answer, still this relates to those that are present at Religious exercises
under a color or pretense, and so it does not reach them who meet together for
no other end, but to worship God, and edify their own Souls; but only reaches
such as use Religious exercises for a pretense and color to carry on some evil
designs, which cannot be proved against these men.

But the most material passage in this Act which is made use of to suppress the
Assemblies of these men, is this, It is pretended their exercises of Religion
are in other manner than according to the Liturgy, and the practice of the
Church of England. And therefore this must now be enquired into; which if these
Informers did rightly understand, and would put on charity, and did fear an
oath, they would be very fearful to persecute these men, or cause them to be
fined and molested upon a pretense that their meeting is in other manner than
according to the Liturgy, and the practice of the Church of England. Before I
answer this, I would premise one passage out of Dr. Jer. Taylour, late Bishop
of Down and Conner, about the interpretation of the Laws, lib. 3. page 31. It Is
observable that all Laws do insinitely decline all barsh senses, and are
ambitious of gentle and benign interpretations. If this rule of interpreting
Laws be granted, and practiced, I doubt not but the Non-conformists and their
Meetings will be exempted from the penalties of this Act.

To clear this more particularly, Let it be considered, whether these men's
prayings be in other manner than according to the Liturgy; to this end let me
tell you in what manner these men pray, they pray to the Almighty God that made
Heaven and Earth, who is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. They pray
to this God in the Name of Jesus Christ, and make use of no other Mediator
besides our Lord Jesus. They pray for things agreeable to the Will of God. They
pray to God in a known tongue, which is understood by those that join with
them. They lift up their hearts, as well as their hands to God in the Heavens.
The glory of God is that which they aim at in all their prayers. And are not
all these things according to the Liturgy of the Church of England? Does not
the Liturgy direct prayer to be made to the true God? Are not the Prayers of
the Liturgy agreeable to the Will of God? Are not the Prayers of the Liturgy
offered up to God in the Name of Christ, and in a known tongue, and for the
glory of God? Did you find these men praying to Jupiter, or any of the Gods of
the Heathen: Did you hear them blaspheme Jesus Christ as the Jews do in their
Synagogues: Did you find them praying in an unknown tongue; or praying to the
Saints or Virgin Mary, as the Papists do; or did you find them praying for
unlawful things, you had some color to inform against them as transgressors of
this act. What is there then in these men's Prayers, that make you judge them to
be in other manner than according to the Liturgy, which in your apprehension
makes them transgressors of the Law? It may be you will say, They do not use
that form of Prayer which is prescribed in the Liturgy, but they pray in other
words. To which I answer, They may be truly said to pray after the same manner,
though they use not the same words: For, our Lord Jesus Christ gave his
Disciples a form or pattern to direct them how to pray, and bid them pray after
that manner that he had taught them, Matt. 6.9. After this manner therefore
pray ye, Our Father which art in Heaven: And we find some of their Prayers
recorded, as Act. 1.24, 25. Act 4.23. Yet in neither of these, nor any other
place, do we read that they used that form of Prayer which our Lord Jesus
taught them; but their Prayers were put up to God in other words. Now I would
demand of these Informers, Did the Apostles transgress the commandment of
Christ, and pray in other manner than Christ directed, when they used not that
form of words which are contained in the Lords Prayers, but prayed in other
words? I suppose they will be ashamed to say the Apostles transgressed the
command, and prayed in other manner than he enjoined them. If they should be so
audacious as to charge the Apostles with the breach of Christ's command for
praying in other words; they may be refuted from that gracious answer, which
God gave to their Prayers, by filling them all with the Holy Ghost, after they
had prayed to him, Act. 4.31. If they will grant the Apostles did not pray in
other manner than Christ directed, though they used other words, and so were no
transgressors of Christ's command. Then I reply, Why then do these Informers
persecute, and persecute these Ministers as transgressors of this Act,
pretending that in their Meetings they pray in other manner, than according to
the Liturgy; when all that is requisite to make a Prayer acceptable to God, is
found in these men's Prayers, as well as in the Prayers in the Liturgy? These
men's Prayers are offered up to the same God, by the same Mediator, by the help
of the same Spirit; for things agreeable to the Will of God; and for the honor
and glory of God, as well as the Prayers prescribed in the Liturgy.

But besides what has been said already, there may be one thing more added,
which will exempt these men from being guilty of exercising any Acts of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, and that is this; The Liturgy of the Church of England, includes all
those portions of the Holy Scripture, which are appointed to be read for the
first and second Lesion for the Morning and Evening Service throughout the
whole year, together with what is read for the Epistles and Gospels. And
whatever Religious exercise is allowed of by these, by those portions of
Scripture appointed to be read by the Liturgy for the Morning or Evening
Service; that Religious exercise is not performed in other manner than
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England. And if all those portions of
Scripture be part of the Liturgy (which I suppose none will deny) it will be
easy proving, that there is nothing done at these Assemblies, but what is
agreeable to the Scriptures used in the Liturgy; I will touch but upon one or
two places. On July the 18th, for the second Lesson at the Evening Service is
appointed to be read, 1 Timothy 2. and there, praying in houses, and in every
other place is allowed of as well as in Temples, so it be done in an holy
manner, v. 8, I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands
without wrath and doubting. And June the 30th, for the second Lesson is
appointed Ephesians. 6, and there the Apostle allows of all manner of Prayer, so it
be in the Spirit, v. 18, Praying always with all Prayers, and Supplication in
the Spirit: So that all manner of Prayer at what time or place soever it be
made, if it be Prayer in the Spirit, is allowed by the Scriptures appointed to
be read by the Liturgy, and so is not in other manner than according to the
Liturgy. Many more instances might be given to prove the Religious exercises of
these men to be in such manner as agrees with the Scriptures prescribed to be
read by the Liturgy; but I shall add no more.

Now let us consider whether these men's exercises of Religion be in other
manner than according to the practice of the Church of England. If they had no
benefit by the former clause (which as before explained, is for their
advantage, though made use of to suppress them) yet they have protection from
the penalty of the Law, as I conceive, by this clause, The practice of the
Church of England. To clear this, let it be considered,

1. What is the Church of England? The best way to know this, is to consider
the Doctrine of the Church of England, declared in the 39 Articles; and there
the Church is thus defined, Art. 19, The Visible Church of Christ, is a
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly administered according to Christ's Ordinance, and in
all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. And if this be a
true description of the Church of England (which they that own the Articles, I
think should not deny) then these Non-conformists are a considerable part of
the Church of England. For they are faithful men, men that believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ (which I suppose is meant by faithful men); in their Congregations
the Word of God is preached in truth and purity, the Sacraments are duly
administered according to Christ's Ordinance, in all things that of necessity
are requisite to the same. If these Non-conformists be not a part of the Church
of England, How, and when, and by whom were they excommunicated and cast out of
the Church? If any say they do not comply with the Discipline and Ceremonies of
the Church, I answer:

1. In that definition which is given of the Church in the 19th Article, there
is nothing mentioned of the Discipline or Ceremonies: As Mr. Rogers observes in
his Exposition of the 39 Articles, dedicated to the Archbishop of Canterbury;
His words are these, Some (and they, many of them very godly men) add
Ecclesiastical Discipline for a note of the Visible Church; but because the
said Discipline in part is included in the marks here mentioned; both we, and
in effect, all well-ordered Churches, over-pass it in this place, as no taken
simply of the Visible Church.

2. The Church of England is not founded upon the Ceremonies or the Discipline;
but it is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone: And upon this foundation do these
Nonconformist Ministers build as well as the Conformable Clergy; and therefore
are of the Church of England as well as they. And if the Non-conformists be a
considerable part of the Church of England, how can these Informers swear their
Religious exercises are in other manner than according to the practice of the
Church of England?

If any man will put such a harsh sense upon these words, The practice of the
Church of England, that he will have none understood but the conformable part
of the Church of England; Yet in this sense it may be pleaded, It is not
contrary to the practice of the Church of England, for men that have been
brought up at the University, and after their examination of their fitness for
the work of the Ministry, have been ordained, and set apart thereunto with
fasting and Prayer, to preach sound Doctrine, and before and after their
Sermons to pray to God in the name of his Son, for things agreeable to his
Will; which is the practice of these men. But if it be said it is the practice
of the conformable Clergy in England to use the forms of Prayer prescribed by
the Liturgy, which these men do not; I answer, It is the practice of the
Ministers of the Church of England to pray with other Prayers when in their
Pulpits, both before and after Sermon, than what are prescribed in the Liturgy;
so that praying in other words, and in another method than what is prescribed
in the Liturgy, either before or after Sermon in Public Assemblies, as the
Non-conformists do, is not contrary to the practice of the Church of England.

2. Neither is praying and preaching without having the Liturgy read to the
Assembly, contrary to the practice of the Church of England. For at Funeral
Sermons the reading of the Liturgy is often omitted. And it was the usual
practice at the chiefest Church in Cambridge, and I suppose still is continued
(where the Vice Chancellor, Masters, and Fellows of Colleges, and other
Students assemble together) to have praying and preaching both in the forenoon
and afternoon every Sabbath Day, without the use of the Liturgy in that
Assembly. Also when there is Concio ad Clerum (which is frequent in Term time)
there is praying to God, and preaching his Word without the use of the Liturgy.
And yet I suppose no man will say, These are none of the Church of England.

3. It is no crime to use different words, and different methods in preaching;
so they that preach, do preach sound Doctrine. And why should it be esteemed
such a great crime to use different forms and Methods in Prayer, provided that
they that pray, pray to one and the same God, in the name of one and the same
Mediator, for things agreeable to the Will of God.

4. As for the Informers that plead they have Law for what they do, if this
were a truth (which yet I will not grant them) I would advise them to consider
how contrary their practice is to the Laws of God; I might name many instances,
I will mention but two or three, Pro. 25.15, Lay not wait, Oh wicked man,
against the dwelling of the righteous, spoil not his resting place. Isa. 16.3,
4, Hide the outcast, bewray not him that wandreth. Let my outcasts dwell with
thee Moab; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler. If Moab who
was a stranger to the Commonwealth of Israel, was to show that humanity
toward the Israelites, when in a suffering condition, as not to bewray him
that wandered; but to hide them, permit them to dwell in safety, to be a covert
from the face of the spoiler: Then what shall we say to them that profess
themselves Christians, and yet are so far from hiding and being a covert to the
servants of God, that they lie in wait to betray them, and endeavor to spoil
them of their goods? Zech. 8.12, Let none of you imagine evil in your heart
against his neighbor, and love no false oath; for all these are things that I
hate, says the Lord. When you are contriving how you may do evil to these men;
you are doing that which the Lord hates. The greatness of your sin, and your
contrariety to the Word of God, has been so fully set out in the former
Chapter, that I shall need to add no more on this head: only I shall mention
this, The Laws by which we shall all be judged at the last day, are the Laws of
God; and therefore we should do nothing here, but what we can give a good
account of at the day of Judgment, Jam. 2.12, So speak ye, and so do ye, as
they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.

Plea 6. If these men would preach and meet in Churches, we would not molest
them; but we hate this meeting in houses and barns, and such like places.

Ans. 1. But why should you be so much offended at preaching in houses, and
other retired places, when as our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles preached
not only in the Temple and the Synagogues, but in private houses, and ships,
and other places, where the people could come conveniently to hear them. Jesus
Christ preached in an house, when there was as many as the house could hold,
even to the very doors, Mark 2.1, 2. It was noised that he was in the house.
And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch as there was no room to
receive them; no, not so much as about the door; and he preached the word unto
them. He preached out of a ship, Luke 5.3, He entered into one of the ships
which was Simons, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the
Land, and be sat down, and taught the people out of the ship. He preached
sometime upon the mountains, Matt. 5.1, 2, And seeing the multitudes, he got up
into a mountain, and when be was set, his Disciples came unto him, and he
opened his mouth and taught them. He did not decline preaching in any place
where he had an opportunity to dispense the Word. And as Jesus Christ, so also
his Disciples preached in houses, as well as in the Temple, and in the
Synagogues, Act. 5.42, And daily in the Temple and in every house, they ceased
not to teach and to preach Jesus Christ. Act. 20.20, I kept back nothing from
you, but have showed you and have taught you publicly, and from house to
house. For the space of two years Paul preached in his own house, and received
all that came to him, and no man forbade him. Act. 28.30, 31, And Paul dwelt
two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came unto him,
preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord
Jesus Christ with all confidence, no man forbidding him. And sometimes their
Meetings and Preachings were very private, Gal. 2.2. Joh. 21.19.

2. Could these men enjoy public places to preach in they would choose them
rather than private houses; not that they place any holiness in them, or think
the worship of God more acceptable in one place, than in another; but because
of the convenience of them. Act. 17.24, God that made the world and all things
therein, seeing he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made
with hands. It Is the worship and worshipper that God looks at, more than the
place where the worship is performed, Joh. 4.21, 23. It seems irrational and
not candid (to say no worse) to shut these men out of the Churches, and then to
reproach them and persecute them, because they preach not in Churches, but in
private houses and barns, and where they best can.

3. A stable is a more contemptible place than a dwelling house, or barn; yet
because there was no room in the Inn, our Lord Jesus was born in a stable, and
laid in a manger after he was put into his swadling-cloths, Luke 2.7. She
brought forth her firstborn Son, and wrapped him in swadling-cloths, and laid
him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn. And shall we
think any place too mean for us to assemble together in, seeing our Lord Jesus
humbled himself so far as to be born in a stable?

Plea 7. We cannot believe it is such a great sin as you have said, to molest
and persecute these men; for if it were, we should be greatly troubled in our
Conscience, and should have no quiet in our minds night nor day; but we are
under no trouble of Conscience for what we do; and therefore we think we do not
sin in molesting them.

Ans. 1. A man may be a great sinner, and yet have no trouble in his Conscience
for his sins; yea, it may be a hard matter to convince him of his sins.
Whoredom is a great sin; Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Yet Solomon
speaks of some that live in this sin, and say they have done no iniquity, Prove.
30.20. Such is the way of an adulterous woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth,
and says I have done no wickedness. Oppression and Murder are grievous sins,
yet some men have such seared Consciences, that they are no more troubled at
these sins, than if they were innocent persons. Zech. 11.4, 5, Feed the flock
of the Slaughter, whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty;
and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, I am rich. Jer. 2.34, 35,
Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents, I
have not found it upon secret search, but upon all these, yet thou say,
because I am innocent, surely hss anger shall turn from me. To kill the
Disciples of Christ is an exceeding great sin; yet some are under such a spirit
of delusion, that instead of acknowledging their sin, they think they do God
good Service. Joh. 16.2, They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, the
time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God Service.

2. It has been already proved by many Arguments out of the Word of God, that
this practice of yours is exceeding sinful, and abominable in the sight of God,
and therefore if you have no terrors of Conscience for what you have done, it
is because your hearts are so hardened that you are grown past feeling.

Plea 8. But if our persecuting these men were so great a sin, surely God would
send some great Judgment upon us; either fire would fall from Heaven and
consume us, or the earth would open its mouth, and swallow us up, or some other
strange punishment would befall us; but God lets us alone, and we thrive and
prosper in the world, and therefore we cannot think this is such a great sin.

Ans. 1. God oft-times lets great sinners alone, and does not punish them for
their sins in this world; because he reserveth them to be punished at the day
of Judgment. 2 Pet. 2.9, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptation, and to reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment to be punished.
Job observed in his time, that there were persons that did remove the
landmarks, and violently took away the flocks, and fed thereon, oppressed the
Widow and the Fatherless, and grind the face of the poor, and committed other
abominable sins, and yet God did not punish them for their sins, Job 24.2, to
the 12. Some remove the Landmark, and violently take away flocks, and feed
thereon. They drive away the ass of the fatherless, and take the widows exe for
a pledge, and yet God lays not folly to them. And David observed of many in
his time, that were great oppressers and afflicters of Gods people, and yet
they prospered, and did not meet with troubles, either in life or death, as
other men did; but had even what heart could wish, though they were ungodly
sinners, Ps. 73. from v. 3. to the 12th.

2. Glory not in this, that God lets you alone in your sinful ways, and suffers
you to prosper; For it is a token that he intends to destroy you for ever, Ps.
97.2, When the wicked do spring as the grass, and when all the workers of
iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

3. It may be the hand of the Lord is lifted up, and has gone out against you
several ways, since you took up this practice of Informing; though you take no
notice of it, Isa. 26.11, Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see,
but they shall see and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire
of thine enemies shall devour them.

4. Though you do not meet with judgments in your Bodies, Estate, or Families;
yet it may be God has smitten you with spiritual judgments. When Pharaoh
oppressed Israel, and would not let Israel go to worship God; besides the
Plagues that reach the outward man, God sent Plagues upon Pharaoh's heart,
Exodus 9.14, I will at this time send all my Plagues upon thy heart. And how did
God send all his Plagues upon Pharaoh's heart? It was by giving him up to
Judicial hardness, Exodus 10.1, And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh,
for I have hardened his heart. It Is a grievous curse to be given up of God to
obstinacy of heart, Lam. 3.65. Give them sorrow of heart: (or as it is in the
Margin) obstinacy of heart, thy curse unto them. So Vatablus, give them
obstinatum cor, an obstinate heart. When God gives a man an obstinate heart, he
gives him a dreadful curse; what sadder token of God's displeasure, than when
God lets him alone in his sins, as he did Ephraim? Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined
to Idols, let him alone. Hos. 12.14, Ephraim provoked him to anger most
bitterly. Whence I infer, God is provoked to anger most bitterly with those
sinners whom he lets alone, and suffers to go on in their sins without rebuke;
For whom he loves, he rebukes and chastens, Rev. 3.19.

5. Though God out of his patience bear with you, and give you time and space
to repent; yet if you repent not, sudden and unavoidable destruction will come
upon you, Prove. 29.1, He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Job speaking of oppressors (and
I conceive Informers to be guilty of oppression) tells us, how oft-times God
takes them away in a very sudden and terrible manner, Job. 27.20, 21, 22,
Terrors take hold of him as waters, a tempest steals him in the night, the
east wind carries him away, and he departs, and as a storm burleth him out
of his place. For God shall cast upon him and not spare; he would fain flee out
of his hand. All this time that God bears with you, and waits for your
repentance, he is whetting his sword and bending his bow, and preparing for you
the instruments of death; and the longer the sword is whetting, the sharper it
will be, and give the more deadly wound when it strikes you, Ps. 7.10, 11, 12,
God is angry with the wicked every day, if he turn not, he will whet his sword,
he has bent his bow and made it ready, he has also prepared for him the
instruments of death, he ordains his arrows against his persecutors:

Plea 9. It brings us in great profit to go and inform against these men and
their Meetings, and therefore being in straits, and having need of Money, we
take up this trade of Informing; for thereby a third part of all fines will
come into our Purses.

Ans. 1. If the work you went about were so good, yet it is sordid and sinful
to go about such an employment from a covetous principle. Teaching the Word of
God is a good work, and judging the causes between man and man is a good work;
yet when a man's great end in these works is to get Money, they become sinful,
Mic. 3.8.11, I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord to declare unto Jacob
his transgression, and Israel his sin. The heads thereof judge for reward, and
the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money.

2. Judas gained thirty pieces of silver by betraying of Christ, but what good
did his Money do him? when his Conscience was awakened and made sensible of his
sin, his Money was a trouble to him, he was weary of it, and threw it away, and
hanged himself, Matt. 27.5, He cast down the pieces of silver in the temple,
and departed and hanged himself. When Balaam was sent for to Balack to curse
Israel, and had a great reward proffered him, the love of the wages of
unrighteousness prevailed with him to go; but what befell him in the way? An
Angel met him with a drawn sword, and would have slain him, had not the Ass
turned out of the way, Numb. 22.32, 33. And God to show to Balaam his folly and
madness, gave the Ass a voice to rebuke him. 2 Pet. 2.15, 16, which have
forsaken the right way and gone astray, following the way of Balaam the Son of
Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his
iniquity. The dumb Ass speaking with man's voice, sorbade the madness of the
Prophet. They that out of love to the wages of unrighteousness, will curse the
Israel of God, are little better than madmen. The very beasts, had they power
to speak, would cry out of, and rebuke the iniquity of these men.

3. If this practice of yours be so sinful as has been proved, then what you
gain in this kind, is got with the loss of your Souls; and if you could gain
the whole world, and should lose your souls, you would be miserable for ever,
Mark 8.36, What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own Soul?

4. Consider what the Scripture says of unrighteous men, and the gain they
make by their unrighteous practices. And I leave it to your Conscience to
judge, whether to get riches by causing men to be punished for praying to God,
and hearing his Word, be not to get them unrighteously.

1. All that is gained unrighteously, is got with the loss of the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 9.6, Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God?

2. All that is gotten unrighteously, will last but a little while, Jer. 17.11,
He that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and in the end shall be a sool.

3. The riches you get this way, will eat your flesh as it were fire, the
remembrance of these things in the other world will torment your Conscience, as
much as fire does your flesh, Jam. 5.3, 4. Your gold and silver is cankered,
and the rust of them shall witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire, ye have heaped up treasure against the last days. Behold, the bire
of the laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back
by fraud cries, and the cries of them that reaped are entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabbath. If the hire of a laboring man kept back by fraud cries,
and the cry enters into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath; how much more do the
estates of those Ministers who have been Laborers in God's vineyard, which
have been by you taken away by force and violence, cry unto the Lord, and their
cries enter into the ears of the Lord of Hosts? And if the rust of the estates
of covetous men, who heap up Money and do no good with it, will be a witness
against them, and will eat their flesh like fire, then what a witness will all
those goods be against you at the day of Judgment, which you have caused to be
taken away from the servants of God? and how will the remembrance thereof vex
and torment your Consciences; even as if your flesh were continually burning in
the fire?

Plea 10. We abhor those men that turn Informers for filthy lucre sake, and
look upon them as vile persons: It is zeal for the glory of God, and the good
of the Church, that makes us prosecute these men: I purpose to give my part of
the fines to the poor, and to charitable uses; therefore I hope I am
praiseworthy.

Ans. 1. Suppose it be zeal that carries you out to prosecute these men, yet
you may be guilty of persecution. When the Apostle Paul made havoc of the
Church of Christ, and haled the members of it to Prison, he did not act for
gain or preferment, but out of zeal; yet he acknowledges himself a persecutor
and injurious, though what he did proceeded out of a blind zeal, Phil. 3.6,
Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, Act. 26.9. I verily thought with my
self, I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

And though he did nothing against the members of Christ, but what he thought
to be his duty; yet when he was better instructed, he called himself the chief
of sinners, for persecuting of Jesus Christ.

2. An indiscreet zeal may carry a man out, not only to do that which is
prejudicial to himself, but may bring Judgments upon the Kingdom where he
lives. Saul slaying the Gibeonites out of zeal to the children of Israel and
Judah, brought a famine, which is a sore Judgment, that continued a long time
in the Land even three years, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, Then there was a famine in the
days of David three years, year after year. And David enquired of the Lord, and
the Lord answered, it is for Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites. (Now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the
remnant of the Amorites, and the children of Israel had sworn unto them. And
Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)

3. Those alms which you give to the poor out of these men's estates that are
fined for meeting together to pray to God, and to hear his Word, are no way
acceptable to God. For,

1. He loves judgment and righteousness, and hates those Sacrifices which are
taken by Robbery from other men, and then presented to him for a Sacrifice, Is.
61.8, For I the Lord, love judgment, and hate Robbery for burnt-offering.

2. He that would give alms which may be acceptable to God, must give alms of
what he gets righteously, Matt. 6.1, Take heed that ye do not your alms
before men to be seen of them. Some copies render it (...), as Beza observes.
Take heed you do not your righteousness before men: Alms may be called
righteousness; because they must be of goods honestly and righteously gotten.
Your alms. We must give alms out of our own, not other men's estates.

4. Those that sought to build up Zion with blood, took the ready way to
destroy Zion, Mic. 3.10, 12, They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be ploughed as a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps.

Plea 11. We hate these men, and know not how to find an occasion against them;
except it be in the matters of their God, and this is a ready way to be avenged
of them.

Ans. 1. If you hate these men, then you are Murderers in God's account, and
shall have no part in his Kingdom, 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is
a murderer, and ye know, that no murderer, has eternal life abiding in him.

2. Though men cannot see the spite that is in your hearts, but it may be
covered over with fair pretenses; yet God sees it, and he will requite it, Ps.
10.14. Thou have seen it; For thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it
with thy hand.

3. Suppose any that come to these Meetings have done you wrong, yet you ought
not to avenge your selves; but to overcome evil with good, Romans 12.19, 21,
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for
it is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord. Be not
overcome of evil; but overcome evil with good. Much less should you for the
offense of one man seek to be revenged of an Assembly of men. As Haman, when he
had taken offense at Mordecai, sought to be avenged of the whole race of the
Jews, which proved his overthrow.

Plea 12. We think, may others say, that some of these men are righteous
persons, and mean well; but they disturb the peace of the Church, and their
preaching causes division in the Church; for by their means are Families
divided, and some go one way and some another. And this makes us labor to
suppress them; because the good of the Church is to be preferred above the good
of particular persons.

Ans. 1. If you grant these men to be righteous men, you had need take heed how
you persecute them. What Job said to his friends, Job 19.28, But ye should say,
why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is in him? That you should
say, why persecute we these men, seeing the root of the matter is in them,
seeing they are of the same faith with us, and walk in the fear of God?

2. If by the Church you understand the body of Christians, who embrace the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and walk in all the Ordinances and Commandments of the
Lord Jesus; then these men are a great part of the Church, and are not the
disturbers of the Churches peace: For whom do they molest, whom do they
persecute? They are desirous to live at peace among themselves, and to have
peace with all men, as much as in them is. These Informers and their adherents
are the disturbers of the Churches peace, who persecute men professing Faith in
Christ, and walking in all the Ordinances of the Gospel; for worshipping God.
If by the Church you mean the Pastors and Teachers of the Church; these men do
not molest the conformable Clergy, in their executing their Ministerial office.
As for such of them as are sound in the Faith, holy in their Lives, faithful
Preachers of God's holy Word; They say, the Blessing of the Lord be upon them,
and rejoice to hear when they convert Souls to Christ. And in this sense also
Informers are the disturbers of the Church, for their great design is to molest
and persecute the Pastors and Teachers among the Non-conformists, rather than
any other persons.

3. Great divisions arose in the Jewish Church upon the preaching of the Lord
Jesus Christ; Families were divided upon his preaching, some were for him,
others were against him. Fathers against their children, and children against
their fathers, Luke 11.51, 52, 53. Suppose you that I am come to give peace on
earth; I tell you nay, but rather division. For from henceforth there shall be
five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The Father
shall be divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father. The Mother
against the Daughter, and the Daughter against her Mother. The Mother-in-law
against the Daughter-in-law, and the Daughter-in-Law against the Mother-in-law.
Was Jesus Christ to be suppressed? was his preaching to be blamed, because of
these divisions that followed upon it? Far be it from any man to say or think
so. In like manner, if divisions and distentions arise in Families, and among
Relations upon the preaching of the Ministers of Christ; neither they are to be
suppressed, nor their Ministers to be blamed.

Yea, it may be further added, that the preaching of the Conformist Ministers
also does cause dissentions and divisions in Families and Parishes; when many
Families in one Parish will repair to hear the Ministers of another Parish, and
that in great numbers; so that some Congregations where Ministers are eminent,
are thronged; others, scarce any hearers at all; yea, in the same Families in
London, and other places: several in the same Family do repair to several
conforming Ministers of other Parishes. And some Persons of Quality zealous too
for Uniformity, do constantly desert their own Ministers to hear some other
they better approve of, taking all or the greatest part of their Families with
them, and for years together; yet I suppose these Informers judge not themselves
obliged out of their love of the Churches peace to prosecute these Ministers
and their hearers, the one for preaching, and the other hearing.

Plea 13. We are convinced we have done evil, but you should not have reproved
us so openly whereby we are made odious in the eyes of the people. We were
sufficiently hated before, but now we are like to be much more hated.

Ans. You have sinned openly, and therefore you are to be rebuked openly, that
others might hear and fear, and not follow your evil example, 1 Timothy 5.10, Them
that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.

2. Open rebuke is better than secret love, Prove. 27.5, And you are not
offended with a man for loving of you, though it be with a secret love. Why
then should you be offended for being openly rebuked?

3. I have named no man's person. I have only laid open the odious nature of
your sin. And your sin is more odious than can be expressed. I would not have
any man hate your persons; but I would have all men hate your sins.

4. If you had died in your sins, you should have been put to everlasting
shame, for that will be the portion of impenitent sinners, to be put to shame
and contempt for ever, Dan. 12.2, Many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and
contempt. But if by this, or any other means, you are brought to repentance,
then shall you have everlasting glory.

CHAP. IV. Inferences from the foregoing Discourse.
I Shall now draw some Inferences from what has been said concerning the
greatness of the sin of these Informers, that persecute righteous men for
praying to God, and preaching and hearing his holy Word, and cause their
Assemblies to be broken up, and their goods to be taken from them.

Inf. 1. If this be such a great sin, then let those that have been guilty of
it, repent and make restitution. Without repentance there is no possibility that
you should avoid perishing for ever, Luke 13.3, I tell you nay, but except ye
repent ye shall all likewise perish. Consider how sharply the Lord Jesus
reproved the Pharisees, hindering men's entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matt. 23.13.33, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the
Kingdom of heaven against men; for you neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers:
How can ye escape the damnation of hell? The Pharisees were said to shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven; because they hindered the preaching of the Gospel, which is
called, The Gospel of the Kingdom, Matt. 24.14. And the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matt. 13.47. Because it is the way and means of bringing men into the Kingdom.
That the Pharisees did shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, by hindering the preaching
the Gospel, is evident from Luke 11.52. where the shutting up the Kingdom is
called the taking away the key of knowledge. They acted the part of Serpents and
Vipers; they did bite and sting those that preached, and those that heard the
Gospel, Job. 9.22. and so hindered men's entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. And
for this Serpentine carriage, Jesus tells them they were in danger of eternal
damnation. How can ye escape the damnation of hell? will ye do the same things
the Pharisees did, and yet think ye shall not fall into the same condemnation?
your only way to avoid it is, by timely and sincere repentance. Ezekiel. 18.30,
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, and so iniquity shall
not be your ruin.

And as you must leave off your sins, so if you expect mercy from God; you must
make restitution to those persons, from whom you have taken or caused to be
taken away any of their goods. To convince you of the necessity of making
restitution; consider such Scriptures as these, Ezekiel. 33.15. If the wicked
restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in the statutes of
life; he shall surely live, he shall not dye. It Is not sufficient that the
wicked leave off robbing; but he must give again that which he has robbed, to
those from whom it was robbed; if he would enter into life and not dye in his
sins. It may be you will say, We are not thieves and robbers, and so are not
obliged by this Scripture to make restitution.

Ans. 1. The Hebrew word Gazal, signifies any violent wresting, and forcing
men's right out of their hands. And it is so rendered of things taken away
violently, when a man sees or knows it, as Deuteronomy. 28.31. Job 20.19.

2. Restitution is to be made for all acts of deceit, as well as secret theft,
Lev. 6.2, 4, If a soul sin, and commit a trespass agaimst the Lord, in a thing
taken by violence, and has deceived his neighbor. -- Then it shall be,
because he has sinned, and is guilty; that he shall restore what he has
violently taken away; or the thing he has deceitfully gotten.

3. In some respects you are worse than thieves and robbers; For,

1. Thieves are ashamed when they are discovered, Jer. 2.26, The thief is
ashamed, when he is found. But it is not so with you.

2. The thief usually takes the dead time of the night, but you commit your sin
at midday. The more impudency there is in any sin, the greater it is.

3. The thief does not rob men for their Religion; but you take away men's goods
for serving God, see the necessity of restitution from other Scriptures. Zophar
tells us that oppressors, and such as take away others goods, must make
restitution, or else they shall never enjoy peace in their Consciences, Job
20.18, 19, 20. According to his substance shall the restitution be, and he
shall not rejoice therein; because he has oppressed and forsaken the poor,
because he has violently taken away an house which he has not builded, surely
he shall not feel quietness in his belly. Zacheus when he was converted, made
restitution to all persons he had wronged by false accusation; for all wrongs
he had done them, Luke 19.8, If I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold. Hear what Grotius says on this place:
Quatenus fieri potest, resarcienda sunt damna aliis per vim aut dolum illata;
quod ipsa natura dictat: neque enim peccare desistit, qui alienum retinet. As
far as a man is able, all the wrongs he has done to other men, either by fraud
or violence must be restored and made up, for the light of nature teaches a
man so to do, neither does he desist from his sin, that does not make
restitution. It concerns you to consider whether you have not wronged these men
by false accusation, when you accused them to the Magistrates for keeping
seditious Meetings, and thereby getting their goods distrained; if you have,
this example of Zacheus should provoke you to restore and make up all the
wrongs they have sustained by your false accusation.

Ins. 2. Let all men take heed of being partakers with these Informers in their
great sin. For such as partake with them in their sin, shall also be partakers
of those Plagues, which God will send upon them for their sins; and they are
very dreadful, which without repentance will be their portion; as has been
shown in the second Chapter, Rev. 8.4. Come out of her my people, that you be
not partakers of her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues. As they
that partake of Babylon's sins, shall be partakers of Babylon's Plagues; so
shall they that partake of the Informers sins, partake of the Informers
Plagues, Prove. 29.24. Whosoever is partner with a thief hates his own soul. The
same I may say of him that is partner with these Informers, he hates his own
Soul. And why does he that is a partner with a thief hate his soul? Because he
takes a sure and speedy course to destroy his own Soul. Let me here show you,
how many ways a man may be partaker with these Informers in their sin; for
these men do involve many others in the guilt of their heinous transgression.

1. They that harbor these men in their houses, and wish them good success in
their undertakings, are partners with them in their evil deeds, 1 John 2. Ep.
v. 10, 11. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him, God speed; For he that bids him God
speed is partaker of his evil deeds. As he that harbors, and encourages
false teachers, is partaker with them in their evil-deeds; so also they that
receive into their houses, encourage and wish success to these men that oppose
the Ministers of Christ, that teach the Word of God in truth, are partakers
with them in their evil deeds.

2. They become partakers with them in their sin, who rejoice and take pleasure
and delight to see these Informers disturb the Meetings of these men, Obad. v.
12, But thou should not have looked upon the day of thy brother, in the day
that he became a stranger; neither should thou have rejoiced over the children
of Judah, in the day of their destruction, neither should thou have spoken
proudly in the day of their distress. They that take pleasure in others
wickedness, are under the same, or rather a greater guilt than those persons
that commit the wickedness, Romans 1.32, Who knowing the Judgment of God, that
they that do such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but take
pleasure in them that do them. Hoc pejus illo, says Grotius upon the place.
This latter, To take pleasure in them that do them, is worse than the former;
for a man may do evil under a temptation, but to take pleasure in another man's
sin, argues an exceeding great corruption in that man's heart. God was greatly
offended with Moab, for rejoicing at the Assyrian spoiling the Israelites, Jer.
48.26, 27. Moab also shall swallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in
derision. For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?
For since thou speak of him, thou skippedst for joy.

3. Such as at the instigation of these Informers take away or buy those Goods
which are taken away from men fearing God, for their worshipping God, and that
either because they are sold at a low rate, or because they would not have the
Informers go without a reward, Obad. 13. Thou should not have entered into the
gate of my people, in the day of their calamity; yea, thou should not have
looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on
their substance.

4. Such as plead their cause, defend and justify them in their evil ways,
they are deeply guilty, and partakers with them in all the evil and mischief
that they do. It is worse to plead for sin than to commit it. As Grotius
observes, Nam affectu abreptus peccat aliquis, sine eo non peccaturus. At qui
defendunt talia and docent vitio carere, sane gravius delinquunt. Joash thought
that man worthy to dye that should plead for sin, Judge. 6.31, Will ye plead for
Baal, will you save him? He that will plead for him, let him be put to death
while it is yet morning: To justify a wicked man, is an abominable sin in the
sight of God, Prove. 17.15, He that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.

5. They that afford their aid, help and assistance to these men, in their evil
designs, are partakers of their sin. To help an ungodly man in an evil
undertaking, will bring down wrath from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2, Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord; Therefore is wrath upon
thee from before the Lord. When the Apostle Paul made confession of his sin of
persecution, he mentions the keeping the clothes of them that stoned Stephen,
as an evidence of his consent to that wicked fact, and his being involved in
the guilt of his blood, Act. 22.20, And when the blood of thy Martyr Stephen
was shed, I was standing by, and consenting to his death, and kept the raiment
of them that slew him. Paul did not help to throw the stones, he did but keep
the raiment of those persons, that stoned him, and this little assistance that
he gave them was a great trouble to his Conscience. Take heed therefore of
giving any assistance to these men, either by guiding them to the places, where
these persons are assembled, that they seek after; It is recorded to Judas
eternal infamy, That he was guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16. or by
telling them the names of the persons, whom they find assembled together, or
drawing up their Informations they give unto the Magistrate, or aiding them in
the dispersing these Assemblies, or any other way helping them in their evil
way.

6. Such as excite, counsel, and put forward these Informers to undertake their
evil work, are partakers with them in their sin. The people of Israel were said
to make the calf which Aaron made; because he made it by their instigation,
Exodus 32.2.35. The people gathered themselves together unto Aaron; and said
unto him, up, make us Gods, which shall go before us. And the Lord plagued the
people, because they made the calf which Aaron made. The guilt was equally, and
the plague greater upon the people for stirring up Aaron to make the calf, than
upon Aaron himself, that made the golden calf. David is charged with killing
Uriah, 2 Samuel 12.9, Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword; yet
David himself did not touch him, they were the Ammonites that killed him; but
because David plotted and contrived his death, and wrote Letters to Joab, to
set him in the forefront of the battle where he was slain, Chapter 11.14, 15.
Uriah's blood was laid to David's charge. Jezabel stirring up Ahab to work
wickedness, made her a partaker of Ahab's guilt, 1 Kings 21.25, There was none
like unto Ahab that did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord whom Jezabel his wife stirred up.

7. Such as hire those Informers to undertake this work, or give them a reward
for what they do, are partakers of their evil deeds. As the adversaries of the
Jews hired men to hinder the building of the temple, Ezr. 4.5, They hired
counselors against them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus. So
some men that are adversaries to these Meetings, and are ashamed to appear in
this odious work themselves, do hire men fit for their turn to carry on this
evil design. Let such persons remember what a mark of displeasure the Lord left
upon the Moabites, for hiring Balaam to curse Israel. Not only the men of that
generation, but their posterity was excluded for ever from coming into the
Congregation of the Lord for this sin, Neh. 13.1, 2, On that day they read in
the book of Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found written,
that the Ammonite and Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for
ever. Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water,
but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them. Howbeit God turned
the curse into a blessing. All that cleanse their hearts from sin, and walk
according to the rule of the Word, are as dear to God, as the children of
Israel were of old; yea, they are God's Israel, Ps. 73.1. Truly God is good to
Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. Gal. 6.16, As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of
God. And if God were so angry with the Moabites for hiring Balaam to curse
Israel, that he would not suffer them to come into the Congregation of the Lord
for ever; Then how much more will God's anger be kindled against those that
profess themselves Christians, and yet hire vain persons to persecute such as
are Israelites for worshipping and serving the Lord?

Inf. 3. Are these Informers guilty of such a great sin, then let me advise
such as are, or hereafter may be tempted to turn Informers, in the words of
Solomon, Prove. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. My Son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not. If they say, come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us
lurk privily for the innocent without cause. We shall find all precious
substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, let
us all have one purse. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy
foot from their path. Let no proffer of any reward tempt you to persecute
innocent men for serving God; for such as lie in wait against the innocent, lie
in wait to destroy their own soul, Prove. 1.11, 18, Let us lurk privily for the
innocent without cause. They lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily
for their own souls. It is mentioned by the Psalmist among the Characters of
those that shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; that he must be one that will
not be hired by any reward to do any hurt to an innocent man, Ps. 15.1, 5,
Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle, and who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He that back-biteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes reward against the innocent. Remember our Lord Jesus, when the Devil
offered him all the Kingdoms of the world, and all the glory of them to have
committed one act of sin; he rejected his proffer with disdain, Matt. 4.6, 7,
8. As the gaining the whole world could not tempt Christ to consent to one act
of false worship: So no gain should tempt you to disturb the true worshippers
of God, that worship him in Spirit and Truth: So as to hinder one act of true
worship.

Inf. 4. Let the Friends, Relations, and Acquaintance of these Informers as
they love their Souls, pity them, and pray to God for them, and reprove them
for their sins; and plead with them to turn from their evil ways. If you let
them go on in their sins without reproving them, you have no love for their
souls, but you hate them in your hearts, Lev. 19.17, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. And if they do not, or will not hearken unto you, plead
with God for them; that he would give them repentance, and pull them as
firebrarnds out of the fire, before they fall into everlasting burnings. And
watch your seasons to deal with them, when God shall lay affliction upon them,
that is a good season to be dealing with them; for they that are as the deaf
adder in the day of prosperity, and will not hearken unto any good counsel;
have their ears open to instruction in a day of trouble, Job 36.8, 9, 10.

Inf. 5. If these Informers and their adherents be guilty of such great evils,
then it concerns those that are placed in the condition of watchmen upon Mount
Zion, to warn them of their sin, and to warn others also, that they be not
partakers with them in their sins: For if they dye in their sins, and they have
given them no warning, their blood will be required at their hands, Ezekiel. 3.17,
18, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, therefore
hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me, when I say unto the
wicked, Thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to
warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life; the same wicked man shall
dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand.

Inf. 6. Caution to those that are sufferers by these Informers: Let neither
the greatness of their sins, nor the greatness of your sufferings, who are
persecuted by them, provoke you to return evil to them, for the evil they have
done unto you, Romans 12.17, Recompense to no man evil for evil. Vengeance
belongs unto God, and not unto us; and therefore we must not go about to avenge
our selves on those that injure us, v. 19, Dearly beloved, avenge not your
selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine,
I will repay, says the Lord. Our Lord Jesus has taught us, that we must love,
pray for, and do good to the worst enemies we have in all the world; even such
as hate us, curse us, use us despitefully, and persecute us, Matt. 5.44, But I
say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you. These men are the
rod of God, and therefore look beyond the instruments to the hand of the Lord,
who corrects you, that he may make you partakers of his holiness, and humble
your selves under his mighty hand, and turn to him that smites you; and then
the Lord will turn all your sufferings to your advantage. And as you must not
offer any violence to these men; so neither should you fret, nor be cast down
at their prosperity, Ps. 37.1, 2, 7, Fret not thy self, because of evildoers,
neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity; for they shall soon be
cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. Rest in the Lord, and
wait patiently; fret not thy self because of him that prospers in his way,
because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass. Their feet stand in
slippery places, and they shall slide in due time.

Inf. 7. Let all persons both officers and others, to whom these Informers
resort to desire or require their assistance, who are convinced of their evil
ways; be cautious of affording them any help in carrying on their evil designs,
lest they become partakers with them in their sin. They that are helpers in an
evil work are involved in guilt, and will receive punishment from the hands of
the Lord, as well as the chief agents. But some may say, These Informers
threaten to bring us into trouble, if we will not go along with them, and help
to break and disperse the Assemblies of these men: it is not love to them or
the work they do, that makes us go along with them; for it is against our
Conscience to molest these men, either in or for their worshipping of God; but
we do it that we may not come into trouble.

Ans. 1. Trouble of Conscience is greater than any worldly trouble whatever,
and harder to be born, Prove. 18.14, The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? If you will act against your
Consciences for fear of being brought into trouble, it is the way to wound your
spirits; and a wounded spirit may prove an intolerable burden to you.

2. See how far you are from Moses his spirit, he chose affliction rather than
the pleasures of sin, Heb. 11.25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. But you choose
the drudgery of sin, rather than to run the hazard of a light affliction.

3. As those Informers threaten to bring you into trouble, if you join not with
them in their evil designs; so God does threaten woe and wrath to them that
spoil those that did not spoil them, and deal treacherously with those that
dealt not treacherously with them, Is. 33.1, Woe to thee, that spoilest, and
thou wast not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee. What hurt did these men do to you, that you should
assist them that would spoil their goods; and their opportunities of serving
God? whose threatenings are to be dreaded most, the threatenings of God or of Men?

4. You have more cause to fear offending God, than to fear the trouble these
men can bring upon you, by not joining with them in their evil ways. For,

1. Which is easier to be born the wrath of these men, or the wrath of God? The
wrath of God is more dreadful, than the wrath of all the men in the world.

2. God is to be feared more than all the men in the world; for there is no man
can do such things as God can do unto us. The worst that man can do, is to kill
the body; but God can cast both body and soul into hellfire, Luke 12.4, 5. I
say unto you, my friends, be not afraid of them that can kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you, whom you
shall fear: Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell,
yea, I say unto you, Fear him.

5. Put your trust in God, and labor to do that which is right and pleasing in
the sight of God, and then you need not fear what these, or any other men can
do unto you, Ps. 56.11, In God have I put my trust, I will not be afraid what
man can do unto me.

Obj. But these men bring Warrants with them from the Magistrates, which
require us to go along with them, else we would not attend such vile persons as
many of these are; but when we have a Warrant from the Magistrates to go with
them, we must be obedient to authority.

Ans. 1. It is your duty to obey your Superiors in all their lawful commands;
If your Warrants contain nothing in them, but what is warranted by the Word of
God, you ought to do what is enjoined you therein. But if they contain any
thing contrary to the mind and Will of God, in that case you are to obey God
rather than man.

2. When the Informers procure Warrants from the Magistrates to give your
assistance to them, under pretense that there is a seditious Meeting; believe
not their reports: For many of them are false accusers; but see with your own
eyes, and hear with your own ears, what is said and done in their Assemblies,
which they call seditious, before you create any disturbance to them. And it
may be you will be convinced, that God is in the midst of them of a truth; and
that the reports which the Informers raise up of these men and their Meetings,
are false and slanderous reports. When the Pharisees sent Officers to apprehend
Christ upon the strange rumors that were spread abroad concerning him, in
stead of disturbing and bringing him to the Rulers, they went away and extolled
his preaching, Joh. 7.32, 45, 46. The Pharisees heard that the people murmured
such things concerning him, and the Pharisees and chief Priests sent officers
to take him. -- Then came the officers to the chief Priests and Pharisees, and
they said unto them, why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, never
man spoke like unto this man. When you are sent to disturb these men, did you
attend with humble hearts, while they are praying to God, and preaching his
holy Word? I doubt not but you would be convinced in your Consciences, that
there is nothing said or done at these Meetings that deserves punishment, and
that you ought not to offer any violence to them.

3. If you find any person under a pretense of Religious exercises contriving
insurrections, or if you hear them stirring up the people to sedition, you may
make use of your power to suppress sedition and insurrections. I plead nothing
for such kind of men; but abhor and declare against their practices, who use
Religious exercises as a pretense to carry on sedition and insurrections.

4. When you go to the Assemblies of these men; if you find them assembled
together in a peaceable manner; if you see and hear nothing but praying to God
in the name of Christ, for things agreeable to the Will of God; and preaching
the Gospel, whereby men may be saved; if you hear nothing contrary to sound
Doctrine; If you see nothing inconsistent with godliness; instead of molesting
these men, or causing them to be punished, you should do well to carry the
Informers before the Magistrates, and acquaint them, that in obedience to their
commands you have been searching for seditious Meetings, but could find none;
that those men, whom these Informers pretend were met in a seditious manner;
you found met in a peaceable manner, and that they were doing nothing else, but
praying to God in the name of Christ, and preaching and hearing God's holy
Word; and that you think you should sin against God if you should disturb or
punish men for worshipping and serving God, under a pretense of suppressing of
seditious Conventicles; and that in your judgment the Informers ought to be
punished as false accusers; rather than these men for serving God. Under the
Law, when one man was a witness against another, and testified that which was
wrong, diligent inquisition was to be made, and if the witness had testified
that which was false, the Magistrates were to punish the false witness, and not
the party against whom he had testified false things, and his punishment was to
be according to what he had intended to have done against his brother, against
whom he was a false witness, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 18, 19, If a false witness rise up
against any man to testify against him that which was wrong; The judge shall
make diligent inquisition: And behold if the witness be a false witness, and
has testified falsely against his brother, Then shall thou do unto him, as he
thought to do unto his brother; so shall thou put evil away from among you.
Respect to the command of God should keep Magistrates from being too sudden in
crediting and acting upon the testimony of these Informers till according to
God's appointment, they have made diligent inquisition, whether there be truth
in what they have testified; and if they find them false witnesses they should
execute the Law of Moses against them; and that for these reasons:

1. The equity and righteousness of the Law.

2. This would be a means of putting away evil from among them, which may be
understood two ways.

1. It would put away the evil of sin, because punishing the false witness
would deter others from becoming false witnesses.

2. It would put away the evil of punishment; for if they connive at false
witnesses which oppress innocent persons, this will bring down God's Judgments
upon themselves as well as these false witnesses.

Inf. 8. Whereas these Informers, and their adherents, do not only privately
accuse these Ministers and their hearers to the Magistrates, but sometimes take
upon them to get Officers and Soldiers, and come to their Assemblies in a rude
and hostile manner, and disturb them while they are in the worship and service
of God, and do put on that impudence as to call to the Minister, that is
praying or preaching to come down, I would advise them to consider two or three
things:

1. What an irreligious action this is, how inconsistent with the fear of God,
and with the reverence which is due to men made after the image of God, to
disturb the servants of God for doing those things which are commanded of God,
in the very time and season that they are worshipping and serving the Lord. God
is to be feared at all times and places, but more especially the awe and dread
of God is to be upon us, when his servants are assembled to worship him, and we
are present at their Assemblies, Ps. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the
assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that are round about
him. Do you fear God greatly, when you come into the Assemblies of his Saints,
and call to them in the time of their devotion to leave off the service of God?

2. What befell Uzzah for putting forth his hand, and taking hold of the Ark,
when the oxen that carried it stumbled, and the Ark shook, God was angry with
him, and smote him with sudden death, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Uzzah put forth his hand
to the Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the oxen shook it. And the anger of
the Lord was kindled against Uzzah. And God smote him there for his error, and
he died. Uzzah's taking hold of the Ark, was no malicious act, no plotted,
deliberate, wilful sin; but an error, a rash action; yet for this error and
rashness, he dyed upon the place where his sin was committed; though it is
likely, he had a good end in what he did. If rashness and error in taking hold
of the Ark, a type of God's presence among the Jews, was punished with such
severity in Uzzah; what severity may these men expect from God, for
premeditated and deliberate acts of violence against his servants who are
temples of God; and have God really and truly dwelling in them by his holy
Spirit, when they hale them out of their Assemblies, and force them to desist
from the service of God.

3. Remember what befell Jeroboam for stretching out his hand to take the
Prophet for delivering the Lords message, his hand was suddenly dried up, that
he could not pull it in again, 1 King. 13, 14, And it came to pass when King
Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of God, which had cried against the Altar
in Bethel, that he put forth his hand from the Altar, and said, Lay hold on
him. And his hand which he put forth against him dried up, so that he could not
pull it in again to him. Jeroboam was a King, yet for attempting to take hold
of a Prophet for doing the work God set him about, this remarkable and sudden
Judgment of God came upon him. If God dealt thus with such a tall Cedar, what
may the shrubs expect? These men that take upon them to lay hold of the
Ministers and Servants of Christ, while they are about the Lords work, and call
them to cease, may fear lest their tongues should cleave to the roof of their
mouths, or their arms wither, or some other great Judgment should fall upon
them in the act of their sin.

4 Let that Judgment also which fell upon the Captains and Soldiers that went
to Elijah, and called to him to come down, be minded by those that fetch
Officers and Soldiers to the Assemblies of these men, and take upon them to
call them to come down out of their Pulpits, when they are praying to God or
instructing the people. It concerns these Informers and those Officers and
Soldiers that come along with them, to be awakened by this Judgment, to take
heed what they do against these men, 2 King. 1.9, 10, Then the King sent to him
a Captain of fifty with his fifty, and he went up to him, and behold he sat on
the top of an hill. And he spoke unto him, Thou man of God, the King has said,
come down. And Elijah answered and said unto the Captain of fifty, If I be a
man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy
fifty: And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
The same Judgment of fire from Heaven for the same sin, came upon another
Captain of fifty and his fifty, v. 11, 12. The sin of these Informers, and the
Officers and Soldiers that come with them to disturb the servants of God, and
call to the Ministers to come down, is in my apprehension far greater than the
sin of those Captains and their Companies, that called to Elijah to come down;
and that in several respects.

1. Those Captains were sent by the King's own order, and did but deliver the
King's message, The King has said, Come down; yet this did not exempt them
from being consumed, that they had order for what they did, that they were sent
by lawful Authority; but these Informers come of their own head, prompted on
usually, either by covetousness or malice.

2. Those Captains did not disturb Elijah when he was at his devotion, they did
not interrupt him when he was praying to God, or preaching to the people. But
these Informers come in the time that these men are worshipping of God, and
disturb and call to them to come down while they are serving God, which
aggravates their sin.

3. Those Captains did not themselves, or any of their company touch Elijah's
person, or his estate; but these Informers procure Officers to hale these men
out of their Meetings, to break open their houses, and to carry away their
goods.

4. It Is hard to say what was the sin of those Captains that were consumed with
fire from Heaven for calling to Elijah to come down: Whether they spoke to the
Prophet in a rude insulting manner, or not with that respect that became a
Prophet (for the other Captain that went to him in an humble manner was spared)
or because they knew there was evil determined against Elijah by the King, and
yet they would be instrumental to fetch him; or whether they spoke to him, in a
scoffing manner; though all the people held him for a Prophet, yet it may be
they did not, and so might call him the man of God in way of derision. But in
the actings of these Informers there is a complication of many abominable sins;
which are visible and hateful to God and all good men: Yea, the common sort of
people see and detest the odious practices of these men.

Obj. 1. But Elijah was a Prophet, should we call to a Prophet when he was
praying and preaching to come down; or should we get Officers and Soldiers to
pull them out of their Pulpits and disperse their Assemblies, we might be
afraid least fire should come down from Heaven, and consume us, and all that
come along with us; but we do not fear any such thing in reference to these men.

Ans. 1. The Ministers of Christ that live in these days of the Gospel, are to
be respected as much as the Prophets that lived under the Law. And the affronts
and injuries offered unto them are as offensive to God, as the injuries that
were done unto the Prophets by the Jews. If you be not satisfied in the truth
of this assertion, weigh what our Lord Jesus says, Matt. 11.9, 11. What went
you out for to see, a Prophet, yea, I say unto you, and more than a Prophet.
Verily, I say unto you, Among them that are born of women, there has not been
a greater than John the Baptist, notwithstanding he that is lest in the Kingdom
of God is greater than be. There was a clearer discovery of Christ in the days
of John the Baptist than in the time of the Prophets, and therefore he is
preferred above the Prophets, equallized to all that were born of women by our
Lord Jesus. But after the death of Christ there was a fuller and clearer
manifestation of Christ, than when John the Baptist lived; and therefore our
Lord Jesus in this respect, namely, of the excellency and clearness of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, extolleth the least Ministers under the New Testament
above John the Baptist, not that they excel or are equal to him in holiness,
but have a more clear knowledge of the Messiah than he had.

2. The Ministers and Servants of Christ in these days have like precious faith
with the Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.1. Simon Peter a servant, and an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us, through the
righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And there are no gifts or
privileges that commend a man to God like faith, Gal. 5.6, For in Jesus
Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but says
which works by love. God loves all that believe in his Son, as he did Elijah,
and he will avenge the wrongs done unto them as he did what was done unto
Elijah. For their faith is a-like precious in the sight of God, with the faith
of Elijah.

Obj. 2. There is no fire that comes down from Heaven to consume us, as there
did upon the Captains that went to apprehend Elijah; but we enrich our selves
this way, and therefore our sin is not so bad as theirs was.

Ans. 1. Though fire do not come down from heaven, and consume you, yet there
is fire in hell prepared, and reserved for you, Ps. 9.17, The wicked shall be
turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God. And the fire which is in
hell is more dreadful, than that which came down from Heaven. For,

1. That fire consumed the Captains, and the Soldiers that were with with them;
but the fire of hell though it torments you it will never consume you.

2. That fire lasted but a little while, but the fire of hell will last for
ever, Matt. 25.41, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

2. Your being let alone in your sins will prove a greater Judgment, if you
persist in your sins without repentance, than if fire should come down from
Heaven and consume you; for by going on in your sins without repentance, you
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and fill up the measure of your
iniquities; and so will have a greater degree of torment in the other world for
ever.

3. This example of God's consuming those Captains with their Soldiers that
came to apprehend Elijah by fire from Heaven, is recorded to deter all persons
from offering violence to any of the Lords Prophets or Messengers, to the end
of the world, 1 Cor. 10.11, Now all these things happened unto them for
ensamples, and they are written for our admonition; on whom the ends of the
world are come.

4. These men know not how soon they may be consumed by fire from Heaven; for
God's Word speaks of raining down fire upon ungodly men, Ps. 11.6, Upon the
wicked he shall rain fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: This shall be
the portion of their cup, Job. 20.26, A fire not blown shall consume him. When
it thunders and lightens, they may fear every flash of lightning should burn
them to ashes: But if this should not befall them; yet the day is hastening
when all ungodly men shall be consumed with fire in a more dreadful manner than
these Captains and their Soldiers. And then the troublers of the people of God
shall have such a day of trouble as never was since the world stood, 2 Thessalonians.
1.6, 7, 8, 9, It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction,
from the presence of God, and from the glory of his power.

CHAP. V. Humble Advice to Magistrates not to countenance these Informers, nor
to suppress the Nonconformist Ministers or their Meetings.
SEeing these Informers are wont to address themselves to the Magistrates, and
bring false accusations to them against these Ministers called Non-conformists;
informing them that they keep Seditious Conventicles, and do thereby excite and
stir them up to imprison or fine those Ministers, and suppress their
Assemblies. I shall crave leave before I conclude this discourse, humbly to
advise and request those Magistrates to whom these Informers address themselves
for assistance in their undertakings. First, That they would not give any
countenance to this generation of men, that take upon them the employ of being
Informers. Secondly, That they do not at their instigation punish the Ministers
and Servants of Christ, when no other Crime can be proved against them; but
that they have been praying to God in the Name of his Son, or that they have
been Preaching or hearing his Holy Word.

1. My humble request to you is, that you would give no countenance or
encouragement to this sort of Men. And that for Gods sake, in whose stead you
are placed in the world; for your own sake, and for the Kingdom sake, that
guilt and wrath come not upon your selves, and upon the Kingdom; for the sake
of these Informers that they be not multiplied and increased. Give me leave to
touch briefly on these Heads. 1. You are Gods Vicegerents, you stand in his
Room, and Rule in his stead. When God made Moses Ruler over Aron, and the
people of Israel: he tells him, Thou shall be to him instead of God. Exodus
4.16. You rule and judge not for your selves, but for the Lord who stands by
and observes what you say, and what you do, and therefore you had need take
heed what judgment you pass upon every man that comes before you. 2 Chronicles.
19.6. Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is
with you in the judgment. And seeing you stand in Gods stead, and rule and
judge for him; Look how the Lord God would carry himself, if he were in your
Places; so ye ought to carry your selves, whom he would encourage, those you
ought to encourage; whom he would rebuke and reprove; those ye ought to rebuke
and reprove. Now consider with your selves, if the Lord Jesus Christ were on
Earth and were in your place, and these Informers came unto him to complain
against his Servants for praying and Preaching and hearing his Word; what are
your thoughts? and what do your Consciences tell you he would do in this case?
would he countenance or reprove and Punish them? surely he would give no
Countenance to such vile persons in such a sinful undertaking. 2. By asisting
these men, you will bring down Gods Wrath upon your selves, and the Nation.
Upon your selves: To evidence this, weigh what was said by the Prophet to
Jehoshaphat. 2 Chr. 19.2. Should thou help the ungodly? and love them that
bate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. This Wrath
came upon Jehoshaphat for helping Ahab in fighting against the Syrians. Here
let it be considered, 1. That Jehoshaphat was a great man; he was King of
Judah; he was also a good man. v. 3. Nevertheless there are good things in
thee, in that thou have taken away the groves out of the Land, and have
prepared thy Heart to seek God. Yet neither his greatness nor his goodness kept
of the wrath of God from him for helping an ungodly man. 2. Ahab whom
Jehoshaphat helped was a King, King of Israel. And it might seem good policy
for one neighboring Paince to help another: Because by helping Ahab he might
have had his help another time against the adversaries of Juda, yet neither did
this excuse him. 3. The Persons against whom Jehoshaphat helped Ahab were the
Syrians. And the Syrians were Idolaters that Worshipped strange Gods. 2 Chr.
28.23. They were also great enemies. to the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. Jer.
9.12. The Syrians before and the Philistines behind, and they shall devour
Israel with open Mouth. They were a People devoted to destruction. 1 Kings.
20.42. Now if Jehoshaphat incurred the displeasure of God for helping Ahab,
because he was an ungodly man; to suppress the Syrians who were Idolators and
enemies of Israel and Judah. How can you think but that you shall bring down
the Wrath of God upon your selves, if you help these Informers, who go about to
oppress and suppress the Servants of the true and Living God; while they are
worshipping and serving the Lord. If it be said, It does not appear to you, that
these Informers are ungodly men, and such as hate the Lord; you do not judge
them like Ahab, that had sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord. If you did, then you might fear God would be angry with you for being
helpful to them. To that I answer, 1. If you please to peruse those
demonstrations which I have given out of the Scriptures of the Evil of their
ways, in the second of Chron. you may be convinced that their practices are not
consistent with godlyness. In some respects those men are worse then Ahab, for
when Ahab was reproved by Elijah for taking a possession of Naboths Vineyard,
which he had gotten by unjust means; he humbled himself before God, and Fasted,
and rent his Clothes, and lay in Sackcloth. 1 Kings 21.27.29. But we hear of no
Humilliation from these men, after they have been reproved for taking into
their possession other men's Goods, which they obtain by undue means. And as you
will bring the Wrath of God upon your selves so also upon the Nation, if you
countenance and encourage this sort of Men. When the Rulers do not punish evil
doers, they bring guilt and Wrath not only upon themselves but upon the Nation
where they live; how much more if they give encouragement to them. Nehe. 13.17,
18. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what evil
thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day. Did not your Fathers
thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? yet
ye bring, more Wrath upon Isarel, by profaning the Sabbath. They were the
meaner sort of the People that profaned the Sabbath, such as bare burdens,
trod the Winepress, sold Fish and other wares, v. 15.16. And because the
Nobles did not restrain them, what these men did is laid to the Charge of the
Nobles. And Nehemiah tells them they brought Wrath upon Israel by profaning
the Sabbath.

3. If you carry it toward those men as though they were righteous, acquiting
them when complaints and appeals are made to you, or rewarding them as though
they had done well, when their iniquity and folly is manifest, and hateful
almost to all men, you will lose your respect among the People, Prove. 24.24,
25. He that says to the Wicked thou art Righteous, him shall the People Curse,
Nations shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him shall be delight and a
good Blessing.

4. They are usually the basest of men that take upon them this employment, men
of a very ill same in the Place where they live, if their conversations were
Looked into, there are such Blots upon some of them, as would make them
abhorred of all sober men. And if such men be exalted, countenanced, and
rewarded, it will cause Wickedness, and Wicked Persons to abound in the Nation.
Prove. 12.18. The Wicked walk on every side, when the vilest persons are
exalted. If you harken to the Lying informations, these men bring against
innocent Persons, it will not only encourage them, but others also to Tread in
their Steps. Prove. 29.11. If a ruler hearken unto lies, all his Servants are
Wicked. But if you would show your selves angry with them for Backbiting and
Slandring those that are peaceable, you would soon free your selves from the
Trouble of these men, and the Nation also. Prove. 15.23. The North Wind drives
away Rain, so does an angry Countenance a backbiting tongue.

2. My humble request to you is that you would not punish any of the Ministers
or other Servants of Christ; when no other Crime is or can be proved against
them; but their meeting together to pray to God in the name of Christ; or to
preach and hear his holy Word. The advice which Gamaliel gave the rulers of the
Jews, when the Apostles were brought before the Council for Preaching, after
they had received strict Charge to forbear teaching the People was wise and
seasonable advice. I humbly offer the same to you. Act. 5.38, 39. Refrain from
these men and let them alone, for if this Council or this Work be of men, it
will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrough it, lest
happily ye be found even to sight against God. That this advice may be more
effectual; I humbly entreat you to consider.

1. What a strict charge the Lord Jesus has given his Ministers to preach his
word. He charge them three times as they love him, to feed his Sheep and his
Lambs, John 21.15, 16, 17. Jesus said to Simon Peter. Simon Son of Jonas Love
thou me more than those? Feed my Lambs. Love thou me? Feed my Sheep. Love
thou me? Feed my Sheep. He charge them as they will answer the neglect
thereof at the day of Judgment to preach the word in season, and out of season,
2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and dead at his appearing. Preach the word, be instant in
season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all patience and long
suffering. He has laid it upon them as a necessary duty to Preach the Gospel,
and pronounces a Woe against them that neglect it. 1 Cor. 9.16. Necessity is
laid upon me: Yea Woe unto me, if I Preach not the Gospel. Will ye forbid, will
punish these men for doing that for which they have such a strict command from
Jesus Christ.

2. Consider what a high respect and dear love the Lord Jesus bears to all
those, that hear his word and do it. He loves and honors them, as he loved
and honored his Mother and his Brethren, Luke 8.20, 21. And it was told him by
certain that said, Thy Mother and thy Brethren stand without desiring to see
thee. And he answered and said, my Mother and my Brethren are these which hear
the word of God, and do it. If the Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ were now
upon the earth, you would offer no injury to her, you would not disturb her at
her devotion, you would not punish her for hearing the word of God, but show
all respect to her. You should be as unwilling to offer any violence, or suffer
any wrong to be done to those that hear and do the word of God; as you would to
the Mother and Brethren of Christ; For he loves and respects them that hear
and do Gods word as he did his Mother and his Brethren.

3. Remember what a charge the Lord has given you not to touch his anointed
and do his prophers no harm, Ps. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. This charge is given in an especial manner to Rulers and
Governors, as appears from the foregoing words. He reproved Kings for their
sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. By his
anointed, whom he would not have you touch, Fiscator and several other
interpreters understand, Vnctos donis Spiritus Sancti. Such as are anointed
with the gifts and graces of the Spirit. The pouring out of the Spirit is
called an Unction; and the anointing, 1 John 2.20, 27. Prophets were of two
sorts; first, such as had an extraordinary call, and could foretell things to
come. Secondly as were qualified, and called to teach and instruct the people;
though they had no extraordinary gifts, 1 Cor. 14.3. He that Prophesies
speaks unto men, to edisication, and exhortation and confort. And so the word
prophet is used. Math. 10.41. for a Minister of the Gospel. Now though this
charge of not touching his anointed, and doing his prophets no harm, was
primarily given to those rulers, where Ahraham and his posterity sojourned: yet
it equally concerns all rulers in all ages; not to touch those he has
anointed with his holy Spirit, and to do no harm to any of his Ministers.

4. Let it be considered that Praying and Preaching are means appointed by God
for the saving men's souls. Prayer is a means of obtaining salvation, Romans
10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. Amos.
5.4. Thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel; Seek ye me, and ye shall
live. And the Preaching the Gospel is a special means for obtaining salvation,
Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes. Yea even that Preaching which the
world derides and counts Foolishness, God blesses it to the saving of Souls, 1
Cor. 1.21. After that in the Wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew not God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe. And
the saving of Souls from hell torments is a work of the greatest moment in the
whole world. The Eternal Son of God became man, and humbled himself to death to
the painful accursed death of the Cross, to save lost Souls. 1 Timothy 1.15. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners. And great care should be used that we do not
hinder the obtaining that for which Christ shed his precious blood. The
greatest good we can do for any man is to further, and the greatest hurt is to
hinder his Salvation.

5. It is recorded to the honor of Hezekiah, that he was an encourager of all
that did faithfully dispense the word of God. 2 Chr. 30.22. Hezekiah speak
comfortably to all the Levites, that taught the good knowledge of the Lord. And
as he did encourage the Ministers of Gods word, so God did wonderfully bless
him, 2 Chr. 31.30. Hezekiah prospered in all his works. And it is recorded of
Herod as one of his chief sins, that he imprisoned one of Gods Ministers. Luk
3.19, 20. But Herod the Tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his
brother Philips wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done, Added this
above all, that he shut up John in prison, Herod was guilty of many evils, but
this is noted as the principal, as that which was above all the rest, that he
shut up John in prison. And as it is a great sin to afflict the Ministers and
servants of Christ, so it is usally followed with a sore judgment. Herod who
stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, soon after dyed in a
miserable manner being eaten up of Worms. Act. 12.1, 2, 3, 23. Pharaoh, who
oppressed Israel and would not let them go to serve the Lord in the wilderness,
was followed with one plague after another till he was destroyed.

6. Rulers ought not to be a terror to such as do good works, but to encourage
and protect them, Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Will thou then not be afraid of the power, do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same. Preaching of the Gospel whereby men may be
saved, and praying to God in the name of Christ are good works, and therefore
rulers ought not to be a terror to any man for these works.

7. We are taught and Commanded by our Lord Jesus Christ to pray to the Lord to
send forth laborers into his Vineyard, because the harvest is great, and the
laborers are but few, Then said he to his disciples, The harvest truly is
plentious, but the laborers are but few; Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his harvest. To pray for
laborers, and when God has sent them forth to molest and trouble them for
laboring is to contradict our prayers. Let the Ignorance, Atheism,
Profaneness, the growth of Error, and the small number of Preachers that are
found in the Faith, and of an holy conversation, be considered and laid to
heart, and it will evidently appear; that there is great need of prayer for
more Laborers, and of encouraging those that are sent forth, and of not
suppressing any that are faithful, peaceable, and diligent in the Work of the
Lord.

Obj. 1. If it be replied. These informers accuse these Ministers, that they
keep seditious Conventicles, and are ready to give oath of it, and as such we
are obliged by the Law to suppress them.

An. 1. Rulers ought to be wise as an Angel of God, to discern good from evil.
2. Sam. 14, 17. As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King to descern good and
bad. And that is no hard matter in the Noon day of the Gospel to distinguish
between Religion and sedition. When Job was a Ruler among his People, he was
diligent to search out the truth of all causes that came before him; and when
he found any Wicked man oppressing the righteous, he was so far from rewarding
him, that he plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth, and if he held it fast and
would not let it go, he break his Jaws rather than suffer him to hold his
Spoils. Job 29.16, 17. The Cause which I knew not I searched out; I break the
Jaws of the wicked, and pulled the Spoil out of his Teeth.

2. These Ministers, as was hinted before, do abhor seditious Conventicles and
are falsely accused by these Informers, and Magistrates should be slow to
believe their false accusations; and not proceed to Act against them till they
have searched into the truth of these informations, and that for several
reasons, as 1. The great enmity that is in the heart of the Wicked against
Righteous men, which makes them eager to do them all the Mischief they can. The
Scripture speaks so frequently and so fully of this, that I shall need to say
the less. Prove. 4.16. They sleep not except they have done Mischief, and their
Sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall. Ps. 37.19, 32. The Wicked
plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his Teeth. The Wicked
watches the Righteous and seeks to slay him. 2. They are under a temptation
of gain; and the Love of Money is the Root of all evil, and therefore it is no
wonder if they prove false accusers of them against whom they have a great
enmity, and by accusing of whom they make a great advantage. 3. The rule that
is given to Magistrates in the word of God, is not to proceed to Punishment
upon reports till they have made diligent search, and have certain proof of the
truth of the fact. Deuteronomy. 13.13, 14, 15. If thou shall hear say -- Then shall
thou enquire, and make search and ask diligently; and behold if it be truth,
and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought among you.

3. These Ministers and those that assemble with them are oftentimes judged,
and sentence passed upon them for to take away their Goods, before they have
been heard, or had their accusers Face to Face; yea sometimes before they know
who it is that has accused them; and this seems to me to be against the
Light and Law of Nature: which teaches that a man ought not to be condemned
till he has had his accusers face to face, and has had License to answer for
himself. The Romans had no other Light to regulate them in their judicial
proceedings, but the Light of Nature; yet they observed this Rule, not to pass
sentence upon a man, till he had his accusers face to face, and had liberty to
answer for himself. Act. 15.16. It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver
any man to die, before he that is accused, has the accusers face to face, and
have Liberty to answer for himself, concerning the Crime laid against him. If
the Romans, which were Heathens, how much more should Christian Magistrates,
forbear condemning any man till he has seen his accusers, heard his
accusation, and been Permitted to make his own defense. The name of Pilat is
odious in the Christian World, and will be to all generations, for Condemning
our Lord Jesus Christ to be put to Death, yet he showed so much justice in his
carriage, he would not give sentence against him, till he had examined him, and
his accusers, and had heard what he could say for himself. Luke 23.13. And
Pilat when he had called together the chief Priests and the Rulers and the
People said unto them, ye have brought this man unto me as one that perverteth
the People; and behold I having examined him before you and have found no fault
in this man touching those things whereof you accuse him Neither the
hainousness of the Crime objected against Christ, as Blaspheming, going about
to make himself a King, Perverting the People, etc. Nor the greatness or
multitude of his accusers, (the chief Priests, Rulers, Elders, and the People
were combined together) nor the impetuousness of his adversaries, who Thirsted
after his Blood, and cried out with one consent, Crucify him, Crucify him,
could prevail with Pilat, to give sentence against Christ, till he had examined
him in the presence of his accusers. Let it not be said that any Christian
Magistrates come short of the justice Pilat showed, or pretended to show, who
was the Condemner of Christ, That such inconsiderable Persons as these
Informers should prevail with them, to Condemn men fearing God, and give out
Warrants to destrain their goods, without examining them before their accusers,
and hearing what they are able to say for themselves.

4. As for the pretense of the Informers, that these men transgress the Act
made to prevent seditious Conventicles, I have answered that Plea, chap. 3.
Plea. 5. whither I refer the Reader. Where I have proved, that the Meetings of
these Ministers called Nonconformists, are no transgression of that Act,
according to that Charitable interpretation that may be put upon it. And I
quoted a Passage out of Dr. Jeremiah Taylour, concerning the interpretation of
Laws, which was this, All Laws do infinitely decline all harsh sense., and are
ambitious of gentle benign interpretations. Which if allowed as true in the
interpretation of this Law, in my judgment the Meeting of these men are not
Punishable by that Law; because those Meetings that are Punishable by that Law,
must be in other manner than according to the Liturgy, and the practice of the
Church of England, which though the informers Swear, (because they do either
not understand or not fear an Oath) yet they will not be able to prove. For
they must be able to prove, that they are in other manner than according to the
holy Scripture: (which they cannot do) because, 1. The holy Scriptures which
are read for the first and second Lesson, are a great part of The Liturgy of
the Church of England, and therefore what Meetings are not in other manner,,
than is allowed by those Portions of Scripture prescribed to be read by the
Liturgy, are not in other manner than according to the Liturgy. 2. If these
informers will contend and Swear, That though these meetings be not in other
manner than according to the holy Scriptures; yet they are in other manner than
according to the Liturgy, this would set the Liturgy and the Scripture at
variance, and such a conclusion would be drawn from hence as might make them
Punishable for depraving the Liturgy of the Church of England. If it be said
these meetings are in other Manner than according to the Scripture. These
Ministers desire no further favor than to argue this case with the Informers
in the presence of the Magistrates. And if they cannot Justify whatever they do
out of the Word of God, they will contentedly suffer what these Magistrates
shall see meet to inflict upon them.

And if all Laws do infinitely decline all harsh senses, I would appeal to all
Sober men, whether this be not an harsh sense to interpret a Law made to
suppress seditious Conventicles, in such a sense as to Punish men for
performing Religious Duties? And whether this be not an harsh sense to
interpret, those Meetings that are not in other manner than according to the
Holy Scriptures, to be in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the
Church of England? Suppose some pretenders to Religion have Plotted
Insurrections under a color of religious exercises (such practices and
principles I abhor as much as other men, I speak not one word in their behalf)
yet this does not take off the harshness of the interpretation; so to interpret
a Law made to prevent sedition and insurrection, as to Punish such as meet for
no other end but to glorify God, and work out their own salvation. If a strict
Law were made to prevent Drunkenness, and because many have made themselves
drunk with Wine or Strong drink; to interpret this Law, so as to Punish a man
that has a weakly Stomach, and drinks Wine moderately to help his digestion,
or to Punish a man that goes to the Tavern upon weighty Business; would be
judged a harsh interpretation of the Law, to Punish sober men for the use of
that which others have abused: so here, because some have abused private
Meetings, to interpret a Law against seditious Meetings; so as to Punish those
that use Meetings in an holy and Religious manner, seems to me an harsh
interpretation of the Law.

Obj. 2. It may be some will say, we cannot, we dare not say to the contrary,
but many of the Non-conformists are righteous and peaceable men, and we are not
able to prove their Meetings are in other manner than according to the Holy
Scriptures; and if we could avoid it, we would not molest these men or their
Meetings; for it is against our Consciences to break them up, or to fine them:
But these Informers are busy men, and they may possibly make us lose an hundred
pounds, if we do not answer their desire in disturbing these Meetings, and
fining those that are present at them. If it were not that we feared the loss
of an hundred pounds, we would not meddle with these men and their Meetings.

Answ. 1. I have not heard of any Magistrate that has suffered on this
account, and if any Informer should arise to that Impudence, as to Sue any
Magistrate, for not molesting these Men or their Meetings, I have more
charitable thoughts of the Law, and of those that Execute them, than to think
that any Magistrate should be Fined for not punishing those Men, against whom
nothing of Sedition can be proved, nor any thing else, but that they meet
together to pray to God, in the Name of Christ, for things agreeable to his
Will, and to Preach and hear his holy Word.

2. To such as are under a Temptation of acting contrary to their Consciences,
for fear of the loss of an hundred pounds; I may say as the Prophet said to
Amaziah, when he asked him, But what shall we do for the hundred Talents? And
the man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. An hundred Talents is more than an hundred pounds; and if God
could make up the loss of an hundred Talents to Amaziah, is he not able to give
you much more than an hundred pounds. The blessing of the Lord makes Rich, and
he adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10.12. The Lord can by his blessing make up
your loss by prospering you in your callings, by casting an Inheritance upon
you by the death of Friends, by keeping off expensive sicknesses, or by giving
it to your Posterity, and several other ways.

3. If for saving an hundred pounds you will sin against God, and your own
Consciences; God can take away more than that suddenly from you: Either by
Fire, or by losses at Sea, or decay of Trade, or miscarrying of Debtors, or by
expensive sicknesses, or giving you riotous Children, or leting you fall into
the hand of the Extortioner, or diverse other ways. Or else God can send such
trouble upon your Consciences, that your Estate shall do you no good, but you
shall wish an hundred times, that you had suffered the loss of all that you
have, rather than to have sinned against your Conscience. What good did Francis
Spira his estate do him, after he had sinned against his Conscience to preserve
his Estate.

4. There are more material questions to be asked in this Case, than what you
should do to prevent the loss of an hundred pounds; as, What you should do to
keep a good Conscience? For a good Conscience is more worth than all the world.
What you should do that you may not sin against God? For a man should choose
the greatest loss before the least sin. What account you shall be able to give
of your actions at the day of Judgment? For that is the rule we are to walk by;
So speak ye, and so do ye, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty,
Jam. 2 12. We should under go any loss, rather than do any action, which we
cannot give an account of at the day of judgment.

5. Give me leave to put you in mind of Balaam, what he said, what he did, and
what befell him, when he was sent for to curse Israel; and to hint something
from his example in reference to the Informers that come to you to break up the
Assemblies of these men. 1. Balaam was sent for by a King, and the Messengers
that came on the Errand of Balack King of Moab, to invite Balaam to Curse
Israel, were Honorable Persons, the Princes of Moab: yet he would not go with
them till he had consulted with God, whether it were his will that he should go
with these men; and he made them tarry a Night before he gave them their
answer; and then understanding that it was the will of God that he should not
go, he resolved not to go with them, though sent for by a King. Number 22.7, 8,
12, 13, 14. 2. The Princes of Moab brought great rewards to give to Balaam, v.
9. they made him great profers, and Promises, if he would go with them, v. 16,
17, Thus says Balaam: Let nothing I pray thee hinder thee from coming unto me;
for I will promote thee to great Honor, and I will do whatsoever thou say
unto me. Come therefore I pray thee; and Curse me this People; Here are great
entreaties in the name of a King. Come I pray thee. Let nothing I pray thee
hinder thee from coming. And great promises of great Promotion, and giving all
that he would ask. But what said Balaam till God gave him leave, they could not
get him to go: though Balack would have given him his House (and no doubt but
Balacks house was a large one fit for a King) as full of Silver and Gold, as it
could hold. v. 18. And Balaam answered the Servants of Balaek: If Balack would
give me his house full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the
Lord my God to do more or less. 3. When Balaam was prevailed with to go,
thinking he had got Leave from God, the Angel of God met him, holding a drawn
Sword in his hand and would have Slain him, had not the Ass espied the Angel
and turned out of the way, v. 22.23, 32, 33. 4. When Balaam did go to Balack,
he did not Curse Israel at all, but blessed them, though he angered Balack, and
lost all his preferments thereby, Number. 24.10, 15. And Balacks anger was kindled
against Balaam, and he smote his hands together, and said, I called thee to
curse mine enemies; and behold, thou have altogether blessed them these three
times, therefore now flee to thy place; I thought to promote thee to great
Honor, but the Lord has kept thee back from honor. These things did Balaam,
when he was sent for to curse Israel. Here let it be considered, 1. Whether our
righteousness must not exceed the righteousness of Balaam, if we enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, seeing he lived and died a South-sayer, Josh 13.22. And
though he had the gift of Prophecy, he is styled a mad Propher, and branded
with loving the ways of unrighteousness. 2. Whether the people of God in these
days be not as dear to him as the people of Israel were of old? 3. Whether male
facere be not as had as male dicere? whether to afflict and hurt in deeds, be
not as had as to hurt in words; seeing the curse causless shall not come, Prove.
26.2. And sure there is no Divination against Jacob, nor Enchantment against
Israel. These things premised, I would crave leave to advise you. 1. When these
Informers come to you to punish the Ministers of the Gospel for Preaching Gods
Word, or to break up their Meetings, you should do well to ask Counsel of God,
whether it be his will you should go with these men, and do what they would
have you do and make them wait your leisure till you be satisfied in your
Conscience of the lawfulness thereof. Balaam did thus, though he was sent for
by a King; though Princes came to him, he would not go till he had advised with
God. Those Men that come to you are usually mean and beggar'y persons; and
therefore they may well tarry your leisure. I have wondered at the haste of some
men, who, as is reported, have left all, yea, the service of God, to follow
these men. This is far short of Balaam. 2. If you be not satisfied that it is
the Will of God that you should go with these men; whatever entreaties they
use, whatever arguments they lay before you go not with them. Balaam resused to
go with the Princes of Moab, though entreated, though profer'd great rewards,
when it was against the Will of God. These men bring no reward, but shame and
reproach, and the ill will of your neighbors, and yet how forward are many to
go with them. 3. If upon serious consideration you think you may lawfully go
with these men, take heed you be not deceived, and take heed to your spirits,
that you go with a right Spirit. Balaam thought he had gotten leave from God to
go with Balack's messengers, he thought he had good warrant to go, for God had
said, If the men come to call thee, rise up and go with them. Which some
conceive to be spoken Ironically, others by way of Indignation; seeing he had
tempted God by coming again to enquire of his going; when he knew it was
expressly against his mind; He spoke in anger, and said, Rise up and go with
them. Or if he had leave, there was covetousness, or malice, or some other evil
in his heart; whether he had a Warrant to go or not, I do not now enquire, but
this is certain God was angry with him for going, Numb. 22.22. Gods anger was
kindled against him, because he went. And he was in danger to be slain by the
Angel that stood in the way.

4 If you think your selves obliged by virtue of the Law to go along with these
Informers, if you find nothing of Sedition in the Assembly to which they carry
you; if you find them met in a peaceable manner, Preaching sound Doctrine,
praying for things agreeable to the Will of God; instead of cursing them, or
punishing them, leave your blessing upon them, and say, The blessing of the
Lord be upon you, and punish these Informers as false accusers. When Balaam
went to Balack instead of cursing Isiael, he blessed them, though he angered
Balack thereby; and lost great honors and promotions. They that will rather
curse an Israelire, than run the hazard of small losses, of losing their
dignities and promotions, come short of Balaam, who yet fell short of eternal
lise.

Obj. 3. We have yet one scruple more about these men, and these Meetings, if
we could get over that, we would not molest them, and it is this, we shall not
be accounted the Kings friends, if we do not suppress these Men, but shall be
accounted friends and favorers of Phanaticks; If it were not for this, we
would not meddle with them.

Answ. 1. This is a strong temptation upon some men to do irregular things, for
fear they should not be esteemed the Kings friends; as we may see in the case
of Pilat; he was very loath to have meddled with Christ when the Jews brought
him. He would know what Crime they had to lay to his charge before he would do
ought against him, Joh. 18 29. What accusation have ye brought against this
man? And when they pretended he was a Malefactor, Pilat was very desirous to
have been excused from meddling in the case, verse. 31. Take ye him, and judge
him according to your Law. And when they urged him, he vindicated Christ, verse.
32. I find in him no fault at all. And when they pressed hard upon him to
crucify Christ, he would have put them off again, and told them, he could find
no fault in him, Chap. 19. v. 6. They cried out saying, Crucify him, Crucify
him. Pilat says unto them, Take ye him and Crucify him: for I find no fault in
him. Then they plead their Law, that by their Law he ought to die, because he
made himself the Son of God, verse. 7. Upon hearing this, that it was given out,
that he was the Son of God, he was the more afraid to give sentence against
him, and sought which way to release him, verse. 8.9, 12. Then they used this
devise; they tell Pilat he should not be looked upon as Caesar's friend if he
let Christ go. If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's Friend. And though
he had withstood the reasonings and importunities of the Jews hitherto; the
hearing of this, that he should not be Caesar's Friend, prevailed with him,
contrary to his judgment and Conscience, to deliver up Christ to be Crucified,
v. 12, 13, 16. If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's Friend. When
therefore Pilat heard this saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the
judgment seat. Then delivered ho him to be Crucified.

If things be duly estimated, these Informers that Stir up Magistrates to
Punish the Kings Subjects, for praying and Preaching, and those that take in
with them will appear to be none of the Kings Friends; but rather his
adversaries. For, 1. They that misuse Gods Ministers, bring Gods Wrath upon the
Kingdom, as has been before proved, from, 2 Chr. 36.16. They mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
Wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till there was no Remedy. Is not
this misusing the Lords Prophets and Messengers, when they are Punished for
Preaching Gods Word? and whether are they to be reckoned the Kings Friends or
Enemies that bring the Wrath of God upon his Kingdom? 2. David counted those
his Adversaries that prompted him to Punish Shimei, when he was settled upon his
Throne in Peace, and yet Shimei had cursed David to his Face in the day of his
distress. 2 Samuel 19.21, 22. And Abishai the Son of Zervia said, shall not
Shimei be put to Death for this, because he cursed the Lords anointed. And
David said, what have I to do with you, ye Sons of Zervia, that ye should this
day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to Death this day in
Israel; for do I not know that I am this day King in Israel. These men pray for
the King and Kingdoms welfare. And if David accounted the Sons of Zerviah his
adversaries, for stiring him up to destroy Shimei, who had cursed him, because
he had humbled himself, may we not count these Informers the Kings Enemies that
seek the Destruction of these men, who pray to God both in their Families and
Assemblies to bless the King, and Preach obedience to the King in all lawful
things. 3. In the multitude of People in the Kings honor, but in the want of
People is the Kings destruction. Prove. 14.28. And therefore to Suppress,
Impoverish, to force to flee out of the Nation so great a Part of the Kings
Subjects as the Nonconformists are, would be a diminishing of the People, and
so a diminution of the Kings Honor and Safety.

3. It Is a Calumny raised by the adversaries of the Nonconformists, to excite
the Magistrates against them; that they shall not be esteemed the Kings Friends
if they do not suppress them. For our Sovereign Lord the King has been
graciously pleased in several of his Declarations, to testify unto his Kingdom,
that he has a kindness for his Nonconforming Subjects as well as the rest of
his Subjects. And besides these, there may be other demonstrations given that
these Magistrates are true and real Friends to the King, who do shelter the
Nonconformists from the fury of the Informers, and keep them from being
persecuted for righteousness sake. As, 1. They are the Kings true and real
Friends that uphold his throne and endeavor to establish his Throne for ever;
and this they do that deliver the oppressed, and show mercy to such as are
under affliction. Prove. 29.14. The King that faithfully judges the Poor, his
Throne shall be established for ever. Prove. 20.28. Mercy and truth preserve the
King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy Who shows mercy he that Punishes
Men for Praying, and Preaching, or he that Spares them? 2. They are the Kings
Friends that bring down the blessing of God upon the Kingdom, and cause him to
wax great, and to be so feared by the Neighbor Nations that they make no War
with him. And this they do who encourage the faithful Preachers and Preaching
of the word of God. When the Preaching of the Word of God was encouraged in
Jehoshaphats days; there were such eminent Blessings came upon him, and his
Kingdom, that he waxed great exceedingly, and was feared of all the Lands round
about, and none of them durst make War with him. 2 Chr. 17.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
And with them he sent Levites and Priests, and they taught in Judah, and had
the book of the Law of the Lord with them, and went about through all the
Cities of Judah, and taught the people, and the fear of the Lord fell upon all
the Kindoms of the Lands, that were round about Judah; so that they made no War
against Jehoshaphat. And also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat
Presents, and Tribute Silver. The Arabians brought him Flocks. And Jehoshaphat
waxed great exceedingly.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 14. l. 12. (...). p. 29. l. 22. we think we do well. p. 40. l. 4. 1 Samuel
12 23. and l. 6. way. p. 42. l. 18. 2 Kings 10.1. etc. p. 55. l. 17. belly and
l. 46. 2 Ep. Joh. v. p. 56. l. 20. wallow. p. 75. l. 33. overthrow, and l. 47.
will ye. p. 77. l. 5. spoke, l. last r. brake. p. 78. l. 2. brake.


