A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, February 22d. 1688/9. By
EDW. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlocke, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1689.

Imprimatur,

Hen. Wharton, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest.
Ex Aed. Lamb. March 1. 1688.
I. PETER 4. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
Ungodly and the Sinner appear.
THIS Epistle was written by S. Peter for the Encouragement of Christians under
all their Sufferings; but these Words seem to carry so much Terror and
Severity in them, as though none but Martyrs and Confessors could have any
Reason to hope for Salvation, and all others were to be left in Despair.
Although Mankind be not easily satisfied concerning the Punishment denounced
against the Ungodly and Sinner, yet the Justice of God, the Equity of his
Commands, the Freedom of their Choice, the Contempt of Grace, and their Wilful
and Obstinate Impenitency take away all just Cause of Complaint: But, that the
Righteous should scarcely be saved, seems hardly reconcilable with the Grace,
and Design, and Promises, of the Gospel. For the righteous here are not vain,
proud, self-conceited Hypocrites, such who think they need no Repentance, but
such who by the Grace of God were brought off from their former Sins, 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19, 20.
and were redeemed from their vain Conversation with the precious blood of
Christ, who had purisied their Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit;
c. 2. v. 9.
Who were a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People; yet of such as these it is said, If the righteous scarcely be saved.
But how can this agree with the Infinite Goodness and Mercy of God declared in
the Gospel, whereby Sinners are courted and encouraged to repent with the Hopes
and Promise of Salvation? Did not Christ come to save Sinners, and St. Paul
call this a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance; 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and yet after all, shall the righteous scarcely be saved? What Joy in Heaven
can there be over one Sinner that Repents, Luke 15. 7, 10.
if after his Repentance it be so hard to come to Heaven? Does not Christ
himself invite those who are weary, and heavy laden, to come to him, with a
Promise that he will give rest to their Souls? Matt. 11. 28.
But what Rest can they have, who, notwithstanding their coming to him, do with
so much difficulty attain to Eternal Rest? How can that be said to be an easy
yoke, v. 30.
and a light burden, which is of it self so hard to be born, and the Reward
which is to make it easy so hard to be attained?

If it be said that this Expression, that the righteous are scarcely saved, is
to be understood of some Sufferings, and Persecutions, which the Christians
were then to undergo, and it was very hard for any, though never so righteous,
to escape; and that to this v. 17. refers, I answer, That this does not clear
the Difficulty; For from whence does this Necessity of Suffering arise? Is it
not enough to repent and forsake our Sins, but we must undergo some Punishment
for them in this Life, although God remits that of the World to come? But how
is this consistent with the Fullness of Christ's Satisfaction, and the Freeness
of God's Remission of Sins? And if God's Justice be satisfied and the Sins be
forgiven, what need can there be that Persons must here suffer for their Sins
before they can come to Heaven?

So that for the clearing this Subject these thing must be spoken to:

I. In what Sense the righteous are said to be scarcely saved. II. How this is
consistent with the Grace of the Gospel. III. What Encouragement there is for
us to hope for Salvation, when the righteous are said to be scarcely saved.
I. In what sense the righteous are said to be scarcely saved. That may be
understood Two ways;

(1.) With Respect to Accidental Difficulties arising from the particular
Circumstances of Times and Seasons. (2.) With Respect to the General Terms of
Salvation, which are common to all Persons and Times.
1. With respect to Accidental Difficulties arising from the particular
Circumstances of Times and Persons. For the Difficulties of Religion are not
alike in all Times, nor to all Persons; for they are not like a Geometrical
Measure, which is always exactly the same; but rather like a Voyage at Sea,
which is to be managed by the same Compass and to the same Port; but it
sometimes proves Calm and Pleasant, and at other times Stormy and Tempestuous.
Which chiefly happens, when a Religion appears New, or goes about to Reform the
Old; for then it is sure to meet with all the Opposition, which the Passions,
and Interests, and Prejudices of partial Men can raise against it. Its true, he
that stills the raging of the Sea, and the Madness of the People, can, when he
pleases, calm the most violent Passions of Mankind, and make way for the
Reception of Truth in their Minds; but he thinks fit by such means to try and
discover what is in Men. Who never show their Passions more violently and
unreasonably than when they are masked under a pretense of Zeal against Heresy
and Innovation. For that blinds their Understandings, corrupts their Wills,
inflames their Passions, hardens their Hearts, and shuts up all bowels of Pity
and Compassion toward Brethren. Thus it was among the Jews toward the
Christians, both in Judea, and in the several Places of their Dispersion: For
they looked on them as Apostates and Heretics, and treated them, not only
with the utmost Scorn and Contempt, but with all the Fury and Rage imaginable,
and where their own Power fell short, they called in the Assistence of the
Roman Governors, representing the Christians to them, as an Upstart and
Pernicious Sect, Seditious and Turbulent, and therefore ought by all means to
be suppressed: By such Insinuations the poor Christians in the Eastern Provinces
of the Jewish Dispersion, were miserably harassed and proceeded against as
Malefactors. Thus it was at that time when S. Peter wrote his Epistle to the
Jewish Christians, who were scattered throughout Pontus, 1 Pet. 1. 1.
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, where there were abundance of Jews,
and many Converts, but very hardly used among them. St. Peter having been
employed much among them, Gal. 2. 8.
(the Apostleship of the Circumcision being committed to him) and being
withdrawn into the Kingdom of Parthia, Although Babylon were very much
exhausted, by the Neighborhood of Seleucia first, and afterward of Ctesiphon;
yet I see no Reason to conclude that Babylon was not then capable of having a
Church in it, when S. Peter wrote this Epistle. For Josephus, lib. 18. owns,
that there was in Babylon (...) in the time when Hyrcanus was sent thither; and
out of such a multitude of Jews a Church might easily be gathered. The
Calamities which befell the Jews of those parts afterward rather reach to the
Country than the City of Babylon. And when such Numbers of Jews are allowed to
have been after them in Ctesiphon, Nearda and Nisibis, which were all Cities in
those parts, I see no cause to question that there were great Numbers of Jews
at that time in Babylon; since even in Trajan's time, they are confessed to
have been very numerous in Mesopotamia. Strabo, lib. 16. says, that a great
part of Babylon was deserted in his time, and so it might well be, and leave
room enough for a Christian Church to be there notwithstanding. So that no
reason appears sufficient to me to take Babylon in any other sense, than for
the City generally known by that name, without flying to any Mystical sense, or
a Strong place in Egypt bearing that name; there being less probability of a
Church in a Garrison, as Strabo describes it, than in the Remainders of so
great a City.
where he had planted a Church at Babylon, (not so desolate at that time, as
not to be sufficient for such a Number, as appears by Strabo and Josephus) from
thence he writes this excellent Epistle for the Advice and Comfort of the
suffering Christians. He advises them to behave themselves with great Prudence
and Care of their Actions, to give no Advantage against themseves, by doing any
ill things; and then, if it pleased God to call them out to suffer, they ought
not to murmur, or complain, or mistrust his Gracious Providence toward them,
but commit themselves to God in well doing, Pet. 4. 19.
as unto a faithful Creator. And if they did think it hard for them to suffer
these things, they ought to consider, there was a Wise Directour of them above,
who had beforehand appointed such a Series of Events, that although their
Enemies rejoiced to see them suffer in the first Place, yet their Turn would
come not long after, and then these Enemies of the Gospel would feel the
Severity of God's Wrath and Displeasure against them. Which is the meaning of
the foregoing Verse,

For the time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God; and if it
first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of
God? i. e. Christ has foretold Desolation and Ruin to come upon the Jewish
Nation, for rejecting him when he came to save them; but he withal says, that
before these things, Luke 21. 12.
they shall lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to the
Synagogues, and into Prisons, being brought before Kings and rulers for my
name's sake. Which implies a severe persecution of the Christian Church, begun
by the Jews, but carried on by the Governors of Kingdoms and Provinces. And
therefore says the Apostle, although the time be now come that Judgment begins
at the House of God, yet it will not end there; but that which is only a Cup
of Trembling and Astonishment to them shall be a Cup of Fury and Destruction to
the Obstinate and Impenitent Jews. The case was hard to the poor Christians,
but it would be much more severe toward their cruel Persecutours; for if the
righteous, whom God loves, meet with such sharp usage by his Permission for a
time, the day will come when God will avenge the Cause of his suffering People,
and make their ungodly and perfidious Enemies feel the smart of his displeasure
in such manner that they shall not know where to hide themselves, Where shall
the sinner and ungodly appear.

But that which I observe from hence is, that there are some Accidental
Circumstances which depend on Divine Providence, which may make the condition
of some Men, as to Salvation, much more difficult than that of others: For it
is no such easy matter to go through many Tribulations into the Kingdom of
God, Act. 14. 22.
i. e. to be content to be contemned and reproached as the worst of Men; to be
torn from Friends and Relations, and all the Comforts of Life; to be cast into
loathsome Prisons, and more loathsome Company in them; to be in continual
expectation of such cruel Usage and Torments, as make Death be looked on as
their best Friend and most seasonable Deliverer.

If Sufferings do not rise so high, yet when men cannot keep Faith and a good
Conscience, without hazarding the loss of what mankind are apt to set too great
a value upon, their Ease, and Riches, and Expectations in this World, even
these make it harder for such Persons to get to Heaven; because Sincerity and
Constancy are the necessary Conditions of it, which may be tried much more in
some than it is in others. We must all have the same Journey's-end, if we hope
to get to Heaven, but some may meet with a freer Road, and a calmer Season, and
better Company, in their Journey than others. However it happens we must go
through all, and not be discouraged at any appearance of Difficulties upon our
way.

But herein Mankind are apt to be deceived, as though all the Difficulties lay
in a suffering Condition; whereas a soft, and careless, and voluptuous Life is
rather more dangerous to their Souls, because persons are less apt to suspect
their danger. He that is set upon by force and violence endeavors to defend
himself as well as he can; but he that is betrayed under a pretense of Kindness
is drawn into his Ruin before he is aware, and goes on cheerfully to his own
Destruction. Prosperity has the true nature of an Opiate, for it stupifies and
pleases at the same time. The Temptations of the suffering Side are apt to
allarm, awake, and rouse up the sleepy Powers of the Soul; whereas the gentle
and easy Condition of Life either lays them asleep, by a kind of Intoxication,
or so diverts them from all serious things, as puts them out of the very way to
Heaven. For, the first thing in it is a steady and serious Resolution of Mind
to do what lies in them to go thither; which can never be done without a true
Consideration of the vanities of this world, how pleasing soever; and a fixed
and settled Judgment, preferring the Happiness of Heaven before all the most
alluring Pleasures of this Life.

So that the different Circumstances of Life do make the way of Salvation more
difficult to some than to others.

But this is not all; for there are many things which make it more difficult to
some than to others, which are of another Nature. Some Tempers are more
flexible and pliable than others; more capable of harkening to Reason; and more
apt to reflect on their own Actions; whereas others are naturally Stiff and
Obstinate, who stick as fast to an Opinion or Prejudice which they have once
taken up, as if they were fatally determined to it; and such as these can
hardly ever be convinced they are in an Error, unless by a Power superior to
Nature. Some again, are very easily convinced of a Fault, but very hardly
reclaimed; for that facility of Temper which makes them easy to be convinced,
lays them open to the next Temptation, which they are not able to withstand.
These are always repenting and amending and beginning to reform, but without
the Grace of God, not able to go through with it. Some are modest and bashful
Sinners, whom Fear and Shame may restrain; others are so hardened and impudent
in their Wickedness, that they deny even the very first Principles of Morality
as well as Religion, and not only refuse to hearken to Reproof, but reject it
with Scorn and Indignation. And it cannot be supposed that the Grace of God,
working on men's Minds in a way suitable to them, should have as easy an
Admittance into one as into the other; for the one are like a House with doors
shut, but easily opened; the other like a House not only shut, but bolted and
barracadoed.

Again, some have had the Advantage of a Pious and Religious Education, by
which the Principles of Piety and Virtue have made an early Impression on their
minds, and have been a continual Check upon evil Inclinations; and if they have
been too weak to subdue them, yet they have been strong enough to prevent their
Extravagancies, or to bring them to a speedy Repentance, and to take up firmer
Resolutions; and such are more easily brought to themselves and settled in a
virtuous course of Life. But the generality of Mankind, through a wretched
Carelessness, mind not the early Improvement of their Children in what is good;
and what education they give them tends to any thing more than the Planting the
sense of God, and true Religion, and Virtue, in them. It were well, if they
would but let Nature alone in their Children; but instead of that, they often
place such about them, who humor them in their worst Inclinations, and give
them an early taste of Profaneness and Irreligion; so that when they come into
the World, they run into all manner of wickedness, and commit it with
greediness, having so quick a Relish of it; and then indeed it is a very hard
matter to bring them to Repentance; for that is to take Shame and Dishonor to
themselves, to say they have been Fools, and have done wickedly; and rather
than do this, they choose to go on in their Impieties, and treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath.

Those who magnify the Freedom of Will in Mankind in this degenerate State,
seem to consider them only in Theory and Speculation; not as they are, but as
they ought to have been. It is like that which they call the Spring in some
Bodies, which are apt to dilate and expand themselves, but may be easily
oppressed with such a weight as makes it impossible for them to enlarge
themselves till it be removed. There is no doubt in Mankind, considered in it
self, a Power of acting according to Reason, which is the truest Freedom, (for
a Power of acting otherwise is Weakdness and Folly,) but what through the
Natural Propensity to Evil; what through the Power of bad Examples; what
through the violence of some Tempers and Passions; what through the cloudiness
of some Understandings, from bodily Distempers; what through the strength of
evil Habits, and corrupt Dispositions, there is scarce such a thing as Freedom
of Will left, especially as to matters of Salvation. So that if the Scripture
did not so plainly express the Necessity of Divine Grace for the Conversion of
Sinners (as it does,) the mere Consideration of the state of human: Nature
would make me believe it, supposing that any part of Mankind be designed to be
fitted for Heaven. For although the Difficulties be not alike in all, yet, of
one kind or other, they are such as cannot be overcome by our selves, without
the Power of Divine Grace Exciting, Preventing, and Assisting of us.

(2.) Having thus showed what Difficulties there are which arise from the
Different Circumstances of Times and Persons, I am now. to consider those which
arise from the Terms of Salvation, which are common to all Persons and Times.

Here we must suppose Salvation to be the thing aimed at, as the Chief End or
Happiness of such Men; and here are two kinds of Difficulties to be enquired
into;

(1.) Such as are implied in the general Pursuit of Happiness. (2.) Such as
immediately relate to this kind of Happiness.
(1.) Such as are implied in the general Pursuit of Happiness: For Happiness is
not a thing of Chance or Necessity, but a Matter of Choice and Design. It is a
vulgar mistake (and I wish it were only among the vulgar) to account those
Happy, who are fortunate: But this Notion of Happiness was unanimously rejected
by all the Ancient Moralists. Some of them indeed have thought it repugnant to
common Sense, to call those happy who were under great Calamities, i. e. who
were, in the sense of Mankind, miserable: But then they utterly denied, that
the best outward Circumstances could make a Man happy; for that must depend
upon the Temper of a Man's mind, and his Improvement in Virtue. These are some
things which the Moralists agreed in, which may be of great use to us for
clearing the Christian Doctrine in this matter about the Difficulty of
attaining Salvation.

(1.) That Happiness did consist in one Uniform Design of Life, i. e. that a
Man must choose one proper and chief End to himself, and so order his Thoughts
and Actions that he may attain it. And therefore the dissolute and careless
liver, that minds or thinks of nothing but Eating, and Drinking, and Sleeping,
and passing away his time, was no more capable of Happiness than a Brute, which
exceeds him in that which he accounts the Happiness of Life.

(2.) That there must be a Careful and Attentive Mind to pursue this Design.
And that is by keeping close to those Maxims, which were laid down as necessary
to attain it. For, according to their different Notions, they had different
Maxims, or Rules of Practice, either as to Virtue or Pleasure, and as Men did
observe these, they were nearer to their Happiness: But if they broke their
Rules, they must blame themselves if they missed of it.

(3.) That any Man who desired to be happy, must above all things take Pains
about himself; For without that they concluded it impossible for a man to be
happy, let his outward Condition in the World be what it would: For that was
too uncertain a foundation to build such a Structure upon. Therefore it was
necessary for any one that pretended to happiness, to have a true Notion of
what conduced to it in his Mind; and to bring his Passions into Order. For all
the world cannot make one whose Passions are violent and extravagant, to be
happy; no more than him to be a sound and healthful Man, that has a Fever,
and a Dropsy, and Convulsions, at the same time upon him. For the violence of
Lust is an inward burning Fever; Covetousness, or an infatiable Desire of
Riches, a perpetual Dropsy, which increases the Thirst by an endeavor to
quench it; and Excessive Anger is a Convulsion of those Powers of the Soul
which ought to be sedate, and composed, in any one who pretends to Happiness.
But when they considered the force of natural Inclinations, they found it was
no easy matter to make the Unreasonable part to be governed by the Reasonable.
For the less of Reason, the more wilfulness and stubbornness; and therefore the
harder to be brought to Reason and to be governed by it. And herein lay the
main Difficulty; and after all their Arguments, and Rules, and Directions,
humane Nature was found too refractory to submit; and the violence of Man's
Passions overthrew all the plausible Schemes of Happiness which the
Philosophers had set up. To which I add,

(4.) That those who consulted most the Ease and Pleasure of Mankind, were
forced to put Men upon some hard and unpleasant things to make any thing like
Happiness to consist in Pleasure. For they cast off all Riot and Excess, all
Intemperance and Luxury, because the Pain which followed exceeded the Pleasure;
and therefore they made Temperance and Chastity necessary to the true Pleasure
of Life. They reduced the Happiness of Pleasure to a fixed and settled State,
and so took it off from that which was only sensual. They brought Men's Desires
within so narrow a Compass, that the true Lovers of Pleasure would abhor such
Confinements as they made necessary. And although they could never conquer the
Fears of Invisible Powers, and of Death, yet they thought no Happiness was to
be had without it. So that all were agreed, that it was impossible to attain to
any thing that looked like Happiness without some real Difficulty, which was
necessary to be undergone, although the Success were uncertain.

(2.) Let us now consider the Difficulties relating to Salvation, or that
Happiness which Christians expect. And here I shall show,

(1.) That it is far more Reasonable to go through Difficulties, for the sake
of it. (2.) That they are not such, but that we may reasonably hope to overcome
them.
(1.) It is more Reasonable to expect Difficulties in the way of Salvation. For
the more excellent and desirable the Happiness is, the more it is worth the
while for us to take pains about it; especially when there is a Certainty of
attaining it. The Moralists had but very dark, and confused, and uncertain
Notions of Happiness; something they saw, but with a very glimmering light:
They found that all Men desired it, and wise Men sought after it; but wherein
it lay, and how to be attained, they could not agree. The most considering Men
were convinced it must be in the best part of our selves, and that is our
minds, and in the greatest Perfection of that, viz. Virtue and Goodness. But
they met with insuperable Difficulties in the way to it, and the best among
them sadly lamented the state of humane Nature, after all the pains and
endeavors they had used to rectify their Opinions, and to subdue their
Passions. For they found it too restiff and untractable, too much under the
Sway and Dominion of the sensitive Appetite, for them ever to hope by the mere
Power of Reason to bring it into such Subjection, as to pretend to a total
Conquest. And those who refined Pleasure so much, as to make it a Happiness fit
for Mankind to own, did make a Happiness just as they made their Gods, viz. a
Fine, Subtle, Airy, Pleasant No-thing, or that had no Solidity in it: For the
Epicurean Happiness, with all its Refinements, was rather a matter of
Speculation than Practice; and after all was not worth so much pains about it,
but like the Gourd, which after its paring, and cleansing, and dressing, is fit
only to be cast upon the Dunghill.

But it cannot be said that the Happiness offered to Christians is of such a
Nature: For it is really the best, the most valuable and desirable Good, not
promised to be enjoyed in this mean, despicable, and uncertain state of Life,
but reserved for a more free, spiritual and continuing State. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
So our Apostle calls it, an Inheritance, incorruptible and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in heaven for you. Such is the Condition of the World
without us here, and of the Passions and Infirmities within us, that it is a
vain thing to expect a true Happiness to be enjoyed in this Life; the utmost we
can hope for, is to be prepared for a better; and God knows there is Difficulty
enough in that. We have Hearts so vain and sensual, so addicted to the
Pleasures and Impertinencies of this World, so prepossessed with the Objects of
Sense, that it is no easy matter to bring them so much as in earnest to
consider of another World. But it is yet harder to fix the Thoughts of it upon
our Minds, so as to make a deep Impression upon them, as they must do, if we
make the Happiness of Heaven our Chief End and Design. Supposing that Paradise
were still upon Earth in its first Glory, and to be found by the Description
which Moses gives of it; a man may think often concerning it, where it lies,
what the Rivers are by which it is to be discovered; but all this amounts but
to a mere Speculation: But suppose that he takes up a Resolution to go thither,
what other kind of thoughts has he then about it, as to the Truth and
Certainty of the Place, and the Way that leads thither, and the Difficulties he
is like to meet with? Which make another kind of Impression than the former dry
Speculation did. If a Man does not think Heaven worth all the Pains and
Difficulties which lie in our way to it, he never yet had one serious and
becoming thought concerning it. For the Happiness proposed is really so great
and invaluable, that the more we think of it, the more we shall esteem it, and
the more we shall despise and triumph over the greatest Difficulties in order
to it; it being no less than the Perfect Enjoyment of the most Perfect Good, in
a most Perfect State of Life, and nothing can be desired by humane Nature
greater than this.

(2.) The Difficulties in our Way to Salvation are not such, but we may
reasonably hope to overcome them; i. e. if we set our selves about it;
otherwise a very mean Difficulty will appear too great for us. Therefore we
must suppose not only a willing Mind, but a firm Resolution to do what lies
in us. And there are two things to show that we may hope to overcome them;

(1.) That the most difficult Duties are in themselves reasonable to be
performed by us. (2.) That God offers his Gracious Assistence for the
Performance of them.
(1.) That the most difficult Duties are in themselves reasonable. I mean such
whose Difficulty does not arise from accidental outward Circumstances; but from
a respect to the present state and condition of humane Nature. Such as,

(1.) True Repentance; which is one of the hardest Works of a Man's Life, when
he has been long engaged in a Course of Sinning against Conscience. It is not
hard for such a one to be made sensible that he has done amiss; for he that
acts against his Judgment is, as Aristotle observes, (...) Nicom. l. 7. c. 8.
Inter cateramala, hoc quoque habet stultitia proprium, semper incipit vivere.
Sen. Ep. 13.
apt to Repent, i. e. to find fault with himself for his own Actions, and to
resolve to amend. There is a sort of Displeasure against Sin, which is
consistent with the Practice of it, which is called by the Casuists, Attritio
Impoenitentium; but they say it is without a purpose of forsaking it, if there
be such a purpose that they say is Attritio Poenitentium; but if it be an
ineffectual Purpose, the Scripture no where calls it Repentance. For as long as
the habitual Practice continues, it is certain that man's Love to his Sin
exceeds his Hatred of it; and what Repentance can that be which is consistent
with a prevailing Love of Sin? When persons were first made Christians, their
Repentance was easily discerned, whether true or false, because it was a
public and sol^mn Renunciation of all their former Sins; but when men have
accustomed themselves to Sin under a Profession to renounce their Sins, it is a
harder matter to find out the Sincerity of their Repentance as to those Sins.
And here a difference must be made as to the Nature and Kind of Sins: For there
are some Sins which all agree to be Sins, yet is a hard matter to convince
Persons that they are guilty of them, such as Hypocrisy, Schism, and Idolatry,
which men will find something to excuse themselves from, notwithstanding the
clearest Evidence against them. Some are such Strangers to themselves, that
they do not suspect themselves for those Sins which others easily discern in
them, as is common in the case of ^ride, and Envy, and Covetousness, and
Superstition. It cannot be supposed that Persons should so particularly repent
of such Sins which they are not sensible of; but where Self-love blind^ it
cannot excuse. And where such evil habits prevail, persons must repent* and
search, and examine themselves in order to a particular Repentance. There are
other Sins which are really perpetual burdens to a good Mind, but it knows not
how to get rid of them with the utmost Care; such as inward Motions to Sin,
sudden Heats and Surprises, mixed Infirmities, Coldness in Devotion,
Distractions in Prayer, and many Omissions of Personal Duties; in such Cases as
these, if we do not allow Sincerity of Repentance without through Amendment, we
make a General Repentance insignificant, and make the Condition of many good
Men desperate; for none can be saved without true Repentance. And if there can
be no true Repentance without actual forsaking all such kinds of Sins, there is
no such thing as true Repentance to be found. But there are other Sins of a
more dangerous and malignant Nature, which argue a very bad Mind; such as
Malice and Hatred, a rooted Aversion to what is Good; and a strong Inclination
to Evil. There are some Sins that are gross and notorious, of which St. Paul
says, The lusts of the Flesh are manifest; i. e. such Sins are easily known to
be Sins, and Men's Consciences condemn them even while they commit them; such as
Murder, Adultery, Intemperance, Injustice, Perjury, and such like. Of which
the Apostle after declares, That they who do such things shall never come to
Heaven. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6.
Therefore as to them, such a Repentance is necessary as implies not merely a
dislike and sorrow for them, but a thorough Change of a Man's Mind, and the
Course of his Life, with respect to them. And surely it is no easy matter to
new mold the Temper of ones Mind, and to turn the Tide of our Actions; to break
off our beloved Sins, and to bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance. This is
indeed a hard Work; but yet it is a most reasonable Work. It is hard, but it is
like the taking violent Physic in some Diseases, where the humor must be
purged out, or the Party must dye; the Uneasiness is not to be considered, but
the Necessity; and in such a Case the Mind cannot be at Ease till it be done.
So that the very Difficulty of Repentance lays the Foundation for greater Peace
of Mind afterward. And who will think much of such a Difficulty, which is so
necessary to Peace with God and his own Conscience?

(2.) The Love of God is above all things. This is so Fundamental a Duty, that
we cannot place our Happiness in God without it. For if we do not love God
above all things, we must love somewhat else so; and whatever we love above all
things, that we make our Happiness. But I am afraid the greatest part of the
World love all things above him: For we are to judge of Men's love and esteem by
what they court, and pursue, and desire, and delight in; it is impossible there
should be such a Love of God, where the Stream of the Affections and Course of
Actions run quite another way; I mean, to the vanities of this World, of which
the Apostle has said, 1 John ^. 15.
If any man loves it, the love of the Father is not in him. But this is a hard
Point: For some degree of love to this World is allowable; else how can we
thank God for the Comforts of it? And all Persons who know God do grant, that
his Perfections are far above all the World, and therefore they seem to have a
value and esteem for him above it. We must here distinguish a Notional Esteem
from that which is Practical. A Notional Esteem implies no more than a mere
Conviction that God must exceed all the Excellencies which are scattered in the
Creatures; but a Practical Esteem is, when the Acts of our Souls toward him
are suitable to the Apprehensions we have in our Minds concerning him. When we
adore his infinite Perfections, and delight in the Meditation of them; when we
desire to do all things pleasing to him, and avoid what we know to offend him;
when we believe, and hope, and trust in him, and commit our selves to his
Conduct in this World, in hopes of being happy with him in another. This is the
Love of God above all things; but alas! Where is this Love of God to be found?
It is no very hard matter to work up a heated and devout Imagination to the
Fancy of Raptures and Ecstasies and Mystical Unions; 1 John 5. 3.
but after all, This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. As the
true Love of a Prince is not to flatter and admire him, and watch for his
Smiles; but to observe his Directions, and obey his Orders, and to do what is
most for his Service. And although such a Love of God be hard to those whose
hearts are full of carnal Affections, and are taken up with the Follies and
Vanities of this World, yet we cannot take one true step in the way to Heaven
without the Love of God. For even those who have most corrupted the Doctrine of
Repentance do confess, that there can be no true Contrition of Sin, which is
not founded on the Love of God as the Principle of it, and however they have
dangerously flattered and deceived those who are so weak to believe them, that
Attrition with the Sacrament of Penance is sufficient to put men into the state
of Grace; yet St. Peter's Keys must have an extraordinary virtue, if they can
change Nature into Grace, or Fear into Love, or mere Horror of Conscience into
true Repentance.

But although such a Love of God above all things be so hard a thing to minds
prepossessed with the Love of other things; yet no one can deny that it is the
most reasonable Duty in the World. The very Thoughts of God, if they are such
as we ought to have, imply, that he is the Best, the Wisest, the most Perfect
Being, and therefore the most amiable and desirable Object. And whither then
should the most natural Stream of our Affections run, but toward him? What do
we mean to suffer so much earth and filthiness to obstruct the free passage of
them in their most proper Course? What can we meet with in this deceitful
World, that can bear the least proportion to such Infinite Goodness? Oh what a
difference is there between our Reason and our Love? We verily believe that God
deserves our Love above all things, and yet how small a share has he in it? We
love what we profess to despise above all things, viz. our Sins and this vain
World; and we really too much despise what we still profess to love above all
things, viz. God and our Eternal Happiness. O miserable condition of Humanity!
Made to be Happy, and yet fond of Misery; Loving what is vain, and yet despising
Vanity; Hating what is Good, and yet accounts it best; And therefore fittest for
our Choice and Love. The Love of God above all things is so just and
reasonable, that those who do it least approve it as the most excellent
Employment of our Minds; and those that do it most, think they fall short of
what God deserves from them. The more we know of God, the more we know that we
ought to love and delight in him; and all our Difficulty in the Practice of it
can never make us think it is unreasonable to love Him above all things,
without whom nothing can make us happy, and who alone can do it.

(3.) Universal Holiness of Heart and Life. If this were not necessary to
Salvation, our Apostle would not have pressed it with so much earnestness as he
does; 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15, 16.
As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts
in your ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation; because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.
2. 11.
Again, Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the Soul. 4. 2.
And again, That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh, to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God. This is a hard saying to Mankind, who
part with nothing so hardly as with their Sins; yet these must be parted with,
if ever we hope to get to Heaven. I do not say, that a Perfection in Holiness
is required, (for that were to suppose Happiness in this World, since there can
be no perfect holiness without it,) but there must be a constant, uniform, and
sincere endeavor after it; by avoiding all known and wilful Sins, and doing
all our Duties to God in such a manner as our Conscience cannot charge us with
gross Neglect or Insincerity. There are some things we cannot say are downright
Sins; yet if they lead to them; if they indispose our Minds to God, and his
Service; if they tend to Lightness and Vanity, and make us more easy to
entertain the Devil's Temptations, we ought to avoid them as the Snares of the
Devil. So, on the other side, there are some things which we cannot say are
plain, and express, and necessary Duties of Religion, yet they tend so much to
keep up the Life and Spirit of it, that a general Design of Holiness is enough
to recommend them. As to positive Duties of Religion, we cannot exactly fix the
Time, and Measure, and Season of their Performance, which must vary according
to Circumstances; but this we can say, that the more Persons set themselves to
the Practice of Holiness, and the greater Preparation they make for another
World, the more they will delight in the performance of God's Service, and the
more ready to embrace any Opportunities for it. Those who would have all
Religious Duties determined as to the Circumstances of them, are like Men who
would have punctual Rules set down, how often two Friends should converse with
each other, and how long time they are to stay together. True Friendship will
need none of those things, but will incline them to embrace the best
opportunities for mutual Conversation, lest too long distance beget a Coldness
first, and then the Friendship dissolves. It is no hard matter to pray as far
as words go; but to pray with Zeal and Devotion, to attend upon God with that
seriousness of Mind we ought to do, will require our utmost Attention. And it
is no easy matter to keep our Minds composed and fit to converse with God in
Prayer, and other solemn Duties of Religion. But as hard as this appears to us,
it is most fit and reasonable that we should do it: For what an unbecoming
thing it is to worship God in a careless, trifling, perfunctory manner; as
though nothing less deserved the employing the Vigor of our Minds about, than
the Service of God. But how can we love him with all our Hearts, if we do not
serve him with all our Mind and Strength.

(4.) Resignation of our selves to God; This the Apostle calls casting all our
Care upon him. 1 Pet. 5. 7.
This is a very wise Duty if we can attain to it, because it eases our minds of
many Fears and Perplexities, both as to our selves and others: But it is no
easy thing to set our minds free from solicitous thoughts, about possible
Evils. We cannot mend our Condition, nor prevent what is determined by our most
anxious Care; but we may enjoy our selves with far greater Peace and
Tranquillity, if we can be content to commit our selves to the best Conduct,
and that is of him that Governs the World. And whatever strugglings we may find
within our selves about it, yet the more we search, and weigh, and consider
things, the more we shall be satisfied, that the Resignation of our selves to
God, as to all our Concernments in this World, is the best means to calm our
Passions, to abate our Fears, to prevent our Impatience, and so to attain to
that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
which is with God of great Price.

But if all these Duties be so necessary to our being saved, and we lie under
such Difficulties as to the Performance of them, their appearing to be
Reasonable makes our Condition so much worse: For to find it so hard to do
what we are convinced is most Reasonable to be done, is one of the worst
Circumstances of our Condition. Its true we do not want Faculties of
Understanding and Will; but what then, if our Moral Indispositions make these
useless to our Spiritual Advantage? A man that is like to be stifled in a large
Vessel full of Downy Feathers, cannot complain of the hardness of what he lies
upon, for all things feel soft and easy about him, yet he may be stifled with
them; our evil Habits, and corrupt Inclinations, have nothing that feels hard
or troublesome to us; but if we cannot overcome them, they will certainly Ruin
and Destroy us. There is therefore a Necessity of a higher Principle of Divine
Grace to enable us to break thorough all these Difficulties. Which Grace is so
abundantly promised by the Gospel to those who seek it, that it comes at last
to be our own fault, if we be not saved.

II. And this helps us to Reconcile the Difficulty of Salvation, with the
Easiness of the Terms of the Gospel: For that which is not only hard, but
impossible to us, in our own strength, may, by the mighty Power of Divine
Grace, become not only possible but easy to us: And withal those things are
accounted easy which bring ease, and that is a light burden which rids one of
a far harder. And thus the Commands of Christ, however hard in themselves to
us, yet being considered with the Grace of the Gospel, and the blessed effect
of inward Peace, which follows Sincere Obedience, even his Yoke, which keeps us
most in, may be said to be Easy, and his Burden, which sits hardest upon us,
may be said to be light.

III. And from hence we see what Encouragement there is still for us to hope to
be saved, if we be righteous.

There is none for the Ungodly and Sinner; i. e. for the profane contemner of
God and Religion, or for the wicked Liver. For however they may flatter
themselves with vain and presumptuous hopes, there is no more ground to think
that the righteous shall be saved, than that the ungodly and sinner shall not:
For both are alike made known by the same Word of God.

But what Comfort is it (may some say) to hear that the righteous are scarcely
saved, when we are so conscious to our selves of our own unrighteousness? If we
could think our selves righteous before God, there were some hopes, but we are
Sinners; and if we should deny or excuse it, we should be so much more so; what
hope can there be then for us?

To this I shall answer, and conclude.

(1.) The righteous here spoken of were once great Sinners; 1 Pet. 1. 14.
for St. Peter mentions their former lusts, 4. 3.
and working the will of the Gentiles in lasciviousness, lust, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries. Yet these are said, 1. 18,
19.
to be redeemed from their vain conversation by the precious blood of Christ;
1. 3, 4.
and to be begotten again to a lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, etc.

There is therefore, not merely a Possibility of being saved, but a just and
grounded Hope, if we renounce our former Sins, and become righteous, according
to the Terms of the Gospel; i. e. if we sincerely repent of our Sins, and turn
from them, and live the rest of our time, not to the Lusts of Men, 4. 2.
but to the Will of God. But if God had declared, that he expected from Mankind
an entire and perfect Righteousness without any Sin, it were all one, as to
publish a general and irreversible Decree of Damnation to all, Romans 3. 23.
for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. From whence the
Apostle well argues, that Men cannot save themselves: But God, of his infinite
Pity and Mercy toward the deplorable Condition of Mankind, has found out a
way to save them, by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom he has made
a propitiation for their sins. Although therefore as to our selves we have no
hopes, yet herein God has magnified his abundant Love toward Sinners, that
although they have sinned to a high degree, yet if they be so far wearied with
the burden of their Sins, as to take Christ's Yoke upon them, then he has
promised Ease and Rest to their Souls, which is the greatest Blessing in the
World, especially to Repenting Sinners.

But (some may again say) we have repented and sinned, and sinned and repented
again, and can hardly yet tell which will get the better at last; we cannot say
that we have entirely submitted our Necks to Christ's Yoke, for that requires a
great deal more than we can perform; how then can we be thought Righteous?

I answer therefore,

(2.) Where there is a sincere and honest endeavor to please God, and keep his
Commandments, although Persons fail in the manner of doing it, God will accept
of such as Righteous: But where they please themselves in their
Unrighteousness, and go on in it, hoping that God will accept some kind of
Repentance in stead of it; or, where there has been long struggling, and many
Acts of Repentance, and the Interest of Sin prevails; the Case of such is very
dangerous, but not desperate. For as long as there is hopes of a true
Repentance, there is of Salvation; and there is still hopes of Repentance where
Men's hearts are not hardened by an incorrigible Stiffness: For, according to the
best Measures we can take by the Rules of the Gospel, none are effectually
excluded from the hopes of Salvation, but such as exclude themselves by their
own Impenitency.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 24. line 22. dele is.


