THE TRIAL OF Assurance, Set forth in a SERMON Preached at Boston upon a
Lecture day July 7th. School.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of the Church in Northampton.

2 Pet. 1.10. Brethren give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold (...)

The TRIAL of Assurance.
John 21.17. -- Simon son of Jonas, love thou Me?


THE falls of the People of God (...) darken their sincerity: they are as (...)
Cloud covering their uprightness: th^^ do make their sincerity questionab^^
unto others: some that take notice of their fa^^ are ready to suspect, and
others are ready to de^^ their sincerity; standers by are apt to impu^^ their
falls to their Hypocrisy and the reignin^ power of sin; as if they had now
prove^ themselves to be Hypocrites. They are read^ to say of them, as David
said of Doeg, Lo the is the man that made not God his trust. And th^^ ^^^s make
their sincerity questionable to them^^^ves: if they have seen something of
upright^^ss in themselves before, now they fear, they ^^re mistaken: they think
if there had been ^^y Grace, that would have preserved them ^^^m falling: their
falls wound their Consciences ^^d disturb their Peace. They think if God ^^d
loved them, he would not have suffered ^^^m to fall into such sin: it seems to
them (...) be the fruit of Gods hatred: they are apt (...) think that their
sins have turned away the ^^^rt of God from them, and that he cannot ^ight in
them: they think moreover that if ^^^y had loved God, they could not have been
^^^wn to sin so against him. Satan is, wont to (...) prove their falls unto
their discouragement; ^^d raises such mists, that day is turned into night
(...) to them. Upon this occasion Christ puts this ^^estion to Peter: the
Disciples might be unsa^^fyed with him, because of his fall; and he ^^ight be
dissatisfyed with himself: but hereby christ is leading of him into the
Examination (...) his own sincerity. You may conceive Christ's ^^eaning thus:
Peter you have made a Profession many years: but in the time of my affliction,
^^ou shamefully denied me; you formerly professed ^^at you would dye with me,
before you would ^^ny me, but as soon as the Temptation came; ^^u presently
denied me: and as if it were ^^t enough to do it once, you did it a second and
a third time: and as if plain denying (...) not been enough, you did it with
Cursing (...) Swearing: is there any love in your heart u^^ me? you showed some
affection but now, (...) throwing your self into the Sea, but is it (...) love?
have I your heart? am I the object (...) your love? you professed more love
than other Disciples; but do you indeed love me?

DOCTRINE. If a man does not certainly know, that he performed one act of
Saving Grace, he can be certain of his Sincerity from his Walk.
The Trial of sincerity is a great and weight work. Ministers had need be
careful in giv^^ Rules of Trial; and People had need be care^^ in applying
Rules of Trial: the Doctrine (...) propounded to prevent mistakes in this mat^^
Godly men are described in the Scripture to (...) men, that walk in the law of
the Lord; men (...) walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit: but (...) is
impossible for any man to evidence his since^^ from hence; unless he certainly
knows that (...) has performed some act or acts of saving Gra^^ A man may have
a probable knowledge of (...) sincerity, though he do not certainly know (...)
he has performed any act of saving Grace: (...) this is all that he can attain
to by his walk (...) (...) do not know that he has performed any one (...) of
saving Grace. There be many acts of ^^ing Grace; as to believe in Christ, to
love ^^d and Christ, to hate sin, to make the Glory (...) God one's end: and if
a man don't certainly ^^ow any such thing by himself: he will never ^^^able
from his walk to prove himself to be ^^aint. If a thing shine like fire in the
night, (...) you cannot know it to be fire from thence; ^^ess you see in it
some property of fire. If a ^^^ng acts as if it had life, yet you cannot know
(...) thence, that it has life, unless you know ^^^e action to be a Vital
action. You cannot ^^ow that a man does miracles, unless you know ^^^e one
action to be miraculous: So here.

In order to the clearing of this, I shall first ^^^mise three things.

1. They that walk in a way of holiness are ^^cere: all that walk in a way of
obedience are (...) right. Walking in Gods ways is the Character (...) a Saint
Psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in (...) way, who walk in the law of the
Lord. An holy (...) is a certain sign of a holy heart. A life of obedience
shows a principal of Grace: they that live ^^ife of humility, love and faith
are real Saints; ^^y are such indeed as they do profess themselves (...) be:
though they have many infirmities and corruptions, yet they are sincere Saints.
An holy life ^^^ore than any Hypocrite can attain unto: he may counterfeit
Holiness and have the image (...) it; but falls utterly short of an holy life:
an ho^^ life is a life of sincerity and flows from a principle of sincerity:
other principles may make a ma^^ live a moral and religious life: Prudence,
Pri^^^ and slavish fear may produce much out ward co^^^ formity, and many
inward affections: but on^^ a principle of Grace can enable a man to live (...)
holy life: all that live holily are regenerate me^^ Ephesians. 2.10. Created in
Christ Jesus unto good wor^^ 2. They that walk in a way of unholiness a^^ not
sincere: they that lead an unholy life a^^ not upright: a principle of Grace
will keep (...) man from ways of sin. 1 John 3.9. He that (...) born of God,
does not commit sin, for his seed remain^^ in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of Go^^^ he has so much fear that he cannot live a life (...) sin, he
hates sin so that he cannot live a life (...) sin: Some that are sincere have a
less degree of sincerity than others; but the least degree (...) sincerity will
preserve a man from an unholy li^^ Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him
and I k^^^ my self from mine iniquity. An unholy life she (...) the reigning
power of sin. Joh. 8.34. He that co^^^ mitteth sin, is the servant of sin. They
that are se^^ing any Lust are not serving of the Lord: if m^^^ make great
pretensions of sincerity, yet lead unh^^^ lives, there is no sincerity in them:
if they ha^^^ great affections and hopes, yet they have no ^^^cerity; they
profess one thing and practice another. If men serve their Pride or their
Coveteousness, or their Voluptuousness, they are not sincere, ^^ey are utterly
destitute of a principle of Grace: (...) they have shows of Grace, yet they are
but Hy^^crites, and will be damned at the last day. Luke 13.27. Depart from me,
all ye workers of ^^iquity. 3. Many men seem to themselves to walk in a ^^ay of
Holiness, yet don't certainly know that ^^er they did perform an act of saving
grace; ^^ough all that make an high profession don't ^^em to themselves to lead
an holy life, yet a^^ndance of them do: they are conscientious of (...) their
ways, have many religious affections; ^^^urn for sin, rejoice in Sabbaths, are
thank^^^ for mercies; are afflicted under the Tokens (...) Gods Anger, are
desirous of the Conversion (...) others: it seems to them, that they live in
^^ne degree as Saints of old did: they think they ^^lk holily, yet many of
these persons don't cer^^^nly know that ever they did perform one act (...)
saving grace, several of them never did per^^m one act of saving grace,
therefore they can^^^ know that they have: and some that have ^^e it, are in
the dark about it; they are under ^^bts and uncertainties about it: the
Question (...) Whether such persons can know from their ^^lk, that they are
sincere. This the Doctrine ^^s deny, and it may thus be cleared up.
Argument 1. It is the acting of Grace tha^ makes and shows the Walk to be
holy: it is no^^ the orderliness of men's walk that shows it to be^^ holy; nor
the affectionateness of men's hearts i^^^ Religion, that shows their walk to be
holy; no^^ the long continuance of good carriages, nor (...) good behavior in
a day of temptation; nor (...) savoury spirit; these things may all be, yet the
(...) walk not be holy: if there be the acting of love (...) faith and
repentance, then the walk is holy: bu^^ all that men do is done in hypocrisy,
if there b^^ not the acting of grace: if there be no grace i^^ their prayers,
in their fastings, in their discourses, all is in hypocrisy: conscienciousness
don't prove their walk to be sincere: the young man in the Gospel was
conscientious: Mat. 19.20. all these things have I done from my youth. Zeal
don't prove it, a man may be zealous, yet not upright: Romans 10.2. they be the
actings of grace that make and show the walk to be holy; if it be not a life of
faith and love, it is not a holy life: Gal. 2.20. the life that I live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God: therefore he that don't know that
he has performed an act of grace, cannot know that he has an holy walk: he that
don't know that he has that which is the life of an holy walk, and essential to
it, cannot know that his walk is holy.

2. It is harder to know an holy walk than one act of grace: it is harder for
any man to discern that he leads an holy life, then that he performs a gracious
act: for an holy life does consist of many gracious actions; and it is harder
to discern that a man has done many, then that he has done one: it is harder to
find out many profitable herbs in the field than one; harder to discern many
trains of Wheat among the Chaff, than one: it is harder to find many Evidences
of a good Estate than one; to the discerning of many acts of trace, there is
required more observation and examination, then to the discerning of one act of
grace; if it be difficult to find one, it will be more difficult to find two,
ten, an hundred: therefore he that don't know that he has performed one act of
grace, does not know that he leads an holy life. I may allude to that, Jer.
12.5. if thou have run with the foot men and they have wearied thee, how will thou contend with horses.

3. If the holiness of men's actions cannot be discerned severally, it cannot be
discerned in conjunction: if a man looks upon his actions severally, and cannot
say that this or that or any one was an holy action; he cannot say concerning
any action, that it was an act of saving faith, or saving love; how can he when
he looks upon his carriages together, say they are holy, if there be no one
action that he can say is sincere; how can he say that his walk is sincere: if
a man sees an heap of corn, how can he say, it is an heap of wheat, when he
does not know, that there is one grain of wheat there: the sincerity of his
walk depends upon the sincerity of particular actions; and if that be hidden
from him, how can he say his walk is sincere: if for ought he knows every
prayer and duty be done in hypocrisy; then for ought he knows, his whole life
is a life of hypocrisy: if he can instance in no action that is certainly
otherwise, it may be so for ought that he knows; if he cannot answer to this
question. Joh. 21.17. Love thou me? or to that, Joh. 9.35. do thou believe
on the Son of God? or some such like; he cannot tell that he lives an holy
life: therefore such a man cannot prove his sincerity from his walk. No walk can
be evidential, but what is made up of acts of grace; therefore if he sees none,
he can have no evidence from his walk.

4. If there be no act of grace, there is no sincerity; therefore if he sees no
act of grace, he sees no sincerity; when there is no act of grace, there is no
principle of grace: though a man walk in print, yet there is no sincerity; many
carry themselves very fairly, but if there be no grace, there is no uprightness
in them, Joh. 5.42. I know you, that you have not the love of God in you; it is
all counterfeit walk: they are like men upon the Stage, that personate other
kind of men; so these men walk like Saints, and talk like Saints; but if there
be no act of grace, they are no Saints, they want that which does constitute a
Saint, therefore if a man do not know any act of grace in himself, he cannot
know himself to be a Saint, though he walk like an Angel.

5. The multiplication of such acts as are common to Saints and hypocrites,
don't show him to are sincere; prayer is common to Saints and hypocrites. Psalm.
78.34. When he slew them, then they tought him, they returned and enquired
early after God; therefore if a man do this a thousand times, it don't prove
him to be a Saint; so morality is common to Saints and hypocrites. Mat. 19.20.
and if a man carries morally, twenty years together, it don't show him to be a
Saint; so zeal, so delight in Sabbaths; if an hypocrite may do these things,
then the multiplication of them, and walking in such a way is no evidence; that
which is common, let it be multiplied never so often, don't become saving:
multiply ciphers, and they make no number: therefore there can be no evidence
of a good estate from a man's walk, unless he knew some act of grace; if he
cannot discern some act of saving grace, he must be at a loss about his
sincerity.

USE I.
See the reason why many Professors are unsatisfied about their sincerity;
though they have a pretty good conversation, are conscientious, affectionate,
zealous, yet they are full of fears, they are often perplexed, and don't know
what to make of themselves; it seems to them that their walk is pretty much
according to rule, but they do not know that ever they did perform any act of
saving grace; they cannot answer to such questions, Love thou me? Joh. 21.17.
Or do th^^ believe on the Son of God? Joh. 9.35. this does create a deal of
perplexity to them; and they are afraid what will become of themselves, after
al^ their profession. And there are three sorts o^ them.

1. Some Professors never did see any act o^ grace in themselves; they never
had any: and therefore could not see any: they have had affection, but no love;
sorrow, but not godly sorrow encouragement, but no faith. There be many
Professors that are utterly destitute of gracious carriages, they have the
resemblance of them, bu^ they never had any exercise of grace; they are
spiritually dead, and never did perform any act o^ spiritual life; thus it was
with Saul, Doeg, Achitophel, Judas and Demas, they were only the picture^ of
Saints, and imitated the actions of Spiritual Life, but did not perform them;
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, men cannot gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles: Mat. 7.16, 18 they cannot see acts of grace: men cannot see
that which is not. 2. Some Professors never did certainly know that they have
performed any act of saving grace they have discovered the workings of grace
some times in themselves, but not so plainly, as to be able to speak roundly up
to it, as Peter did, Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love
thee? Joh. 21.17. they understand that there is a great deal that does resemble
grace, that is not grace; and so they doubt whether it be of the right kind:
they know that there is a temporary faith, Luke 8.13. some believe for a time,
and then fall away; and there may be strong desires and delight, where there is
no sincere love; here may be great pangs of affection, without any uprightness,
and the acts of grace were not so clear, as some others do speak of, hence they
are not fully satisfied; as when one sees a man at a great distance, he is at
some loss whether it be a man. 3. Some have certainly seen the workings of
grace, but through temptations since, they have lost the certainty of that
knowledge; at the time they knew they did believe in Christ, and that they
loved God, and could say as David, Psalm 116.1. I love the Lord; and as, Psalm.
46.1. The Lord is my strength and refuge: but afterward they have not so full
and clear a remembrance of it: and God brings them into affliction, and
unbelief prevails, and now they are suspicious that they were mistaken;
besides, God don't hear their prayers, they have sought him many a time for
such and such a mercy, and he has denied them at last: besides, they find a
dead heart, corruption strong, and have had no such plain working of Grace a
pretty while, accordingly they are full of fears whether they are not mistaken:
they say, if there were no deceit in it, how comes it to be so and so with me?
USE. II.
Others cannot be certain of a man's sincerity from his Conversation: if others
see men carry well, they presently say, they are good men (...) but they don't
know it from thence; there i^ indeed ground enough for Charity; but not for
Assurance: for whatever men's Conversation be if they don't see the actings of
Grace, they can not be assured that the man is a Godly man. It is not good to
depend upon the judgment o^ others, for they do not know, whether a man be
sincere or not. All the external acts of Charity, Piety, Justice and Sobriety,
may be performed by a man that has no Grace; Prudence and Conscience may
produce them all: and one that has no Grace may carry as well in the eye of the
world, as he that has it. Peter does but suppose Silvanus to be faithful. 1
Pet. 5.12.

Consider 1. The inward actings of Grace are invisible to others. A man may
look into his own heart, and see the actings and workings that are there; but
he cannot look into the hearts of others; men cannot tell what actings there be
^n their understandings and wills: men cannot ^ee when they act, nor what they
act, nor what they act upon; nor how they act: men cannot ^ell whether they
choose or refuse. Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, who can
know it?

2. Men cannot by words or actions make the actings of grace so visible to
others, that they can distinguish them: if a man talk graciously and walk
graciously, he cannot make another certain that he does so: another that sees
the external action, cannot certainly distinguish it from a formal action; if he
satisfy another, yet he cannot assure another, that it is (...) gracious action:
a man may speak like an Angel, yet not have charity; he may give all his goods
to feed the poor; and his body to be buried, and yet not have charity, 1 Cor.
3.1, 2, 13.

USE III.
Of Warning, That you be not confident of your sincerity from your walk,
without the certain knowledge that you have performed any act of saving grace:
some men will be confident that they are in a good estate, though they do not
know that ever they believed in Christ, or have exercised any true love to God:
all that they have to say for themselves is, that they have a conscientious ca^
to do their duty, and are many times affected i^ a religious way, and hope,
they do trust in Christ and make the glory of God their end; and the find
affection to the people of God: but this yo^ may be sure of, you cannot conclude
your sincerit^ from your walk, unless you know that you have performed some act
or acts of saving grace: (...) you do know that, then you have reason to
conclude your walk to be holy: where there is on act of saving grace, there
will be more: there (...) the principle, but without this you cannot conclude
it.

Consider 1. If you be sincere, this confidence (...) mere flattery; good men
sometimes think the are good upon such foundations as will not hold as because
God does the things that they have prayed for; because he smiles upon then in
his Providence; because others think they ar^ Saints: so this is one way of
flattery: if you be upon right, yet you cannot tell it from your walk, if you do
not know that you exercise grace: for ought any thing that you know, your life
is a life o^ hypocrisy: men may do all that you know you do, and yet be
hypocrites; your walk cannot be evidential to you, if you do not see the acts o^
grace, your confidence is presumption; men must go upon a sure bottom, 2 Cor.
13.5. Examin^^ your selves, prove your own selves; and this flattering and ^eep
that you are fallen into does you much hurt: his makes you neglect a good
confidence, and ^xposes you to live a careless life, without any ^^eat matter
of the life of religion.

2. If you be not sincere, it may prove your ^hine; some men that take notice
of their con^cientiousness do conclude themselves godly, ^hen they are ungodly:
and fall short of a principle of grace: they are destitute of faith and ^^ve,
Joh. 5.42. I know you, that you have not the ^^ve of God in you: but because
they imagine that ^hey are sincere, they rest in their present seize,
Joh. 9.41. because you say we see, therefore ^our sin remains: when they are
stirred up to ^et sincerity, they hope they have it already, they ^ope others
will take the warning, and that their children will hearken, but they think
themselves ^re out of danger: counsels and warnings are ^ost upon them, they
bless themselves in their present estate, they think their disease is cured,
and so give over the use of means; they think ^hey are provided for Eternity,
and so they are ^t rest: they are under some endeavors to get ^nore knowledge
and more grace, but not to be Converted: hence this work is neglected; when
once they have taken up such a conceit that they ^re godly, they have got their
deaths wound, if ^nercy do not prevent: they live carelessly, and when they come
to dye, they will be shut out of the Kingdom of God: there will be no roo^^ for
them in heaven, Mat. 25.12. Depart from in^^ I know you not. Isa. 50.11. all
you that kindle a fi^^ and compass your selves about with sparks; walk (...)
the light of your fire, and in the sparks which you ha^^ kindled, this shall ye
have of mine hand, ye shall down in sorrow.

USE IV.
Of Direction: To Saints how to get the knowledge of your sincerity; by getting
such visib^^ actings of grace, that you may know them ce^^tainly to be the acts
of saving grace: it is a gre^^ exercise to some Saints, whether they be since^^
Saints, they labor in it for many years; and o^^ Minister gives signs, and
they try themselves (...) them, and another gives signs, and they try
themselves by them; and sometimes they think the see the signs of Saints, and
sometimes the sign of hypocrites: and they don't know what (...) make of
themselves: the best way is to get su^ exercise of grace, that you may know it
to (...) grace; don't let grace lie in a withering condi^^ on: let it flourish,
that it may act visibly: the you may certainly know it: your walk without this,
will never clear up your good condition.

Consider. 1. There is good use of sign provided they be true signs warranted
by ^^ght interpretation of the Scripture; though ^^any signs that men give are
very fallible: it if the signs be good, there is very good ^e to be made of
them; though a man may ^k signs of signs endlessly; yet they are of ^^od
advantage to beget a probable knowledge (...) a man's good estate; many persons
are in^uraged and supported by them. 1 John 3.14. ^^ereby we know that we are
passed from death (...) life, because we love the brethren: and they ^e a
further confirmation to those that have ^^d Assurances of their sincerity: when
they ^^d Scripture signs falling in with those evidences, which they have
formerly received, they ^^e further established thereby.

2. But the visible actings of Grace will ^^isfy all sorts of Christians. We
may distinguish Christians into two sorts; some are persons (...) great
understanding and knowledge, they ^^ve a deep insight into those ways of deceit
^^d hypocrisy that the heart is subject to: ^^d they are apt to be puzzled with
questions ^^d doubts, that fly over the heads of others; ^^ey are afraid of
such deceits as other men ^^n't suspect: but when they have plain visible
^^^rkings of Grace, that they know to be Grace, ^^is fully satisfyes them: Thou
know that I ^^e thee. Joh. 21.17. Others are weak and ignorant and cannot
give many signs of true Grace, nor distinctly take them up, when they are laid
down: yet when they plainly see the visible actings of saving Grace, the thing
is pu^ beyond question. A weak woman is as we^ satisfied that she loves her
child as the wisef^ man in the land, though she cannot make a larg^ discourse
upon it, nor prove it by infallible sign^ because she seels her love: so it is
in this case.

3. Though the visible actings of Grace may be counterfeited, yet they that
have them, may know that they have them. There is nothing but may be
counterfeited, men may counterfeit themselves to be great men and holy men:
Gol^ and Silver, and Jewels may be counterfeited So these visible actings of
Grace; men may have very strong affections; where there is no love or godly
sorrow. Matt. 8.19. Master I will follow thee whither soever thou go. 1 Samuel
24. 16. Saul lift up his voice and wept. Men may say Hosanna to day, and
Crucify to morrow Yet those that have the visible acting of Grace know it. He
that dreams thinks he is awake, but he that is awake, knows he is awake: though
there be counterfeits, yet the ^^ible actings may be known at the time.

4. If men have such visible actings of Grace but now and then, they will be of
great use to them as long as they live: though they may be after that Exposed
to great Temptations, yet these actings of Grace that they have ^een, will be
stay to them: they will wor^ an abiding hope in the heart; they will often have
occasion to call to mind the years of the right hand of the most high, and
their Song in the night. If a man should live many year after, he will not
forget this. Psalm. 63.2. That I may see thy power and glory, so as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary. If he has great Temptations from deadness and from Gods
with drawings; this will come to mind, and so he will have hope: and the more
such acts are repeated, the more advantage he is under to have a settled
Assurance of his sincerity.

FINIS.

