The Right Reverend EDW: STILLINGFLEET D.D. Lord Bishop of Worcester.


TEN SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions.

By the Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Second VOLUME.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. ACTS XXIV.14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets. Page 1 SERMON II. St. Matthew.
VII.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their Fruits. p.
59 SERMON III. Heb. III.13. -- Lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. p. 121 SERMON IV. 1 Samuel XII.24, 25. Only fear the Lord,
and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he
has done for you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed,
both ye and your King. p. 174 SERMON V. Matthew. X.16. Be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. p. 238 SERMON VI. Phil. III.16. Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the
same things. p. 302 SERMON VII. Gal. VI.9. And let us not be weary in
well-doing; for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. p. 375 SERMON
VIII. Coloss. II.23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship,
and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying
of the flesh. p. 429 SERMON IX. Job XXIII.15. When I consider, I am afraid of
him. p. 484 SERMON X. 1 Timothy V.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. p. 530
Advertisement.
THERE is a Third Volume preparing for the Press.

SERMON I. THE Reformation Justified: Preached at GUILD HALL CHAPEL September.
21. 1673.
ACTS XXIV.14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets.


IN the Beginning of this Chapter we find St. Paul brought to his Trial before
Felix the Roman Governor, wherein (if we only except the unfitness of the
Judge) all other things concurred, which could make such an action
considerable, viz. the greatness of the cause, the quality of the persons, and
the skill which was showed in the management of it. The cause was not common
and ordinary, such as were wont to be tried before the Governors of Provinces,
but of an unusual and public nature; Act 18.15.
not a question of words and names, as Gallio thought it, but a matter of the
highest importance to the World: which being managed by St. Paul, with that
zeal and industry, which was agreeable to it, gave occasion to his malicious
Countrymen to accuse him before the Roman Governor, as one guilty of Faction
and Sedition. Under this color, they hoped easily to gain the Governor's good
will to their design; being a person that more regarded the quiet of his
Province, than all the concernments of Truth and Religion. But that this design
might be carried on with the greater pomp and show of Justice and Piety, they
do not commit the care of it to the rage of the People, or some furious
Zealots; but the High Priest and some members of the Sanhedrin go down on
purpose from Jerusalem to Caesarea, Ver. 1.
and carry with them one of their most eloquent Advocates called Tertullus to
manage the Accusation against Paul. Who was no sooner called forth, but the
Orator begins to show his art, by a flattering insinuation, which is most apt
to prevail with men of mean and corrupt minds; Seeing that by thee, says he,
Ver. 2, 3.
we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation
by thy providence; we accept it always and in all places, most noble Felix,
with all thankfulness: Having thus prepared his Judge, he presently falls upon
the matter, Ver. 5, 6.
and charges St. Paul with being a pestilent and seditious person, a disturber
of his Nation in all parts, a prophaner of the Temple; but the main point of
all, and in which the rest were comprehended, was, that he was a ringleader of
the Sect of the Nazarenes. (So the Christians were then called among the Jews,
from our Savior's abode in the Town of Nazareth.) But although the Writer of
this History gives us only the short heads of his accusation; yet we may easily
suppose by St. Paul's answer, that he insisted more largely on this, than on
any of the rest: representing to Felix, That when the Jewish Church had been at
first established by God himself under Laws of his own making, when he had so
settled the several orders and degrees of men among them, M^l 2.7.
that the Priests lips were to preserve knowledge, and the Law to be sought at
their mouths; when under this Government, their Religion had been preserved for
many hundreds of years, and after many Revolutions they enjoyed one common and
public Worship among them, though there were several distinct Orders of
Religious men (such as the Pharisees and Essenes) yet all agreed in the same
Divine Worship; but now at last, to their great regret and horror, appears one
Jesus of Nazareth, a person of obscure Parentage and mean Education, who
pretended to discover many corruptions in the Doctrine and Practices of our
best men; and without any Authority from the High Priest or Sanhedrin he
gathered Disciples, and drew multitudes of people after him; till at last the
wisdom of our Governors thought it sit to take him off, and make him an
example for Reformers; notwithstanding this, his bold and forward Disciples
after his death carried on the same design, pretending that the time of
Reformation was come; Heb. 9 10.
and accordingly have formed themselves into a Sect, v^gorous and active, of
high pretenses, and dangerous designs, which if it continues and increases, can
end in nothing short of the ruin of our ancient Jewish Catholic Church: which
has had so constant and visible a Succession in all Ages; that has had so
many Martyrs and Confessors in it* so many Devout and Religious Persons as the
Pharisees are; so excellent an Order and Government, so much unity and peace
before this new Sect of Nazarenes arose in opposition to that Authority with
which God had invested the High Priest and Rulers of the People. And among all
the promoters of this new Sect, there is none more factious and busy than this
Paul whom we here accuse; and whom some of our Nation found in the Temple
profaning of it, and there we would presently, out of mere zeal to our
Religion, have taken and destroyed; but he was violently rescued out of our
hands, and sent hither to be tried; and these things, which I have spoken, is
the sense of all those who are come down as witnesses; for so we read, v. 9.
And the Jews also assented, and said, that these things were so. St. Paul being
thus accused, and having leave given him to answer for himself, was so far from
being daunted by the greatness of his enemies, Ver. 10.
or the vehemence of their accusation, that he tells the Governor, that he did
with all cheerfulness undertake his defense: and there being two parts of his
accusation, 1. His tumultuous and profane carriage in the Temple; this he
utterly denies, v. 11, 12, 1^. and plainly tells them, they can never prove it
against him. 2. But as to the other and main part of the Charge, his being a
ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes; although he would not, out of his
great modesty, take upon himself to be one of the Heads or Chiefs among them,
yet as to the owning of that way, notwithstanding all the imputations they had
cast upon it, he does it with the greatest freedom and courage in the presence
of his Judge and Accusers; and not only so, but defends himself therein, that
he had done nothing contrary to the Laws of God, or the most ancient Religion
of his Country: all which particulars are contained in the words of the Text;
But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets.

Wherein we have these three things considerable.

1. The Imputation which Christianity suffered under in its first appearance:
After the way, which they call heresy.

2. The Way taken by St. Paul to remove this false Imputation; viz. by appeal
to Scripture and Antiquity; So worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all
things that are written in the Law and the Prophets.

3. The Courage of St. Paul in so freely owning his Religion in the presence of
his greatest enemies, and when they were in hopes to destroy him for it: This I
confess unto thee, that after the way, etc.

1. I begin with the false Imputation which Christianity suffered under at its
first appearance; After the way, which is called heresy; the same Word which
is translated Sect, v. 5. and although the Word be indifferent in it self, yet
where it is taken for a combination of men together against an established
Religion and lawful Authority (as it was by the Jews when they charged the
Christians under this name) then it implies in it a twofold accusation: 1. Of
Novelty and Singularity. 2. Of Faction and Sedition.

1. Of Novelty. A Sect or Heresy in this sense implies in it, men's setting up
with a new Doctrine which was not heard of before; and making that the
Foundation of a new Society separate and distinct from the established Church,
and consequently they must charge the Church they are divided from with errors
and corruptions, or they make themselves guilty of Schism, i. e. unnecessary
separation. Now upon these two grounds the Jews laid the imputation of a New
Sect upon the Nazarenes or Christians, 1. Because they could not show a visible
succession in all Ages: 2. Because they could not prove the Jewish Church to be
guilty of such errors and corruptions as to need a Reformation.

1. They could not show a Succession in all Ages of such persons who agreed in
all things with them. For where (say they) were the men to be found in former
Ages, that taxed the Jewish Church with such errors and corruptions as Jesus of
Nazareth did? that bid men beware of the leven of the Scribes and Pharisees, i.
e. of the most learned and holy men? Had not God always a Visible Church among
them? they could produce the names of their High Priests in every Age, and show
them all the marks of a Visible Church? For in Judah was God known, Psalm. 76.1.
Deuteronomy. 12 11.
and his Name was great in Israel. Has not God said, that in his House at
Jerusalem he would put his Name for ever; 2 Kings 21.7. 2 Chronicles. 7.16.
and his eyes and his heart should be there perpetually? How is it then
possible but there must be a constant and visible Succession in all Ages? since
God would always have a people to dwell among; and that might be known to be
his people by the outward marks and signs of a true Church. But if the
Christians pretenses held good, God must for several Ages have wanted a Church
amongst them. For none of those things which they charged the Jews with, were
newly crept in among them, but had been delivered down to them by the Tradition
of their Forefathers, in an uninterrupted manner, as they thought, from the
very time of Moses. This was their Rule whereby they guided themselves in their
actions of Religion, and in the sense of obscure places of the Law and the
Prophets; and in that time after the cessation of Prophecy, when the Christians
supposed these corruptions to have come in among them, they could draw down a
constant Succession from the men of the great Synagogue, of persons eminent for
Learning and Piety that never charged them with any such corruptions as Jesus
of Nazareth and his Disciples did. Would God ever suffer such dangerous errors,
hypocrisy, and superstitions to prevail in his own Church, and raise up no
Persons to discover these things, till these new Teachers and Reformers arose?
Were not Hillel and Shammai that so accurately discussed all the niceties of
the Law, able to find out such gross and open corruptions, if any such had been
among us? Might not we say, that not only the Teachers, V. Bell. de not.
Eccles. l. 4. c. 5.. praeterea.
but God himself had slept all that time, if he raised up no one Person to
discover the coming in of such errors and corruptions? Where had God then any
true Church in the world, if not among his people of the Jews? And would he
suffer that to be overspread with such a Leprosy, and send none of his Priests
to discover it? And even by the confession of the Christians themselves, they
were once the beloved and chosen people of God, how or when was it that they
ceased to be so? Do not themselves acknowledge, that they receive the Law and
the Prophets from our hands? Romans 3.2.
And that to us were committed the Oracles of God, and to us pertained the
adoption, 9.4, 5.
and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service
of God and the promises, and that ours are the Fathers? How is it then possible
after all these privileges, to suppose this Church to fall into such a
degeneracy, as at last to be cast off by God, and a new Church to arise out of
the ashes of it? Thus we may reasonably suppose the Jews to have argued for
themselves; and on the other side, they trampled upon and despised this new
Sect of the Nazarenes, That had nothing of the Pomp and Splendor of their
Church: they had only a company of mean and illiterate persons at first to join
with them; the Disciples of their Master were a sort of poor Fishermen and
inconsiderable persons, men of no Authority, or reputation for extraordinary
Sanctity or Learning: even their Master himself was one of no great severity of
life, that did not retire from the world, and lead an abstracted life, but
conversed with Publicans and Sinners, and put not his Disciples upon Fasting
and long Prayers; whereas the Pharisees were men of great austerity and
mortification, much exercised in devotion, making frequent and long prayers, at
certain hours; and in whatever place those hours took them. Now how is it
possible to believe, that such devout persons as these are mistaken, and the
Sect of the Nazarenes only in the right? But besides all this, Where was their
Church before Jesus of Nazareth? We offer to produce a personal succession on
our side, that joined in constant communion with us at the Temple at
Jerusalem; let the Christians show any number of men before themselves, that
joined with them in believing what they do, and rejecting the abuses which they
tax among us. If they cannot do this, let them then suffer under the just
imputation of Novelty.

2. But supposing they do not think it necessary to assign a number of men
distinct from our Society, but say it is enough that though they joined with
them in the worship of God, yet they did not in their corruptions: yet to
vindicate themselves, they must show how it was possible for such corruptions
to come in, and no more notice be taken of them: Such things could not be
introduced without some notable alteration; and in such a one, the author, the
time, the place, the manner may be assigned: We can tell, say they, all these
circumstances in the Idolatries of Jeroboam, Ahab, and Manasseh; if so great
alterations have happened in the state of our Church, that there is a necessity
of reforming it; name us the persons, the time, the place, the manner how all
these corruptions came in. When came men first to forsake the letter of the
Scripture, and adhere to Tradition? Who first brought in the Pharisaical
Superstitions? What was his name, where was his abode, who first opposed and
condemned him? Were all men asleep then to suffer such alterations, and to say
nothing at all against them? What, could one Generation conspire to deceive the
next? and if not, how could such changes happen in matters of Religion, and no
one take care to discover it and prevent the infecting of posterity by it? Had
no persons any regard to God and the purity of Religion then? If they had,
would they suffer strange fire to come upon God's Altar, and take no notice at
all of it? Why did not Jesus of Nazareth, when he so frequently and vehemently
declaimed against the Pharisaical hypocrisy and superstitions, and false
Doctrines, show to the people, when, and where, and how these things came into
the Church of God? He only condemns them, and speaks sharply against them, but
he says not one word to satisfy the Scientifical men among them, how it was
possible for corruptions to come in, and prevail to such a degree, and yet no
circumstances of time or place be assignable of it. Thus the Jews still
believed themselves to be the only true, ancient, visible, Catholic and
infallible Church of God, and despised the poor Christians, as a novel and
upstart Sect of Nazarenes; which is the first imputation the Christians
suffered under.

2. They suffered under the imputation of Faction and Sedition; which is the
second thing employed in the name of Sect or Heresy here mentioned; and that
they charged upon them two ways. 1. For not submitting to the Churches
Authority. 2. For disturbing the peace and quiet of the People.

1. For not submitting to the Churches Authority: not, that the Disciples of
our Lord did out of humor, or fancy, or only to make a party, break with the
Jews in matters merely of order and indifferency: no, on the contrary we find
them extremely cautious of giving any offense in such matters, which temper
they learnt of their Lord and Master, who complied with many things, that
others might not take advantage by his omission of them, to slight and contemn
them; Mat. 3.15.
thus when others were baptized of John, he would be so too; not, that he had
any need of washing away of sin: but he would not make use of a particular
privilege to bring any discountenance upon a general duty. Thus we see, he went
up at the solemn Feasts to Jerusalem as others did; and not only was present
in the Temple, but vindicated by a Miracle the order and decency of i^, by
driving out the buyers and sellers from the outward parts of it, although they
had a fair pretense of being ready at hand to serve the necessities of such as
were to sacrifice to God in the Temple; Mat. 21.12.
nay, St. Mark tells us, that he would not suffer any vessel to be carried
through the Temple: Mar. 11.16.
and this he did not upon any reason peculiar to the Levitical Law, but because
it was a House of Prayer. And this example his Apostles followed, who after
they had the Holy Ghost poured upon them, yet they attended the Temple at the
hours of prayer. Acts 3.1.
But most remarkable to this purpose, is the instance of St. Paul at that very
time when he was seized upon, and like to be destroyed by the fury of the Jews.
For understanding at Jerusalem from St. James, Acts ^1.20, 21.
that there were many thousands of believing Jews that were still zealous of
the Law, and were informed that St. Paul among the Gentiles slighted
Circumcision and the Levitical Customs; he, to give them all reasonable
satisfaction that he intended to make no unnecessary breach among them about
indifferent matters, submits himself to a legal purification in the Temple for
seven days together; Ver. 7
before the end of which, the Jews made a tumult and seized upon him, and so he
was brought to answer the accusations against him in this Chapter. Thus
careful St. Paul was to give no ground for suspicion that he delighted in
disorders and separations; this example he did leave to all prudent Christians,
rather to submit to things which they have no great value for (as no doubt at
this time St. Paul had very little for the Levitical Customs) than to hazard
the breaking the peace of the Church for such matters. But notwithstanding all
this care of the first Christians, they could not avoid the imputation of
Faction; because they would not entirely submit their judgments to the
Authority of the Jewish Church. For this was the great pretense they stood
upon, that they were the Governors of the Church by God's own institution,
that they were to explain and interpret the Law and the Prophets; and this was
expressed in the beginning of their Law, That in all cases of difficulty they
were to go up to the place which the Lord their God should choose; Deuteronomy. 17.8,
9, 10, 11, 12.
and to go to the Priests, and the Levites, and to the Judge, and they shall
show thee the sentence of judgment. And thou shall do according to the sentence
which they of that place (which the Lord shall choose) shall show thee, and thou
shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee; and the man that
will do presumptuously, and will not hearken to the Priest, (that stands to
minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall
die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. Upon this place, they might
certainly much better establish the infallibility of their own Church, than
others draw an argument for Infallibility in the Christian Church from it.
However, absolute obedience would serve their turn, to charge the Christians
with Faction, in not submitting to their Authority. For, was not this a matter
of difficulty, whether the Messiah were to be a temporal Prince or not?
concerning what time, and place, and person the Prophecies were to be
understood? Who were the competent Judges in this case, but those whom God had
established by his Law? If the Scribes and Pharisees were charged with false
glosses, and corrupting the Law by their Traditions, the Christians were not to
take upon themselves to judge of them; but to appeal to the High Priest and the
Sanhedrin, who were the only lawful Judges in these matters: Their duty was
submission and patience; but by no means ought they upon their own Authority to
begin a new Church, and to broach new Doctrines directly contrary to the
judgment of the High Priest and Sanhedrin* yea, after they had pronounced
Sentence against Jesus of Nazareth, and condemned him to death; and
excommunicated his followers, and punished as many as they could get into their
power; what could it (in their opinion) be but the Spirit of Faction and
Disobedience thus to oppose the Authority of their Church, in believing
contrary to its decrees, and reforming without any power derived from it? We
see in our Savior's time how severely they checked any of the people who spoke
favorably of Christ and his Doctrine; as though the poor ignorant people were
fit to judge of these matters! to understand Prophesies, and to know the true
Messiah, when he should appear! And therefore when some of their Officers that
had been sent to apprehend him, came back with admiration of him, and said,
Never man spoke like this man; they take them up short and tell them, They must
believe as the Church believes; what, they take upon them to judge of such
matters! No, they must submit to their Governors. Joh. 7.46, 47, 48, 49.
Have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believed on him? but this people which
know not the Law are cursed. i. e. When they set up their own judgment in
opposition to the Authority of the Church. And after our Savior's death at a
solemn Council at Jerusalem, when Peter and John were summoned before them;
the first Question they asked was, By what power, or by what name have ye done
this? Acts 4.7.
They never enquired, whether the Miracle were wrought or no, or whether their
Doctrine were true; all their Question was about their Mission, whether it were
ordinary or extraordinary; or what authority they could pretend to, that were
not sent by themselves; but let the things be never so true, which they said,
if they could find any flaw in their Mission according to their own Rules and
Laws, this they thought sufficient ground to forbid them to preach any more,
and to charge them with Faction if they disobeyed.

2. They charged the Christians with Faction in being so active and busy to
promote Christianity to the great disturbance of the Jews in all parts. This
Tertullus accused St. Paul of, Ver 5.
that he was a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world; and
accordingly the Jews at Thessalonica take the Christians by force and carry
them to the Rulers of the City, crying, Acts 17.6.
Those that have turned the world upside down are come hither also. This they
knew was the most effectual course to render them odious to all Governors, who
are apt to suspect all new things as dangerous, and think no truth can
compensate the hazard of alterations. Thus it was especially among the Roman
Governors, who had learnt from the counsel given to Augustus, to be
particularly jealous of all innovations in Religion; and had much rather the
people should continue quiet under an old error, than have the peace disturbed
for the greatest Truth. This was really the greatest difficulty in the way of
Christianity; it came no where, but people were possessed beforehand with quite
other apprehensions of Religion, than the Christians brought among them. The
Jewish and Pagan Religions were in possession in all places, and the people
were at ease in the practice of them. What then must the Christians ^o? Must
they let them a^one and not endeavor to convince them of the truth of their
own Doctrine? If so, they are unfaithful to their trust, betrayers of truth,
and false to the Souls of men: if they go about to persuade men out of their
Religion, they know, such is the fondness most men have for their own opinions,
especially in Religion, that where they might hope to convince one, they might
be sure to enrage many; especially of those whose interest lay in upholding the
old Religion. How little does Reason signify with most men, where Interest is
against it! Truth and Falsehood are odd kind of Metaphysical things to them,
which they do not care to trouble their heads with; but what makes for or
against their Interest, is thought easy and substantial. All other matters
are, as Gallio said, questions of names and words, which they care not for; but
no men will sooner offer to demonstrate a thing to be false, than they who know
it to be against their interest to believe it to be true. This was the case of
these great men of the Jews that came down to accuse Paul; they easily saw
whither this new Religion tended, and if it prevailed among their people,
farewell then to all the Pomp and Splendour of the High Priesthood at
Jerusalem; farewell then to the Glory of the Temple and City whither all the
Tribes came up to worship thrice a year; farewell then to all the riches, and
ease, and pleasure which they enjoyed: And what was the greatest Truth and best
Religion in the World to them, in comparison with these? These were sufficient
reasons to them to accuse Truth it self of deceiving men, and the most
peaceable Doctrine of laying the Foundation of Faction and Sedition. Thus we
have considered the false imputations which were cast upon Christianity at
first, employed in these words, After the way which is called Heresy.

2. I now come to the way taken by St. Paul to remove these false imputations,
which he does,

1. By an appeal to Scripture, as the ground and rule of his faith, Believing
all things which are written in the law and the Prophets.

2. By an appeal to the best and purest Antiquity, as to the object of Worship;
So worship I the God of my Fathers, not bringing in any new Religion, but
restoring it to its primitive purity.

1. By an appeal to Scripture as the ground and rule of his faith. The Jews
pleaded Possession, Tradition, Authority of the present Church: against all
these, St. Paul fixes upon a certain and unmovable Foundation, the Law and the
Prophets. He does not here insist upon any particular revelation made to
himself, but offers the whole matter in dispute to be tried by a common Rule
that was allowed on both sides. And his meaning is, if they could prove that he
either asserted, or did any thing contrary to the Law and the Prophets, then
they had some reason to accuse him of innovation, or beginning of a new Sect;
but if the foundation of his doctrine and practice lay in what themselves
acknowledged to be from God, then they had no cause to charge him with
introducing a new Sect among them.

But the great Question here is, What ground St. Paul had to decline the
Authority of the present Church? Since God himself had appointed the Priests to
be the Interpreters of the Law; and therefore in doubtful cases resort was to
be made to them; and not the judgment left to particular persons about the
sense of Scripture: And yet in this case it is apparent St. Paul declined all
Authority of the present Church; for at that very time the Highpriests and
Elders came down to accuse him, and he takes not the least notice of their
judgment in this matter. I shall therefore now show that St. Paul had very
great reason so to do, and to appeal only to Scripture.

1. Because the Authority of the present Church was more liable to error and
mistake, than the Rule of Scripture was.

2. Because it was liable to more partiality, than that was.

1. Because it was more liable to error and mistake, than the Rule of Scripture
was. It was agreed on both sides, that the Law was from God, and that the
Prophets spoke by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; all that was now left was
only to find out the true meaning of them, and to compare Prophecies with
events. As in the case of the Messiah, if the circumstances foretold by the
Prophets had their exact accomplishment in Christ, as might appear to those who
carefully compared them; If he were born at Bethlehem, of the Tribe of Judah,
when the Scepter was departed from it, and during the second Temple, and all
other circumstances agreeing; then though the ordinary judgment concerning true
Prophets belonged to the Sanhedrin, yet it was far more reasonable to believe
that they were mistaken, than that all the Prophecies should be accomplished in
a person that was not the true Messiah. For those Prophecies were not intended
only for the Priests and Rulers, but for directions to the People, that they
might be able to judge of the accomplishment of them: otherwise when the
Authority of the Jewish Church condemned our Savior, the People could have no
reason to believe him to be the Messiah; if they were bound in the sense of
Scripture to submit their judgment wholly to the ^hurches Authority. It is
plain then, that the sense of Scripture may be so evident to private
capacities, that they are not to submit in it to the present Authority of a
Church. For notwithstanding all the promises made to the Jewish Church, and the
command of submitting to the sentence of their Priests and Rulers, in a matter
of the highest concernment, viz. concerning the true Messiah, men were bound to
believe directly contrary to the present Authority in the Church. For the
people were bound to believe Christ to be the true Messiah; although the High
Priests and Elders had condemned him for a deceiver and malefactor. But besides
this particular case, there may be several others wherein men may lawfully
reject the authority of the present Church; and those are, when that Authority
shall go about to overthrow those things which must be supposed antecedent to
the belief of any such Authority: as, 1. The common sense of mankind. 2. The
force of a divine Law. 3. The liberty of judgment concerning truth and
falsehood. All these must necessarily be supposed before any Authority of a
Church; but if any Church goes about to overthrow these, it thereby forfeits
its own Authority over men.

1. If it requires things contrary to common sense; as in that instance wherein
some of the Jewish Rabbis required submission to their Authority, viz. in
believing the right hand to be the left, or the left to be the right, if they
determined so; or supposing the Jews to have required the people to deny that
they ever saw any Miracle wrought by Christ; or in the Miracle of the Loaves,
that what they saw and handled, and tasted, to be bread was true bread; or to
say, that the same individual body might be in a thousand places at once, or
that things whose nature it is to be in another, can subsist without their
proper subject; what Church soever requires such things as these from its
members to be believed, gives them just reason to reject its Authority.

2. If it requires things contrary to the force and reason of a divine Law: as
the Jews themselves would have acknowledged, if any Authority among them had
gone about either to have left out the second Commandment, or made it lawful
to give Religious worship to Images, under any distinctions whatsoever: or if
the Priests had taken away from the people their share in the sacrifices, under
pretense of the unsanctified teeth, or the long beards of the Laity, which were
not fit to touch what had been offered in sacrifice to God. But we need not put
cases among them, for our Savior therefore bids men have a care of the leaven
of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 15.6.16.6.
because by their traditions they made the Commandment of God of none effect:
as in their Corban, if they made a vow to God they thought themselves excused
from relieving their Parents; and in this way our Savior generally deals with
them, showing that though they pretended to keep the letter of the Law, yet by
their corrupt additions and false glosses they overthrew the scope and design
of it: which he thought sufficient reason to reject their Authority; and
therefore when he bids his Disciples, observe and do whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees bid them; Mat. 23.3.
it must be supposed to be only while they keep to the letter and reason of the
Law; for if he had intended an absolute obedience, he would never elsewhere
have bid his Disciples beware of their Doctrine. Mat. 16.12.


3. If it takes away all liberty of judgment concerning truth and falsehood in
Religion. For this is a natural right which every man has to judge for
himself: and they that take this away, may as well command all men to put out
their eyes, that they may better follow their Guides. But the other is so much
worse, because it is an assault upon our understandings, it is a robbing us of
the greatest talent God has committed to our management, it is a rape upon our
best faculties, and prostituting them to the lusts of Spiritual Tyrants; it is
not captivating our understandings to the obedience of faith, but enslaving
them to the proud and domineering usurpations of men; wherein they would do by
us as the Philistines did by Sampson; they would put out our eyes, that we
might grind in their prison, and make them sport. I would not be mistaken, it
is the liberty of judgment I plead for, and not of practice; that may be justly
restrained by the Laws of the Church, where the other is allowed; because the
obligations to peace and unity are different from those to faith and inward
assent. And that no absolute submission of judgment could be required by the
Law of Moses, notwithstanding the command of outward obedience in the cases
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, etc. is most evident from hence, because that Law
makes provision for a sin-offering in case the whole Congregation of Israel sin
through ignorance, Lev. 4.1^.
and the thing be hid from the eyes of the Assembly, or Supreme Council, and
they have done something against the commandment of the Lord: which had been a
Law made to no purpose, if it had been impossible for their chief Authority to
have erred or been mistaken in their judgment. From hence we see St. Paul had
great reason to appeal from the High Priest and Elders to the Law and the
Prophets, because they were subject to error and mistake, but these are not.

2. Because the Law and the Prophets are less liable to partiality, than a
living Judge, or the Authority of the present Church. I have oft-times wondered
to hear men speak so advantageously of a living Judge, before an infallible
Rule, in order to the end of Controversies. If all they mean be only that an
end be put to them no matter how, I confess a living Judge in that case has
much the advantage, but so would any other way that persons would agree upon,
as the judgment of the next person we met with, or Lottery, or any such thing;
but if we would have things fairly examined and heard, and a judgment given
according to the merits of the cause, the case will be found very different
here from what it is in civil causes. For here the Judge must be a party
concerned, when his own Authority and Interest is questioned; and liable to all
those passions which men are subject to in their own cases. Which will be
notoriously evident in the case before us, between the High Priest and Elders
on one side, and St. Paul on the other: They pleaded, that if any difficulty
arose about the sense of the Law, it belonged to them to judge of it; St. Paul
declines their judgment, and appeals only to the Law and the Prophets: had it
been reasonable in this case for Felix to have referred the judgment to them
who were the parties so deeply concerned? A living Judge may have a great
advantage over a bare Rule to put an end to controversies; but then we must
suppose impartiality in him, freedom from prejudice, an excellent judgment,
diligence and patience in hearing all the evidence, and at last delivering
sentence according to the sense of the Law; if any of these be wanting, the
controversy may soon be ended, but on the wrong side. I suppose none of those
who would have controversies in Religion ended by a living Judge, will for
shame say, they would have them ended right or wrong; but if they would have
Truth determined, they must give us assurance, that these Judges shall lay
aside all partiality to their own interests, all prejudice against their
Adversaries, shall diligently search, and examine, and weigh the evidence on
both sides, and then shall determine according to the true sense of the Law.
How likely this is, will appear by the living Judges in our Savior's time; Was
there ever greater partiality seen than was in them* or more obstinate
prejudice, or more wilful errors, or a more malicious sentence than came from
them in the cause of our Lord and Savior? They would not believe his Miracles,
though told them by those that saw them; when they saw them, they would not
believe they came from God, but attributed them to the Devil; they would not so
much as enquire the true place of his Nativity, but ran on still with that
wilful mistake, that he was born in Galilee; and by this they thought to
confound Nicodemus presently, Search and look, Joh. 7.52.
for out of Galilee arises no Prophet. If they had searched and looked
themselves, they would have found, that Christ was born in Bethlehem, and not
in Galilee. But where men are strongly prejudiced, any thing serves for
evidence and demonstration; whereas all the arguments on the other side shall
be despised and contemned. How captious were they on all occasions toward our
Savior, lying in wait to entrap him with questions, to pervert his words, and
draw blasphemy out of the most innocent expressions? And when none of all these
things could do, they use all the ways of fraud, malice, and injustice to
destroy the Savior of the world as a Malefactor and Blasphemer. Was not here
now a mighty advantage, which the Authority of the present Church among the
Jews of that time had, above the guidance of the Law and the Prophets? And the
knowledge St. Paul had of the same temper being in them still might justly make
him decline their judgment, and appeal only to the Law and the Prophets, for
the ground and rule of his Faith.

2. For the object of his worship, he appeals to the best Antiquity, I worship
the God of my Fathers. i. e. I bring no new Religion among you, but the very
same in substance with that which all the Jews have owned; so some render
(...), Deo Patrio, the God whom all my Brethren acknowledge, but he rather
understands it of the same God that was worshipped by Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, quem majores nostri coluerunt; so St. Peter in his preaching to the
people concerning the resurection of Christ, to avoid the imputation of
Novelty, says, The God of Abraham, Acts 3.13.
and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son
Jesus; and again to the Sanhedrin he says, 5.30.
The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus; and St. Paul, 22.14.
The God of our Fathers has chosen thee; in the use of which expressions they
purposely declare, that they had no thoughts of bringing in any new Religion
among them, contrary to what God had of old declared to the Patriarchs. The
main things in which the Jews objected innovation to them, did either concern
the bringing in some new doctrine, or the reformation of corruptions among them.

1. For their doctrine; that either concerned the Messiah, or a future State.
For the doctrine of the Messiah it was as ancient as the records of any
revelation from God were. It was the great promise made to the Patriarchs long
before the Law of Moses; and even Moses himself speaks of him, Acts 7.37.
as St. Steven proves to them; and David, and Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and
Ezekiel, and Daniel, and Micah, and Malachi, as the Apostles at large prove in
their writings. Why should this then be accounted any new doctrine which they
all believed and received? If the Question be only whether Christ were that
Messiah or no; for that, they desire nothing more than the testimony of the Law
and the Prophets, and the Miracles wrought by him; but they had no reason to
quarrel with them upon their belief, for such an alteration of the state of
things which themselves believed must be when the Messiah came; for in him not
only the Nation of the Jews, but all the Nations of the earth were to be
blessed; which was inconsistent with supposing the Ceremonial Law to continue
in its force and obligation; being particularly suited to one people lying
within such a compass as they might three times a year attend upon the service
in the Temple at Jerusalem. If their quarrel was, concerning a future state,
as though that were a new doctrine, St. Paul adds in the next Verse, That
themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead both of
the just and the unjust. And in his defense before Agrippa, he says, And now I
stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers,
Acts 26.6* 7.
unto which promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night hope
to come. So that the Apostle produces Antiquity, Universality and Consent in
these Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion; only a late busy and
Politic Faction of the Sadducees opposed this doctrine; but why should their
opposition signify any thing against so full a stream running down from the
first and purest Antiquity? Thus much for the positive part of their faith and
doctrine.

2. For the negative part, or the reformation of abuses and corruptions among
them; this was St. Paul's plea; Let them show where the God of our Fathers
imposed any of those heavy burdens which the Scribes and Pharisees place so
much of their Religion in. What ground is there in the Law and the Prophets,
for the Pharisaical Superstitions, and Vows, and Severities to themselves in
fetching blood and knocking their heads against the walls, and different garbs
and dresses to appear more holy unto men, with many other customs of theirs,
the observation of which was made so great a part of the Religion of their
devoutest men? And it is a strange thing they should think it impossible such
things should come in among them, without great notice being taken of it; for
although sudden and violent changes may have all the circumstances known, yet
it is not to be expected in more insensible and gradual alterations. A man may
tell when a violent Fever seized upon him and inflamed his blood, but he cannot
do so by a Hectic or a Consumption; must he therefore believe himself well,
because he cannot tell the punctual time when he fell sick. We may easily
describe the circumstances of a Landflood which overflows the banks, and bears
all before it, but we cannot do so by the coming in of the Tide, which steals
in secretly and insensibly, and no man can assign the place where the salt and
fresh water first mix together. Superstition is a Hectic Fever to Religion, it
by degrees consumes the vitals of it, but comes on insensibly, and is not
easily discovered till it be hard to be cured. At first, it may be some devout
but indiscreet men made way for it, who love to find out some Modes of devotion
different from the rest of the world, which are greedily embraced by such who
admire and follow them; this example taking, another begins and sets up for a
more refined way than the former; and so the design spreads, till at last true
piety and goodness be swallowed up by superstitious fopperies. Which is the
most probable account of all the Pharisaical corruptions; some of whose
observations might be begun at first with a good mind, and by the devout
persons of that time; but afterward, every one that had a sowrer look and a
worse nature than ordinary, thought it not enough to follow the example of
others, but like a great Physician he must have his Nostrum's, something of his
own finding out, a new garb, or ceremony, or posture of devotion, whereby he
may be taken notice of, and admired for his sanctity. Thus that fardle of
superstitious rites was gathered up among the Scribes and Pharisees in our
Savior's time, whom he most severely upon all occasions rebukes for their
hypocrisy, in placing so much of their Religion in them. And thus much for the
way taken by St. Paul to vindicate Christianity from the imputations of being a
new Sect or Heresy, by an appeal to Scripture and the best Antiquity.

3. There remains only, the freedom and courage expressed by him in owning his
Religion, notwithstanding these false imputations. But this I confess unto
thee, that after the way which is called heresy, etc. He abhorred that mean
and base* spirited principle, which makes it lawful for men to deny their
Religion when it brings them into danger; he studied no secret arts of
compliance with his Adversaries to secure himself; he did not decline
appearing, though to the hazard of his life in so just a cause. He valued his
Religion beyond his own safety, and regarded not all the calumnies and
reproaches of his enemies, as long as he made this his constant exercise, to
keep a conscience void of offense, Ver. 16
both toward God and toward men. And this he elsewhere says, afforded him
more inward comfort and satisfaction, than all the crafts and policy in the
world could give him. 2 Cor. 1.12
For our rejoicing is this, says he, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world. There is nothing inspires men
with so much courage, as integrity and uprightness of mind does; and such
persons who have the comfort of that, have not only better hopes as to another
world, but oftentimes escape better as to this, than others do; for even their
enemies cannot but esteem them: whereas the fawning, sneaking and flattering
hypocrite that will do or be any thing for his own advantage, is despised by
those he courts, hated by good men, and at last tormented by his own
conscience, for being false to God and Religion. But we may see here in St.
Paul a great instance of true Christian magnanimity; he was sensible how great
both the malice and quality of his enemies were; he knew he was to answer
before a Judge, that regarded nothing either of Justice or Religion; yet he
neither flatters his Judge, nor betrays any distrust of him: he does not
bespatter his enemies, nor discover any fear of them; but with a modest freedom
and manly courage owns the main part of their accusation, and effectually
vindicates his own innocence and his Religion together. For even Felix himself,
although a man otherwise very capable of being wrought upon by some ways of
address, of which we read, Ver. 26. yet the High Priest and the Elders with
their eloquent Tertullus were forced to return as they came, and leave St. Paul
under the name of a Prisoner, but enjoying the conveniences of liberty, ver.
23.

I have now gone thorough all the parts of the Text, with a respect to St. Paul
and the Authority of the Jewish Church, which was engaged against him; it may
now be justly expected that I make Application of what I have said, to our own
State and Condition. Thanks be to God, we are not brought to such a trial as
St. Paul was, we enjoy the liberty of speaking for our selves and our Religion,
and not only speaking for it, but professing and owning it. And may we ever do
so! But we have busy and restless Adversaries abroad, the factors of the High
Priest and Elders at Rome, who have as much spite and malice against us, as
ever those of Jerusalem had against St. Paul; and they have their Tertullus's
too, men of art and insinuation, and who manage their cause against us, just as
he did against St. Paul, they charge us with bringing in new Sects under the
pretense of Reformation; or with rejecting the Authority of the present Church
which we were bound to obey, and thereby laying the Foundation of Faction and
Schism. These are heavy charges, but they are no other than those the High
Priest and the Elders made against St. Paul; and thanks be to God, his Defense
and Vindication is ours too, for we appeal to Scripture and the best and purest
Antiquity; and desire to be judged according to these. These three things
therefore I shall speak to before I conclude,

1. That the same reasons which they produce against the Reformation would have
held against the spreading of Christianity at first.

2. That the same Defense which St. Paul made for Christianity will justify
the Reformation.

3. That we have all reason to follow the courage of St. Paul in owning and
defending our Religion, notwithstanding the imputations which are cast upon it.

1. That the same reasons which they produce against the Reformation would have
held against Christianity at first. What have all the clamours of our
Adversaries for above a hundred years come to, but the very same which I have
already mentioned as the Jews Objections against Christianity, viz. Novelty,
and Faction? Where was your Church before the Reformation? produce your
succession in all Ages of persons who agreed in all things with you. Where were
those distinct bodies of men who found fault with those corruptions that you
pretend to reform? Our Church has had a constant and glorious succession of
Bishops, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and religious Orders of Men, Virgins and
Widows. But supposing such a distinct succession were not necessary, yet show
how it was possible for so many errors and corruptions to come into the Church,
and no one take notice of them and discover them. Where was the watchful eye
of Providence over all the Church all this while? What, all the Pastors asleep
at once! or all conspiring together to deceive their posterity! Besides, how
can the Protestants ever answer their rejecting the Authority of the present
Church which they lived under? and to whom God had promised his infallible
Spirit? how can they clear themselves from faction and disturbing the peace of
the Christian world, which lived in so great unity and peace before? This is
the sum of their Objections against the Reformation, which are the very same
we have mentioned before, as produced by the Jews against Christianity. If the
arguments are good now, they were so then; if they were good then, for all that
I can see the High Priest and Elders were in the right, and St. Paul in the
wrong; if they were not good then, but are now, some remarkable disparity must
be showed between their case and ours; and that must lie in showing these three
things.

1. That the Christian Church has greater infallibility promised than the
Jewish had.

2. That the first Christians had greater reason to reject the Authority of
that Church, than the Reformers had, as to the Church of Rome.

3. That the Causes of corruptions in the Jewish Church, could not hold in the
Christian. But if none of these can be made good, then the case will appear to
be the very same.

1. It cannot be proved that the Christian Church has greater infallibility
promised than the Jewish had. Of which we have this plain evidence, that one of
the strongest arguments produced for the infallibility of the Christian Church
is taken from the Promises made to the Jewish. How often has Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9,
10. been made use of to prove infallibility in the Christian Church? If they
had any better arguments in the New Testament, would they ever run so far back
to a Command that most evidently relates to the Jewish constitution? Where has
ever God promised that he would dwell in St. Peter's at Rome, as he did, that
he would dwell in his Temple at Jerusalem? What boastings and triumphs would
there have been, if any such words had been in the Gospel concerning Rome, as
there were of old concerning Jerusalem; viz. that God had sanctified it, that
his Name might be there for ever; 2 Chronicles. 7.16.
and his eyes and his heart should be there perpetually? What pitiful proofs
in comparison of this, are all those brought out of the New Testament for the
Authority and Infallibility of the Roman Church? What are all the promises of
the Spirit made to the Apostles, and remarkably accomplished in them, to this
plain promise of God's particular presence in that place for ever? Suppose St.
Peter had privileges above the rest of the Apostles; how comes the entail to be
made to all his successors, and only at Rome and no where else? Where are the
Deeds kept, that contain this gift? Why are they not produced during all this
contest? And yet we see in the Jewish Church where such a promise was made to a
particular place, no such thing as Infallibility was employed in it.

2. It cannot be showed, that the first Christians had greater reason to reject
the Authority of the Jewish Church, than our Reformers had to reject that of
the Church of Rome. I know here it will be presently said, That the Apostles
saw the Miracles of Christ, and wrought many themselves, and received an
immediate Commission from Jesus Christ in whom the Churches infallibility was
then seated. All which I grant to be true in it self, but cannot be pleaded by
them who contend for absolute obedience to the present Churches Authority as
infallible. My reason is, because upon this principle they could not believe
Christ to be the true Messiah; for his being the true Messiah depended upon two
things, viz. the fulfilling of Prophecies, and the truth of his Miracles; now
according to their principles, no man could be certain of either of these
without the Authority of the Church; for the fulfilling of Prophecies depended
upon the sense of many obscure places of Scripture, about which they say there
is a necessity of an infallible Judge; and for Miracles, they tell us, that
there is no certain way of judging true and false, but by the Authority of the
Church. Now if these things be so, what ground could the first Christians have
to believe Christ to be the true Messiah, when in both these, they must oppose
the Authority of the present Church?

3. They can never prove, that the same causes of corruptions do not hold as to
the Christian, which did as to the Jewish Church. For the Christian Church in
those Ages which we charge with introducing the corruptions, was degenerated
into greater Ignorance, Barbarism, Luxury and Superstition, than the Jewish
Church in the time of its darkness from the cessation of Prophecy till the
coming of Christ. Our Adversaries themselves confess, that for a long time,
there was nothing either of Learning or Humanity among them; nothing but ease,
and luxury, and ambition, and all manner of Wickedness among the chief Rulers
among them; nay, even at Rome there was a succession of fifty of their High
Priests, so remarkable for their wickedness, that Annas and Caiaphas (setting
only aside their condemning Christ) were Saints in comparison of them. And is
it now any wonder that such errors and corruptions should come into that
Church, as those we charge them with? Nay, rather the greatest Wonder seems to
be, that any thing of Christianity should be preserved among them. But besides
the sottishness of those times, we have many other causes to assign of the
corruptions introduced among them; as a Compliance with Gentilism in many of
their Customs and Superstitions; Affectation of new Modes of Devotion, among
indiscreet Zealots; Ambition and constant endeavor to advance the Authority
and Interests of the Priesthood above all Secular Power; and when for a long
time these had been gathering the rude materials together, then the Moorish
Philosophy happening to creep in among them, the Monks began to busy
themselves therein, and by the help of that, a little better to digest that
Mass and Heap of corruptions, and to spend the wit they had to defend and
improve them.

2. But against all these, we stand upon the same defense that St. Paul did: we
appeal to Scripture, and the best and purest Antiquity. We pretend to bring in
no new Doctrines, and therefore no Miracles can be required of us; which the
Apostles wrought to confirm Christ's being the true Messiah, who was to alter
that State which God himself had once appointed: All that we plead for, is that
the Religion establshed by Christ may serve our turn, and that which is
recorded by the Apostles and Evangelists; to these we make our constant appeal,
and have the same reason to decline the Authority of the Roman Church, that St.
Paul had as to the High Priest and Elders, when he appealed to the Law and the
Prophets: Nay, we have somewhat more reason; because God had once appointed the
High Priests and Rulers of the People among them, but the Supremacy of the
Roman Church was a mere Usurpation begun by Ambition, advanced by Forgery, and
defended by Cruelty. But we do not only believe all that is written in the Law
and the Prophets, but we worship the God of our Fathers; of the Fathers of the
first and purest Ages of the Christian Church; we are not only content to make
use of their Authority in these matters, but we make our appeal to them; and
have begged our Adversaries ever since the Reformation, to prove the points in
difference between us, by the testimony of the first six hundred years; but
from that time to this, they are as far from proving any one point, as ever
they were.

3. What then follows from all this, but that we should imitate St. Paul^s
courage in owning and defending our Religion, notwithstanding all the false
imputations which are cast upon it. What a shame would it be for us, meanly and
basely to betray that Cause, for which our Ancestors sacrificed their lives? Is
the Romish Religion any thing better than it was then? What error in Doctrine,
or corruption in Practice have they ever reformed? Nay, have they not rather
established and confirmed them more? Are they any thing kinder to us than they
have been? No; notwithstanding all their late pleadings for Evangelical Peace
and Charity, they can at the same time tell us, Advocate of Conscience*
Liberty, p. 236, ^4^
That the Statutes against Heretics are still in force against us, as
condemned Heretics; and we are not so dull, not to apprehend the meaning of
that; viz. that were it in their power they could lawfully burn us to morrow.
And is not this the height of Evangelical Love and Sweetness? Who can but
admire the perswasiveness of such arguments to Gospel-meekness, and melt at the
tenderness and bowels of an Inquisition? Let us not deceive our selves; it is
not the mean compliance of any in going half way toward them, will serve their
turn: there is no chewing their Pills, all must be swallowed together, or as
good in their opinion to have none at all. For not only plain Heretics, but
the favorers and suspected of Heresy are solemnly excommunicated every year
in the famous Bull of Caena Domini; Lindwood Provinc l. 5. tit. de haeret. p.
162.2.
and Lindwood their English Canonist, tells us whom they account suspected of
Heresy, viz. All that show common civility to Heretics, or give Alms to them,
or that once hear their Sermons. This last indeed has been mitigated by a
considerable party among them; for notwithstanding the opposition of the
Jesuits in this matter, and seven Breve^s obtained by their means from several
Popes forbidding all Roman Catholics to come to our Churches; yet the Secular
Priests have contended for it as a thing lawful for them not only to come to
our Prayers, and hear our Sermons, but to partake of our Sacraments too.
Vertum. Romans p 104, 105.
Which they may allow, while they hope to carry on their interest better that
way; but if once, (which God forbid) the Tide should turn with them, then the
old Laws of their Church must prevail, and nothing will be thought so wholesome
as an Inquisition. Which it is strange, their Advocates for Liberty of
Conscience, should call only, Laws in Catholic Countries against Heretics,
Advoc. for Lib. p. 24.
and not Laws of the Church, when there are extant above a hundred Bulls and
Breve's of Popes establishing, confirming, and enlarging the Inquisition. Since
then no favor is to be expected from their Church (for whatever they pretend,
V. Append. ad Nicol. Eyneric. Director. Inquisit. Ven. 1607.
all the severity comes from thence, all the favor and mitigation from the
clemency and wisdom of Princes) let us endeavor to strengthen our selves, by a
hearty zeal for our Religion, and using the best means to confirm and uphold
it. And since the Children of this world are in their Generation wiser than the
Children of light; there are some things practiced among them, which may
deserve our imitation: and those are,

1. A mighty Industry and Zeal in promoting their Cause; they have learned of
their Predecessors to compass Sea and Land to gain one Proselite. They
insinuate themselves into all companies, stick at no pains, accommodate
themselves to all humors, and are provided one way or other to gratify
persons of all inclinations; for they have retirement for the melancholy,
business for the active, idleness for the lazy, honor for the ambitious,
splendor for the vain, severities for the sour and hardy, and a good dose of
pleasures for the soft and voluptuous. It is not their Way, but their Zeal and
Industry I propound to our imitation; I know not how it comes to pass, but so
it often happens, that they who are most secure of truth on their side, are
most apt to be remiss and careless; and to comfort themselves with some good
old sayings, as God will provide, and Truth will prevail, though they lie
still, and do nothing toward it; but certainly such negligence is inexcusable,
where the matter is of so great importance, the Adversaries so many, and an
account must be given shortly in another world, of what men have done or
suffered for their Religion in this.

2. Submission and Obedience to their Spiritual Governors; the greatest
strength of that prevailing Faction lies in the close union and cohesion of all
the parts together, by a settled subordination of one to another; which though
not always effectual, yet the contrivance is so laid, as if there were as much
Truth and Reason as Policy in it, cannot be denied to be fit for upholding the
interest of a Church. But we plead not for their blind and absolute obedience;
but sure the Apostles had some meaning when they bid the Christians obey them
that had the rule over them, Heb. 13.17. 2 These. 5.13.
and submit themselves, for they watched for their souls; and esteem them very
highly in love for their Works sake: not, be ready on all occasions to reproach
and contemn them, and be glad of any idle stories wherewith to bespatter them.
If men would once understand and practice the duties of humility, modesty, and
submission to the Government which God has set over us, we might have greater
hopes to secure the interest of our Church and Religion, than without it we can
ever have. For spiritual pride, conceitedness in Religion, and a Spirit of
contradiction to Superiors are to be reckoned among some of the worst Symptoms
of a declining Church.

3. Lessening of differences among themselves; for although with all their care
they cannot prevent them, yet they still endeavor to extenuate them, as much
as possible, and boast of their Unity among strangers to their Churches
affairs. The great wisdom of the Court of Rome lies in this, that as long as
persons are true to them in the main points wherein the difference lies, they
can let them alone in smaller differences among themselves; and not provoke
either of the dissenting parties, unless they are sure to suppress them, lest
they give them occasion to withdraw from their communion. They can allow
different Rites and Ceremonies in the several Orders of Religion among them,
and grant exemptions and privileges in particular cases; as long as they make
them serviceable to their common interest by upholding and strengthening them.
Would to God we could at last learn this Wisdom from our enemies, not to widen
our own differences by inveterate heats, bitterness and animosities among our
selves; but to find out ways whereby even the dissenters in smaller things may
be made useful for the maintaining the common interest of our Church and
Religion. And it is a vain thing in any to go about to separate these; or ever
to hope that the Protestant Religion can be preserved among us without
upholding the Church of England. For if once that Bullwark be demolished, our
Adversaries will despise all the lesser Sconces and Pallisado's: they will be
but like Romulus his Walls, which they will easily leap over at their pleasure.
I pray God then (and I hope you will all join with me in it) that he would
vouchsafe to our Governors the Spirit of Wisdom and Peace, to find out the
most proper means for the establishment of our Church and Religion; and I pray
God give us all a Spirit of knowledge to understand the things which belong to
our peace, and of Love and Unity to endeavor after them.

SERMON II. Preached November V. 1673. AT St. Margaret's Westminster.
St. Matthew. VII.15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye shall know them by their
Fruits.


IF we were to judge of the nature of Christianity by the designs and practices
of some, who would be thought the only true and Catholic Christians, we should
have no great reason to esteem it our honor to be called by his Name, who
first brought this Religion into the world. For if the Christian Religion did
indeed justify all the fraud and treachery, the mischief and cruelty which
has been either acted or designed by men under the glorious pretense of
advancing the interest of the Catholic Church, we might better choose not to be
Christians, than to be such men: Because whatever Religion overthrows the
common principles and duties of humane nature, such as those of Civil
obedience, integrity and humanity are, cannot be supposed a Religion proper or
intended by God for Mankind; whose great end in Religion is to improve and
rectify, and not to debauch or corrupt the dispositions of men. Men need no
Religion to instruct them in the arts of deceiving, the contrivances of malice,
or the methods of revenge; such fruits as these spring up too easily in our
corrupt and degenerate natures, which need no great force or improvement to
bring them forth: But when the warmth of the Sun shall be joined with the
fruitfulness of the soil, when men are encouraged to pursue their own natural
inclinations by the most powerful motives of Religion, what bounds can be set
to the growth and increase of these accursed fruits? Of all Religions in the
world, we might have thought the Christian least liable to be abused to such
ill purposes; for it was one of Machiavel's quarrels against Christianity, that
by its precepts of meekness and patience, it rendered men unfit for such great
undertakings, which could not be accomplished without something of cruelty and
inhumanity, whereas the old Religions by the multitude of Sacrifices did inure
men to blood and destruction, and so made them fitter for any enterprise. And
Machiavel was certainly in the right, if Religion were intended only to make
men Butchers: or to instruct them in the use of Swords and Gunpowder. Nay, the
Religion of Mahomet is in this respect to be very much preferred before the
Christian, for that makes it not only lawful to destroy those of a different
Religion, but enrolls them for Martyrs that die in the Field, and makes the
blood of enemies as meritorious, as we do that of the Cross. But that is
reserved as the peculiar honor of the Christian Religion, that it commands the
subduing all the brutish and savage inclinations of men to acts of revenge and
cruelty; that it restores humane nature to it self by its precepts of meekness,
mercy, peaceableness, and universal charity; that it advances it to a divine
nature by the imitation of God himself, in showing kindness to enemies, and
overcoming evil with good. This is the Religion established by our Lord and
Savior in this excellent Sermon on the Mount, wherein the scope and design of
Christianity is delivered with the greatest plainness and perspicuity; which
(if it be possible for us to judge of his meaning by the clearest expressions)
was far enough from being the setting up a Monarchy in the Church to which all
the Kings of the Christian world are by their Baptism bound to vail their
Crowns, and lay their Scepters at its feet: or in case they do not, that then
this Spiritual Monarch may excommunicate, depose, and deprive Princes of their
Government, and dissolve all the obligations between their Subjects and them:
and make it lawful for them to depose them: We find not the least footstep of
any thing tending this way, where our Savior speaks most advantageously
concerning the honor of his Disciples; which honor he represents by things
which set forth their usefulness in common: Ye are the Salt of the Earth,
Matthew. 5.13, 14.
ye are the light of the World; and not by setting up one above all the rest,
far above all Principalities and Powers, to whom Kings and Princes, and all
People are bound to be subject, if they regard their salvation. If any such
thing as this had been so material a part of the Christian Doctrine, as some
imagine, if it had been so necessary to salvation, it is somewhat strange, that
when our Blessed Savior gave so many directions in order to salvation he
should give not so much as the least intimation concerning this. And yet he
says, at the end of this Sermon, Every one that hears these sayings of mine,
and does them, Matthew. 7.24.
is like unto a wise man that built his house upon a rock; not super hanc
Petram, i. e. according to the Roman Gloss, upon the Pope's Authority; but upon
such a firm foundation as will never fail him. And what is it which our Savior
endeavors to persuade men to, in order to so firm a settlement of their minds
against all the assaults of persecutions? viz. to humility, meekness, goodness,
universal holiness, to the love of God and Mankind, to sincerity in devotion,
dependence on Providence, prayer, and doing as we would be done by: this is the
substance of the Christian Law delivered by the Son of God; than which nothing
can be imagined more contrary to the Spirit of Faction and disobedience, of
cruelty and revenge, and that covered over with a pretense of zeal for
Religion. But he who gave these excellent precepts, did foresee, that there
would arise men who should preach and prophecy in his Name, and in his Name
cast out Devils, and do wonderful works: that yet for all their fair shows and
pretenses to the world should be of a temper and disposition directly contrary
to the Gospel; and therefore it was necessary for all Christians, as they
valued their own welfare, to have an eye to them, lest they should be deceived
by them: which is the meaning of our Savior in these words; Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves: By their fruits ye shall know them. Wherein we have these two things
considerable:

1. The Caution given, Beware of false Prophets, together with the ground of
that Caution, For they come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves.

2. The Rule laid down whereby we are to judge of them: By their Fruits ye
shall know them.

1. The Caution given, Beware of false Prophets. There were two sorts of
deceivers our Savior gives his Disciples particular caution against, viz.
false Christ's and false Prophets; Mat. 24.24.
the false Christ's were those who pretended that they were the persons who were
foretold by the Prophets that should come for the redemption of his People;
Mat. 24.5.
for many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.
Not as though they pretended to be sent by Christ, but that they would assume
to themselves the Dignity and Authority of the true Messiah; and of this sort
there were many that arose among the Jews, such as Theudas, Jonathas,
Barchochebas, and many others. But besides these, there were false Prophets,
some of which did openly oppose Christianity, Acts 13.6.
such as that Bar-Jesus mentioned in the Acts; but there were others who
pretended to own Christianity, and to prophecy in the Name of Christ, Matt.
7.21
whom St. Peter calls false Teachers; and whom St. Paul describes by the same
character that our Savior here does: 2 Pet. 2^.
But I know that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you,
Act. 20.29, 30.
not sparing the flock: also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw disciples after them: whom he elsewhere sets forth by
their Sheeps clothing; when he says, that by good words and fair speeches
they deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18.
whom he calls false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13.
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: which
carried so fair a show and appearance among the people, that St. Paul was very
full of jealousy and apprehension concerning them, lest they should by degrees
draw away his Disciples from the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ. For I am
jealous over you, says he, with godly jealousy; but I fear, lest by any means
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, V 2, 3.
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. It
may seem strange, that after the Apostles had with so much care and diligence
planted the Gospel o^ Christ in several Churches, they should express so much
fear as they did, (and especially St. Paul) of their being so soon corrupted by
these false Teachers* as he does, not only of the Corinthians* but of the
Galatians too. I marvel, Gal. 1.6.
says he, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ. And O foolish Galatians, 3.1.
who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? and of the
Ephesians, That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, Ephesians 4.14*
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: and of the Colossians,
Col. 2.8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 18.
And let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels: and of the Hebrews, Heb. 13.9.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines. But we shall see this
great Caution, delivered here first by our Savior, and afterward by his
Apostles, was no more than necessary, if we consider under what pretenses they
came, and what Arts and Methods these false Teachers used to delude and seduce
the people.

1. They pretended to the same infallible Spirit which the Apostles had. And
this may be the reason, why our Savior does not here call them false Teachers,
but false Prophets. For Prophecy in its proper notion does not relate to future
events, but to divine Inspiration. So St. Chrysostom says (...) is the same
with (...), S. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. hom. 36.
a Prophet, says he is the same with God's Interpreter: so the word (...) is
used in Greek Authors, Auct. de Mundo, c 1. Plut. de def. Orac. Lucian in Vi^.
Phil.
as in the Author of the Book de Mundo, (...) is rendered by Apuleius effari
caeteris; and Festus says, that the Latins called those Prophets, which were
oraculorum interpretes; and so the Hebrew words are taken in the same sense
without any rela^ion to foretelling things to come So Moses is said to be a God
to Pharaoh and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Pro^phet: Exodus 7.1.
Genesis 20.7.
i. e. thy interpreter. Abraham i^ called a Prophet, and the Patriarchs ar^ all
called Prophets, Ps. 105.15.
in regard that Di^vine Revelations were more common before the written Law:
but the reason why the name of Prophecy came to b^ restrained to the prediction
of things t^ come, was because future events lying most out of the reach of
men's know^ledge, the foretelling of these was looked upon as the greatest
evidence of divine inspiration. But in the New Testament, prophesying is often
taken for the gift of interpreting the hard places of the Old Testament,
Themist. Or. 1.
as Themistius calls one that interpreted the hard places in Aristotle, (...);
thence Prophesying is reckoned among the spiritual gifts; 1 Cor. 12 10
and so these false Prophets were not men who pretended to fore-fell future
events, but to the assistance of an infallible Spirit, in giving the sense of
Scripture; and by this pretense they transformed themselves into the Apostles
of Christ, giving out that they enjoyed equal privileges with them: whereby
three things may be observed which deserve our consideration.

1. That nothing is more easy, than for false Teachers to pretend to an
infallible Spirit; such whom our Savior and his Apostles did warn men
especially against, pretended to be Prophets and Apostles, and to know the mind
of Christ better than they who truly had the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Some
think the bare pretense to Infallibility ought in such a divided state of the
Christian world to be entertained as the best expedient to end Controversies,
and that Church which does alone challenge it, ought on that account to be
submitted to; as though the most confident pretenders were to be soonest
believed: so they will be, do what we can, by the weakest sort of mankind, but
by none who have and use their judgments. If bare pretenses were sufficient,
Simon Magus did bid the fairest to be Head of the Church, Epiph. haer. 2^.
for he pretended to be God's Vicar upon Earth, or the divine Power sent down
from Heaven, which none of the Apostles pretended to. Why then did not the
Christian Church submit to Montanus his Paraclete, when no other Christians
pretended to such an immediate inspiration as he did? And certainly Prisca and
Maximilla were better Oracles, than a Crucifix was to a late Pope. If there be
any thing beyond a bare pretense to an infallible Spirit, we desire to see
better arguments for it, than the false Apostles could produce for theirs; if
there be nothing but a bare pretense, we must leave the Pope and Quakers to
dispute it out.

2. That the pretense to Divine Inspiration is very dangerous to the Christian
Church. For we see what mischief it did in the Apostolical times when there was
a true infallible Spirit in the Apostles of Christ to discover an^ confute it;
yet notwithstanding all the care and diligence of the Apostles many were
seduced by it. For those who have the least ground, do commonly use the
greatest confidence, and denounce Hell and Damnation the soonest to those who
despise and reject them. Which being expressed with a grim countenance and a
terrible accent, startles and shakes more persons of weak judgments and
timorous dispositions, than all the reasons and arguments they could ever
produce. This has always been the method of deceivers, to pretend to the
highest, and then make the sin of those who do not believe them as great, as if
the thing were real. Thus the rejecting men's Fanatic Pretenses to Revelations
and Ecstasies is cried out upon, as blaspheming the Holy Ghost; and refusing to
believe upon the Roman Churches pretended Infallibility, is called no less,
than denying God^s Veracity. We profess to believe the true inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, and every tittle of what God has revealed: but we will not swallow
pretenses for Evidences, nor Enthusiasms for Revelations. For as the true
Religion was at first founded upon Divine Inspiration; so we know that the
greatest corruptions of it have sprung from the pretense to it. Maim. de Idol
c. 1. sect. 3.
Maimonides says, that the first beginning of Pagan Idolatry, was owing to the
pretense of Inspiration, and immediate Revelations for the Worship of the
Stars. However that be we are certain the Devil made use of Oracles and
Enthusiasms, as the most effectual means to bring men to the practice of it,
both in Egypt, in Greece, and many other places; and they who have taken the
pains to collect them, have reckoned one hundred and sixty several Oracles that
were in request in the times of Paganism. After Christianity began to be settled
in the world, the greatest corrupters of it were the pretenders to divine
Inspiration, a^ the false Apostles, the Gnostics, the Montanists, and many
others. And the pretense to this, is so much the more dangerous, because it
bids high, and i^ easily taken up, and requires no learning or wit, but only
con^idence to manage it, and may carry men by impulse* and motions to the most
unwarrantable a^ctions, and where it meets with an Enthu^siastical temper, is
very hardly removed

3. We may observe, that a truly in^fallible Spirit is not sufficient to put a^
and to Controversies. For when wa^ that ever more evident, than in the holy
Apostles after the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon them? Many are apt
to say now, That there will never be an end of these wranglings, and schisms,
and disputes in Religion, till there be an infallible Judge to put an issue to
them; But were there not infallible Judges in the Apostles time, that gave
infinitely greater evidence of an infallible Spirit, than any ever since have
done? But were Controversies put to an end by it? No certainly, when the
Apostles complain so much of the Schisms, and Divisions, and Errors, and
Heresies, and Disputes, and Quarrellings that were among them. And if so great
an evidence of a Divine Spirit manifested by their Miracles, had no greater
effect then, what can we imagine the shadow of St. Peter, or the dream of
infallibility can do in the Roman Church? And give me leave to say, it is the
Inquisition and not Infallibility, which keep things quiet among them. But God
deliver us from such an end of Controversies.

2. The false Prophets and Apostles pretended to greater mortification and
self-denial than the true Apostles did. Hier. in loc.
St. Hierom understands their coming in Sheeps clothing, of this pretense to
greater severity and rigor of life than others used. Those that go about to
deceive, must appear to have something extraordinary this way, to raise an
admiration of them among those who judge of Saints more by their looks than by
their actions. Whereas the greatest Hypocrites have been always the greatest
pretenders this way. Our blessed Savior was so far from making any show of
this rigor and severity, that he was reproached by the Scribes and Pharisees,
those mortified Saints, to be a wine-bibber, a friend to Publicans and Sinners.
Alas! what heavenly looks, and devout gestures, and long prayers, and frequent
fastings had they more than Christ or his Disciples? The poor Widows were so
ravished with their long prayers, that they thought they could not do better
with their houses or estates, than to put them into the hands of such mortified
men to the world: till they found, notwithstanding their Sheeps clothing, that
by their devouring they were ravening Wolves. Those that seem so much to fly
from the world, do but as Soldiers in a battle sometimes do, that seem to fly
from their enemies, but only with a design to make them follow, that they may
have the more advantage upon them. One would think no men were so afraid of the
world, as they that seem to run so fast from it, but they lay their Ambuscado's
to entrap it; and i^ once it gets into their hand, no men know better how to be
revenged upon it. What pleasant incongruities are these? to see men grow rich
by Vows of Poverty, retired from the world, and yet the most unquiet and busy
in it? Mortified to the pleasures of life, and yet delighting most in following
the Courts of Princes? Such kind of men were the Pharisees of old: and who
would have thought, that under the Name of that Jesus, who so much detested and
abhorred their hypocrisy, there should others arise, who have outdone them in
their own way? As though Christ had said, Except your righteousness be like the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. But we need not wonder that in these later ages such pretenses
should be made use of, since in the very beginning of the Christian Church,
these were the common arts of deceivers. They found fault with the Apostles as
giving too much liberty to men in the use of Marriage and Meats; but they
thought the state of the one was not agreeable to their sanctity, nor the free
use of the other consistent with their severe and mortified life. For they did
forbid to marry, ^ Tim. 4.3.
and commanded to abstain from meats. They would not make use of the liberty
which God had allowed, but they were ready to take that which he had forbidden:
therefore the Apostle gives the true character of them when he says, they
spoke lies in hypocrisy. There was an outward show of sanctity and severity in
their doctrine; but no men are observed by Ecclesiastical Historians to have
been more eager of what God had forbidden, than they who were so scrupulous
about what God had allowed. We do not say, the case is altogether the same,
where men are forbidden absolutely, as though Marriage were unlawful in it
self; which was the case of the ancient Heretics; and where it is forbidden
only to a particular Order of men, as it is in the Church of Rome: but this we
say, that where it is forbidden to a particular Order of men, as though it did
not become the sanctity of that Order; this is reviving that hypocrisy which
St. Paul condemns: especially when it is forbidden on such an account as Pope
Siricius did it, Siric. Ep. 1. c. 7. Ep. 4. c. 9,
because they that are in the flesh cannot please God; which is in effect
sending all married persons to Hell. This was one part of the pretended
mortification of false Teachers about Marriage, the other was about Meats. St.
Paul knew no such holiness in one sort of Meat above another, as though men
could fast their bellies full of one, but the least taste of the other destroyed
it. What a pleasant thing it is to account that fasting, which the unmortified
Epicures of old accounted their most delicious feasting, viz. Fish and Wine!
This is not doing so much as the Pharisees did, for they appeared unto men to
fast: Matt. 6.17.
but in the Church of Rome they cannot be said to do that, unless fasting and
eating be the same thing. But may not the Church call not eating prohibited
meat fasting? No doubt it may; as well as call that no bread, which we see, and
taste, and handle to be bread. However I cannot understand, but if their Church
had so pleased, the eating Flesh and abstaining from Fish might have been
called fasting; and so they might have made one entire Fast of a whole years
eating: and notwithstanding all the pretense of fasting and mortification in
that Church, I cannot see that any man is bound by the Laws of it, to keep one
true fast all the days of his life. But if all the mortification required, lies
only in a distinction of meats, the false Apostles went beyond them in it; for
they utterly forbid some sorts, saying, touch not, taste not, handle not; and
not merely to show their obedience to the commands of the Church, Col. 2.24.
but that they might not gratify the desires of the flesh, and therefore the
Apostle says, these things had on that account a show of wisdom in them* V. 23.
being in all probability taken from the severe precepts of the Pythagorean
Philosophy, which makes him bid them, Beware lest they were spoiled through
Philosophy and vain deceit, V. 8.
after the tradition of men, and the principles of the world, and not after
Christ. For if this sort of mortification were a thing so pleasing to God, the
Heathen principles were more agreeable to his nature, than the doctrine of
Christianity. This only requires the subduing our inward lusts, and in order to
that, to keep the body in subjection; but in the mysteries of the Heathen
Religion far greater severities were to be undergone, in order to their
participation of them. And the hardships were so great in some of their
initiations, especially those of Mithras, that some died before they could pass
through them: and yet for any to be admitted without them, was present death to
them. They were to make confession of their sins, shave their heads, change
their habits, lie upon the bare ground, fast for several days, and when they
eat, it was to be only of some certain meats; these and many other severities
they were to go through in order to the purifying their souls, as they thought,
and bring them to the state they were in before they came into the body. Some
part of these hardships the Pythagoreans took into their Philosophy; and from
them the Colossians began to be infected with them: but St. Paul calls them
only vain deceits, the commandments and doctrines of men, things that made a
fair show, but he looks upon them as corruptions of the doctrine of Christ. Yet
afterward the Montanists and Encratitae and others were much stricter and more
frequent in these fasts and abstinence, than the Catholic Christians; but the
Church thought sit to condemn them, as corruptors of Christianity. By all which
we see, how apt men are to be deceived by false Teachers, when they pretend to
so much Mortification above what Christianity requires from them.

3. They pretended to know the mind of Christ better than the Apostles did:
they pretended, that they had conversed familiarly with Christ upon earth, and
understood his meaning better than the Apostles did. And therefore their
Disciples in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12.
were neither for Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, but they were only for Christ:
and gave out that from him they understood, that what he had said concerning
the Resurrection, was only to be understood of the state of Regeneration: which
doctrine it seems had gotten great sooting in the Church of Corinth by their
means. They reported, that the Apostles understood only some common and
ordinary things, but the deeper and more hidden mysteries were only made know
to them: which makes St. Paul in his Epistles to those Churches which they had
corrupted, speak so often of his understanding the mysteries of God: 1 Cor. 2.7.
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world to our glory: Ephesians 1.9.
having made known unto us the mystery of his will: whereby ye may understand
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. The true Apostles declared, that they
kept back nothing of the counsel of God, 3, 4.
but delivered it openly and plainly, to make all men see and understand what
that mystery was: the false Apostles pretended, V. ^.
that the Doctrine and writings of the Apostles did not contain all the great
mysteries of the Gospel, but they were received from Christ's own mouth, and
conveyed to others by a secret and oral Tradition. The things written by the
Evangelists they could not deny to be true, but they were dark and obscure, and
could not be understood but by the help of their oral Tradition: and upon this
principle, Cerinthus, Basilides, Valentinus, and Mar^ion went, Iren. l. 3. c. 2.
as appears by Irenaeus. For when they saw they could never make good their
Doctrines by the writings of the New Testament, they sought to blast the
reputation of these, and set up the Authority of an oral Tradition above them.
Men do not use to pick quarrels with their Friends; and therefore when we find
any charging the Scripture with obscurity and imperfection, we have reason to
believe, they hope for no comfort from it.

4. They made use of the most subtle and crafty methods of deceiving. To this
end they were very busy and active, watching every opportunity; therefore St.
Paul charges them with slight and cunning craftiness, lying in wait to
deceive: Ephesians. 4.14.
i. e. with using all the arts and tricks of deceivers: as (1.) By deep
dissimulation and disguising themselves; not appearing at first to be what they
really are; nor letting them understand, what their true doctrine and design
is. If any of those they hope to gain, object any thing against them, how do
they pity their ignorance, and rev^le their Teachers, that did so foully
misrepresent their Doctrines to them! Alas for them poor men, they neither
under and us nor our Religion! They have taken up things upon trust, and their
prejudice will not suffer them to exam^ne things as they are. Have you not been
told thus and thus concerning us, and not one word of it is true? Never trust
such men more, come, be persuaded by us, and then you shall ^e truly
enlightened. (2.) By rai^ing prejudices against their Teachers; as they did in
the Church of Corinth against St Paul representing him as a man of a mean and
contemptible presence, and rude in speech, ^ Cor. 10.^. 11.6.
Come, say they, and hear our Preachers, with what admirable eloquence and
moving expressions they speak, how they dart beams of light into men's minds,
and strike through the souls of men! you would never care for this dull and
obscure way of St. Paul more. But this is a small thing to disparage only his
gifts; Observe, say they, his doctrine, and see whither it tends, is not he
against those that forbid to marry, and abstain from meats? Judge now whither
these loose doctrines lead men. So St. Paul tells us, that they had represented
him as one that walked after the flesh; 2 Cor. 10*2.
and had prevailed so far upon the people by these sly insinuations, as though
all he aimed at, was only for his own advantage, viz. that he might be popular,
and get himself an interest among that rich people of Corinth, so that he tells
them, he was fain to live upon other Churches to do them service: 2 Cor. 11.8.
and he tells us afterward the false Apostles gave the occasion of it: 1^.
and in the Churches of Galatia they had turned his greatest friends to be his
enemies, and he gives this account of it, they would exclude us, that you might
affect them. Gal. 4.^5*16, 17*
(3.) By sowing Schisms and Divisions among them. This was their masterpiece,
to beget contentions where they could not prevail themselves. What joy was it
to them to see in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.12.
such parties and factions made among them? some for Paul, some for Apollos,
3.3.
some for Cephas; from hence proceeded envying, and strife, and divisions among
them; and this gave them a fair opportunity of breaking them in pieces one
against another. And therefore the Apostle saw it necessary to use the utmost
means to cure these divisions among them; and elsewhere beseeches the
Christians to mark them that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, Romans 16.17, 18.
and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but
their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple: i. e. they carry on their own designs and interests, by these means;
and therefore study all the ways to foment and increase them. Why should the
disciples of Peter yield to those of Paul, and why should not those of Apollos
be regarded as much as either? And such was the unhappy success of these men's
arts in this divided Church of Corinth, that notwithstanding all the care of
St. Paul to put an end to their factions, they brake out with greater fury
afterward, as appears by the Epistle of Clemens to them: Clem. Ep p. 2.19.
and he takes notice of those who did cast the arrows of contention among them:
and therefore he makes that the chief argument of his Epistle, to defeat the
design of the false Teachers, by persuading them to peace and unity among
themselves. (4.) By the most plausible insinuations. By good words and fair
speeches, says St. Paul, they deceive the hearts of the simple: they might
find by their softness and gentleness that they were in Sheeps clothing. How
meek and humble, and insinuating are they where they have any hopes of a prey!
how do the bowels of these ravening Wolves yearn toward the silly Sheep, that
look only on their outsides! They would not hurt a limb of them for all the
world! Nothing but mere zeal for their good, could make them run such hazards,
and venture so much as they do! What end could they have in following such
stray Sheep, but to reduce them to the true sheepfold? Thus, if the Wolves may
be believed, there is no danger to the Sheep, but from their Sherherds: let
them but forsake them, and then see what admirable love, and peace, and unity
they would live together in: but the Apostle well adds to all this, deceiving
the hearts of the simple, for none else are capable of being thus deceived, by
all their fair pretenses and plausible insinuations.

5. The false Teachers were for a more pompous and easy way of Religion, than
the true Apostles were: These were for the purity and simplicity of the Gospel
of Christ, the other were for joining the Jewish Ceremonies and the Heathen
Customs together with it; and by this means they hoped with much more ease to
gain Proselites to them; especially when to this they added a greater liberty
in men's lives; so that by these offers, they hoped to gain the vain, the
superstitious, and the profaner sort wholly to them. See how St. Paul describes
them, ^. Tim. 3.4, 5.
having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it; for of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts. These were subjects rightly disposed to be deceived by
them: their folly made them capable, and their lusts very tractable, to such a
formal, pompous, easy Religion: It was by this indulgence of men in their
sins, that vile Sect of the Gnostics gained so much ground in the beginnings
of Christianity. St. Chrysostom thinks these words of our Savior have a
particular respect to the foregoing words, Matt. 7.14.
Strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it. Now these words coming immediately after seem to imply, that
these false Prophets were for making the gate wider, and the way to Heaven
larger than Christ has done, and such need not fear they shall have many
followers, and especially of those who are farthest from the Kingdom of Heaven.
All the blessedness our Savior prom^se^* (...) to the (...) and contrite, to
the meek and righteous, to the merciful, pure and peaceable: but if others
make easier conditions of blessedness, no wonder if their doctrine be
entertained by those who are willing to be happy, but unwilling to leave their
sins. As if false Teachers should turn our Savior's Beatitudes into such as
these; Blessed are ye, if ye confess your sins to a Priest, and receive the
Sacrament of Penance, for your sins are forgiven. Blessed are ye, if ye vow
poverty, and leave the world; for ye shall inherit the earth. Blessed are ye,
if ye go in Pilgrimages, and visit the seven Churches (especially in a year of
Jubilee, and receive the Pope's benediction) for ye shall be called the
Children of God. Blessed are ye, if ye do or suffer evil for the Catholic
Churches sake; for great shall be your reward in Heaven. Blessed are they, that
howsoever they live, die in St. Francis his habit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. For so Gregory the Ninth says, (...) Privile^^ S. Francis. p 6.
that St. Francis obtained this privilege of God, that whosoever had that habit
on, could not die ill: and St. Francis adds himself, That whosoever loved his
Order in his heart, how great a sinner soever he was, should obtain mercy of
God. And are not these much easier terms of blessedness, than those our Savior
lays down? Besides, that which makes the way to Heaven more narrow, is that our
Savior declares, he came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it: and adds
precepts of his own to it: But do not they make the way to Heaven much opener,
that teach men to dissolve both the Law and the Precepts of Christ? For this is
the language of these false Teachers, if we bring their doctrine to the manner
of our Savior's expressions. Ye have heard, that it has been said of old,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; but we say
unto you; that ye are to give worship both to Saints and Angels. Ye have heard,
that it has been said by them of old time; Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, etc. but we say unto you, that
this Command may be left out among Christians. You have heard that it has been
said of old, Thou shall not kill: but we say unto you, that to murder Princes,
blow up Parliaments, destroy Heretics is lawful for the good of the Catholic
Church. You have heard, that it has been said of old, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: but we say unto you, that marriage in a Priest is worse than
Fornication. Thus far for the Law; now let us see the liberty they take as to
the precepts of the Gospel. Ye have heard that it has been said by Christ,
Drink ye all of this. but we say unto you that notwithstanding this precept of
Christ, the Laity must not do it. You have heard, that it has been said by the
Apostle, that men ought to pray with understanding: but we say unto you* that
men need not understand what they pray for. Ye have heard that ye have been
commanded both by Christ and his Apostles, to read the Scriptures: but we
forbid the people to read the Scriptures, and sa^, that more hurt than good
comes by it* Judge now* whether the character of false Teachers do not belong
to them, who have found another way, nay, a contrary way to Heaven* to that
which our Savior directed? And so much for the Caution here given, and the
Reason annexed to it; Beware of false Prophets for they come to you in Sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. I come now,

2. To the Rule laid down by our Savior for the judging of them; By their
Fruits ye shall know them. He does not send men to an infallible Judge to know
the true and false Teachers from each other, but lays down such a Rule as he
supposed might be sufficient to direct men in their judgment of them. If Christ
had ever intended to have left such a Vicar upon earth, whose judgment all
Christians are bound to follow, he would never have put them to such a needless
trial of men's Doctrines by their Fruits: the short and plain way had been to
have said thus, There will false Teachers arise* but remember that you are to
obey and follow the Bishop of Rome; and if you will be saved, I command you, to
hold in communion with him. This had ^een the fullest and clearest direction in
the world; and no doubt, if our blessed Savior had meant any such thing, such
was his care of the souls of men, this would have been one of the first and
plainest precepts of the Gospel. But so dark and obscure, so remote and
impertinent are the proofs brought from Scripture for the Pope's Supremacy,
that I dare say, that Aristotle's Politics do prove it much better than any
Text in the Bible: and those I suppose have been of my opinion, who slightly
passing over the passages of Scripture, have been large in proving, that
Monarchy is the best Government, and therefore ought to be in the Church. Which
argument if it have any force for an Universal Monarchy in the Church, I should
not at all wonder to see the same persons zealous to promote an Universal
Monarchy in the World too. For if the argument in the Canon Law be good* ^
That the Pope is above the Emperor, because God created two great Lights, the
Sun and the Moon: I hope the same reason, which will prove it necessary for the
Sun to rule the day* will equally hold, that the Moon should rule the night.
And I shall easily agree, that when it will be thought reasonable for all the
Kings and Princes in the world to submit themselves to one Universal Monarch,
it may be then expedient for all particular Churches, to give up their rights
to the Pope. In the mean time we think it most convenient to follow our
Savior's rules, to judge of men's pretenses, how great and haughty soever, by
the fruits they produce. Which Rule is not to be understood concerning the
particular actions of men which have no respect to their doctrines; for as St.
Chrysostom observes, many Heretics have been men of excellent lives, and so on
the contrary; but we are to understand it of those fruits which their doctrines
have a direct influence upon. And therefore this Rule has a particular respect
to two things by which we are to examine the fairest pretenses: viz. 1. The
design they tend to. 2. The means made use of for the accomplishing this
design. If therefore the design be quite of another nature from that of the
Gospel; if the means be such as are directly contrary to it, we may from thence
justly infer, that how plausible soever the pretenses are, how fine and soft
soever the Sheeps clothing be, yet inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

1. I begin therefore, with the design of their doctrines. Nothing is more
easy, than for men to understand the design of Christianity, viz. the exercise
of all Christian virtues to sit men for the Kingdom of Heaven: for our Savior
declares, Joh 18.36
That his Kingdom is not of this world; that he came not to meddle with the
rights of Princes, or to dispose of Crowns and Dominions; all that he aimed at,
was to possess men with a firm belief of another world, and by the most
powerful motives to persuade men to repentance, and a sober, righteous, and a
godly life. And if they did these things, wha^ever troubles and difficulties
they met with in this world, should ^e abu^dantly recompensed in that to come.
This is the main scope and design of the Christian Religion; and the great art
of the false Prophets lay in this, that they pretended still to own
Christianity, (which was their Sheeps clothing) but withal by secret and
pernicious mixtures of their own doctrines to undermine and pervert the whole
design of it. So St. Paul says of them, not that they did oppose, but that
they did pervert the Gospel of Christ. I marvel, Gal. 16.7.
says he, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ to another Gospel: which yet is not another, but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. Now I desire, it may be
considered, whether any thing does more effectually pervert the design of the
Gospel, than the setting up a Kingdom in this world under the pretense of it,
that should be paramount to all Princes and Potentates, and to which they owe
subjection and obedie^^^? And yet this has been the open and avowed design of
the prevailing Faction in the Church of Rome for the last six h^ndred years. I
do not deny but there were some tendencies to it before, and wise men might
easily guess what it would come to, if the design came once to be managed by a
man of Spirit and courage* as it was by Gregory the Seventh, who in a Council
at Rome published his famous Dictates, viz. That there is but one Name in the
World, viz. that of the Pope: Baron. An. 1076. Sect. 31.
that it was in his power to depose Emperors, and absolve Subjects from
obedience to their Princes. Now the grand design breaking out, all other things
were contrived and carried on which were thought necessary to accomplish it:
and there being two things needful for the maintenance of such a pretended
Monarchy, viz. sufficient numbers of men, whose interest should lie in
upholding it; and great revenues to support the dignity of it: These two were
taken care of with all the art and industry imaginable. For the first it was
necessary to dis-engage them from all civil interests, and yet to preserve
their honor and reputation with the people. The former could not be done while
the Clergy gave hostages of their fidelity to the C^vil Government by the
interests of their Families and Children, therefore this Pope did most severely
forbid all Clergy-mens marrying; that as the old Roman Soldiers were forbidden
marriage while they received pay, lest their domestic interests should abate
their courage: so the Celibate of the Clergy was strictly enjoined, to make
them more useful and hearty for this design. But lest the number of these
should not be thought sufficient, great swarms of Monks and Friars were
encouraged and dispersed in all Countries, and to make them more faithful to
this interest (because Princes might oblige particular Bishops who might curb
and restrain these spiritual Janissaries) therefore they were exempt from their
jurisdiction, and kept in immediate dependence on the Pope. To give yet further
encouragement to both Orders, the Doctrine of Ecclesiastica^ Liberty was set on
foot; not a liberty from the Law of Moses, or the power (...) Sin, or the
dominion of Satan, which i^ all the Liberty the Gospel speaks of; but an
exemption from the power of the Civil Magistrate; insomuch, that the Popish
Casuists determine, that Rebellion in a Clergy man is no Treason, because he is
not subject to the civil power. And this doctrine of Liberty is no invention of
the Jesuits; (...) Aph^r. V. Clericus Ed. Colon. Conc Constable. S^ss 19.
but it is determined by the famous Councils of Constance, Lateran and Trent,
that Lay persons have n^ Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical. Council. Lat* 5.
S^ss. 10. Conc. Tri^ Sess. 25. c. 2^. V. Ponti^i^* Rom in (...),
But besides this, the Pope has other ties upon them; every Bishop is at this
day sworn to obey the Pope at his Consecration; all the Regular Clergy are
under a Vow of blind obedience to their Superiors, who are more immediately
influenced by the Court of Rome. Now such an infinite number of persons being
made thus sure to the Papal Interest, it must be so ordered, that these persons
may preserve their reputation among the people; to this end, they are told,
that they must depend wholly upon the Priesthood for matters of faith and
salvation, and it is of mighty concernment to them to have the good will of the
Priests, for that upon their good or bad intention depends the making or
marring of their Sacraments. But that no designs might be carried on, which
they should not understand, never was there such an invention to that purpose,
as Auricular Confession: and yet that the people may have greater reverence to
their Priests, they are told, that they can make their God at any time by
pronouncing the Five Words of Consecration. And what cannot they do, (as one of
them bravely said) while they have their God in their hands, and their Prince
on his knees? And both these doctrines of Confession and Transubstantiation
were defined by the same Pope Innocent the Third, a man of the same spirit and
undertakings with Gregory the Seventh. And lastly, that no supplies should be
wanting to support the Grandeur of the Papal See, besides the pretended
Donations and Concessions of Princes, all arts imaginable were used to drain
money out of al^ Countries in subjection to the Pope, an^ to empty it into the
Pope's Treasury This very Kingdom of ours was a remarkable instance of this,
during it Vassallage under the Pope's Tyranny For an account being taken in
Henry the Eighths time, it was found, that i^ the compass of forty years
foregoing no less a sum than 160000 l. was carried to Rome upon the sole
account o^ Inves^iture of Bishops, Antiq Brit. A D. ^^^^.
besides the va^summs that were raised by Peter-penc^ dispensations and
Indulgences, which were a kind of Contribution upon the sins of the People.
Thus we see, how the design was laid and managed for a^ Universal Monarchy in
the Church. Bu^ some will say, That the world is grow^ (...) now. I heartily
wish it were so for nothing would be more prejudical to the Papal Interest,
than its being so. But let us not deceive our selves, the pretensions are as
high and as great at Rome to this Monarchy as ever they were. And whatever some
vainly distinguish of the Court and Church of Rome in this matter, it is
certain those of the Court of Rome not only assert, but prove it too, that this
doctrine has been the doctrine of the Roman Church for six hundred years; and
they produce for it besides a great number of Authors, no fewer than ten
Councils, whereof two are allowed by them to be general viz. those of Lions and
Lateran. But this is not all, but they contend for it not as a probable
opinion, but as a thing certain and of faith, and that not barely at Rome, but
even in France. For in the memory of many yet alive, after a hot debate in a
general Assembly of the three Estates at Paris, the Pope^s Power of deposing
Princes was assented to by all the Nobility and Clergy of that Kingdom. A D.
161^*
Some particular persons among them, may and do oppose it of late; but they are
excommunicated at Rome for doing it; and thereby declared as much as they can
be, not to be members of their Church* for daring to oppose so Orthodox and
Catholic a Doctrine as the Pope's power of deposing Princes. Nay, Cardinal
Perron says in his eloquent Oration to the third Estate at Paris, Harangue
sait de la part, de la Chamber Ecclesiastique en celle dutiers Estat. sur
l'article du Serment. Par. Mo^sig. l' Eminentiss. Cardinal du Perron ^'An. 1615.
who opposed this Doctrine. That unless it were approved, it followed that the
Church of Rome for many Ages has been the Kingdom of Antichrist, and Synagogue
of Satan: K (...) Defense of the Right of Kings* in the Preface.
and King James tells us, That the Pope in his Letter of thanks to the
Nobility, for complying with this blessed Doctrine, called the Commons or
Deputies of the third Estate, Nebulones ex faece plebis, a pack of Knaves of
the very dregs of the people. Very obliging Language from the Head of the
Church! When all that the Commons desired, was only to have this opinion
condemned, That the Pope has power to depose Princes, and that killing of
Kings is an act meritorious to the purchase of the Crown of Martyrdom: but this
by all their instances and arguments, they could never obtain; but the Nobility
and Clergy overruled them in it. For the Clergy, King James says, he did not
wonder so much, because they look ^n themselves as properly Subjects to the
Pope, and therefore are bound to advance that Monarchy to which they belong.
But for the Nobility, says he, the King's right arm, to prostitute, and set as
it were to sale, the Dignity of their King, as if the arm should give a thrust
unto the head; I say, for the Nobility to hold and maintain even in Parliament
their King is liable to deposition by any foreign Power or Potentate, may it
not pass for one of the strangest Miracles, and rarest Wonders of the World?
For that once granted, this consequence is good and necessary; That in case the
King once lawfully deposed, shall stand upon the defensive, and hold out for
his right, he may then be lawfully murdered. Which consequence is very well
understood at Rome, and allowed to be good by the Roman Casuists; and yet the
eloquent Cardinal call that Doctrine which makes Princes indeposable by the
Pope, A breeder of Schisms, a gate that makes way for all Heresy to enter; and
a Doctrine to be held in such detestation, that rather than he and his fellow
Bishops will yield to the signing thereof, they will be contented like Martyrs
to burn at a stake. Blessed Martyrs the mean while! and ^it to be put in the
same Calendar with the Gunpowder Traitors, who suffered, as I shall show
presently, on the same principle; methinks they might have chosen a better
cause to have died Martyrs for. But surely it must be an article of faith, and
a main point of their Religion, which makes men Martyrs who suffer for it. And
such no doubt, it is accounted among them; when the same Cardinal says, That
it leads men not only to unavoidable Schism, but manifest Heresy to deny it;
and that it obliges men to confess, that the Catholic Church has for many
ages perished from the earth; for he confidently avows it, that all parties in
the Catholic Church have held it, and the whole French Church, till the time
of Calvin; that if this Doctrine be not true, the Pope is so far from being
Head of the Church and Vicar of Christ, that he is a Heretic and Antichrist,
and all the parts of their Church are the Limbs of Antichrist. And i^ they be
so, we cannot help it: but think we have great reason to secure our selves
against the infection of such pernicious principles both to Christianity and
the Civil Government. And what can be more opposite to the design of
Christianity, when that requires men to obey even Infidel and Heathen
Governors for conscience sake, Rom 13.5.
this Doctrine makes it lawful to depose, destroy, and murder Christian
Princes for the Pope and the Churches sake? This is the first thing we are to
examine false Teachers by; viz. the design of their Doctrines.

2. By the means made use of to accomplish this design: If things in themselves
evil, repugnant to the principles of humane nature, and those of civil
societies, as well as to the precepts of Christianity, are made lawful only
for the carrying on their design; we need not go farther examine them; for by
these fruits we may know them. There are three things which mainly uphold Civil
Societies, Truth, Obedience, and a care of the good of others; but if men fall
not through any sudden infirmity or surprise, but openly and avowedly justify
the lawfulness of falsehood, treason and cruelty, when they are intended for the
carrying on their design; what could they invent more contrary to the Laws both
of God and Man? wherein could they better discover themselves, notwithstanding
their Sheeps clothing, to be mere ravening Wolves? 1. Falsehood, and that both
in their words and dealings. 1. In their words, by asserting the lawfulness of
aequivocation and mental reservation in their most solemn Answers: as Father
Garnett, when the Lords asked him, Proceed. against the (...).
Whether he had any conference with Hall? denied it upon his Soul, and
reiterated it with such horrible execrations as wounded their hearts that heard
him, and immediately upon Hall 's confessing it, he excused himself by the
benefit of aequivocation: which being objected against Garnett after his
Execution, ^
the Roman Jesuit Eudaemon Johannes defends him in it, and says it is lawful
for a man to swear, and take the Sacrament upon it, when he knows in his
conscience, what he says to be absolutely false, if he does help himself by a
mental reservation. And Tresham a little before his death in the Tower
subscribed it with his own hand, Proceed. against the (...).
That he had not seen Garnett in sixteen years before, when it was evidently
proved, and Garnett confessed they had been together but the Summer before; and
all that Garnett had to say for him was, that he supposed he meant to
aequivocate. Lord* that men going into another world, should think thus grossly
to impose upon God and men. What was speech intended for, if not that others
might understand our meaning by it? Did ever any man tell a lie to himself?
Truth in words consists in an entire proposition, and not of one half-spoken
and half-concealed? and if it be lawful thus to abuse mankind, it was to no
purpose ever to forbid lying; for any but mere fools may help themselves in
their most solemn protestations, by some secret reserve in their own minds: and
so this principle makes way for all the lies or perjuries in the world, if a
man thinks that he is not bound to betray himself, or if he judges his own
damage will be greater by discovering the truth, than the others damage will be
by concealing it. 2. Falsehood in dealings: and that notwithstanding the most
solemn Promises, nay, the safe conducts of Princes. For notwithstanding all
their shifts and evasions in this matter, no man that regards his safety, will
ever put his life into their hands for the sake of the Council of Constance.
All that they have to say is, that the Emperor did as much as ^ay in him to
do; but it belonged to the Council to proceed upon Heretics, and the Emperor
could not hinder that. And what is this, but plainly to say, that Princes are
to keep their words with Infidels and Catholics, but they have nothing to do
to keep their words with Heretics? And if this be their principle, we must
have a care how far we trust them.

2. Treason. It is the honor of our Church of England, that it asserts the
Rights of Princes so clearly and fully, without tricks and reservations; and
all that mean honestly, love to speak plainly. But how many cases have they in
the Church of Rome, wherein men are acquitted from their duty from their
Princes? If a Toy comes into the Pope's head, or upon some Pique or Jealousy,
he falls to the censures of the Church, and excommunicates a Prince* what a
case is this poor Prince in, as to all those Subjects that think themselves
bound to obey the Pope? They may lawfully in their own opinion rise against
him, fight with him, assassinate and murder him. And which is very observable,
all this while they are not bound to believe the Pope infallible in these
censures; so that right or wrong, if a Prince chance to fall under the Pope's
censures, we see what a liberty is left to all his creatures to ruin and
destroy their Sovereign? The frequent attempts upon Queen Elizabeth, the murder
of Henry the Third of France, after their excommunications by Pius the Fifth,
and Sixtus the Fifth, are sufficient evidences of the danger of Princes in
these cases. By which last instance, we see it is not only the case of Heresy,
which renders them obnoxious to the Popes censures; but particular piques and
quarrels; or if the Pope chance to think a man unfit to govern, as in the case
of Chilperic of France; or if they detain Church Lands belonging to
Monasteries, in which case Becanus says expressly, Becan. (...) Angl. p* 1^7.
Kings and Princes are to be excommunicated and deprived: and Pope Paul the
Fourth was perfectly of this opinion; and declared, They were in a state of
damnation that held them. But so far some of them, History of the Council of
Trent, l. 5. n 39^
are kind to Princes to say, That they ought not to be deposed, till they are
excommunicated; and yet Gregory the Seventh before excommunication deprived the
Emperor Henry the Fourth for the damnable Heresy, of defending his own
Rights. But since they are liable to these horrible censures upon so many
causes, we may see how very ticklish and uncertain the doctrine of Obedience
must be among them, and that men's being guilty of Treason depends upon the
Popes pleasure. And methinks herein the case of Princes deserves hugely to be
pitied, that when no man thinks it lawful to cut another man's throat, or put
him out of his house and estate, because he is excommunicated; yet if a Prince
falls under excommunication, he loses presently his right to the Crown, and his
Subjects may take away Crown, Liberty, and Life from him.

3. Cruelty. And by this they fully discover themselves to be ravening Wolves:
when they have lost all the tenderness, and love, and good nature of men or
Christians: when no design can be so horrible or bloody, so mischievous and
treacherous, so base and cruel, but persons will be found to undertake it, and
that under a pretense of Conscience and Religion. I need not here tell the long
and dreadful stories of the Roman Inquisition, the numbers of those in other
Countries who have been butchered on the account of Religion, but the Fact, I
mean the Conspiracy, (for God be thanked it went not farther) which we bless
God for the discovery and defeating of this day, does abundantly manifest the
fruits of those doctrines, which they had sucked in from the Roman Church. If
only a few desperate persons upon personal provocations had been engaged in so
villainous a design, we should have had never the less reason to thank God for
our deliverance; but since it does appear, that those persons who undertook it,
pretended nothing in it but conscience and Religion, we have not only reason to
abhor the undertaking, but the principles which animated them to it.

I know very well what Sheeps clothing has been of late cast over the most
barbarous cruelty of these ravening Wolves; and men by their impudence would
endeavor to bear us down, that it was only a project of some few malcontents,
Apology for Papists. Reply to the Answer* p. ^03. Advocate for Libert^ of
Consci^nce, p 218.
drawn in by the subtilty of a crafty Statesman in those days; and that it
ought not in justice or honor to be imputed to the principles of their
Religion. Therefore to lay open before you the just and true circumstances of
this horrible Conspiracy, I shall proceed upon th^se thr^e particulars.

1. That the persons engaged in it had no personal provocations to move them to
it.

2. That all the motives they had to it were from the principles of their
Religion.

3. That the Church of Rome has never since detested the principles upon which
they acted; or set any mark of infamy on the Actors in it.

1. That the persons engaged in it had no personal provocations. What injury
had Catesby, or Piercy, or Tresham, or Digby received from the King or
Parliament, to stir them up above thousands of others to be the great managers
of so hellish a Plot? Did not they enjoy their estates and places, and one of
them at Court too? Why should these men venture lives, estates, honors,
families, and all that was dear to them? Were their estates confiscated before;
and themselves every hour in danger of having their throats cut? This might
make men of high spirits grow desperate. But not the least tittle of all this
was pretended, by the most enraged of them: nothing but Zeal for Religion and
the Catholic Cause, was ever pleaded for them. To which purpose these are
remarkable words of King James in his Speech in Parliament upon the discovery.
For if these Conspirators, K. James's Works, p. 501.
says he, had only been bankrupt persons, or discontented upon occasion of any
disgraces done them, this might have seemed to have been but a work of revenge.
But for my own part, as I scarcely ever knew any of them, so cannot they
allege so much as a pretended cause of grief, and the wretch himself in hands
does confess, that there was no cause moving him or them, but Merely and Only
Religion. And the King himself again avowed it to the whole Christian world, K.
James's Works. p 253
That the Papists had not before this horrible design, the least color of any
discontent from him: that he had so far suspended penalties, and abated the
rigorous execution of Laws against them, to such a degree, as gave great
suspicion to his best Subjects, who told him what would be the fruit of all his
kindness to them. Nay, he says, they grew to that height of pride in
confidence of his Mildness, as they did directly expect, and assuredly promise
to themselves Liberty of Conscience, and equality with his other Subjects in
all things: that he had sh^wn particular Favors to many of (...) a free access
to him, eased them of their payments, set their Priests at liberty, granted a
general Pardon to them after conviction. Now after all this, what color or
pretense in the world can there be to say, that only discontent and despair
brought these men to it? O, but it might however be the cunning of a great
Minister of State, to draw a few Gentlemen and others into such a Plot. This I
know is suggested and believed by some, who think it a fine thing to talk out
of the common road, and to be thought more skillful in Mysteries of State than
other men. But I would fain understand from whence they derive this profound
intelligence at such a distance of years. If King James may be believed, if the
Popish Historians and Apologists at that time may be credited, there was not
the least intimation given, either by the Actors or Sufferers, from abroad or
at home of any such thing. Was not the world sufficiently alarmed at the news
of this dangerous and unparalleled Conspiracy? Were not men very inquisitive
into all the particulars? and those of the Church of Rome, especially the
Jesuits, concerned in point of honor to wipe off the stain from themselves,
and to cast the odium of it on a great Minister of State? Were not two of the
Jesuits who were conscious of the Plot, preferred afterward at Rome? and how
many Writings came from thence about it? and yet not one man discovered the
least suspicion of any such thing. If they go on in this way without the least
shadow of proof to lay the contrivance of this Plot on a professed Protestant:
for all that I know, by the next age, they may hope to persuade men, that it
was a Plot of Protestants to blow up a Popish King and Parliament.

2. That they had all their Motives and Encouragements from the principles of
their Religion to undertake such a design. (And Philostratus contends, L. 7.
Vit. Apol.
that the murder of Domitian ought rather to be attributed to the doctrines of
Apollonius, than to the hands of Stephanus and Parthenius.) For which we are to
consider, that they were fully possessed with this as a principle of their
Religion, That it was absolutely in the Pope's power to deprive heretical
Princes of their dominions: which had been rooted in them, especially after
that Pius the Fifth had fully declared it in his Bull against Queen Elizabeth.
In her case they made no scruple to destroy her if they could, and thought they
should do it with a good conscience. And there are no Villains in the world
like those who are Villains out of conscience. But as to the Queen's Successor,
the Pope had declared nothing; till such time as Garnett being Provincial of
the Jesuits, had received two Breves from Rome, wherein he declared, That in
case they should suspect the Queen's Successor would not be true to their
Religion, A^^idringt append. ad Supplicat. p. 133.
it was lawful for them to use their endeavors to keep him from the Crown.
These Breves Garnett shows to Catesby* Proceed. against the ^raitors Garnett's
^ival.
who took the rise of his design from hence. And when afterward in conference
Garnett desired him to know the Popes opinion in it, he replied, That he needed
not ask that, for if it were lawfu^^ to exclude him before he came to the
Crown* it was lawful to take him away when he was in possession of it. Which
argument was so strong, that Garnett either had no mind, or was not able to
answer it. All the scruple Catesby had after this was, whether it were lawful
to destroy the innocent and guilty together? which Garnett fully resolved him
in, so it were for the greater good of the Church. Upon these two grounds, as
Widdrington, a Roman Catholic well observes, Catesby laid the foundation of
his whole Conspiracy. After this, it is evident by manifest proofs, and
Garnett's own confession under his hand, that he and other Jesuits did
understand the particulars of the Plot; and Tesmond another Jesuit and he
discoursed the circumstances walking together in Moor-fields; and that not in
confession, as is pretended, for the Jesuit did not confess it as a fault, but
advised with him about particulars, and asked him, who should be Protector of
the Kingdom after the Plot took effect? as Garnett himself confessed. But
suppose it had been in confession; why might not Treason be discovered as well
as Heresy? and their Casuists acknowledge, that Heresy may be revealed. There
is only this difference, that Treason is only against Secular Princes, but
Heresy against the interest of their Church; which is dearer to them than all
the Princes lives in the World. Yea, so busy were the Jesuits in encouraging
this Plot, that they not only debated it among themselves; but one of them gave
them the Sacrament upon the Oath of Secrecy, and then absolved them after the
discovery; another prayed for good success, another comforted them after it was
discovered by the examples of good designs that had wanted success. And must we
after all this believe, that only a few discontented Laics were engaged in it,
and that it was nothing at all to their Church? when the Jesuits gave all the
encouragement to them in it, in point of conscience: so that it was truly, as
well as wittily said of one, That the Jesuits double garment might well be
called Charity, because it covered a multitude of sins.

3. But if the Church of Rome give no encouragement to such actions; why has
it not detested the principles upon which it was grounded? Why has it not
removed all suspicion in the minds of Princes and People of giving any
countenance to such treasonable designs* But on the contrary, the same
doctrines are still avowed, and the persons of the Conspirators honored.
Widdrington says, (...) 150.
That Garnett 's name was inserted into the English Martyrology, though he gave
it under his hand, that he died for Treason, That his bones were kept for
Relics, and his Image set over Altars, as of a holy Martyr? Is this the
honor of Regicides and Traitors in the Roman Church? When in the late
prosperous Rebellion, the prevailing Faction had proceeded to such a height of
Wickedness, as to take away the life of our Gracious Sovereign, how did the
Church and Nation groan and grow impatient till they could vindicate the honor
of our Religion and Country! not only by an execution of Justice on the persons
of the Regicides, but by declaring in Parliament against the principles that
led to it. What has there been done like this in the Court or Church of Rome,
against the principles or actors of this Gunpowder Treason? If it had
succeeded, by all that we can see, Paul the Fifth might have admired the
providence of God in it, as much as Sixtus the Fifth did in the murder of Henry
the Third of France: and we may guess his mind shrewdly by the Bulls he
published against the Oath of Allegiance, which the King was forced for his own
security to impose on the Papists after this Conspiracy. With what scorn and
contempt does Bellarmine treat the King in his Writings against him, and tells
him in plain terms, if he would be secure, he must give liberty to their
Religion? It seems then, their principles are dangerous to Princes where they
have it not. What mark of dishonor was there set by their own party on any one
of the Conspirators? Two of the Jesuits upon their arrival at Rome, met with
such hard usage, that one was made the Pope's Poenitentiary, the other a
Confessor in St. Peter's at Rome. And is not this the way to let the world see,
how detestable such persons and practices are to their Church? To conclude all,
I challenge those of the Roman Church to produce any one solemn Declaration of
that Church, (I do not say of Secular Powers or some particular persons, or
Councils rejected at Rome) whereby they make it unlawful for the Pope to
depose Princes, or to absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance to them.
But instead of that, even in this present age of ours, that opinion which makes
it unlawful, has been condemned at Rome by three several Popes, Paul the
Fifth, Innocent the Tenth, and Alexander the Seventh: and which is more
considerable, all three have condemned it with a particular respect to the case
of his Majesty's Subjects; and not merely condemned it as a false opinion, but
as wicked and contrary to faith. And is not the world grown wiser now as to
these matters? But if they be not I hope we may be. And after their frequent
Treasons and horrible Conspiracies, and principles never disowned by their
Church, have we not reason to entertain suspicion of them, as to their
principles of Civil Government, till they give sufficient security, that these
pernicious principles have no influence upon them?

But blessed be that God, that has hitherto defeated the malicious purposes of
the inveterate enemies of our Church and Religion: that has brought to light
these works of darkness; and yet continued us in the enjoyment of the benefits
of this mighty deliverance to this day. May the same Gracious God go on still
to protect our established Religion, against all Foreign Usurpations and
Domestic Factions. May our love to it still increase, and our zeal for its
Preservation make us study the best means to preserve it; that neither
Divisions among our selves, nor Assaults of our common enemies may be ever able
to ruin and destroy it; that we may still say with the Psalmist, Blessed be the
Lord, (...) 6, 7, 8.
who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped as
a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken and we are escaped.
Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth.

SERMON III. Preached before the KING, February 24. 1674/5.
HEB. III.13. -- Lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.


WHen the Jewish Christians had formed themselves into an established Church,
and were become considerable for their number, as well as for their zeal and
devotion, their obstinate Brethren thought it high time for their own security,
at least to weaken and divide them, if they could not wholly suppress and
destroy them. For this end, they made use of different instruments and means,
according to the different seasons, and dispositions of men. Sometimes when
they had any encouragement, or connivence from the Roman Power, they set upon
them with rage and fury, Heb. 10.32, 34.
spoiling their goods, and threatening their lives: But this hard usage did only
heighten the courage, and unite the affections of the more zealous Christians.
Sometimes they suggested to them the mighty veneration, which their whole
Nation always had for Moses and the Law, and what an infinite scandal and
dishonor it would be to them all, to have that Law, which was delivered by
Angels, confirmed by Miracles, established by Prophets, admired by the
Gentiles, and had continued among them for so many Ages, now of a sudden to be
laid aside for the sake of a new institution, that expressed no more regard to
them than to any other Nation in the World. And so great was the love which the
Jews had to their own Country and Religion, such an opinion was generally
received among them of the peculiar favor of God toward them, that they who
could not be shocked by persecution, were in danger of being overcome by
flattery. From hence the Author of this Epistle makes it his business to show
the excellency of Christ above Moses, and of his institution above that of the
Law, in respect of the Priesthood and Sacrifices, and the benefits which come
by them; and that although this new and living way were but lately discovered,
yet it was that which was always designed by God, foreseen by the Patriarchs,
foretold by the Prophets, and longed for by good men as the Consolation of
Israel* and it could be no more disparagement to Moses and the Prophets to
yield to the Glories of the Kingdom of the Messiah, than it is to the Stars not
to be seen when the light of the Sun appears. But besides these, there were
some among them capable of being wrought upon by other kind of arguments, such
I mean, who out of a sudden transport of zeal, and being convinced by the
miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost, had declared themselves Christians,
but yet retained a secret love to their sins, and the pleasures of this World:
these were the Persons whom the Apostle, not without reason, expresses the
greatest jealousy of, as in danger of Apostasy: and therefore in many places
of this Epistle, he represents to them the dreadful consequences of such an
Apostasy, for it was no less than crucifying the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6.6.
and putting him to an open shame; it was counting the blood of the Covenant
wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing, and doing despite unto the
spirit of Grace; nay it was not only crucifying, 10.29.
but treading under foot the Son of God; and therefore he bids them consider,
what punishment such persons would deserve at the hands of God into which they
must fall, and what hopes there could be of pardon for those who so openly
rejected the only means of obtaining it; ^
For if they did herein si^ wilfully after they had received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour the
Adversaries But he not only sets before them the sa^ effects of Apostasy, but
as one that loved their souls, and designed to prevent their ruin, he gives
them the best advice and counsel against it: He knew well enough, it was not
the dissatisfaction of men's reason, which was the ground of their infidelity:
but, as men's more open designs are governed by such springs which are least
discovered; so, whatever these warping Christians might pretend, as to zeal for
the Law, and their ancient Religion, the bottom of all was a principle of
infidelity, not arising from want of sufficient reason to convince them, but
from a close and secret love of sin which made them willing to quarrel with
what ever was so repugnant to it, as the doctrine of Christ. To this end, he
puts them in mind of the case of their Forefathers in the Wilderness, who
wanted no arguments to convince them of God's Goodness and Providence; yet
nothing would satisfy them, but they were still murmuring and complaining,
till at last God swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest.
Heb. 3.11
And since you all acknowledge, they had reason enough to be satisfied, but out
of an obstinate and stubborn humor hardened their hearts in the day of
temptation in the Wilderness; take heed Brethren, says the Apostle, ^
lest there be in any of you such an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God; and do not look upon this advice as vain and needless to you
that are called the believing Jews, but you have cause to be (...) watchful
over one another, especially in this tempting Age, exhorting one another daily
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin. As though he had said to them, You who now glory in the name of
Believers, and are hitherto as forward as any in the profession of
Christianity, do not think your selves to be above the need of any helps to
confirm your faith, and to arm you against the assaults of temptations, for
your very security may betray you; but consider the sin that does so easily
beset you on every side, the various artifices it makes use of to deceive men,
and when it has once gotten admission, how strangely it bewitches and
infatuates the minds of men, how unwilling they are to be convinced of their
sins, how much more unwilling to part with them, and how naturally the love of
sin brings men to infidelity, and then you will see how great reason there is,
why you should be exhorting one another daily while it is called to day, lest
any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

In which words, are these three things considerable.

1. The danger they are in of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
who have the most powerful motives and engagements against it.

2. The manner whereby sin does prevail upon men to harden them, through the
deceitfulness of sin.

3. The care that all Christians ought to have to prevent being hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin: Lest any of you, etc.

1. The danger men are in of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
though they have the most powerful motives and engagements against it. For
never any Persons had greater arguments against returning to the practice of
sin, than these to whom this Epistle was written. They had embraced among the
first principles of the doctrine of Christ, H^b 6 ^^
the foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God, of the
doctrine of baptisms and of laying on of ^ands (for the miraculous gifts of the
Holy Ghost) and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And
what can we suppose to have greater (...) and ef^^cacy to restrain men from
sin, than what is contained in these fundamentals of Christianity? But we shall
find that no Motives have ever been great enough to restrain those from sin,
who have secretly loved it, and only sought pretenses for the practice of it.

Such is the frame and condition of humane nature considered in it self, so
great are the advantages of reason and consideration for the government of our
actions, so much stronger are the natural motives to virtue than to vice, that
they who look no farther, would expect to find the world much better than it
is. For why should we suppose the generality of mankind to betray so much
folly, as to act unreasonably and against the common interest of their own
kind? as all those do, that yield to the temptations of sin: For if we set
aside the consideration of a Divine Law, to sin is nothing else but to act
foolishly and inconsiderately. But on the other side, if men first look into
the practice of the world, and there observe the strange prevalency of Vice,
and how willing men are to defend as well as to commit it; they would be apt to
imagine that either there is no such thing as Reason among men, or that it has
very little influence upon their actions; and that the talk of Virtue was first
found out by some great enemy to the Felicity of Mankind. Such different
apprehensions would men have from the different ways of beholding the Picture
of Humane nature; either as it is in its own frame, or as it is to be seen in
the World. They who have with the greatest judgment and care searched into the
nature and first principles of humane Societies, have all agreed that the chief
end and design of men in joining together was, for the mutual benefit and
advantage of each other; and that in order to this, certain Laws of Justice,
Equity, Mercy, Truth, Gratitude, Te^perance, as well as of Subjection to
Government, ought to be inviolably observed by men. And since these things have
the universal consent of mankind to be for their general good, how comes it to
pass, that men being joined in these Societies for such ends, make so little
Conscience of the practice of them? How come so many to live as it were in open
defiance to these Fundamental Laws of Nature? How come others, only to make use
of the pretense of virtue to deceive, and of honesty and integrity to cover the
deepest dissimulation? If they be not good, why are they pretended? If they are
good, why are they not practiced? So that whether we consider mankind in it
self, or in Society; we find the Motives to virtue to be much more weighty, and
considerable than those to sin; and yet that the practice of men is directly
contrary.

But it may be said, that all this might happen in the world for want of wit
and education to polish and improve the natural Faculties of men's minds, and to
direct and encourage the practice of virtue. I wish the world had not so many
instances, that men of the greatest wit have not been men of the best Morals;
but if wit, and education, and Philosophy had been the most effectual means to
reclaim men from sin, where should we have looked more for the flourishing o^
virtue, than in Greece and Rome? And yet in those times, when all the
accomplishments of wit were at the highest in those places, the manners of men
were sunk into the greatest filth of debauchery. It would make one astonished
to read the admirable discourses o^ their Philosophers, and to consider the
strange height that eloquence and wit were arrived to among their Orators and
Poets; and then to compare the account given of the manners of the Gentile
World, not only by their own Satyrists but by the Apostles in their several
Epistles: What a monstrous Catalogue of sins do we meet with in the first
Chapter to the Romans? Romans 1.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
of sins of so deep a dye, and of so horrid a nature, and such an Inventory of
all sorts of Wickedness, that one might imagine the Apostle had been rather
describing some vision of Hell, than the seat of the Roman Empire. 1 Cor. 6.10.
Ephesians. 4* 17, 18.
To the same purpose he speaks of the Corinthians and Ephesians, who thought
themselves behind none of the Greeks of that Age in the breeding then most in
Vogue; but we need not instance in particulars, when St. Peter calls it in
general the will of the Gentiles, to live in lasciviousness, lusts, 1 Pet 4 ^.
excess of wine, revellings and banquetings, as well as abominable Idolatries;
and St. John in short says, the whole world lies in wickedness. 1 John 5.29.


It might be worth our while to consider how so universal a degeneracy of
manners should happen in those ages, when men pretended more to Wit and
Learning, than they had done in any time before. And for this, it were very
unreasonable to assign any Cause that were equally common to all other Ages,
such as the corruption of humane nature; which, how great soever it be, is the
same at all times; neither do I think it reasonable to lay it wholly on the bad
examples of the teachers of virtue, knowing how malicious the worst of men are
in endeavoring to make those who seem to be better, to be as bad as
themselves: but there are some peculiar reasons for it, and I wish they had
been only proper to those times as,

1. Separating Religion and Moralit^ from each other. When their Religion was
placed in some solemn Rites, an^ pompous Ceremonies, and costly Sacrifices; but
all the matters of Moralit^ were confined to their Schools, there (...) be
enquired after by those that had le^^sure and curiosity for them. As though God
were more concerned for the color, and age, and pomp of their Sacrifices, for
the gestures and shows of their devotion; than for the purity of their hearts,
the sincerity of their minds, o^ the holiness of their lives. When once the
people had swallowed that pernicious principle, that Morality was no part of
their religion, they had no great regard to the good or evil of their actions,
as long as a little charge, and sour looks, and going to their Temples at
certain times were thought sufficient to expiate their sins. And they were much
more encouraged in Wickedness, when the Gods they worshipped were represented
on the stage as acting all manner of villainies: and no doubt they thought it a
great comfort to them in their debaucheries, that their Gods were as good
fellows as themselves. And what could all the precepts of Philosophers, or
sayings of wise men signify to those who were so far from looking on virtue as
any necessary part of their Religion, that they thought those fit to be
worshipped for Gods, whom they never believed to have been good men?

2. When they had thus rendered virtue unnecessary, by making it no part of
their Religion, the next thing was to make it appear ridiculous; which was a
certain way to make Fools out of love with it; who do not consider, what is fit
to be laughed at, but what is so. When Socrates at Athens undertook with many
sharp and cutting Ironies to reprove the vices of his Age; and with a great
deal of Wit and Reason to persuade men to the sober practice of Virtue, the
licentious people knew not what to do with him, for they were not able to
withstand the force of his arguments; at last Aristophanes (having a Comical
Wit, whereby he was able to make any thing seem ridiculous although he knew
very well the Wisdom and Learning of Socrates; yet) to please and humor the
people, he brings him upon the Stage, and represents his grave instructions
after such a manner, as turned all into a matter of laughter to the people of
Athens: which did more mischief to the reputation of Virtue among them, than
the taking away his life did. For, his dying convinced the people he was in
good earnest, and brought a great veneration to his memory; whereas the other
exposed him only to scorn and contempt; and the people were made judges whether
it were with cause or no: who besides their ignorance and want of judgment,
were too much Parties to be Judges. This is the method which men take, when
they set their wits against Virtue and Goodness; they know it is impossible to
argue men out of it; but it is very easy by ridiculous postures, and mimical
gestures, and profane similitudes, to put so grave and modest a thing as virtue
is out of Countenance, among those who are sure to laugh on the other side. I
do not think such things can signify any thing to wise men; but when was the
world made up of such? and therefore it signifies very much to the mischief of
those who have not the courage to love despised virtue; nor to defend a Cause
that is laughed down. And to these I may now add,

3. The bad examples of others, especially of those to whom it belonged to
teach and encourage Virtue above others, No man will pretend, that it is ground
enough for him to do a thing merely because he sees another do it; yet in all
Ages men have seen and complained that the power of examples has outdone that
of Laws. Some that think themselves more subtle than others, question whether
those mean what they say, who speak one thing and do another; and therefore
they will do what they think the others mean; which were a good plea, if their
actions were better than their words. Others think, that all discourses of
virtue, and honesty, and true honor, are mere matter of talk for men to
entertain some idle hours with, and that men are universally agreed in nothing
but in speaking well and doing ill. These look on virtue as a kind of Phoenix,
a thing often talked of, and believed by some, but never seen by any: but such
find all things so very bad at home, that out of charity to themselves, they
believe the whole World to be like them. Others have so much natural modesty
and sense of shame, that they have not the courage to commit a great
wickedness, unless they were hardened to it by the example of greater sinners
before them. But the most common reason of the prevalency of example is, that
men find in themselves a strong propensity and inclination to do evil, and are
willing to meet with such a pretense for committing it, that they do but as
others do; and therefore I cannot think that bare example were enough to
corrupt the World if there were not some antecedent inclination in humane
nature to the practice of evil. For since there is less reason to follow bad
examples than good, why should one prevail more than the other in the world, if
there were nothing but the bare example to move? But that inclination being
considered, we may easily give an account of the ill consequence which the bad
examples of those who are to direct and encourage others in virtue, must needs
be of to the rest of mankind Xenophon was not without reason so much
displeased, Xen. ep. ad Aesch.
when he saw some of the best of Socrates his Disciples, make their Court to
Dionysius in Sicily; knowing how inconsistent the reputation of virtue is, with
the very suspicion of Flattery: and that nothing makes great men more
suspicious of virtue, than when they see Philosophers become Flatterers, and
carrying on the restless designs of ambition under the pretense of teaching the
art of contentment to others. It was this which made the very name of them
become so odious at Rome, that even virtue it self was hated for their sakes*
so that the very teachers of virtue contributed to the increase of vice.
Especially, when by their endless disputes and wranglings about words and terms
of art, they made the people suspect they did but play prizes before them; and
only pretended to quarrel, but were well enough agreed to cheat and deceive
them. Upon such grounds as these, all the Motives to Virtue contained in the
Writings and Instructions of Philosophers lost their due force and efficacy on
the minds of the people, who were rather more hardened in their sins by these
disadvantages which attended the means that were used to reclaim them from the
practice of them.

But when all other motives proved ineffectual by these disadvantages, what
could be more reasonably expected, than that the motives of the Gospel should
prevail with men, being of so great weight in themselves, and recommended with
so much advantage to the World, by the examples of those who delivered them?
The great arguments of Christianity against the practice of sin are not drawn
from any uncertain Topics, or nice and curious speculations; but from the
influence men's good or evil actions in this World will have upon their
happiness or misery in another. And what concerns another state is revealed
with much more clearness, and confirmed by stronger evidence, and enforced by
more moving considerations, than ever it was before among the best and wisest
of the Gentiles. The doctrine of Christianity is plain and peremptory in this
matter, that God will render to every man according to his Works: Romans 2.6.1.18.
and that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. And however prone men are to be deceived with vain
words, yet let them look to themselves, Gal. 6.7.
God will not be mocked, (however men may be) for because of these things the
wrath of God will come upon the Children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5.6.
No Sacrifices, no prayers, no penances, no vows and promises will keep off
this wrath of God without a hearty repentance and timely reformation. Never any
Religion or Institution in the World made it so much its business to keep men
from doing evil, and to persuade them to do good, as the Christian does. The
Apo^^les thought it the greatest contradiction to their profession, for any men
to be called Christians, and to live in the practice of their former sins, 1
Pet. 4 3
Let the time past of your life suffice you, says St. Peter, to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, i. e. that time past when you were no Christians. To
be a Christian then was all one as of a loose, profane, dissolute person to
become sober, religious, exact in his conversation. To put on Christ, was but
another phrase, Rom 13.14.
for making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; To learn
Christ, Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 24.
was all one as to put off as concerning the former conversation the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and to put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Those were the
blessed days of Christianity, when it was no hard matter to understand what it
was to be a Christian; when the niceties of disputes, and the subtle artifices
of men of corrupt minds had not yet debauched the notion of Christianity, to
reconcile it with the lusts of men. To be a Christian then, was not to be
versed in the subtilties of the Schools; or to be able to swallow
contradictions without chewing them; or to be as fierce and earnest for every
doubtful opinion and uncertain custom, as if the substance of Christianity
were like Epicurus his World made up of a great number of very small and
restless Atoms. To be a Christian, was not to sight for the Faith, but to live
by it; not to quarrel for good Works, but to practice them; in short, to be a
Christian was to depart from iniquity and to do good, to be meek and humble,
and patient, and peaceable toward all men; to be charitable and kind; to be
sober and temperate in all things, to be holy, sincere, and innocent in his
actions toward God and men. This is the true Idea of a Christian, and not a
mere Idea; but such as every one that owns himself to be a Christian is bound
by the most Sacred vow of Christianity in Baptism to be like; so that, if
either the consideration of their own eternal welfare, or the nature, design,
or honor of Christianity, or their own most solemn engagements can restrain
men from the practice of sin, we see that those who are Christians, are under
the most powerful motives and engagements against it.

But yet such there have been (I wish I could not say such there are) who have
broken through all these things, and have been hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. One might have thought, if any persons had been out of
this danger, they had been such as the Apostle makes this exhortation to; who
had seen the miraculous operations of the holy Ghost for confirming the
Doctrine and Motives of Christianity; nay who had themselves been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.4, 5.
and had tasted of this Heavenly gift, and of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come: Who had testified their repentance for their
former sins in the most public and solemn manner, and had entered into the most
Sacred Vow of Baptism, never to return more to the practice of it: who had done
this in the heat of persecution, which they endured with courage and rejoicing;
yet after all these things, the Apostle expresses a more than ordinary
jealousy lest any of them should fall away, and their hearts be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. When Critias and Alcibiades had forsaken the
paths of virtue, which they seemed very forward in, while they continued under
the instructions of Socrates, Xenophon says, There were some that contended
that they never had any virtue at all, (...). ^^. p. 416.
because those who once had it could never lose it: but for his part, he says,
he was by no means satisfied with their opinion: for as m^n by discontinuing
bodily exercises make themselves incapable of doing those things which they
were most expert in before; so men by the neglect of improving their minds in
virtue; and giving way to the temptations of honor and pleasure (which was the
case of Critias and Alcibiades) may by degrees lose the force of all the
motives to virtue, and consequently the virtue it self. It is agreed by all men
who understand any thing in these matters, that even Grace, although it be the
effect of a divine power on the minds of men, is of it self capable of being
lost; the great dispute is, whether it may be lost past all recovery? But as we
have no more reason to set any bounds to the Grace of God in men's Recovery,
than as to their first Repentance; so we ought to consider, that there is such
a falling away, mentioned by the Apostle, of those who have been once
enlightened, Heb. 6 4* ^
of which, he says, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance: and
that Scripture deals with all persons in its exhortations, and admonitions, and
threatenings, as if they were capable of falling to the utmost degree: and to
suppose that thing impossible to be done, which the gravest counsels, and the
most vehement persuasions are used to keep men from the doing of, is to make a
severe reflection on the wisdom of them that give them. And the Apostle here
leaves none of them out; but bids the most forward believers beware of an evil
heart of unbelief; and those who had been most softened by repentance, take heed
of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. So that we see, how
powerful soever the motives to Virtue are; how great soever the engagements
against Sin; yet the Apostle thought it needful to give them warning against
the deceitfulness of sin.

2. But what kind of deceitfulness is this in sin, that the best and wisest men
are so much cautioned against it? What irresistible charms does it use to draw
men into its snares? with what infusion does it so far intoxicate mankind to
make them dote upon it, against the convictions of Reason, and dictates of
Conscience, and the power of persuasion, and the most solemn and repeated Vows
and Promises against it? nay to make men pursue it to such a degree, as rather
to be damned for it than forsake it? If we were to consider this only by
Reason, we could imagine nothing less than that sin at one time or other has
laid such a mighty obligation on mankind, that rather than part with it, the
greater part of men, out of mere gratitude, would be content to suffer for ever
with it: or, that it is a thing so absolutely necessary to the comfort of men's
lives, that they cannot live one good day without it: Whereas in truth, the
whole race of mankind has suffered extremely and continually by it: and it is
so far from being necessary to the comfort of men's lives, that the greatest
troubles and vexations of life have risen from it; and men may enjoy far
greater satisfaction, and more real contentment; and more noble, and solid, and
lasting pleasures if they did utterly renounce and forsake it. But this still
makes the difficulty so much the greater, how it should so far bewitch and
infatuate the far greatest part of mankind; and of those who know how dearly
they must suffer for it in another World? And yet to assoil this difficulty, we
have only two Accounts to give how sin comes to deceive mankind so generally,
so fatally; and those are 1. By subtle insinuations; 2. By false reasonings.

1. By subtle insinuations. The great Masters of pleading in ancient times have
told us, that there are some Causes which are never to be managed by plain and
downright reasonings, (because they are too weak to bear that method of
handling) and then they bid men have a care in their beginning, of coming close
to the business; but they must fetch a compass about, and by secret arts and
degrees insinuate themselves into the good opinion of the Judges before they
are aware of it. This is the very method which is made use of by the
deceitfulness of Sin; i^ dares not stand the examination of any close
reasoning, for all its artifices would presently be discovered then; but i^
makes use of these arts of insinuation 1. It endeavors to raise a good opinion
of it self by false colors and representations of things. 2. When it has done
that, it draws men on by degrees to the practice of it. 3. When men are engaged
in the practice of sin, then it represents to them how much it is their own
interest to defend it, and so brings them from the counsel of the ungodly, and
the way of sinners, to the seat of the scornful.

1. It endeavors to raise a good opinion of it self by false colors and
repre^entations of things. The first precept of insinuation is to remove
prejudice; for while that continues, all that can be said will be of no force.
While men look on sin as vile, and loathsome; as mean and unworthy of a man; as
inconsistent with the peace and contentment of their minds, so long temptations
are easily resisted: all arts must therefore be used to make it appear with all
the address and flattery which is most apt to entice a poor deluded sinner.
Then, the fetters and shackles which it brings to enslave men with, must be
looked on and admired as ornaments; its most sordid and filthy pleasures must
be thought great and manly; and a little present honor and advantage appear
more valuable than an eternal state of Happiness and Glory. These are things we
should think it very hard for men to be deceived with; and yet every day we
find they are so; and which is far more, they are ready to take it very ill of
those who go about to undeceive them. In other cases, if a man tells another,
that he is like to be deceived with a false and counterfeit Jewel instead of a
true one; or to buy a bad Title to an Estate instead of a good one, he thinks
himself very much obliged to him for his fidelity and kindness; only in the
case of man's beloved sins, although they will prove the greatest cheats in the
World to him, yet he cannot well endure to be told so* but his blood is apt to
fire and inflame him into a passion against him that does it; and although it
be meant with the greatest innocence and kindness, it is ready to be
interpreted to be only the effect of malice and ill will. For now sin has
insinuated it self so far into him that no one can be thought a friend to the
person, who is not so to his sins* and they are then come to that heigh^ of
friendship and community of interests, to have common friends and common
enemies. Now all the discourses (...) the freedom, and pleasure, and
satisfaction of a man's mind in the practice of virtue appear very dull and
insipi^ things; and fit only for Learned Foo^ or Philosophers to talk of.

Nothing deserves the name of Liberty with them, but a power of doing what they
please. What nonsense and contradiction does it seem to them for those to be
accounted free, who are under any bonds or restraints? No matter to them,
whether they be from God or Nature, from Reason or Conscience, as long as they
are restraints, they look on them as inconsistent with their notion of liberty.
And next to those who threaten men with punishments in another World for what
they do amiss in this, they account those the greatest Fools that first found
out the distinction of good and evil, and just and unjust in the actions of
men, What Fools (say they) were they to fasten dishonorable and reproachful
names on some of the most pleasant and beneficial actions of life? For thus a
man is debarred that noble and manly Vice of Drunkenness for fear of losing the
reputation of Sobriety; and the extravagancies of Lust, for fear of doing
injury to his Neighbor's Bed; and supposing a man has never so much
advantages in his hands to enrich himself by defrauding another, yet he must
not do it, because although an estate be in the keeping of a Fool, yet another
must not be a Knave to get it from him. Thus do these miserable Slaves to Vice
pity the weakness of those who have so little wit (as they think) not to
understand the Liberty they enjoy: But thus do mad men pity the dullness of
those that are in their wits, that do not sing, and rant, and despise the
World, as they do: and fancy themselves to be Kings and Princes, while they are
tied fast in their Chains, and lie in Straw. And upon such grounds as these,
the most rude and barbarous Indians did better understand the liberty of
mankind, than the most civilized Nations. For all civility is a debarring men
of some part of this natural liberty, i. e. of those things which men have a
power to do; and upon this ground all ancient Lawgivers and Wise men, who by
degrees brought several Nations to order and government, and to live by Laws,
ought to be hated as the greatest Tyrants and Usurpers upon the liberties of
mankind: and the natural consequence of this would be the overthrow of all
Laws, and Order, and Government in the World. But if there must be some
restraints upon men, then we are to consider what restraints are just and
reasonable, within whose bounds we are to contain our selves; and whatever
tends to the dishonor of God, to the injury of others, or to our own
destruction, it is all the reason in the World we should abstain from. And if
men would but do this, they would be kept from the practice of sin: And so this
imaginary notion of a boundless liberty will appear to be only one of the false
colors that sin puts upon evil actions, on purpose to tempt men to the
commission of them.

But there is another Poison which more subtly and dangerously insinuates it
self into the hearts of men, and by which sin gets the possession there, and
that is the love of pleasure; I do not mean the pleasure of the mind, or the
pleasure of a good conscience, for there is no danger in these; but it is the
love of sensual pleasure which is most apt to ensnare men in the practice of
sin. It is under this representation chiefly, that sin deceives, betrays,
entangles, bewitches, destroys the souls of men: It is this which fills the
imagination, and darkens the understanding with filthy steams and vapors, and
hurries a man on with the impetuous violence of passions, without considering
the mischievous consequence which attends it, either as to his honor in this
World, or his salvation in another. This danger which attends the pleasures of
sin, was well represented in one of the Eastern Parables, ^
of a man violently pursued by Wild Beasts to the top of a Precipice, where
there was a Tree growing on the side of a great lake, and at the foot of it a
prodigious Serpent lying ready to devour him; the man being in this
astonishment gets upon the first branch of the tree he could reach; but he was
no sooner there, but his horror increased at the apprehension of his danger on
every side of him; and that which added the most to his consternation, was,
that the very branch on which he stood was almost eaten off; while he was in
this terrible fright, he looks up to the top of the tree, and there sees some
wild honey trickling down the body of the tree, which he was so taken with, and
so pleased with the sweetness of it, that he forgets his danger, till of a
sudden the branch breaks, and down he drops into the lake without recovery.
This is the true representation of the pleasures of sin, which men are so much
entertained with, that they never consider the hazard they run, and scarce
think of their danger, till they drop into that state of misery from whence
there is no redemption.

But besides these soft and voluptuous sinners, (who are easily deceived and
hardly drawn out of the snares they fall into) there are others of a more
busy, restless, and designing temper, and to these sin appears under another
shape to deceive them, with all the advantages of external Splendour and
Greatness. And thus they who possibly might escape the baits of pleasure, are
carried away by the more plausible temptations of Riches and Honor. It is
supposed by some, that when the Devil tempted Christ with the offers of the
Kingdoms of this world, M^t 4 8, 9
if he would fall down and worship him; he did not know who he was, but had a
mind to try him by the most probable way of discovering what was within him:
But surely the Devil thought him some extraordinary person, or else he would
never have made so large an offer at first, viz. of no less than all the
Kingdoms of the World, whereas very much less than one of these has served to
corrupt and debauch the minds of many who have been great pretenders to Piety
and Virtue. It was indeed somewhat a hard condition the Devil joined with his
offer, to fall down and worship him, because he then designed not only a
Victory but a Triumph; but with others he conceals the condition and draws them
on by degrees, still rising higher and higher in his temptations, thereby
feeding and enlarging their desires; till the love of this World has gotten
such an entire possession of their hearts, that they scarce ever in good
earnest think of another till their souls are passing into it. And then it may
be, they sadly reflect on their own folly, in that they have preferred the
deluding scenes and pompous shows of worldly greatness, before the complete and
endless felicity of another life. But it very often happens, that it is not so
long, as till their leaving this World, that men come to understand the
restless folly of ambition. For the things of this World are like Epicurus his
Atoms, always moving and justling one against another; and one man's ambition
serves to supplant another, and they who cannot raise themselves may yet help
to ruin others; and oftentimes those very designs by which they most hoped to
advance themselves, prove the occasion of their fall and destruction. The
Mahometans have a story to this purpose; Warn. Prove Persie. p. 33.
In the time of Jesus, three men in a journey happened to find a Treasure; but
being hungry, they sent one of their number to buy provisions; he consults how
he might get this Treasure to himself, and for that end resolves to poison
their meat; the other two agreed to share it between them, and to kill the
third as soon as he returned, which they did, and themselves soon after died of
the poisoned meat. Jesus passing by with his disciples, said, This is the
condition of this world! see what the love of it has brought these men to! Woe
be to him that looks for any other usage from it. This is the first way whereby
sin does insinuate into the minds of them; viz. by false colors and
representations of things.

2. But when sin has so far insinuated it self to bring men to a better
opinion of it, it does not presently hurry them on to the greatest height of
wickedness; but leads them gently and by easy steps and degrees, lest they
should start back presently with the fright of some dreadful sin. Which will
appear, if we consider how one comes to be corrupted by sin that has had the
advantage of a modest and virtuous education: if those who design to debauch
him speak out at first in plain words what they aim at, a sudden horror seizes
upon him at the apprehension of it, and it may be he hates their company for
ever after. But there is so much a sense of shame left in humane nature, that
men dare not tempt others to sin, at least at first, in plain terms; and the
same temptation which being represented one way would affright, appearing with
greater art and dissimulation may easily prevail. And sin is a thing, that men
hate to be forced, but too much love to be cheated into the practice of it. How
does a young sinner struggle with himself, and would if it were possible get
out of the noise of his own Conscience, when he has offered force and violence
to it! He is very uneasy to himself, and wishes a thousand times he had never
committed the sin, rather than to feel such horror and disquiet in his mind,
upon the sense of it. But if this does not make him presently repent, and
resolve never to be guilty again of the same folly, (as in all reason it ought
to do) then by time and company he wears off the impression of his guilt, and
the next occasion of sinning makes him forget the wounds of his Conscience, and
the smart he endured before; and the fresh temptation revives the sense of his
former pleasure, and then he is able to withstand no longer; and thus by
repeating the same acts, by degrees he becomes a very hopeful sinner, and the
reports of his Conscience are but like that of sounds at a greater distance;
they lessen still more and more, till at last they cannot be heard at all. And
when he has thus mastered his Conscience, as to any one sin, which at first he
was fearful of committing, and has sound such an Ice upon his Conscience as
will bear him, he goes on still farther and farther, till nothing be too hard
for him. He that at first started and trembled at the hearing of an horrid
oath, now can hear whole volleys of them discharged without shrinking; and can
bear his part in that hellish Concert: and he that was so hardly brought to be
wicked himself, may in a little time (as some men are strange proficients in
wickedness) tempt and encourage others to the practice of it.

3. And when men are arrived to an habitual continuance in sin, then for their
present ease and security, they cast about for any ways to defend it. For
whatever is become of Conscience, they may have such a sense of reputation
lest, that they would not be thought Fools, and be contemned and despised by
others. But although it be impossible for such to avoid scorn and contempt
among all those who have any true regard to Virtue or Honor, yet they will
endeavor rather to defend themselves in doing ill than recover their
reputation by repentance. And because it would puzzle the wits of the most
subtle and concerned persons to find out pretenses and excuses for some kinds
of sins; therefore the easiest way is to represent all the World as alike bad,
although not alike cunning; and although it may be not in the same way, yet in
something as ill in it self, but more agreeable to their Age, temper, and
condition of life. Thus the greatest sinners love to herd themselves in a
crowd, and think it some poor defense for their sins, that they would have
others believed to be as bad as they: as though a man were in the less danger
by the Plague, because it is a general Contagion. But if it happen that some
persons in the World should have any reputation for virtue among them, then all
the weaknesses, and indiscretions of such, are sure to be enquired after, that
so what is accounted virtue, may be thought only natural sourness of temper, or
want of wit to be otherwise. But if any such should be found in a miscarriage,
what Joy and Triumph does this make? what load of circumstances and
aggravations do they lay upon them; as though one single miscarriage of such
persons were to weigh down a thousand enormities of theirs. And because it is
impossible to defend their extravagant courses by Reason, the only way left for
them is to make Satirical Invectives against Reason; as though it were the most
uncertain, foolish and (I had almost said) unreasonable thing in the World: and
yet they pretend to show it in arguing against it: but it is pity such had not
their wish, to have been Beasts rather than men, (if any men can make such a
wish that have it not already) that they might have been less capable of doing
mischief among mankind; by representing all the excellencies of humane nature,
which are Reason, and Virtue, and Religion, but as more grave and solemn
fopperies. But how hard are such men put to defend their vices, that cannot do
it, without trampling under foot the most noble perfections of their own nature!

These however are the more ingenuous sort of sinners, that yield Reason and
Religion to be of Virtue's side; but there are others that make use of some
shallow pretenses of Reason to excuse themselves in their sins: which is the
second way whereby sin deceives men, viz.

2. By false Reasonings: and those taken either, 1. From their Present
Impunity: 2. Or from their Future Repentance.

1. From their present Impunity in sinning, men are apt to deceive themselves
into a continuance in it. This is the account the Wise man has long since
given of men's being hardened in sin; Eccl. 8.11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the
hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. It seems somewhat
hard to understand the consequence, why men should grow more desperately
wicked, because God gives them a space to repent? Is it necessary that if God
does punish at all, he must do it presently? that would seem to be rage and
fury, or a necessity of nature, and not justice. Cannot judgment be duly
executed, unless the Judge break open the Prison doors, and torment the
Malefactor in his chains? Why may not God respite the punishment of sinners,
when he pleases, to another state, since he has declared that he has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness? Act* 17 31.
What incongruity is there in this to any principle of reason or justice? Will
not this time of God's patience, be a sufficient vindication of his lenity and
goodness in order to the drawing men to repentance? And will not the day of his
future judgment be a full vindication of his justice? Will not the
insupportable horrors of a miserable eternity discover far more God's
abhorrence of sin, than present sufferings in this life, which, the greater
they are, the less they continue? But all this false way of reasoning arises
from that gross piece of self-flattery that such do imagine God to be like
themselves; i. e. as cruel and revengefull as they are* and they presently
think, if any persons did offend them at the rate that sinners are said to
offend God, and they had so much power in their hands to punish them as he has,
without any fear of revenge upon themselves, they would be sure to dispatch
them presently* but because they see God does it not, therefore they conclude
that all the talk of God's anger and hatred against sin is without ground: and
from hence they take encouragement to sin. So the Psalmist says in God's name,
These things thou did and I kept silence; Ps^^. 50.21.
and they presently took his silence for consent; for it follows, and thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but the Psalmist adds,
how ill he took this at men's hands, and that he would one day make them know
the difference between the forbearance of sinners, and the love of their sins;
but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. And therefore he
bids them be better advised, v 22.
and consider this while they forget God, lest he ^ear them in pieces, and
there be none to deliver.

2. Men are hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, from the hopes of their future
repentance. For that is one of the great cheats of sin, that every one thinks
he can repent and shake off his sins when he has a mind to do it. Sin does not
lie like a heavy weight upon their backs, so that they feel the load of it; and
therefore they think it is easily removed, if they would set themselves to it.
Most of those that believe a God and a judgment to come, and yet continue in
sin, do it upon this presumption, that one time or other, they shall leave
their sins, and change the course of their lives before they go out of this
world. They have not only thoughts of repentance, ^ut general purposes of doing
the acts of it at one time or other; but that time is not come, and God knows
whether it ever will or no. For sin entices them and draws them on still; and
when any motions toward repentance come into their minds, that presently
suggests, It is time enough yet; why so much haste? there will be trouble
enough in it when you must do it, what need you bring it so fast upon you? Are
not you likely to hold out a great many years yet? what pity it is to lose so
much of the pleasure of life, while you are capable of enjoying it? There is
old Age coming, and when you will be good for nothing else, then will be time
enough to grow wise and to repent. But O foolish sinner, who has bewitched
thee to hearken to such unreasonable suggestions as these are! For

3. In the last place, it ought to be our present, our constant, our greatest
care to prevent being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. For to this end, it
is not enough to consider of it at one time or other in our lives, but we must
be exhorting one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of us be
hardened through the witchcraft and deceitfulness of sin: And if it be so much
the duty of others to show that regard to one another souls; how much more
does it become us to do it, who expect to be called to an account at the great
day for the discharge of our trust in this matter? It is a dreadful passage we
read of in the Prophet Ezekiel, and enough to make our ears to tingle at the
repeating it, Ezekiel 33.8.
When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man thou shall surely die, if thou do
no^ speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. We would fain believe
this to have been some particular and extraordinary commission given to the
Prophet by God himself, which does not concern us; for what will become of us,
if not only our own faults (which God knows are too many) but other men's shall
be charged upon us? when either through neglect, or flattery, or fear of
displeasing, or for any mean and unworthy ends, we betray our trust, and
instead of preventing prove the occasion of men's being to much hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. But although we neither pretend to be Prophets, nor
Apostles, yet it is our Office to take care of the Souls of men, and can we
discharge that, as we ought to do, if we do not with all faithfulness warn men
of the danger they run into through the deceitfulness of sin? It were happy for
us if we could say, that all the Lord's people are holy; for then we should
have nothing to do, but to praise and commend their Virtues, which were an
easy and a delightful task: but what pleasure is it to rake into the sores,
or to reprove the Vices of a degenerate age? to be thought troublesome and
impertinent, if we do our duty; and men of no conscience, if we do it not? But
our work is neither to libel our Auditors, nor to flatter them; neither to
represent them as better, nor worse than they are; nor to charge them with more
guilt than their own consciences do charge them with: but our business is, to
beseech and exhort them by the mercies of God, by the sufferings of Christ, by
the love and tenderness they have for their immortal souls, that they would to
day, while it is called to day, take heed lest they be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. And that will appear to be very reasonable on these
considerations.

1. That none are out of the danger of it, while they live in this tempting
World. What need have we to take care of being deceived by that, which has
been too hard for the best, the wisest, and the greatest of men? Man in his
best state, even that of Innocence, was deceived by the insinuations of sin*
when there was no matter within for the temptation to work upon, no reason
suggested that could move a common understanding, no interest or advantage that
could sway him; no other moving cause appears to us of that fatal Apostasy of
Adam, but either the imagination of some unknown pleasure, or the bare
curiosity of trying an experiment what the effects would be of tasting the
forbidden fruit. And ever since so general has the corruption of mankind been,
so successful have the artifices and deceits of sin been in the World, that
the best of men have not wholly escaped them; but have sometimes fallen in
those very Graces which have been most remarkable in them, as Abraham in his
trust in God, Moses in his meekness, Job in his patience, Peter in his zeal for
Christ. What cause then have others to look to themselves!

If wisdom and experience would have secured men, we should have thought, of
all men in the World, Solomon the least in danger of being deceived by the
insinuations of sin, who had given such excellent cautions against those very
snares he fell into himself; and that to such a degree, that his case is left
disputable to this day, whether he ever recovered by repentance or no. What
numbers are there upon record of those mighty men, who have made the earth to
tremble at the noise of their Armies; who have led Kings in chains after their
Triumphal Chariots, and have been served by those whom others have adored; yet
have, notwithstanding all this, been enslaved themselves by some mean lust, and
destroyed by the power of an effeminate passion? What can be strong enough to
resist those charms, which neither innocence, nor wisdom, nor power are
sufficient security against? Nothing, but the Grace of God, and continual care
of our selves.

2. The less men suspect their danger, the more cause they have to be afraid of
it. None are more fatally deceived by sin, than those who apprehend no danger
in it, or think they can escape it when they please. How strangely infatuated
are those through the deceitfulness of sin, who think with themselves, that
after they have spent their lives in sin, they shall make God amends by a few
dying groans, and such a repentance as can have no amendment of life? Most men,
who are the greatest slaves to their sins, are so much deceived by them, as to
think they have them wholly at their command, and can when they please cast
them off: and such imaginations keep them faster in subjection to them. For if
they did apprehend themselves under such slavery, as really they are, they
would grow weary and impatient of the yoke; whereas now because they are not
forced to commit their sins, they suppose they can with ease forsake them. But
none are such incurable Fools, as they that think themselves Wise; and none are
so miserably deceived, as they that think themselves too cunning for their
sins. If it be so easy to shake off your sins, remember that your condemnation
will be so much more just, if you do it not; for God required no hard thing for
you to do: and if it be so easy, why is it not hitherto done? Why do you mock
God so often, and pretend every year to repent, and yet are every year as bad,
if not worse than other? Why are not the fruits of repentance seen in the
amendment of life for one year, or a month, or one bare week? Is it not worth
while to do so little for him, that has done so much for you? Methinks, common
ingenuity might prevail with men, at least to let God have some part of their
lives entire to himself, without interfering with the Devil. But therein lies a
great part of the deceitfulness of sin, that it falls out here, as in some
malignant Diseases, men seldom understand their danger, till they are almost
past recovery.

3. None are so likely to be hardened in sin, as those who delay and put off
their repentance. For the very putting it off is a sign that sin has a greater
power, than the convictions of Conscience: for why should men ever intend to
repent, if they did not think it necessary? and if they think it necessary and
yet do it not, it is plain there is something within them stronger than
Conscience, which keeps them from it. So that he that intends to repent, and
yet lives in sin, has that aggravation of sin above others, that he sins
against his Conscience all that time. Tell me then, O thou subtle sinner, that
hopest to be too hard for God and for sin too, by enjoying thy sins as long as
thou can, and then repenting at last, to escape the vengeance of God: do
thou in good earnest intend ever to repent or no? If thou do not, never
deceive thy self; God will not accept these pretenses and promises instead of
real repentance. If thou do intend it sincerely, what makes thee to intend
it? is it not, that thou art convinced it is much better to be done than not,
but can not find it it in thy heart to do it yet? Thou know all this while
it were much better to leave thy sins, than to live in them, it were far better
to be sober, and temperate, and pious, and devout, than to be debauched and
profane; and yet for all this, thou do not repent, but go on in the same
course. Consider then, that this very circumstance deeply aggravates every sin
that is committed after it. For it is not a bare neglect of repentance. which
thou are guilty of, but a contempt of God and Goodness; it is not only not
repenting, but it is an obstinate and wilful resolution of sinning: for there
is no medium between living in sin and forsaking of it; and nothing deserves
the name of Repentance, that is short of that. And if thou art so wilful and
unreasonable now, as notwithstanding thy resolutions to repent, to live still
in thy sins, how can thou ever hope to repent at last when thy heart will be
so much more hardened by continuance in sin?

4. Lastly, Consider the sad condition of those who are hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. They are said in Scripture to be past feeling, Ephesians. ^ 19.
Romans 1.^8.
and to be given over to a reprobate mind, i. e. to have lost all sense of
their danger, and of the ill condition they are in; they despise all means of
instruction, and scorn all those who would do them good, and who mean them no
other injury but to persuade them to be happy. With what disdain and contempt
do those proud and lofty sinners, who are once arrived at this height of
wickedness, look down upon all those, who endeavor by Reason and Scripture to
convince them of their sins! As though it were not possible for any thing to
make men seem more ridiculous to them, than to see them concerned to plead the
cause of Virtue and Religion. To what purpose is all this about Repentance? why
should not men be let alone to do as they think fit? for let them preach their
hearts out, men will do as they please. This is the language of those who are
already hardened in their sins; but God forbid, it should be so of any here
present; who make it our prayer to God to be delivered from hardness of heart,
and contempt of his word and commandments. And we have great reason so to do;
for there is no judgment short of hell, like to the being given up to a
reprobate sense: for all the most weighty arguments and most forcible
persuasions are to such but like showers falling upon a Rock, that make some
noise and slide off again, but make no impression or entrance into them. God
Almighty give us all his Grace to understand our danger and to repent in time,
that none of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

SERMON IV. Preached on the FAST DAY, AT St. Margaret's Westminster. November.
13. 1678.
1 Samuel XII.24, 25. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your
heart: for consider how great things he has done for you. But if ye shall
still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.


IT has been well observed by some, that those who look at a distance upon
humane affairs are apt to think that the good or bad success of them depends
wholly upon the Wisdom and Conduct of those who manage them; others who look
nearer into them and discern the many intervening and unforeseen accidents
which often alter and disappoint the Counsels of men, are ready to attribute
the events of things rather to Chance than Wisdom: but those who have made the
deepest search and the strictest enquiry, have most firmly believed a Divine
Providence which overrules all the Counsels and Affairs of men; Psalm. 73.17.22*
and sometimes blasts the most probable designs, sometimes prospers the most
unlikely attempts, to let us see that though there be many devices in men's
hearts, Prove. 19 1.
yet the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand. We live in an Age not over prone
to admire and take notice of any remarkable instances of Divine Providence
either in our preservation from dangers or deliverances out of them; for so
great is the security of some men, that they are unwilling to apprehend any
danger till they fall into it, and if they escape will hardly believe they were
ever in it; and such is the concernment of others, to bassle all evidences of
truth wherein their own guilt is involved, that they all agree in robbing God
of the honor of his Mercy, and our selves of the comfort of his Protection.
But blessed be that God who has hitherto defeated all the secret, and subtle,
and cruel designs of his and our Churches enemies; and has given us the
liberty and opportunity of this day to meet together to implore the continuance
of his favor and mercy toward us in the preservation of his Majesty's person;
for in praying for him, we pray for our selves, since our own welfare does so
much depend upon His.

When we look back upon the History of this Church ever since the Reformation
of it, we may observe such a wonderful series of Divine Providence going along
with it, that we have the less reason to be discouraged with present
difficulties, or disheartened with the fears of future dangers. What struglings
did it meet with in the Birth? And although it were therein like Jacob who took
hold of the heel of his Brother, and at last obtained the blessing; yet the
Romish party got the start like Esau, Genesis 25.25.
and came forth all red and hairy, full of blood and cruelty; and the old
Dragon cast out of his mouth a Flood of Fire to destroy our Church before it
could attain to its full growth and maturity. But after it not only survived
these flames, but enjoyed a firm establishment under the care and conduct of a
wise and cautious Government, what restless endeavors, what secret plots, what
horrid conspiracies, what foreign attempts, what domestic treasons were
carried on during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth? And yet, which is very
considerable, while she openly and heartily owned the Protestant Cause, it
pleased God to deliver her out of all her dangers, and to give her a long and a
prosperous Reign, when two of her Neighbor Princes were assassinated for not
being zealous enough in the Popish Cause though they professed to own and
maintain it. And it is but a very little time since you met together in this
place to celebrate the memory of a mighty deliverance which both King and
Kingdom, and together with them our Church received from that never to be
forgotten conspiracy of the Gunpowder Treason in her Successor's Reign. May we
not then take up St. Paul's argument, and say, 2 Cor ^^*
Who has delivered us from so great death, and does deliver, in whom we trust
that he will yet deliver us?

Especially if we do not fail in the performance of that duty which God expects
from us in order to our own preservation, which is delivered by Samuel to the
people of Israel, in the words of the Text:

Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider
how great things he has done for you.

But if they would not hearken to this wise Counsel, but go on in their sins,
he tells them what the fatal consequence would be, not to themselves only, but
to their King too:

But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be destroyed, both ye and your
King.

Which advice will appear to deserve our serious consideration this day, if we
either regard (1.) The Person who gave it. (2) The Occasion of giving it. (3.)
The Matter contained in it.

1. The Person who gave this Counsel to the People, Samuel; a Person of great
Wisdom, and long experience in Government, and therefore very able to judge
concerning the proper causes of a Nation's Prosperity and Ruin. The People had
enjoyed a long and uninterrupted tranquillity while they followed his
directions. They had before been miserably harassed by the inroads of the
Philistines, discomfited in several battles, and at last the Ark of God it self
taken by their enemies, and their leaders destroyed, at which sad news, Eli,
who had judged Israel forty years, 1 Samuel 4.1^
fell backwards and so ended his days: while they were under the sense of their
present miseries, v. 18.
Samuel puts them into the most hopeful way for their deliverance, which was
by a reformation of Religion among them, by returning to the Lord with all
their hearts, 7.
and putting away their strange gods, and preparing their hearts unto the Lord
and serving him only; and then, says he, He will deliver you out of the hands
of the Philistines. The miseries they felt, and the dangers they feared made
them own the true Religion with more than usual courage: v. 4.
Then the Children of Israel did put away Baalim and Astaroth, and served the
Lord only. But besides this, Samuel appoints a public and solemn Feast of all
Israel at Mizpeh; And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, v. 5.
and I will pray for you unto the Lord. And they gathered together to Mizpeh,
v. 6.
and drew water and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, ar^
said there, We have sinned against the Lord. Mizpeh, a City in the confin^ of
Judah and Benjamin, as Masius an^ others observe, Man. in I^s. 18.21.
was the place where the States of Israel were wont to be assembled together
upon any great and important occasion; where there was ^ place on purpose for
them to meet i^ and an Altar, (...)* in Jud. 20.
and House of Prayer (...) the public Worship of God: and therefore it is
said, Judge. 20.1. The Chi^^dren of Israel gathered together from (...) end of
the Land to the other, unto the Lord in Mizpeh; and there the chief^ all the
Tribes of Israel presented themselves in the Assembly of the People of Go^ And
therefore Samuel chooses this as the fittest place for them to fast and pra^
and confess their sins in, and to implor^ the Mercy of God to the Nation. W^ do
not read in Scripture of any more public and solemn Fast of the People of
Israel kept with greater signs of tru^ humiliation than this at Mizpeh was; for
the pouring out of water was used among them either to represent their own
despera^e condition without God's help* that they were as water spilt upon the
ground; or the greatness of their sorrow for their sins, and the floods of
tears which they shed for them. And to let mankind see what influence a general
and serious Fasting and Humiliation has upon the welfare of a Nation, we find
from the day of this Fast at Mizpeh the affairs of Israel began to turn for the
better. For the Philistines thought they had an advantage against the Israelites
by this general meeting, and hoped to surprise them while they kept their Fast
in Mizpeh; 1 Samuel ^.^.
and made such an incursion upon them, as put them into a great consternation;
and they came trembling to Samuel, praying him that he would not cease to cry
unto the Lord their God for them, v. 8.
that he would save them out of the hand of the Philistines. Samuel prays, the
Lord hears, Israel marches out of Mizpeh, pursues the Philistines and smites
them; v. 9.
and Samuel sets up a stone of remembrance, v. 11.
and calls it Eben Ezer, saying, v. 1^
Hitherto has the Lord helped us. Yea from hence forward did God help them,
for it follows, so the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
Coast of Israel; and the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the
days of Samuel. v. 13
Never any People had greater reason to be pleased with a Governor than they
had with Samuel; who managed their affairs with so much wisdom and piety, with
so much faithfulness and integrity, with so much courage and constancy, with so
much care and industry, with so much success and prosperity. But people are apt
to surfeit upon too much ease and plenty, and to grow wanton with abundance of
peace; they began to be weary of Samuel's Government, and secretly to wish for
a change. And when men's discontents grow ripe, there seldom wants a plausible
occasion to vent them: v. 16.
Samuel was grown old and could not go about from year to year in circuit to
Bethel, ^ Sam. 8.2.
and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, as he was wont to do, but fixed at his house in Ramah,
and placed his Sons in Beersheba; these not following their Father's steps,
were soon accused of maladministration; v. 3.
and nothing would now satisfy the discontented Elders of Israel, but Samuel
himself must be discharged of his Government; For they gathered themselves
together, and came to Samuel in Ramah; and said to him, v. 4.
Behold thou art old, and thy Sons walk not in thy ways; v 5.
this was their pretense, but their design was to alter the Government. Their
plenty and prosperity had made them fond of the ^omp and Grandeur of their
Neighbor Nations, and whatever it cost them, they were resolved to have a King
to judge them like all the Nations. From v 1^. to v. 19.
Samuel tells them, what inconveniences that more absolute form of Government
of the Neighbor Nations would bring among them, as Josephus shows; Jos. An. l.
6. c. 4. v. 19, 20.
all which signified nothing to them; for it is said, Nevertheless the people
refused to obey the voice of Samuel, and said, Nay, but we will have a King
over us, that we also may be like all the Nations. It was not the Monarchical
way of Government that was so displeasing to God or Samuel; for their
Government was of that Form already, God himself being their King, and
appointing such Vicegerents as he thought fit to manage their affairs under
him. So God answered Samuel, Chapter 12* 13
8.7
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not
reign over them. Not, as though Kingly Government were inconsistent with God's
Sovereignty over his people; for by him Kings Reign; and they are his Ministers
to us for good, and that Government is the most agreeable to his own, and to
the primitive institution of Government among men. But wherein then lay this
great sin of the Israelites in asking a King, Deuteronomy. 17 14
when God himself had provided by his Law, that they should have a King when
they were settled in their own Land? And yet we find the Israelites at last
confess, We have added unto all our sins this evil to ask us a King. (...) 9
Their great fault was, that they were so impetuous and violent in their
desires, that they would not wait for Samuel's decease whom God had raised up
among them, and whose Government had been so great a blessing to them; and
therefore God looked on it as a rejecting him more than Samuel, since he had
appointed him; and they had no reason to lay him aside for his Sons faults, but
they made use of that only as a color for their own self-willed humor and
affectation of being like to other Nations. However God commands Samuel to
yield to them; 8.7.
and he appoints another meeting at Mizpeh, (...) 17.
for this purpose; where the Person was chosen by lot; and at his solemn
inauguratiom at Gilgal, Samuel makes that speech unto all Israel contained in
this 12th Chapter; (...). 15.
whereof the words of the Text are the conclusion; which make these words the
more considerable,

2. In regard of the Occasion of them; being delivered by Samuel at so great a
solemnity in which he delivers up the Government into the hands of their King,
(1.) With a great protestation of his own integrity, 12.3.
with an appeal to their own Consciences concerning it, 4.
and they freely give a large testimony of it. (2.) He upbraids them with their
ingratitude toward God time after time; that they were never contented or
pleased with his Laws or the Governors he raised up amongst them; From v. 6.
to 14.
and now at last upon a sudden fright concerning Nahash the King of Ammon, they
were resolved they would have a King; and behold, says he, the Lord has se^ a
King over you. (3.) Notwithstanding their sin in so unseasonable a demand, yet
he tells them they might be happy under his Government if they did sincerely
keep to their established Religion and obey the Laws of God. This he delivers,

(1.) More Generally, verse. 14, 15. If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him,
and obey his voice, and not rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then
shall both ye and also the King that reigns over you, continue following the
Lord your God; i. e. God will protect and defend you. But if you will not obey
the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the Commandment of the Lord, then
shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your Fathers. But
this being a matter of the greatest consequence to them, whereon the welfare of
the Nation did depend, he delivers it,

(2.) More Emphatically; after the Thunder and Rain had affrightned and softened
their hearts; and they came praying to Samuel and confessing their sin to him;
v. 18, 19. v. 20, 21.
then he counsels them not to fear, if they did not forsake God; and for his
part, however they had disobliged him, he would not only continue to pray for
them, v* 23.
but give them the best advice and directions he could: But I will teach you
the good and the right way And then these words immediately follow, Only fear
the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart, etc.

3. These words are most considerable for the Matter contained in them; which
lies in these three particulars.

(1.) The influence which continuance in sin has upon a Kingdom's ruin: but if
ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.

(2.) The best means for the welfare and preservation of it, viz. maintaining
and practicing the true Religion; Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth
with all your heart.

(3.) The great argument and encouragement here given for the doing it; for
consider how great things he has done for you.

The first of these will be the main subject of my present Discourse, viz. The
influence which continuance in sin has upon a Kingdom's ruin. If we believe
Moses and the Prophets, we cannot question the truth of this concerning the
People of Israel; for this is the main scope and design of their doctrine.
Moses assured them, that all the strength, and force, and combination of their
enemies should do them no prejudice as long as they obeyed the Laws of God;
Lev. 26. from v. 3. to 14. v. 1^.
but if they would not do his Commandments, but despise his Statutes and abhor
his Judgments, all the care and policy they could use would not be able to keep
off the most dismal judgments which ever befell a Nation, I will even appoint
over you terror, v 16.
consumption and the burning Ague; that shall consume the eyes and cause sorrow
of heart; and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. v.
17.
And I will set my face against you, and you shall be slain before your
enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none
pursues you. v. 18.
And if you will not for all this hearken unto me, then will I punish you seven
times more for your sins, so he proceeds to the end of the Chapter, still
rising higher and higher, according to the greatness of their provocations. And
to the same purpose he speaks throughout Deuteronomy. 28. promising great Blessings to
their Nation upon obedience, and horrible Curses, such as would make ones ears
tingle to hear them, upon their refractoriness and disobedience, The Lord shall
send thee cursing, Deuteronomy, 28.2^.
vexation and rebuke, in all that thou set thine hand unto for to do;
until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly, because of the
wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou have forsaken me. To the same purpose
all the Prophets speak, only applying this general doctrine to the
circumstances of their own times. If ye be willing and obedient, Isa. 1.19, 20.
says Isaiah, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse and rebel,
ye shall be destroyed with the sword, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
When the Prophet Jeremiah saw dreadful calamities coming upon his people, he
cries out, Jer. 4 18
Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy
wickedness because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart. Ezekiel
tells them there was no hope to escape being destroyed, but by speedy and
sincere Repentance, Ezekiel 18* ^
Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall
not be your ruin.

But here a material question may be asked, whether this connection between
their doing wickedly, and being consumed were not by virtue of that political
Covenant between God and the people of Israel which was peculiar to themselves?
and how far it may be just and reasonable to argue concerning the case of other
Nations, with whom God has entered unto no such Covenant, as he did with them?

To make this clear, and to bring it nearer to our own case, I shall proceed in
this method.

1. To show, that God does exercise a particular providence with respect to the
state and condition of Kingdoms and Nations.

2. That according to the usual method of providence their condition is better
or worse as the People are.

3. That there are some circumstances of sinning, which do very much portend
and hasten a Peoples ruin.

1. That God does exercise a particular providence with a respect to the state
and condition of Nations, i. e. as they are united into several and distinct
bodies, which are capable as such of being happy or miserable. For since
mankinds entering into society is both necessary and advantageous to them; and
God does not barely permit and approve, but dispose and incline men to it; and
has given them Laws to govern themselves by, with respect to society; it is
but reasonable to suppose that God should call men to an account in that
capacity; and to distribute rewards and punishments according to the nature of
their actions; which must either be done in this world, or it cannot be done at
all; for all those bonds are dissolved by death, and men shall not answer for
their sins by Kingdoms and Nations in another world, but every man shall give
an account of himself unto God. Either therefore those societies as such shall
go wholly unpunished, or they must suffer according to them in this world; and
therefore here the case is very different from that of particular Persons. We
say, and with a great deal of reason, that it is no disparagement to the
Justice of God's Providence for good men to suffer, or for wicked men to escape
punishment in this Life, because the great day of recompense is to come,
wherein there will be a Revelation of the righteous judgment of God: But that
will not hold as to Nations, who shall not suffer in communities then as they
have sinned here: and therefore it is more reasonable to suppose the rewards
and punishments of such shall be in this life according to the measure and
proportion of their sins. And of this we have sufficient evidence in Scripture,
upon these accounts.

(1.) Because it charges guilt upon Nations as well as upon particular Persons.
And in case of uncertain murder, If one be found slain in the Land, Deuteronomy* 2^ ^
which the Lord thy God gives thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it
be not known who has slain him: v. ^.
the Elders of the next City were not only to protest, their own innocence; but
to use this Prayer, Be merciful, v. 8.
O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent
blood unto thy people of Isreal's charge. v. 9.
And the blood shall be forgiven them, so shall thou put away the guilt of
innocent blood from among you. Here we see the guilt of innocent blood goes
farther than the bare shedders of it, it lies upon the Nation till it be
expiated; and the Jews say, the soul of a person innocently murdered hovers up
and down the earth crying for vengeance, till the guilty persons be found out
and punished, and then it ascends above to its place of rest. The guilt of
innocent blood is indeed a crying sin; it cries loud unto Heaven for vengeance,
and nothing s^ops its voice but the execution of it. And where that is not
done, it leaves a guilt upon the Land; for God himself has said it, Blood
defiles the Land; Numb. 35.33.
and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the
blood of him that shed it. This sin we see, is of such a malignant nature, that
it infects the Land where it is committed, and lies upon it till it be
expiated. But there are other sins which con^ract a National guilt, when the
Auth^rity of a Nation, either gives too much countenance and encouragement to
the practice of them, or does not take that care it ought to do to suppress and
punish them. When men daily and insolently break the Laws of God, and bid as it
were defiance both to them and to the Laws of men; when wickedness spreads like
a leprosy, and infects the whole body; when vices become so notorious that
they are a reproach and a byword to Neighbor Nations; these are the signs and
tokens of National guilt.

(1.) Because the Scripture tells us of a certain Measure to which the sins of
a Nation do rise before they are ripe for punishment. This was the reason given
why Abraham's Children must stay to the fourth Generation before they come to
the possession of the promised Land, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not
yet full. Genesis 15* 1^
Where it is plain that God does consider Nations as distinct bodies, the
measure of whose sins is taken after another manner than that of particular
persons; but when once that measure is completed, ruin and destruction is
unavoidable; or at least, some signal and extraordinary judgments falling upon
them as the punishment of their iniquities. Men may ask why the Canaanites in
Joshua's time were dealt with so severely, that nothing but utter extirpation
would satisfy the Justice of God against them? But God prevents that objection
by letting Abraham know how much patience and long-suffering he used toward
them, waiting till the fourth Generation; and when their iniquities still
increased, and every Age added to the guilt of the foregoing, the burden grew
too heavy for them to bear it any longer, and therefore they must sink under
the weight of it. So our Savior says to the Jews in his time, Fill ye up then
the measure of your Fathers. Matthew. 23.32.
Not as though God did punish any Age beyond the desert of its own sins; but
when the measure of their sins is filled up, God does no longer forbear to
punish them; and that seldom happens, but when the sins of that time do exceed
those of the foregoing Generations; as it was in the case of the Jews when
their City and Temple were destroyed.

(3.) Because it attributes the great Revolutions of Government to a particular
Providence of God, God is the Judge, or the supreme Arbitrator of the affairs
of the world, Psalm. 75.7
he pulls down one and sets up another. Which holds with respect to
Nations as well as particular persons. Which does not found any right of
Dominion (as some fansied till the argument from Providence was returned with
greater force upon themselves) but it shows that when God pleases to make use
of Persons or Nations as the Scourges in his hand to punish a People with, he
gives them success above their hopes or expectations: but that success gives
them no right. And of this the Psalmist speaks when he adds, v. ^.
For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup and the Wine is red; it is full of
mixture, and he pours out of the same; but the dregs thereof all the wicked
of the earth shall wring them out and drink them. It is called by Isaiah, the
Cup of Fury, Is. 51.17.
and the Cup of Trembling, which God gives to Nations destined to ruin: which
makes them like people intoxicated and deprived of that apprehension of danger,
of that judgment and consideration to prevent it, which at other times they
have. When a Nation is near some dreadful calamity, as a just punishment of
its sins; God takes away the wisdom of the Wise, and the understanding of the
Prudent, and the resolution of the men of courage, that they all stand amazed
and confounded, not knowing how to give or take advice; but they are full of
fears, and rather apt to quarrel with one another than to consult the general
good. This was just the state of Egypt when God did purpose to execute his
Justice upon it.

(1.) First, their courage failed them, And the heart of Egypt shall melt in
the midst of it; Is. 19.1, 3.
and the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof. In that day shall
Egypt be like unto women; 16.
and it shall be afraid and fear, because of the shaking of the hand of the
Lord of Hosts, which he shakes over it. It is a very ill sign when men want
the spirit and vigor they were wont to have; when they are daunted at the
apprehension of every danger, and rather meanly seek to save themselves by base
arts and sordid compliances, than to promote the common welfare. It is folly
and stupidity not to apprehend danger when there is cause for it, and to take
the best care to prevent it; but it is a fatal symptom upon a Nation when their
hearts fail them for fear, that they dare not do the duty which they owe to
God, to their King, and to their Country. God forbid that any should exceed the
bounds of their duty to prevent their fears, but when men want resolution to do
that, they are in a lost condition.

(2.) Their Counsels were divided and infatuated: v. 2.
And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians. 11.
The Princes of Zoan are Tools, the Counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh
is become brutish; they have also seduced Egypt, 13.
even they that are the st^y o^ ^he Tribes thereof. The Lord has ming^^^ a
perverse spirit in the midst ther^of, 14.
and they have caused Egypt to err ^n every work thereof, as a reeling man
staggereth in his vomit, i. e. they know not what to fix upon, all their
Counsels being so uncertain, and the best taking no effect. But after all their
consultations, they advance not one step forward, but fall back just to the
same case they were in before; every one blaming another for want of success in
their designs. This is the deplorable state of a People when ruin and
desolation is near them.

But on the other side, when God raises up a Nation to be a Scourge to other
Nations, he inspires them with a new spirit and courage, unites their counsels,
removes their difficulties or carries them easily through them, and by a
concurrence of some happy circumstances gives them ^^range success beyond all
their hopes and expectations. Look over all the mighty Revolutions which have
happened in the Kingdoms and Empires of the World, and the more ye search and
consider and compare things together, the greater truth you will find in this
observation. When God designed to punish the Eastern Nations for their
transgressions, then the Babylonian Monarchy rose so fast and spread so far,
that nothing was able to stand before it. The combinations of the Kings of
Judah, Jer. 27.3.
and Edom, and Moab, and Tire, and Sidon, and Egypt were but like the Withs
which the Philistines bound Sampson with, Jud. 16.9.
which he brake in sunder as a thread of Tow is broken when it touches the
fire. Judah drinks first of the Cup, and she trembles and falls, and is carried
into captivity; then follow, Jer. 25. from 18. to 26. Ezekiel. 24.2, etc. 30.5.
Nah 3.8, 9. ^^ph. 2.13.
as God had foretold by his Prophets, the desolations of Tire, of Egypt, of Put
and Lud, i. e. of Libya and Aethiopia; and at last the Cup passes round, and
Nineveh's turn comes to drink deep of this Cup of Fury, and she was laid wast
for returning to her sins after Repentance.

And when the sins of Babylon called for vengeance, God raised up Cyrus, and
called him by his Name, Is. 45.2.3.
long before he was born, and brought the fierce Nations of the East to submit
themselves to him: and when Babylon was most secure, full of Wine and Jolli^y
at an anniversary feast, he led Cyrus into the City by a way they dreamed not
of, and all the plagues which the Prophets had foretold, came upon that people
when they lest expected them. It was not the Courage and Spirit of Alexander
with his Macedonian Army could have made such sudden and easy conquests of the
East; if God by his Providence had not strangely made way for his success by
infatuating the Counsels of Darius, so as to give him those advantages against
himself he could never have hoped for. There is no such mighty difference in
the wits and contrivances of men; no such great advantages in military power
and conduct; no such wonderful disproportion in the courage, or wisdom, or
educations of men; but when God has pleased to let loose the most rude, and
barbarous, and unexperienced Nations in matters of War, upon the most
flourishing Kingdoms, the most disciplined Armies, the most fortified Cities,
they have in spite of all opposition overrun, overcome, and overthrown them.
Who could have thought that the cowardly Goths (as they were then esteemed) the
barbarous Vand^ls, and the despicable Hunns, could have made such havoc and
devastations in the Roman Empire, that in fifty years time, more of it was lost
and destroyed by their means, than had been gained in a thousand? It would make
ones heart bleed to read the miseries which all the parts of the Roman Empire
suffered, where these Barbarians prevailed; and yet they were despised and
reproached by the Grave and Wise Romans at the same time when they were
conquered and destroyed by them; as Salvian who lived then, Salvian. de G^b.
Dei, l. 7.
at large relates. But the best and wisest men could not but see an
extraordinary hand of God going along with them; and one of their greatest
Generals found himself carried on by such a mighty impulse, and met with such
an unaccountable success in all his undertakings, that he called himself
Flagellum Dei, The Scourge in God's hand to chastise the wickedness and follies
of men that called themselves Christians, and did not live like such. Disput.
in Live. l. 2. c. 29.
Machiavel himself takes notice of so strange a difference in the Conduct and
success of the Romans at different times, that he says, they could hardly be
imagined to be the same People; and after all his attempts to find out other
causes, he at last is forced to conclude that there is a superior cause to the
Counsels of men which governs the affairs of mankind, which he calls Fate, and
we much better, the Providence of God. Some learned Physicians are of opinion
that when diseases are not curable by common remedies, H. Jordanus de eo quod
in morbis est divinum, Con^ing. Epist. 29.
there is in them (...), something divine, and therefore in such cases Divine
Remedies are the most proper and effectual: thus in the alterations of States
and Kingdoms, there is often a (...), a more than ordinary hand of God, in
which cases the best means we can use to prevent danger is by Fasting and
Prayer, by true repentance and speedy Reformation of our evil ways.

(4.) Because the Scripture still leaves hopes of Mercy to a People where they
have a heart to repent. I do not find by any declaration of God's Will in
Scripture, that he has made any such peremptory decree concerning the ruin of
a Nation, but upon their repentance there is a way left to escape it; but
rather the contrary in those words of Jeremiah, Jer. 18.7, 8.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil which I
thought to do unto them. And therefore all threatenings of that kind are
conditional, as this in the text is, But if ye shall still do wickedly: which
implies that if they did cease to do so, they might be preserved, both they and
their King. And where repentance has intervened between the threatening and
execution of judgment, God has showed wonderful kindness either in stopping,
removing, or deferring the severity of judgments.

1. In stopping his hand when it has been lifted up, and just ready to strike.
We can desire no clearer instance in that case than that of Nineveh; Jonah 3.3.
a vast City (or rather a Country enclosed in Walls) full of all the delights
of Asia, and of the sins which usually attend them; to this City God sends a
Prophet to let them know how near they were to destruction, that they had but
forty days time to turn themselves in. This was a strange and unexpected alarm
to them, given by a strange Prophet after a peremptory manner to a people
unacquainted with such messages. How many objections would the Infidels and
Scepticks of our Age have made against such a Message as this? They would
rather have concluded the Prophet Mad, than have been persuaded to repent by
him. Yet so great was the apprehension they had of the just desert of their
sins, that the People of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth, v. 5.
from the greatest of them even to the least: and they cried mightily to God,
v. 8. v. 10.
and turned from their evil ways: And what then? Would God disparage the
reputation of his Prophet, and alter the sentence he had sent him so far to
denounce against them? What hopes had he given them of mercy if they repented?
It appears they had nothing but general presumptions, Who can tell, if God will
turn and repent, v. 9.
and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? Yet sincere repentance
being performed upon no greater assurance than this, prevailed so with God,
that he repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it
not. O the depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Goodness of God! His
Wisdom in leading them to repentance; his Goodness in forbearing to punish
after so great provocations. What encouragement does God hereby give to others
to repent, when Nineveh was rescued from the very brink of destruction by it?

2. In removing his hand when it has struck. When David's vanity transported
him so far, that without any necessity he would know the Number of his People;
his heart did misgive him as soon as he had done it, 2 Samuel 24.10.
and he confessed he had sinned greatly in it; notwithstanding this, God sends
a plague among the People, which touched David to the quick, as a tender Father
is most sensibly punished in the loss of his Children; v. 17.
and then he cried, Lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly; but these Sheep
what have they done? And when the Angel had stretched out his hand upon
Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the
Angel, It is enough, stay now thy hand. Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God; on them which fell severity; but toward Jerusalem goodness.
His severity was intended to make people avoid a vain confidence in their own
strength and numbers; his goodness to let them see how ready he is to draw back
his hand when men truly repent.

3. In putting by the stroke for the present, or deferring the execution of his
wrath. No King of Israel provoked God more than Ahab; for it is said of him,
that he did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him; 1
King 16.30.
and that he sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. At last
the Prophet Elijah meets him in Naboth's Vineyard which he had just taken
possession of by fraud and violence; 33.
21.25.
when Ahab saw such an unwelcome Guest in that place, his guilt made him ready
to start back, and to say, 20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? The Prophet having this fair opportunity
followed the blow he had given him so home, that Ahab was not able to stand
before him: for it is said, that when Ahab heard the terrible judgments God
denounced against him for his sins, he rent his clothes, v. 29.
and put Sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted, and in good earnest humbled
himself before God; For so God himself owns that he did. I do not say he
continued good after this; but he now heartily repented for the time; and for
the time of repentance God enlarged his time of forbearance. Because he
humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days. Even a short
repentance, when sincere, gains time, by a reprieve from punishment. When the
sins of a Nation are grown to a great height, and become ripe for vengeance,
the best Princes can obtain no more than not seeing the evil in their own days,
as in the case of Josiah who was an excellent Prince, and a true lover of God
and his Law, yet the people continued so hardened in their sins, though under
some show of Reformation; that the Prophetess told him; 2 Kin. 22.16.
behold I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, 19.
etc. But because his heart was tender, and he humbled himself before the Lord,
he obtained that favor, that his eyes should not see the evil which he would
bring upon them. 20
If the People had been as good as Josiah was, there is no question, but even
then God would have repented of the evil; but where there was such an obstinate
impenitency, that neither God's Laws, nor the Prophet's threatenings, nor the
Princes example could prevail upon them; all that his humiliation could obtain,
was only a putting it off for his own time; and we have reason to think that
their sins did hasten his end too; as sometimes the sins of a people make the
best of Princes to be taken away from them: and when the ten Tribes were
carried captive, their King Hoshea is said, 2 Kin. 17.2.
not to have done evil as the Kings of Israel that were before him. And to
Judah after Josias his death, God punctually made good this threatening in the
Text, But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your
King.

II. The second particular is, That according to the usual method of Providence
the state or condition of a People is better or worse according to the general
nature of their Actions. If they be good and virtuous, careful to please God,
just, sober, chaste, merciful, diligent observers of God's Laws and their own,
and dealing with other Nations according to the Laws of Nations, they will live
in a much more flourishing and happy condition; than a Nation can do where
Atheism, Profaneness, and all sorts of Wickedness abound: which I shall prove
two ways.

(1.) Absolutely, from the tendency of Religion and Virtue to promote the
Honor, the Peace, the Courage and Safety of a People.

(2.) Comparatively, that Nations are more or less happy according to their
virtues and vices.

(1.) Absolutely, and that will appear, (1.) From the tendency of true Goodness
and piety to promote a Nation's Honor and Interest abroad. And no man is
ignorant how much Reputation brings of real advantage to a Nation; and that a
People despised are next to a People enslaved; and that it is impossible to
hold up honor and esteem in the World, where the reputation of Virtue is lost.

(2.) From its tendency to maintain peace and tranquillity at home; preventing
private quarrels, by justice, and honesty, and temperance, and chastity; and
public disturbances by avoiding idleness, and debauchery, and bad principles,
which are the great nurseries of Rebellion; and teaching men quietness,
patience, due government of themselves, and obedience not only for wrath, but
also for Conscience sake. Whereas loose principles, and bad practices, and
extravagant desires naturally dispose men to endeavor changes and alterations,
in hopes of bettering themselves by them* and the prevalency of Vice does
unhing Government, and weaken the strength and sinews of it.

(3.) From the keeping up the spirits, and securing the safety of men. A good
Conscience makes a man dare to do his duty; but the sinners in Zion are afraid,
Is. 33.14.
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites. These were men says Grotius, who
carried a fair show for the present, but were inwardly prepared, if the King of
Babylon got the better, to be of his Religion, whatever it was. Such men who
are false to God, and really of no Religion at all, are full of thoughts and
fears, not knowing what may happen; they dare not own what they would be, for
fear it ruin them at present; and they dare not appear too much for what they
seem to own, for fear of what may come hereafter. If the Lord be God, 1 Kin^
18* 2^*
says Elijah, then follow him; but if Baal, then follow him: No, say such men,
if they durst speak their thoughts, we desire to be excused at present, we find
there is a contest between them, and we do not yet know which will get the
better, when we see that, you shall know our minds. As Asinius Pollio told
Augustus in his Wars with Anthony he was resolved to be praeda victoris, he
would be of the Conqueror's side. But men that are sincere in any Religion, do
hate and abhor such hypocritical Dissemblers, and despise and spue them out for
their nauseous lukewarmness; and as men indeed of no Religion or Conscience,
but for what serves to their present ends. But observe in what a lofty strain
the Prophet sets forth the security and confidence which follows integrity. v.
15.
He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain
of oppressions, that shakes his hands from holding bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and stops his eyes from seeing evil. He shall
dwell on high, 1^,
his place of defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him,
his waters shall be sure. These were very critical and doubtful times which
the Prophet speaks of, and many were secretly for complying with the King of
Assyria, as believing it as impossible to withstand his force, as to dwell with
everlasting burnings; the Prophet is so far from granting this, that he tells
them all their security lay in being just and honest, and doing their duty, and
then they would be as safe, as if they had constant provision among the most
inaccessible Rocks. It is observable concerning the Israelites, that when they
went about to secure themselves by subtle devices and contrivances of their
own, making leagues and confederacies with the King of Egypt and other
neighbor Princes, so often they were foiled, and bassled, and overcome by
their enemies; but when they put their trust in God, and committed themselves
to his protection, he preserved and delivered them from the greatest dangers. I
will not deny that there was something peculiar in their case, having the
Prophets directions; and to trust man's wisdom against God's was madness and
folly in them. But setting that aside, as there is no security like to God^s
protection, so there is no reason to think that will be wanting to them who do
their duty sincerely and put their trust in him.

(2.) Comparatively; If we do compare several Nations together, we shall find
those to flourish most, and to be the most happy where men do most fear God and
work righteousness; where piety and virtue have the greatest countenance and
encouragement; and where vice and wickedness are the most discouraged and
punished.

This may seem a Paradox at first hearing to those who consider by what ways of
fraud and violence, of injustice and cruelty, of rapine and oppression, the
great and m^ghty Empires of the world have been raised and maintained; and how
little regard is showed to any rules of Honesty, Justice, or the Laws of
Nations in those Kingdoms and States which resolve to be great, and in spite
of other Nations to maintain their Greatness.

Yet notwithstanding this plausible objection, the truth of my assertion will
appear, if we understand it as we ought to do with these following Cautions.

^. That it is not to be understood of the largeness of dom^nion, or
superfluity o^ r^ches, but of the true happiness of living in society together;
which is by promoting the real good of all. To which the vastness of Empire,
and immensity of riches is by no means necessary, but a sufficiency both of
strength and treasure to defend it self in case of foreign enemies, and to
provide for the necessities and conveniences of all the Members of it. Those
who have best considered these things, Arist. Pol. l. 4. c. 11.
suppose that to be the most exact and perfect Idea of Government, where all
things are in a certain measure, and have a proportion to each other so as most
conduces to the true end of living; not to riot and luxury, not to softness and
effeminacy, not to pride and ambition, not to the heaping up of riches without
use and respect to a general good; but so as all men may according to their
conditions and circumstances enjoy what they have or can get, with the greatest
comfort to themselves and their friends, and do the most generous and virtuous
actions.

2. That this is not to be understood of the private benefit of any particular
persons, but of the general good of all sorts and conditions of men. The
Eastern Monarchies have seemed to be the most happy and flourishing to those
who look at a distance upon them, and only observe the Pomp and Grandeur of
their Princes, without looking into the State and Condition of the People.
Aristotle observes, Polit. l. 3. c. 14.
that the Eastern people had more wit and slavery with it, the Northern had
less quickness and more liberty, the Greeks lying between both, had their share
in both. But the Eastern slavery has brought Barbarism into Greece it self;
and the Northern Liberty has so improved the wits, and given such
encouragement to the industry of men, that our people at this day enjoy more
benefit by the riches of the East, than those do among whom they grow. Can we
call them a happy people that see much riches and enjoy none; having nothing
which they can call their own, unless it be their slavery? That is certainly
the happiest condition of a people, where the Prince sits upon the Throne of
Majesty and Power, doing righteousness and showing kindness; and the people sit
every man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, enjoying the fruits of his
own labors, or his Ancestor's bounty: Where the people think it their interest
to support and obey their Prince; and the Prince thinks it his interest to
protect and defend his people. Happy is the People that is in such a case; Ps.
144.15.
but above all, happy is that People whose God is the Lord. For without his
blessing, the best Government, the best Laws, the best Ministers can never
preserve a Nations happiness; and there is no reason to expect his Blessing,
but in the ways of Piety and Virtue.

3. That it is not to be understood of sudden and surprising events, but of a
lasting and continued state. For when God had been highly provoked to punish
several Nations for their sins; he may give unexpected success to that Nation
by whom he designs to punish the rest; and when they have done that work, they
may then suffer more smartly for their own iniquities. Of this we have a
remarkable instance in Scripture; God designed to punish the Kingdoms of the
earth for their sins; to this purpose he raises up Nebuchadnezar King of
Babylon, Jer. 25.26.
v. 9.
whom he therefore calls his Servant; and the first example of his severity was
his own People; 11.
when this was done, then follow the desolations of Egypt, of Phoenicia,
Arabia, and other Countries in so strange a manner, that some have called it
the Age of the destruction of Cities. Marsh. Chr. Can. p. 556.
But does the King of Babylon think to escape himself? No, says the Prophet,
Jer. 25.15. v. 26.
the King of Shesbach shall drink after them; his turn would come at last, when
he had accomplished the design God sent him upon in the punnishment of others.
Thus for a time, a Nation may seem to flourish exceedingly, and be victorious
over others while they are as Scourges in God's hand for the punishment of
others, and when that work is over may suffer most severely for their own sins.

4. It is to be understood of Persons under equal circumstances, when we
compare the condition of People with each other: not the Nobles of one Nation
with the Peasants of another, nor the Princes with the People; but every rank
and order of men with those of the same rank and condition.

And upon these terms, we need no other proof of the truth of this assertion,
than the instance in the Text of the People of Israel; which will best appear
by comparing the state of both Kingdoms after the Body of the People was broken
into the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The Kingdom of Israel by Jereboam's
Policy, and for Reason of State, fell off from the Worship of the true God* and
worshipped the Calves of Dan and Bethel. But did they prosper or succeed more
than the Kingdom of Judah? The ten Tribes had a much larger territory, yet the
Kingdom of Judah was stronger and flourished more, and continued longer by 135
years, than the Kingdom of Israel did; and when they were carried into
Captivity, the ten Tribes were lost as to their name and interest among the
People of Assyria; but the two Tribes were restored after 70 years Captivity
under the Princes of the Line of David. If we compare the Kings of Israel and
Judah together; the Posterity of David was kept up among the Kings of Judah;
but there were nine Families in the Kingdom of Israel; and but one of them
lasted to the fourth Generation, and that was of Jehu, who did something
toward the Reformation of Religion. Of the eighteen Kings of Israel, but eight
escaped dying by the Sword: and it is easy to judge how miserable the state of
that People must be, under so many violent changes of Government. Among the
Kings of Judah those who were firmest to the true Religion prospered most, and
the Nation under them enjoyed the greatest peace, or received the greatest
deliverances, as in the days of Asa, Jehosaphat and Hezekiah. If we compare the
times of the same Kings together, we shall find that while they adhered firmly
to God and Religion, the Nation prospered exceedingly, as for a long time under
the Reigns of Solomon and Asa; but when in their old Age they began to warp in
their Religion and to decline in their Piety, nothing but trouble and confusion
followed. So true did they find the saying of Hanani to Asa, 2 Chapter 16.9.
the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. But
because he said, he had done foolishly in not relying on the Lord, but on the
King of Syria, therefore, v. 10.
says he, from henceforth thou shall have wars. And from that time his
Government was uneasy both to himself and his People; when he had imprisoned
the Prophet for reproving him.

III. That there are some circumstances in the sins of a Nation, which do very
much portend and hasten its Ruin. As,

1. When they are committed after more than ordinary mercies received; such as
in reason ought to keep men most from the commission of them; as greater
knowledge of the Will of God that other People enjoy; more frequent warnings of
their danger than others have had; many and great deliverances which God has
vouchsafed; when none of these things, nor all of them together do move a
People to repent, they show an obstinate and incorrigible temper, and therefore
God may sooner proceed to punish them. God did not forbear to punish other
Nations for their transgressions, but he began with his own People. Jer. 25.29.
For lo I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my name, and
should ye be utterly unpunished? The destroying Angels in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.6.
were to begin at the Sanctuary. Judgment, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4 1^
must begin at the House of God. He draws the line of his Justice parallel to
that of his Mercy; and when every Mercy is put to the account, and heightens
the guilt, the sum will soon rise so high to call for execution. The Prophet
Amos tells Damascus, and Gaza, and Tire, and Edom, and Ammo^, and Moab, that
none of them shall escape being punished for their transgressions; they need
not doubt, the Rod would come time enough upon them; but yet God would begin
with his own Children: Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities. Where God has given wonderful marks of
his kindness, and many deliverances time after time, and yet they continue to
do wickedly, there is the greater reason to expect sharper and severer
punishments.

2. When they are committed with more than ordinary contempt of God and
Religion. All Ages are bad enough; and every Age is apt to complain of it self,
as the worst of any; because it knows more ill of it self, than of the
foregoing. But yet there is a difference in the manner of sinning; sometimes
the stream of wickedness hides its head, and runs under ground, and makes
little noise, although it holds on the same course; at other times it seems to
break forth like a mighty torrent as though it would bear down all before it, as
though the fountains of the great Deep were broken up, and Hell were let loose,
and the Prisoners there had shaken off their chains and come up upon the earth;
When Atheism, Profaneness and all manner of Wickedness grow impudent and
barefaced; when men do not only neglect Religion, Jer. 5.9, 29.
but reproach and contemn it. Shall I not visit for these things, says the
Lord, shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? God did forbear
his People of Judah beyond what they could have expected, waiting for their
amendment; but when they added impudence to their obstinacy, when they made
sport with the Prophets, and turned their threatenings into songs of mirth and
drollery, then the peremptory decree came forth, and there was no hopes to
escape. But they mocked the messengers of God, 2 Chr. 36.16.
and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his People, till there was no remedy. There still seemed to be
some hopes left till they came to this temper. But when they burlesqued the
Prophet Jeremiah's words, Jer. 23.34, 36. Ezekiel. 33.31. In canticum oris sui
vertunt illos. Vul. Lat.
and turned the expressions he used into Ridicule, crying in contempt, The
burden of the Lord, which is called, perverting the words of the living God:
when they turned Ezekiel's words into pleasant songs, and made sport with God's
judgments, no wonder he was so highly provoked. For there can be no worse
symptom to a people, than to laugh at the only means to cure them; and if this
once grow common, it must needs make their condition desperate. For then it
comes to God's turn to mock and laugh too; Because I have called and ye have
refused, Prove. 1.24.
I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded; 25.
but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my reproof;
26.
I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. Woe be
unto that people whom the Almighty takes pleasure in punishing.

3. When there is an universal degeneracy of all ranks and conditions of men. I
do not mean such as is common to humane nature, but from the particular virtues
of their Ancestors, or a common practice of those vices which do most
frequently draw down the judgments of God, and make him to have a controversy
with a Land. By swearing, ^os 4.2, 3.
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out,
and blood touches blood, therefore shall the Land mourn. It was a strange
degree of corruption the People of Jerusalem were fallen to before God led them
into Captivity; when the Prophet Jeremiah used those expressions to them, Jer.
5.^.
Run ye to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek
in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Could there
ever be a fairer or kinder offer than this? But as Isaiah expresses it, Isa.
1.5, 6.
the whole head was sick, and the heart faint; from the sole of the foot even
unto the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and
putrefying sores. It seems a very strange passage in the Law of Leprosy, Lev.
13.12, 13, 14.
that if the Leprosy covered all the flesh, the person was to be pronounced
clean; but if any raw flesh appeared, he was unclean: which it is very hard to
understand, unless it were that the power of infection was then gone. Such a
state the People of Jerusalem seemed to have been in, there was no room for
infection left, the plague of Leprosy had so overrun them, that there was no
sound part left in the whole body.

Thus I have considered the influence which doing wickedly has upon the ruin
of a Nation, it remains now that I make Application of this to our own case.

We have been a People that have received wonderful Mercies and many signal
Deliverances from God's hand. He has placed us in a rich and fruitful Land;
and has furnished us with so great plenty, that even that has been thought
our burden; has blessed us with such an increase of Trade, that our Merchants
far exceed those of Tire both in Riches and Number. Our Ships of Trade are like
a Valley of Cedars when they lie at home; and when they are abroad, they
compass the earth, and make the riches of the East and West Indies to meet in
our Streets. And since like the Prince of Tire, our seat is in the midst of the
Seas, God has thereby secured us from such sudden inroads and invasions of
foreign Enemies as many of our Neighbor Countries do groan under at this day:
where the miseries of War are felt before they are seen; and those who thought
themselves at ease and quiet, may be surprised in their Beds, and before they
are aware of it may themselves, and Families, and Goods, and Houses, and
Country be all burnt and consumed together. But God has compassed us about
with a deep Sea and a large Channel, and given us such a powerful Navy as may
be both a Defense at home and a Terror abroad.

As to our civil Constitution, if we consider the admirable Temper of our
Government, the Justice and Wisdom of our Laws, and the greatness of our
Liberties, we have no reason to envy the condition of any people upon earth.
And after all our intestine broils and confusions which our sins had brought
upon us, God was pleased in a most surprising manner, without War or bloodshed,
to our great satisfaction and the amazement of the World, to restore our
Sovereign to his Throne, our Church and People to their just Rights and
Liberties. And while our Neighbor Nations have lamentably suffered under all
the dismal effects of a lasting War, he has enlarged our Trade, continued our
Peace, and thereby increased our prosperity, after we had smarted under a
dreadful Fire, and a raging Pestilence. Thus far all things tend still to make
us a happy Nation, if we did know and value our own happiness.

But that which above all other things should make us so, has been the great
Occasion of our Trouble, and is still of our Fears, and that is Religion. And
yet in this respect we have advantages above any other Nation in the Christian
World, having a Church reformed with so much Wisdom and Moderation, as to avoid
the dangerous extremes on both sides. But even this has enraged our
Adversaries of the Roman Church, and made them the more restless to destroy it;
and to stick at no means which they thought might tend to its ruin. O blessed
Jesus! that ever thy Holy Name should be assumed by Traitors and Murderers; or
that the promoting thy true Religion should be made the color for the most
wicked practices!

Not that the pure and peaceable Religion of Jesus Christ does sour and
imbitter the Spirits of Men toward each other, or dispose them to malice,
hatred, revenge and cruelty (some of the worst passions of humane nature) or to
the accomplishing their own ends by secret conspiracies and open violence, by
treachery and falsehood, by Murders and Assassinations, either on the Ministers
of Justice, or on the most merciful and best natured of Kings. But be
astonished O ye Heavens, and tremble O earth, that have brought forth such a
Generation of Vipers who are continually making their way through the Bowels of
their Mother, and as we have reason to believe have designed to destroy the
Father of their Country. If these be the kind embraces of one that pretends to
be the Mother Church, if this be the paternal affection of the Holy Father at
Rome, if this indeed be zeal for the Catholic Cause, if this be the way to
reconcile us to their Communion, have we not great reason to be fond of
returning into the Bosom of such a Church which may strangle us as soon as it
gets us within her Arms? But there are some whose concernment it is, to make
men believe there was no such dangerous plot intended; I meddle not with that
evidence which lies before you, but there is one notorious circumstance obvious
to all persons, and sufficient to convince any, which is the horrid Murder
actually committed on one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, in cold blood,
with great contrivance and deliberation. Do men imbrue their hands in blood,
for nothing? Why no other Person, why at such a time, why in such a manner?
There was a reason for all this; he had taken the examinations; he knew too
much to be suffered to live, and they hoped by his death to stifle his
evidence, and to affrighten others from searching too far; and they managed
that matter so, as though they had a mind to convince the World, they had no
other end in taking away his life, but to prevent a further Discovery. And they
whom his Death does not convince, neither would they be convinced, though he
should rise again from the Dead.

God forbid that we should charge such barbarous cruelties, such wicked
conspiracies, such horrid designs on all who live in the Communion of that
Church; but we must distinguish between the seduced party who are not thought
sit to be trusted with such things, ^or fear their Consciences check at them,
and their good nature disclose them; and the busy Active Faction, who are
always restless and designing, and act by such Maxims of Morality as the more
so^er and modest Heathens would abhor. What has this Party of men been ^^ing
among us this last hundred of years and more, but plotting conspiraracies,
inflaming our differences, betraying our liberties, heigh^^i^g our discontents,
and in short, undermining the Foundations both of our Government and Religion?
And shall such men always triumph that they are too hard for our Laws? and that
like the Canaanites and Jebusites to the Children of Israel, they will still be
as scourges in o^r sides, and thorns in our eyes? If these things must be, Jos.
23.13.
I hope God designs it not to destroy us at last by them, but I am sure it does
prove and try us, whether we will hearken to the Commandments of the Lord, or
to the vain Traditions of Men.

God knows, I speak not these things out of any malice or ill will to the
Persons of any, for, that I may use St. Paul's words, My heart's desire and
prayer to God for them all is, that they might he saved. And although I cannot
bear them witness, yet my hopes are, some even of these may think they have a
zeal for God in all this; but we are sure it is not according to knowledge.
Such a blind zeal as the Jews had, who when they killed the Apostles, thought
they did God good service. But it is so furious, so inhumane, so unchristian a
zeal, that it is charity to them, as well as necessary care of our own safety,
to keep them from a capacity of doing themselves and others mischief.

But before I conclude, the Text suggests to us three things, very pertinent to
the duty of this Day; which I shall briefly recommend to your consideration.

1. Matter of humiliation for our sins, as they have an influence upon the
Nation's suffering.

2. Matter of Advice, Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, and with all
your heart.

3. Matter of encouragement, For, consider, what great things he has done for
you.

1. Matter of Humiliation for our sins. Which have been many and great, and
aggravated by all the Mercies and Deliverances which God has vouchsafed to us;
and therefore he may be justly provoked to punish us proportionably to the
measures of our ingratitude and disobedience. Let us lay our hands upon our
hearts this day, and seriously consider what requital we have made to the Lord
for all the benefits he has bestowed upon us? For the Light of his Truth, the
Purity of his Worship, the Power of his Grace, the Frequency of his Sacraments,
the Influences of his Spirit, and the continuance hitherto of our established
Religion, in spite of all opposition whatsoever. But have we not been guilty of
too much sleighting that Truth, neglecting that Worship, resisting that Grace,
contemning those Sacraments, quenching that Spirit; and of too great coldness
and indifferency about matters of Religion? I do not fear that ever the Church
of Rome should prevail among us by strength of Reason, or force of Argument,
with all its specious colors and pretenses, unless it be among those who
understand neither one, nor the other Religion; but if men be loose in their
principles, and unconcerned about Religion in general, there will not be
courage and constancy enough to keep it out. I do much more fear Popery coming
in at the back door of Atheism and Profaneness; than under all its false and
deceitful pretenses of Universality and Infallibility. And this those have
been aware of, who have been so industriously sowing among us the seeds of
Irreligion; knowing that if men be unconcerned as to all Religion, they will
never have the courage to oppose any; but will be sure to close with the
prevailing side. Next to this, I know no greater advantage that they take
against us, than from the unnatural heats and unchristian divisions which have
been among us. If men were wise they would consider, at least in this our day,
the things which do belong to our Peace. How can men answer it at the great
day, if in such a critical time as this is, they stand upon little niceties and
punctilio's of Honor rather than Conscience, or upon keeping up the interests
of their several Parties, and do not those things which themselves think they
lawfully may do toward an Union with us? I pray God, the continuance of these
breaches may not look like an argument of divine Infatuation upon us. But what
can we say to that looseness and debauchery of manners, to that riot and
luxury, to that wantonness and profaneness, to that fashion of customary
swearing, and Atheistick Drollery, which have been so much and so justly
complained of among us? I hope there are many thousands at this day in England,
whose souls abhor the abominations that are committed, and who mourn in secret
for them, and therefore our case may not be so desperate as that of Jerusalem
was. May we all this day so heartily repent of all these follies and impieties,
that the Cause of our Fears which our sins give us being removed, we may hearken

(2.) To the matter of Advice here given, Only to fear the Lord, and to serve
him in Truth, and with all our heart.

As though Samuel had said, Your hearts stand trembling still at the fear of
God's judgments, when he does but lift up his voice in the Thunder, and show
his Power in the Rain; I will tell you, how your hearts may be at ease and
quiet from the fear of evil; Be faithful to God, maintain and practice the
true Religion, sincerely, diligently, constantly, universally, and never doubt
his protection of you, let your enemies be never so many, or your dangers never
so great. Nothing exposes men more to the Wrath and Vengeance of God, nor
provokes him more to leave a People to their own counsels, than false
heartedness in Religion and Hypocrisy do. For the Hypocrite thinks to put a
trick upon God Almighty; and while he seems to carry it fair toward him, he is
dealing underhand for his own security another way: And God is then concerned
in honor to let the world see he will not be mocked; for he knows how to take
the crafty in their own devices; and very often brings to naught the most
politic fetches of self-designing men. For when men seek themselves, and not
the honor of God or Religion, but are ready to betray what ought to be dearer
than their lives, for some mean and private interests of their own, they are
oft-times so far from compassing their ends, that they become the Scorn and
Reproach of men. But if men preserve their integrity, and hold fast to the
thing that is right, they preserve their honor, even among their enemies, and
either escape troubles, or have the comfort of a good Conscience under them,
and however things happen to them for a while, they are sure to have peace at
the last.

3. Lastly, Here is matter of encouragement. For consider what great things he
has done for you. v. 8.
When Jacob was sent into Egypt, and your Fathers cried unto the Lord, then the
Lord sent Moses and Aaron which brought our Fathers out of Egypt, and made them
dwell in this place. When their sins had brought them into great distresses
afterward, and they cried unto the Lord and confessed their sins, v. 9
then the Lord raised up Jerubbaal and Bedan, and Jepthah, 10
and Samuel, 11.
and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and you
dwelled safe. Now consider, the same God who did those things, can do as great
for you still; for his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness are the same, and
therefore you have the greatest reason to put your trust in him at all times,
Psalm. 9.10.
since he never forsakes them that seek him.

Blessed be God that we have this day a farther argument for us to fear and
serve him in truth, and with all our heart, by considering what great things he
has done for us. Many deliverances has he wrought for us time after time, for
which we ought still to be thankful, since we yet enjoy the benefit of them.
But the memory of former deliverances was almost worn out with many, and some
began to question whether such holy and innocent men as the Fathers of the
Society could be guilty of such horrid conspiracies; some were so persuaded of
their Loyalty, that the Vipers seemed to have changed their natures and to have
lost their teeth, and to be a very soft and innocent kind of Creatures.
Insomuch, that they were hardly brought to believe there could be a plot among
them, especially of so horrid a nature as this appears more and more to have
been, when such a viperous brood were suffered not only to lie quiet in the
Shade, but to sport themselves in the Sun, and to enjoy the freedom of their
own retreats. But God does bring to light the hidden things of darkness by such
ways as show his Providence, more than our prudence and foresight, that while
we have the comfort, he alone may have the glory of our deliverance. But yet
methinks we stand as it were upon the brink of a mighty Precipice, which is so
full of horror that we tremble to look down from it; we are at present held up
by a strong hand, but as by one single thread, and can we then think our selves
secure from so great a danger?

Blessed be God for that Unanimity, that Zeal, that Courage, that Constancy You
have hitherto showed in the maintenance of our Church and Religion; but there
is so much yet to be done for a firm Establishment of it to all Generations
(which now by his Majesty's Gracious favor is put into your hands) as calls
for all our Prayers, and your particular Care, lest if this opportunity be let
slip, you never have such another.

This seems to be an Honor reserved for this Parliament, as the Crown and
Glory of all your endeavors for the Public Good. Go on then, to raise up this
Monument to your Eternal Fame. This will not only make you beloved and esteemed
by the present Age, but this will endear your Memories to Posterity, and make
Ages to come rise up and call this a Happy Session.

But lest our sins should yet hinder us from so great a Blessing, We have great
reason to humble our selves before God this day, to bewail those sins which may
yet provoke him to punish us, and by Fasting and Prayer to implore his Mercy;
that he would go on to preserve his Majesty's Person from all violent attempts,
our Church and Religion from all the designs of its enemies, and deliver us all
from Unreasonable and Wicked Men.

SERMON V. Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, March 7. 1678/9.
Matthew. X.16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we read of one of the greatest and most
improbable designs that ever was, viz. Christ's sending out his twelve Apostles
to convert and to reform the World. For although the occasion of their first
Mission, was to prepare the Jewish Nation for entertaining the doctrine of the
Messiah, and therefore they are commanded to go to the lost sheep of the House
of Israel; v. 6.
and as they went to preach; saying, v. 7.
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; yet our Savior in his following discourse
mentions several things which cannot be applied to their first going abroad;
particularly, that which relates to their hard usage and bad entertainment from
the world; which we do not find they met with from the Jews upon this general
message, but rather the contrary: for which cause he bids them to provide
nothing for themselves, v. 9, 10, 11.
foreseeing that in all places there would be some that would be ready to
receive them kindly; and when the Seventy Disciples were sent upon a like
errand, they returned with joy, Luk 10 17
which such young beginners would hardly have done, if they had met with such
sharp persecutions then, which Christ here foretells his Apostles should suffer
for preaching the Gospel. Either therefore we must say that St. Matthew puts
things together by way of common Place, as he seems to do the Miracles and
Parables of our Savior, without pursuing the Order of time, as S. Luke does,
and so upon occasion of Christ's sending out his Apostles sets down all that
relates to their Mission, although delivered at several times; or else that
Christ himself did now at first acquaint them with all the difficulties that
should attend their employment in preaching the Gospel to the world, and
consequently thought it necessary to give them at once their full instructions
for their discharge of so great a trust, and due behavior under so hard a
service. A trust indeed so great, a service so hard as to require the Wisdom of
an Angel, and the Innocence of Adam in Paradise; so many were the difficulties,
so powerful were the prejudices, so dangerous were the snares and temptations,
which in all places did hinder the success of so great a Work. We are apt to
admire and applaud the mighty conquests which men do make over some small parts
of the world, by the subtilty of their Wit, or by the force of their Arms, or
by the vastness of their Treasure; but in all these cases, there is nothing
wonderful; for the causes being supposed, there is at least a great
probability the event should follow* But for twelve inconsiderable persons, as
to all outward circumstances, without craft, without arms, without money, to
undertake the conquest of the world, by changing not only men's opinions as to
Religion, but which is far more uneasy, the hearts and lives of men; seems at
first appearance so unlikely a thing, that though none but very wise men could
hope to manage it, yet none who were thought so would ever undertake it. Yet no
less than this was the work which Christ sent abroad his twelve Apostles upon;
and he tells them, very little to their comfort, what hardship they were like
to meet with, to be betrayed by friends, persecuted by enemies, v. 21, 22* ^^
and hated of all men for his names sake: yea so great would the rage and
malice and cruelty of men be against them, that he says in the beginning of
this verse, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves. What! to
be destroyed and devoured by them? No, but to turn those very Wolves into
sheep. But what powerful charms must they use to secure themselves from
present danger, and to work such mighty change? no other than those which our
Savior recommends in the words of the Text, Be ye therefore wise as Serpents,
and harmless as Doves. Not as though we were to search all the properties of
Serpents and Doves to understand the meaning of these words, and to determine
the truth or falsehood of all the relations that are made concerning both of
them; but as Solomon chose the Ant for an example of diligence, so our Savior
designing to join Wisdom and Innocence together proposes the Serpent for one
and the Dove for the other; to let his Disciples understand that he allows them
so much Wisdom as is consistent with innocence, and persuades them to no more
simplicity than is consistent with Wisdom. For Wisdom without Innocence turns
into craft and cunning; and Simplicity without Wisdom is mere folly.

But the great difficulty lies in the joining these two together. For as the
world goes and is like to do, men will be apt to say, How can those be as wise
as Serpents, who must be as harmless as Doves? If all the world were agreed in
the practice of innocence, and men did not fare the worse for it, it might pass
for Wisdom; but when they have to deal with others who will use all the Wisdom
of the Serpent, and are so far from being harmless as Doves, that they will
take all the advantages that men's innocence and simplicity gives them, it seems
hard to reconcile these two together. To what purpose, may some say, are men's
eyes bid to be open, when their hands are tied up? Had they not better be
without the Serpent's sagacity and quickness of sight, than espy their dangers,
and not use the most likely means to prevent them? What does the simplicity of
the Dove signify, but to make them a more easy quarry for the birds of prey?
Simplicity, and innocence, and patience, which our Savior recommends under the
phrase of being harmless as Doves, are good lessons for another world, but what
do they signify in this, which is made up of nothing but artifice and fraud,
and wherein the great art and business of life seems to be overreaching and
deceiving one another? Those only seem to have the true subtilty of the Serpent
who can turn and wind themselves every way as makes most for their advantage;
who by their soft and easy motions, by their artificial glidings and
insinuations get an interest great enough to mischief while they watch for an
opportunity to do it. 2 Cor. 11.3. Ramirez de Prado Pentecont. c. 1.
As the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, i. e. say the Fathers by the
familiarity and easiness of access which he had, playing, as some fancy, about
the Neck and Arms of Eve in the state of Innocence. Those have the true
subtilty of the Serpent who creep into houses and understand the secrets of
persons and families; and so know how to address, and how to keep in awe: who
seem as harmless as Doves till they have a fair opportunity of instilling their
poison, and do the greater mischief by being thought so innocent. Who have the
dangerous teeth and the double tongue, who can deny the Truth without lying,
and forswear themselves without perjury; who would sanctify the greatest
villainies by their good intentions; and when they are ravenous as Wolves, and
as cruel as Vultures, would yet be thought as harmless as Doves, or as innocent
as a Child new born.

What now can simplicity and innocence, and meekness, and patience signify
against all this serpentine subtilty? And if you take away from the Serpent his
artificial motion and his poison, you leave him weak and contemptible, ready to
be trampled on by every passenger, having nothing to defend himself but his
skin and eyesight. And if you do allow his most natural properties, the
innocence of the Dove is a very unequal match for him if they be opposed, and
seem of so different natures that they can hardly be joined together in the
same subject.

And yet notwithstanding all these objections, it was certainly the design of
our Savior in these words,

1. To recommend the conjunction and union of these two to his disciples, being
wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.

2. To do it chiefly upon this consideration, that this would be the best means
to promote his Religion against all the arts and designs of men, as well as the
best security for themselves.

And therefore in the prosecuting this subject, I shall endeavor these two
things,

1. To show wherein the conjunction of these two does consist.

2. That this is the best means to promote the Christian Religion against all
the mischievous arts and devices of men.

1. Wherein the conjunction of these two does consist. It is no hard matter to
tell men how they may be wise as Serpents, etc. By foresight and caution, so as
to discern and prevent unnecessary dangers; not to run themselves soolishly and
vainly upon needless troubles, nor to draw persecutions upon themselves, when
they can decently and lawfully avoid them; not to give advantages to their
enemies by their weakness and indiscretion, nor a just occasion of offense to
any; but in all lawful things to endeavor to gain upon them, and by all acts
of kindness and charity to recommend our Religion to them. Neither is it hard
to tell wherein we must appear to be harmless as Doves, viz. by simplicity and
integrity of mind, by meekness and patien^e, by forgiving injuries, and bearing
persecutions as becomes Christians, by a holy, innocent, and unblameable
conversation: but the difficulty still lies in the conjunction and mixture of
both these; which as S. Chrysostom observes, Chrysostom. in loc.
is the thing which Christ especially aims at, so as to make one virtue arise
from both of them; as Greg. Nazianzen said of his Father, Greg. Nazian. orat.
^9.
That he neither suffered the Wisdom of the Serpent to degenerate into cunning,
nor the innocence of the Dove into indiscretion, but made up one complete kind
of virtue from the mixture of both together; and that I suppose lies in these
things, (1.) Integrity of Mind, (2.) Ingenuity, or fairness of behavior, (3.)
Meekness and Patience: and in the due practice of these consists that prudent
Simplicity which results from these two, being wise as Serpents, and harmless
as Doves. Which I shall make appear by showing, that men cannot be harmless as
Doves without them; and that they are so far from being inconsistent with being
wise as Serpents, that a great part of Wisdom lies in them.

I. Integrity of Mind; which is opposed to falseness and hypocrisy; and
therefore St. Paul joins simplicity and godly sincerity together. 2 Cor. 1.12.
Psalm. 12.2. Jam. 4.8.
We read of some in Scripture who are said to have a double heart, as well as a
double tongue: they are (...), says St. James, men with two Souls, one for God
and another for the world; or rather none at all for God, (since he must have
all or none) but one to appearance and another in reality, having quite other
thoughts, intentions and designs than they make the world believe. Some tell us
that the Serpent has no forked tongue, Isid. Orig. l. 12. c. 4.
but through the quickness of its motion, and suddenness of its vibration it
appears to be so; men have but one heart and mind, but they may use such
artificial motions and sudden turnings, as to appear to have more. But this is
contrary to that integrity and simplicity which Christ requires, and the
Scripture every where so much extols, as to place men's perfection and wisdom in
it. Genesis 6.9.
Noah was said to be a just man and perfect in his Generations, because he
maintained his integrity in a very corrupt and degenerate Age. Job is said to
be a man perfect and upright, Job 1.1.
one that fears God and escheweth evil: and in another place of Job, 9.22.
the perfect and the wicked are opposed: he destroys the perfect and the
wicked; i. e. the good and the bad. Ps. 37.37.
Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, says the Psalmist. The
righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, Prove. 11.5.
says Solomon; but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness, and in the
next words; 6.
The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, but transgressors shall
be taken in their own naughtiness. And if Solomon's word may be taken, a man's
integrity is his greatest wisdom; for righteousness, says he, 13.6.
keeps him that is upright in the way; but wickedness overthrows the
sinner. 10.9.
He that walks uprightly, walks surely; but he that perverteth his ways
shall be known. And therefore he concludes that a man of understanding will
walk uprightly. 15.21.


All this seems a strange Paradox, and to come from such as are not versed in
business, nor acquainted with affairs of the world, or from those who are
resolved to maintain their hypothesis, though against the common sense of
mankind, as the Stoics of old, who made their Wise man beautiful though never
so deformed, rich though ready to starve for poverty, and a Prince though sold
for a slave; just thus does it seem to some men to talk of the consistency of
Wisdom and Simplicity together, or to suppose those take the most prudent care
of their own interest, who are tied up to the strict rules of downright
honesty, and are resolved with Job to hold fast their integrity.

But that there is nothing absurd or unreasonable in this supposition, nothing
but what is true, and may be justified by the common sense and experience of
mankind will appear by these considerations.

1. That is the truest Wisdom of a man which does most conduce to the happiness
of life. For Wisdom as it referrs to action lies in the proposal of a right
end, and the choice of the most proper means to attain it. Which end does not
referr to any one part of a man's life, but to the whole as taken together. He
therefore only deserves the name of a Wise Man, not that considers how to be
rich and great when he is poor and mean, nor how to be well when he is sick,
nor how to escape a present danger, nor how to compass a particular design; but
he that considers the whole course of his life together, and what is fit for
him to make the end of it, and by what means he may best enjoy the happiness of
it. I confess it is one great part of a wise man never to propose too much
happiness to himself here; for whoever does so, is sure to find himself
deceived, and consequently is so much more miserable as he fails in his
greatest expectations. But since God did not make men on purpose to be
miserable, since there is a great difference as to men's conditions, since that
difference depends very much on their own choice, there is a great deal of
reason to place true wisdom in the choice of those things which tend most to
the comfort and happiness of life.

2. That which gives a man the greatest satisfaction in what he does, and
either prevents or lessens or makes him more easily bear the troubles of life,
does the most conduce to the happiness of it. It was a bold saying of Epicurus,
That it is more desi^eable to be miserable by acting according to reason, than
to be happy in going against it; and I cannot tell how it can well agree with
his notion of felicity: but it is a certain truth, that in the consideration of
happiness, the satisfaction of a man's own mind does weigh down all the
external accidents of life. For, suppose a man to have riches and honors as
great as Ahashuerus bestowed on his highest favorite Haman; yet by his sad
instance we find that a small discontent when the mind suffers it to increase
and to spread its venom, does so weaken the power of reason, disorder the
passions, make a man's life so uneasy to him, as to precipitate him from the
height of his fortune into the depth of ruin. But on the other side if we
suppose a man to be always pleased with his condition, to enjoy an even and
quiet mind in every state, being neither lifted up with prosperity, nor cast
down with adversity, he is really happy in comparison with the other. It is a
mere speculation to discourse of any complete happiness in this world; but that
which does either lessen the number, or abate the weight, or take off the
malignity of the troubles of life, does contribute very much to that degree of
happiness which may be expected here.

3. The integrity and simplicity of a man's mind does all this. (1.) It gives
the greatest satisfaction to a man's own mind. For although it be impossible
for a man not to be liable to error and mistake, yet if he does mistake with an
innocent mind, he has the comfort of his innocence, when he thinks himself
bound to correct his error. But if a man prevaricates with himself and acts
against the sense of his own mind, though his conscience did not judge aright
at that time, yet the goodness of the bare act with respect to the rule, will
not prevent the sting that follows the want of inward integrity in doing it.
The backslider in heart, says Solomon, Prove. 14.14.
shall be filled with his own ways, but a good man shall be satisfied from
himself. The doing just and worthy and generous things without any sinister
ends and designs, leaves a most agreeable pleasure to the mind, like that of a
constant health which is better felt than expressed. When a man applies his
mind to the knowledge of his duty, and when he does understand it, (as it is
not hard for an honest mind to do, for as the Oracle answered the Servant who
desired to know how he might please his Master, Clem. Alex. Str. 4.
If you will seek it, you will be sure to find it,) sets himself with a firm
resolution to pursue it, though the rain falls, and the floods arise, and the
winds blow on every side of him, yet he enjoys peace and quiet within,
notwithstanding all the noise and blustering abroad; and is sure to hold out
after all, because he is founded upon a rock. But take one that endeavors to
blind, or corrupt or master his conscience, to make it serve some mean end or
design; what uneasy reflections has he upon himself, what perplexing
thoughts, what tormenting fears, what suspicious and jealousies do disturb his
imagination and rack his mind? what art and pains does such a one take to be
believed honest and sincere? and so much the more, because he does not believe
himself: He fears still he has not given satisfaction enough, and by overdoing
it, is the more suspected. It is a very unsatisfactory employment that man has
who undertakes to persuade others of the truth of that which himself at the
same time knows to be false; for he is not convinced by his own arguments, and
therefore despises those that are, and is afraid of those that seem to be;
either he thinks them fools for believing him, or that they only flatter and
seem to believe when they do not; and then he thinks his arts are understood
and his credit lost, and fears while he goes about to impose upon others, they
may do the same by him. So that unless he could see into the hearts of men,
(which would be no very comfortable sight to him) all his craft and subtilty
must leave him under perplexity and continual fear. But suppose that through
over officiousness he happens to take some false step, and so fall into the
disfavour of those whom above all he desired to please; how miserable is that
man's condition when he finds himself forsaken of God, despised by men, and
without any peace or contentment within? (2.) Because integrity does more
become a man, and does really promote his interest in the World. It is the
saying of Dio Chrysostom an Heathen Orator, Dio Chrysostom* de regn. or. 1. p. 6.
that Simplicity and Truth is a great and wise thing; but Cunning and Deceit is
foolish and mean; For, says he, observe the beasts, the more courage and
spirit they have, the less art and subtilty they use; but the more timorous and
ignoble they are, the more false and deceitful. True Wisdom and Greatness of
mind raises a man above the need of using little tricks and devices. Sincerity
and honesty carries one through many difficulties which all the arts he can
invent would never help him through. For nothing does a man more real mischief
in the world than to be suspected for too much craft; because every one stands
upon his guard against him, and suspects plots and designs where there are none
intended; insomuch that though he speaks with all the sincerity that is
possible, yet nothing he says can be believed. And is this any part of true
wisdom to lose reputation, upon which men's power and interest so much depends?
From hence the most artificial men have found it necessary to put on a guise of
simplicity and plainness, and make greatest protestations of their honesty when
they most lie in wait to deceive. If then the reputation of integrity be so
necessary, the main point to be considered as to wisdom is this, whether such
reputation can be sooner gained and longer held by mere pretending to
simplicity, or by the practice of it? He that only pretends to it, must act
otherwise than he designs, and yet is concerned to make others believe he does
not: but in this he puts a force and constraint upon himself which is uneasy
to any man, and he lets the vizard fall off sometimes when it is more observed
than he thinks, and then his countenance is taken at the greatest disadvantage,
and this is given out for the only true Copy. And while he keeps it on, it is a
hard matter to deceive all eyes; for it may be some bystanders have practiced
the same arts themselves, and they know the make and the fashion, and all the
several strings which help to keep it from falling off: and when the suspicion
grows strong, the laying aside the disguise will not be able to give
satisfaction. But he that walks uprightly, Psalm. 15.2.
and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart, as the
Psalmist describes the practice of integrity, may possibly meet with such as
will be ready to condemn him for hypocrisy at first; but when they find he
keeps to a certain rule, and pursues honest designs, without any great regard
to the opinion which others entertain concerning him; then all that know him
cannot but esteem and value him; his friends love him, and his enemies stand in
awe of him. The path of the just, Prove. 4.18^
says the Wise man, is as the shining light which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. As the day begins with obscurity and a great mixture of
darkness, till by quick and silent motions the light overcomes the mists and
vapors of the night, and not only spreads its beams upon the tops of the
Mountains, but darts them into the deepest and most shady Valleys: thus
simplicity and integrity may at first appearing look dark and suspicious, till
by degrees it breaks through the clouds of envy and detraction, and then shines
with a greater glory. Thus the Christian Simplicity was despised and reproached
as folly and obstinacy, and many hard censures and sharp persecutions did men
undergo for the sake of it for a long time, (as the most durable Kingdoms have
had the sharpest pangs and been the longest in the birth:) but at last
persecuted and despised innocence prevailed over all the craft and power of the
World. It was then the great glory of Christians that their enemies could
reproach them for nothing but their Religion; that they were in all other
things honest and good men, only they were Christians: and then true Religion
is most like to prevail in the world, when men's other virtues commend their
Religion, and not when zeal for their Religion is their only virtue. When
righteousness, and peace, and humility, and charity, and temperance, and
patience, and a constant integrity make men enquire after a Religion which
produces such fruits as these are, then it will appear that Apostles and
preachers of Religion are then wise as Serpents as to the promoting the honor
of their Doctrine, when by the innocence and simplicity of their lives they are
harmless as Doves.

(3.) But suppose that troubles and persecutions do arise, what becomes of the
harmless Doves then? they are soon taken and easily destroyed, when those who
are only wise as Serpents may see many ways to escape danger, which the
innocent Doves dare not follow them in; what wisdom then can there be in so
much simplicity as makes suffering unavoidable?

This is the hardest part of the case, but that which our Savior does here
suppose, when he says, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, etc. So that, if we cannot make out
this to hold in respect of sufferings, we must yield this counsel or advice of
Christ to his Disciples to be defective as to the main occasion of it. To this
therefore I answer in these particulars;

1. Our Savior does allow the wisdom of prevention as to all unnecessary
dangers; for otherwise he would never have bid his Disciples be wise as
Serpents, but only be as quiet as Sheep and as harmless as Doves. God forbid
that Christian simplicity should be taken in so ill a sense as to hinder us
from a just and necessary care of our own safety: and not only for the
preservation of our selves but of our Religion too. When we have liberty and
opportunity to do it, it is being stupid as Sheep, and careless as the Ravens
of their young ones, and not being only harmless as Doves, to neglect the doing
it. In such a case it is a violation of the duty we owe to God and to
Posterity, if we do not use all lawful endeavors for the preservation of our
selves and our Religion from all the attempts of wicked and unreasonable men.
But in case storms do arise after all our care, Christ does not seem ^o forbid
his Disciples making use of a present shelter till the storm be blown over;
Mat. 10.23.
But when they persecute you in this City, flee to another. And some say, the
likeness to Doves is recommended in regard that its safety lies chiefly in the
quickness of its flight. But our Savior neither imposes a necessity of
suffering in all cases, nor allows a liberty of flying upon every apprehension
of danger, but leaves this matter to be determined according to circumstances,
as makes most for God's honor, and his Church's good: i. e. herein to be wise
as Serpents and harmless as Doves; by not exposing themselves to needless
dangers when they may be avoided with a good conscience, nor declining any
necessary duty for the sake of any trouble which may follow upon it. There were
some in the Primitive Church who thought it unlawful in any case to avoid
persecution, and Tertullian pleads their cause with many plausible reasons;
saying, That persecution is designed on purpose for trial by God himself;
Tertul. de fug. c 1 etc. c. 6.
that the allowance for flying was peculiar to the Apostles case, not to avoid
persecution, but for the more speedy propagation of the Gospel; and some of the
Christians were so far from flying that they ran upon persecution, and seemed
ambitious of Martyrdom. S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom* hom. 40. in Juv. and Max.
It was one of the reasons Julian gave why he would not openly persecute
Christianity; because he knew the Christians gloried in being Martyrs; and he
would not humor them so much as to spread his Nets to catch such silly Doves,
that never minded the danger they fell into. But the Christian Church never
approved rash and indiscreet suffering, as much as it encouraged all Christians
to patience and courage and perseverance; for they required not only a just
cause, but a necessary occasion of suffering, Clem. Alex. S^r. 4. p. 481.
and blamed those who hastened their own destruction; for they observe that
Christ himself made use of prudent caution when he knew the Jews had designed
to put him to death; for it is said, Joh. 11.54.
from thence forward he walked no more publicly among the Jews. When the
storms seemed to threaten the leaders of the Church in such a manner that by
their withdrawing the People might probably enjoy more quiet, Orig in Joh. Tom.
31.
and not want help enough to perform the necessary Offices, even the Bishops
were allowed to retire; and upon this ground S. Cyprian and Athanasius
justified themselves: Cypr. ep 14. Athan. de. fuga.
but when the case is common, when the necessities of the Church require the
presence of their Pastors, then the good Shepherd must lay down his life for
the Sheep, Aug. ep. 180.
as S. Augustine has resolved this case in his Epistle to Honoratus. So that
this whole matter belongs to Christian prudence, which is then most needful
and fit to be used, when the resolution of the case depends upon particular
circumstances; so as not to shun any necessary duty for fear of danger, nor to
run upon any unnecessary trouble to show our courage.

2. Since no wisdom is great enough to prevent all troubles of life, that is
the greatest which makes them most easy to be endured. If the Wisdom of the
Serpent could extend so far as to avoid all the calamities that mankind is
subject to, it would have a mighty advantage over the simplicity of the Dove;
but since the most subtle contrivers cannot escape the common accidents of
life, but do frequently meet with more vexations and crosses than innocent and
undesigning men do, we are then to consider, since the burden must be born,
what will make it sit most easily upon our shoulders: And that which abates of
the weight, or adds to our strength, or supports us with the best hopes, is the
truest wisdom. 1 Pet. 3.13.
And who is he that will harm you, says S. Peter, if ye be followers of that
which is good? i. e. innocence is the best security against trouble which one
can have in this World; but since the World is so bad as that the best may
suffer in it, and for being such, yet that ought not to trouble or affright
them; But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; 14.
and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. But should it not
trouble a man to suffer innocently? yes, with a respect to others, but as to
himself he may more justly be troubled if he suffered justly. For nothing makes
sufferings so heavy to be born as a guilty Conscience: that is a burden more
insupportable to an awakned mind than any outward affliction whatsoever. Judas
thought himself to be wise as a Serpent, not only in escaping the danger which
he saw Christ and his Disciples falling into by the combination of the Priests,
and Scribes, and Pharisees against them; but in ingratiating himself with them
and making a good bargain for his own advantage: but the want of a Dove-like
innocence marred his whole design; and filled his conscience with such horror
as to make him own his guilt, and put an end to his miserable life. Whereas the
other Apostles whose chief care was to preserve their innocence as to any
wilful sins, though they had too much of the fearfulness as well as the
simplicity of Doves, till the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them; yet they
held out in the midst of fears and dangers, and came at last to rejoice in
their sufferings. Act. 5.41.
And S. Paul tells us what the cause of it was, 2 Cor. 1.12.
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world. See here, not only what peace
and serenity, but what rejoicing follows an innocent mind, and the testimony of
a good conscience! when all the arts of fleshly Wisdom will be found vain and
useless, affording no satisfaction to a man's mind, when he looks back upon all
of them, then sincerity and integrity of heart will give a man the most
comfortable reflections, and fill him with the most joyful expectations. This
enables a man to look back without horror, to look about him without shame, to
look within without confusion, and to look forward without despondency. So that
as the straight line is the shortest of any; so upon greatest consideration it
will be found that the upright and sincere man takes the nearest way to his own
happiness.

II. Prudent Simplicity implies the practice of Ingenuity; which is such a
natural freedom in our words and actions, that men may thereby understand the
sincerity of our mind and intention. Not that men are bound to declare all they
know to every impertinent enquirer, which is simplicity without prudence; but
in all cases wherein men ought to declare their minds, to do it without fraud
and dissimulation; and in no case to design to overreach and deceive others.
This is that simplicity of Conversation which our Savior requires when he
says, Mat. 5.37.
let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, i. e. you ought to converse with
so much sincerity, that your bare affirmation or denial may be sufficient, this
being the proper use of speech that men may understand each others minds by
their words: for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, i. e. the
wickedness of mankind and that distrust and suspicion which is occasioned by
it, is the reason they are ever put to make use of oaths to make their
Testimony appear more credible. And therefore nothing but such necessity can
justify the use of them; Oaths and Wars being never lawful but when they are
necessary. Malder. de abusu restr. meant. c. 12. Sect. 3. p. 98.
Some understand the reduplication of those words, yea, yea, nay, nay, after a
more emphatical manner; viz. that our words must not only agree with the truth
of the thing, but with the conception and sense of our minds; and so the
greatest candor and sincerity is commanded by them. Truth was described of
old, Themist. orat. 3.
sitting upon an Adamant, with Garments white as Snow, and a light in her hand,
to intimate that clearness and simplicity and firmness that does accompany it;
such as was most remarkable in the primitive Christians; who abhorred any thing
that looked like dissimulation and hypocrisy, especially in what concerned
their Religion. In this they were plain and open, hearty and sincere, neither
exasperating their enemies by needless provocations, nor using any artificial
ways of compliance for their own security. When the casting some few grains of
incense on the altar, and pouring out wine before the Emperor's statue might
have saved their lives, they chose rather to die than to defile their
consciences with that impure and idolatrous Worship. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 3
To be dismissed after summons to the tribunal without compliance was a
scandal, and raised suspicions of some secret assurances given; to be
proclaimed to have sacrificed though they had not, and not to contradict it was
great infamy; to procure a certificate of sacrificing though they did not; or
to pay fees to the Officers to be excused from doing it, made them a sort of
libellati, although their names were never entered in the Heathen Rolls, Rigalt
ad Cypr. ep. 81.
and they were forced to undergo severe penance before they were restored to
the communion of the Church. So much simplicity and singleness of heart was
then supposed necessary to the Christian profession. No directing the
intention, no secret reservation, no absolution either before committing the
fact or immediately upon confession of it, were ever heard of or allowed in
those days of Christian innocence and simplicity. If the Heathen Officers
sought after Christians, Aug. de Mend. c. 13.
they neither lied to them, nor betrayed their Brethren; but would rather
endure torments themselves, than expose others to them; for which reason S.
Augustine highly commends the resolution of Firmus an African Bishop, who rather
chose to be tortured himself than discover a Christian committed to his care
who was sought after for no other reason, but because he was a Christian; and
the Heathen Emperor himself was so pleased with it, that for his sake he
forgave the other person and suffered him to enjoy his liberty. When the
Christians were summoned before the Heathen Tribunals, they used no shifting
tricks or evasions, they concealed no part in their minds of what was necessary
to make what they spoke to be true; they did not first peremptorily deny what
they knew to be true, and then back such a denial with horrid oaths and
dreadful imprecations upon themselves, and after all think to justify the
doing so by virtue of some secret reservation in their own minds. Is this
becoming the simplicity and ingenuity of Christians? Such may possibly think
themselves Wise as Serpents in so doing, but I am sure they are far from being
innocent as Doves. But are there any who go under the name of Christians, who
own and defend such practices? I think indeed scarce any who went under the
name of honest Heathens ever did it. For they did not only require constancy
and fidelity in oaths and promises, but simplicity and sincerity both in the
making and keeping of them. They condemned the Romans who thought to avoid
their oath by a trick, Cicer. de Offic. l. 1. and 3.
and sent them back to the Carthaginians: they mightily applaud the constancy
of Regulus in observing the words of his oath as to his return, although very
capable of a mental reservation; and if he did not promise the Carthaginians to
persuade the Roman Senate to the Peace, he behaved himself with great sincerity
as well as constancy. When the King of Persia thought by a trick to avoid the
oath he had made to one of his Neighbor Princes, Eutych. Alex To. 2. p. 119.
viz. That he would not pass such a stone which was set up as a Boundary
between them, and he took up the stone and caused it to be carried before his
Army; his Counselors told him they feared such deceit would never prosper with
him, because as the Prince sent him word, Covenants are to be understood
according to the plain meaning of the words, P. 123.
and not according to any secret reservation.

Since then the very Heathens disallowed such artifices and frauds, are there
any worse than Heathens that justify and maintain them? Is not this rather an
artifice and fraud of their Adversaries to render them odious? But even in this
respect we ought to be harmless as Doves, and therein lies a necessary part of
Christian Ingenuity, in not charging on others more than they are guilty of*

I shall therefore fairly represent the doctrine held in the Church of Rome
about these matters, and leave you to judge how far it is consistent with
Christian Simplicity.

There are some things wherein the Divines of the Roman Church are agreed, and
some things wherein they differ.

The things wherein they are agreed are these.

1. That an Officious lie is but a venial sin. This they do not stick to
declare to be the common opinion of all their Divines. Ex communi omnium
sententia, says Azorius, A lie that hurts no body, Azor. Inst. Moral. par. 3.
l. 13. ^. 1. dub 2. Reginald. pra^. l. 24. sect. 5. n. 13.
but is intended for the good of others is no mortal sin; and herein all are
agreed, says Reginaldus; because, say they, where there is no other fault but
the mere falsity, it is not of its own nature and kind any mortal sin; for a
lie of it self is a harmless thing, or at least, says Lessius, Less de just.
and jure, l. 2. c. 47. dub. 6. n. 40.
the hurt is not great that it does, and it is no great matter whether men be
deceived or not, if they do not suffer much by it; and from hence he concludes
it to be venial in its own nature. It is true, they say an officious lie may
become a mortal sin by accident, when it is confirmed by an oath, when it is
too public and scandalous, and used by those from whom the people expect
Truth, as Bishops and Preachers and Religious men, Sayr Clav. R^g. l. 11. c 3 n
18. Navarr. Man. c. 18. n 3. Cajet. in 2.2. qu. 69. art. 1.
says Sayr. Not even in them, says Navarr, unless the scandal be great, or
their consciences tell them they are mortal sins; or some other circumstances
make it so. If it be in matter of judicature, although the thing be small, yet
I think a lie a mortal sin, says Cajetan, because men are then bound to speak
truth. Soto de rat. ^egendi secret memb. 2. qu 6. Navar. ubi supr. Bassa Theol.
pract. v. peccat. 5 n. 3.8. Bell. de omiss great. and s^at. p^ccati, l. 1. c. 13.
That reason is of no force at all, say Soto and Navarr, for that circumstance
alone does not alter the nature of the sin. So that if a man tells never so
many lies, provided he intend to hurt no body by them, they do not make one
mortal sin. For that is a sixed rule among the Casuists, that an infinite
number of venial sins do not amount to one mortal; and consequently though they
have obliquity in them, yet they do not put a man out of the Favor of God. But
upon these principles what security have men to invent and spread abroad lies,
provided they are intended for a good end in their own opinion? What sincerity
is to be expected, when the confessing a truth may do them injury; (...) in
2.2. (...) 4.
and the telling a lie may do them good? for even Cajetan himself makes that
only a pernicious lie, when a man designs to do mischief by it. They cry out
upon it as a great scandal for any of us to say, they think it lawful to lie
for the Catholic cause; and in truth they do not say so in words; for they
still say, a lie is unlawful for any end whatsoever; but here lies the
subtilty of it; They grant it in general to be a fault, but such a venial, such
an inconsiderable fault, if it be for a good end; and they have so many ways to
expiate the guilt of venial sins; that the difference is very little as to the
practice of it, from making it no sin at all. Gro^. de jure belli and pacis l.
3. c. 1. n. 17.
And some think they had better own downright lying, than make use of such
absurd ways of evading it by mental reservations; by which men may be truly
said to affirm that which they do deny, and to deny that which they do affirm.
But notwithstanding this,

2. They are agreed, that in some cases, that which otherwise would be a lie,
is none by the help of a mental reservation. Let us not therefore do the
Jesuits so much injury to charge that upon them as their peculiar doctrine,
which is common to all their Divines and Casuists. And herein F. Parsons was in
the right, when he asserted, that the doctrine of Equivocation and mental
reservation has been received in the Roman Church for four hundred years:
Treatise tending to Mitigation, c. 7. Sect. 2, 3.
only some have extended the practice of it farther than others have done. But
in the Case of Confession they all agree without exception, C. 10. Sect. 1.
says the same Author, that if a man has confessed a thing to a Priest, he
may deny and swear that he never confessed it, without being guilty either of a
lie or perjury; reserving this in his mind, that he has not confessed it so as
to utter it to another. And I find the greatest enemies to the use of Mental
reservation in other cases, do allow it in this; and do not barely allow it,
but think a man bound in conscience to use it, under grievous sin, says
Parsons, Genes. Sepulveda de (...). dicendi testim. c. 3. (...) c. Aequiv.
Sect. 28. n. 4. p. ^55. Hurt^do resolut. moral. p 449. Caramu. de restrict
m^n^al. a^t. 13. p. 360. ^teph a Sancto Paulo Theol Moral er. 5. disp. 5. (...)
sect. 3. n 232.
when by no other means of silence, diversion* or evasion the said secrecy can
be concealed. I do not now meddle with the inviolableness of the Seal of
Confession, which I do not deny a great regard ought to be had to (where an
obligation greater than that of keeping a secret does not take it off, as where
the life of my Prince or the public safety are concerned) not from any divine
Institution, but from the baseness of betraying a Trust: but I wonder how they
came to think it to be no lie or perjury in this Case, and yet to be so in any
other? It is to no purpose to allege other Reasons peculiar to this Case, for
the single question is, whether what a man keeps in his mind, can keep him from
being guilty of a lie, or of perjury in his words? If it cannot, then not in
the case of Confession; if it may, then a mental reservation will equally do it
in any other Case. And consequently no man who does allow it in this case, can
on that account disallow it in any other.

This Navarr very well saw, Navarr. in c. human. aures, qu. ^. n. ^, 3*
and therefore from the allowance of it in this Case of Confession he deduces
the lawfulness of the use of it in all cases wherein a man is not bound to
speak all he knows. The common answer in this case is, That in confession the
Priest does not know as man but as God; Quare omnes qui fatentur quod
Confessarius vere dicere potest, Ille huc non est mihi confessus*
subim^lligendo ita u^ tenear prodere* coguntur profecto confiteri quo^ etian
alius quilibet qui non tenetur aliquid dicere, vere poterit respondere illud
sibi non esse dictum, subintelligendo non esse ita ei dictum, ut teneatur id
prodere Cum igitur omnes confiteantur illud, nemo d^bet hoc negare. Nav. ib. n.
8.
and therefore when he is asked any thing as a man he may deny what he knows as
God. But Navarr at large shows the folly and absurdity of this Answer, because
this does not salve the contradiction, for to say he does not know is as much
as to say he does not any way know it; which is false if he does know it in any
capacity: and it is false that he does not know it as man, because he knows it
as a Priest, and as such he is not God but Man. And the very Seal of Confession
discovers that it is made known to him as a Man, and with the consent of the
penitent a Priest may reveal what he heard in con^ession; and in other cases he
may make use of that knowledge as a man, without particular discovery. I do not
therefore wonder to see the stout and plain-hearted defenders of the lawfulness
of this practice in other cases* to express so much astonishment at the nicety
and scrupulosity of those, who dispute against it as so dangerous and
pernicious a thing upon other occasions, when they think it so pious and
innocent in this. For, say they, (...) en^m est mendacium (...) quod noveris,
non est in Ecclesiae, imo neque in ipsius Dei potestate, quocunque tandem ex
fine efficere, ut Sacerdos licite inficietur qu^e novit. Emoner. Splendour
verit. Moral. c Barnes. c. 16. n. 3.
If it be a lie to deny what a man knows, it is not in the power of the Church
or of God himself for any end whatsoever to make it lawful for a Priest to
deny what he knows. And if it be not a lie in that Case, neither is it in any
other.

But although none in the Roman Church are able to answer that argument, yet I
must do some of them that justice, as to clear them from the owning the
allowance of this practice in other common cases upon the same ground. Yet I
fear upon strict enquiry we shall find that those do equivocate more who seem
to deny it, (...) those who openly assert it. For (...) two persons of the
Roman (...) ^eem wholly to reject it, except in the case of Confession; yet the
Genes. Sepulveda de rat. dicendi Testimon.
one of them is charged with Emoner. c 13. p. 241.
singularity and suspicion of Heresy, and the Barns c. Aequivoc
other with little less than Heresy and Apostasy; V. Theophil. Rayn. sive
Emonerium adit. ad Disput. n 4, 5, 6.
and their proceedings with him show what esteem they had of him After Fa.
Barns had written his Book against Equivocation, and otherways provoked the
Jesuits, by order of the Pope, and by means of Albertus he was seized on, and
carried to Rome, and there died mad in the Inquisition.

V. Leodegar. Quintin. Haeduum advers. Th. Hurtado p. 71. where the Jesuit
relates the story.


. But most of their other Divines and Casuists do approve it in case of
Testimony and Accusation. Soto does allow a Witness being examined about a
secret crime to say, he does not know any thing of it, although he were privy
to it: and for this he quotes some Divines of great Authority before him; as he
might have done many others: but he will not allow him to say, He did not see
the fact committed, Soto de rat. teg secret. memb. 3. qu 3* concl. 4. Adrian.
6. quod l. 11. ad 2 princip C. C Sylvest. v. Juram.
nor that he heard nothing of it, because says he, words of knowledge seem to
be restrained by judicial proceedings to that which a man is bound to declare.
But this subtilty the latter Casuists will by no means admit of, and allow
denying the fact in any words; and say of him, that he was afraid where no fear
was. Cosm. Philiarchus de Offic. Sacerd. t. 1. p. 2. l. 3. c. 14

Navar. ubi supra n. 9.

Sayr. Clav. Reg. l. 12. c. 17. n. 24.


They therefore say, it is enough that a witness answers to what ought to have
been the intention of the Judge, whatever his actual intention was; and
therefore if a man supposes the Judge not to proceed legally against him,
Suarez de juram. l 3. c. 10. n. 3.
he may not only deny the fact he knows, but swear to that denial, provided he
keeps this in his mind that he denied any such fact which belonged to the
Judges conusance; or that he did not do it publicly, Mich de Palacio in 4. d.
21. disp. 2. Testis vere dicit Nescio quum vere sciat, quia testis non tenetur
respondere Judici secundum suam iniquitatem, sed secundum id quod potest ut
Judex, and secundum mentem quam debet habere, etiamsi illam non habeat. Mich.
Salon. 2.2. q. 69. art. 2. controv. 11.
and in this case, say they, there is neither lie nor perjury.

Others say, no more is necessary to avoid a lie, or perjury in such cases, but
only to understand the word of denial with this restriction so as to be bound
to tell you. Quando igitur reus negat se crimen f^cisse, id in animo habere
debet, ut negat se non commississe tale crim^^ de quo Judex interrogare debe^t.
Et idem est dicere, n^n feci hoc crimen, ac si diceret non public seci* quod
verum est. Et cum haec responsio sit vera, nullum crit peccatum, etiamsi
intercedat juramentum. Lud. Carbo tr. de restit. q. 19. conc. 8.
And this is the common case which Parsons* and others speak of. If a man be
examined upon oath whether he be a Priest or not, they say, he may with a safe
conscience deny it with that poor reservation in his mind; and that is a known
rule in this case among them that what a man may truly say, Quamvis regulariter
adjuratus respondere debeat adjuranti juxta mentem ejus, fallit tamen ea
doctrina, quando alia mente quam debet adjuratur; tunc enim sufficit ut
respondeat verum secundum mentem and intentionem suam, li^et falsum sit
secundum mentem interrogantis, and adjurantis. Greg. Sayr Clav Reg. l. 12. c.
17 n. 21, etc

Parson's Treatise of Mitigation, c. 8. n. 20.51, 57. c. 9. n. 2.


he may truly swear. So that a Priest may not only say, but swear he is none,
and yet by this admirable art neither tell a lie, nor forswear himself.

Some of later times being made sensible of the pernicious consequences of the
imputation of such doctrines and practices to their Church have endeavored to
qual^fie and restrain the Abuse of them. But upon due examination we shall find
this to be only a greater art to avoid the odium of these things, and a design
to dece^ve us with a greater fineness. For they allow the same words to be said
either in Oaths or Testimonies, i. e. a plain denial of what they know to be
true, but only differ from the other as to the way of excusing such a denial
from being a lie: which say they, depends on the circumstances of denying, and
not upon the reservation of the mind. Malder. de abusu restrie. mental c. 10.
Sect. 1. p. 64.
So Malderus himself grants, that a guilty person being examined upon a capital
Offense, may deny the fact with this reservation, so as to be bound to tell it;
but then he says, the circumstances give that sense and not the reservation in
his mind. Emoner. splend. verit. moral. ^. 16.
But says Emonerius (or rather a famous Jesuit under that name) these
circumstances only limit the words to such a sense which they cannot otherwise
bear, because in such circumstances a man is not bound to declare what he
knows, therefore, says he, wherever there is a reasonable cause of concealing
what a man's knows, such mental reservations are to be understood, and so there
is the same liberty allowed in practice.

Among the late Casuists ^one has seemed to have written with more pomp and
vanity against mental Restrictions than Caramuel: Caramuel Haplotes sive de
restrict mental. art. 13 p. 360.
yet he not only allows a Confessor to deny upon oath what he heard in
Confession; but in case of secret Murder that a man may with a good conscience
deny the Fact, though the Judge be competent and proceed according to due form of
Law. What way can this be excused from a lie, since he says, a mental
reservation will not do it? He has a ^etch beyond this. A Judge is only to
proceed upon evidence; if there be no sufficient evidence against him, he may
persist in denying it, because it cannot be fully proved, and therefore his
denial, says he, is of such a fact which he can proceed upon, and what cannot
be proved is none in Law. Quod igitur plene probari non potest, infectum
civiliter and vertualiter est, hoc est prudentum judicio and aestimatione ita
se habet, acsi factum non esset. At quae facta non sunt negari possunt; ergo
etiam quae secreto sunt facta. Caram. p. 362.
These are the shifts of those who seem most to oppose the Jesuitical art of
Equivocation; and inveigh bitterly against it, as a thing wholly repugnant to
the Truth of our words and the sincerity of our minds, and that Candor and
Simplicity which ought to be in Christians.

But in my apprehension they had altogether as good take up with the dull way
of lying, or with the common artifice of equivocation and mental reservation,
as make use of such refinings as these.

But however, we gain this considerable advantage by them, that they do assure
us, that mental reservations are so far from excusing the words spoken from
being a lie, Cajet. in 2.2. qu 89. art. 7. ad 4.
that they contain a premeditated lie; and so the sin is the more aggravated by
them; that all such propositions are in themselves false, Imo illa ipsa sua
restrictione convincitur non praecipitanter fuisse mentitus, sed quodammodo
meditatus fuisse mendacium quod gravitatem peccati auget. Malder. de abusu
restr. meant. c. 10. Sect. 2. p. 70.

Ut quidvis licet falsissimum verum sieri possit restrictione sola mentali. Id.
p. 28. Caramuel. ib. art. 2. concl. 4. p. 28.


and designed only to deceive others, and so all the effect and consequence of
lying follow them; that there is nothing so false but may be made true, nothing
so true but may be made false by this means. Caramuel gives a remarkable
instance of this kind in some of the Articles of the Creed; for by this way of
mental reservation a man might truly say, Christ was not born, understanding it
secretly, at Constantinople. He did not suffer viz. at Paris. He was not
buried, viz. in Persia. He did not rise again, viz. in Japan. Nor ascended into
Heaven, viz. from America: so that by this blessed Art, the most abominable
Heresies may be true doctrine; and the most cursed lies prove precious Truths.

Besides, they confess that it takes away all confidence in men's words, and
destroys all sincerity of conversation, and the very inclination to speak
Truth: Th. Alb. Stat. Morum Tom. 1. p 172. Malder. p 24. Azor. Instit. Moral.
p. 1. l 11. c. 4 Layman. Theol. Mor. l. 4. tr. 3. c. 13. n. 6, 7
For as Malderus well observes, there is no reason men should not have the same
liberty in private conversation which is allowed them before an incompetent
Judge: and some Jesuits themselves grant, that if the common use of it be
allowed, there can be no security as to men's words, there being nothing so
false but it may be made true in this way. And no man can be charged with a lie
till they know his heart; nor the Devil himself in all his lying Oracles; who
surely had wit enough to make some secret reservation; and a very little will
serve for that according to Suarez, Suarez de Rel. To. 2. l 3. c. 10. n 4.
who says, it is enough in the general, that a man intend to affirm or deny in
some true sense; although he know not what.

Since from their own Authors, we thus f^r understand the mischievous
consequence of these practices, it will not be amiss to set down briefly the
cases, wherein they are commonly allowed.

1. In general, Wherever there is a just and reasonable Cause for concealing
of Truth. Less de justit and jure l. 2. c. 42. d^b. 9. n. 47.
For that is the most general rule they give in this case; where a man is not
bound to speak his whole mind, he may utter one half, and reserve the other
half of one entire proposition. Now a just and reasonable Cause with them is
declining of danger, or obtaining any advantage to themselves either as to
body, honor, or estate. In all such Cases, they allow that a man may speak
what is simply false and swear to it too, Potest aliquis jurare simpliciter
falsum addendo aliquid mente, ex quo juramentum sit verum quoties intervenit
justa causa. Justa causa esse potest necessitas, vel utilitas ad salutem
corporis, honoris, rerum familiarium, vel etiam quando injusta interrogatio
proponitur. Dian. part. 3. tr. 6. resol. 30.
provided that he hold something in his mind which makes it true. But if a man
happen to do it without just cause, what then? does he lie? does he forswear
himself? by no means. Sed juramentum cum deficit sola discretio, non est
peccatum mortale. Sanch. in sum. tom. 1. l. 3 c. 6. n. 22. aliique.
But he is guilty of Indiscretion: and is that all? then they tell him for his
comfort, that an oath that wants only discretion is no mortal sin.

2. If a man be barred the use of Equivocation, or mental reservation, that
does not hinder the using it, even in renouncing equivocation. Even Soto
himself says, Soto de ration. tegend. secret. memb 3. qu. 3. concl. 4.
that if a Magistrate requires from a person to speak simply all he knows of
such a matter; i e. without any reservation; a man may still answer he knows
nothing of it; i. e. with this reservation, to tell him. But what if in
particular, says he, he asks about a secret Murder; whether Peter killed John,
which he alone saw, does it not seem to be a lie for him to say, he knows
nothing of it? No, says he; for still the meaning is, so as he is bound to
tell. F. Parsons speaks home to this point; Suppose, says he, V. Barns c.
Aequivocat. Sect. 20. n. 3. p. 174. Sect. 22. n. 7.
a Judge asks a man whether he does equivocate or not? He may answer, Not, but
with another equivocation. But if he still suspects he equivocates, what then
is to be done; he may deny it with another equivocation; and so, toties
quoties, as often as he asks, the other may deny and still with a farther
equivocation. Suppose a Priest, says Jacob. a Graffiis, be asked a thing he
heard in confession, may he deny that he knew it? Jac de Graffiis decis. aure^e
l. 1. c. 23. n. 3.
Yes says he, and swear it too; because he knew it not as man. But suppose he
be asked whether he knew it not as man, but as God? He may deny it still, with
another equivocation, i. e. not as God himself, but as his Minister. What if a
Judge, Quando quis inique interrogat, excludendo omnem aequivocationem* posse
interrogatum uti aequivo. atione apponendo aliquam particulam in mente, per
quam verum efficiatur juramentum. Bonacina To. 2. disp. 4. q. 1. punct. 12. n.
5.
says Bonacina, be so unreasonable to bar all equivocation? yet the respondent
may equivocate still. And he cites several others of theirs who defended this
practice; and therefore Barns says, it is so slippery a thing, that the faster
you think to hold it, the sooner it gets from you.

3. If a man be charged with a secret crime, which cannot be sufficiently
proved by Testimonies beyond all exception, he may safely deny it, though he were
guilty of it. Less. d^ justit. and jure, l. 2. c. 31. dub. 3. n. 8.
If a man, says Lessius, can m^ke any exception against the Witnesses, or show
that it was a report spread abroad by men, that bore ill will to him, or that
there was some mistake in it, he is not bound to confess the truth, and
consequently he may deny it with a reservation. Nay, as long as the thing is so
secret, that a man may probably defend himself, and hope to escape, he may
persist in denying the fact; although the Judge do proceed according to due
Form of Law, says the same Lessius. It is no mortal sin to deny it, says
Filliucius. Not, Filliuc. Mor. Quaest. tr. 40. c. 9. n. 266. Sa. Aphorism.
judicial. Actus, n. 3.
though others be like to suffer for it, says Em. Sa; especially if the
punishment be capital, says Filliucius and others in him. But if a man does
suspect whether the Judge does proceed according to due form of Law, which
depends upon his opinion of the proofs and Witnesses brought against him, they
make no question then, but he may deny the fact by help of an easy reservation
in his mind.

4. If a man has denied the Fact when he was bound to confess it in Court,
according to their rules, yet they will not allow that he is bound to confess
it before execution. Because* says Navarr, Navarr. Man c (...) n. 38. Dian.
Sum. v. Reus n. 12. Jac. de Graffiis, l 3. c. 7. n. 17. Escoba^ tr. 6. ex. 6.
n. 62. Azor. p. 3 l. 13. c. 25. dub. 5. Sayr. Clav. R l. 12. c. 17. Layman l.
3. tr. 6. c. 5. n 3. Sa Aphor. de Reo. n. Bass. reus p. 5. n. 15.
confession to a Priest and absolution by him is sufficient for salvation, his
Confessor ought not to put him upon it, says Diana. Not unless it be clearer
than Noonday that the Law compels them to it, say others; i. e. that they have
no kind of exceptions again the judicial proceedings. Some thought they ought
then to do it for the reputation of the Judges who otherwise might suffer in
the esteem of the People as condemning innocent persons; but this is overruled
by the generality of the later Casuists, because the presumption is always on
the side of the Judges, when they proceed according to Law. But one of the
latest Casuists has given an excellent Reason against Imo pusillanimes and
stulti habentur si ea sateantur. Di castillo de juramento disp. 2. dub. 12. n.
3^7.
public Confession, Lugo de Justit. and jure Tom 2. Disp 40. Sect ^ n. 19
because they are accounted Cowards and Fools that make it.

5. Where the Judge is supposed incompetent, they make no question of the use
of Equivocation and mental reservation in denying the crimes they are guilty
of. An incompetent Judge is one that wants lawful jurisdiction over the
person; as if a Lay man pretend to judge one in Orders according to their
doctrine of exemption; or if a Heretic or excommunicated Person take upon him
to judge good Catholics.

And thus they look on all our Judges as incompetent; of which, besides the
general charge of Heresy, we have this particular evidence. When the
unquietness of the Jesuits gave just occasion to those severe Laws which were
made after the Bull of Pius V. several cases were proposed at Rome for
Resolution in order to the better conduct of their affairs here; G Abbot. de
Mendac. p. 41, 42. and in pras. p. 9. etc.
and among the rest this, Suppose an oath be required in an Heretical Court
before incompetent Judges (quales sunt omnes nunc in Anglia, as all are now in
England) how far does such an oath bind? The Answer is, no farther th^n the
Person that swears did intend it should: and he may either refuse the oath, or
he may Sophistice jurare and Sophistice respondere: he may swear and answer
with juggling and equivocation: and he that discovers any by virtue of his oath
commits a double sin. And in the Answers approved by Pius V. our Judges are
declared incompetent, and our Courts of Judicature unlawful Courts; and
therefore no man by his oath is bound to confess any thing to the prejudice of
the Catholic Cause; nor to answer according to the intention of the Judge, but
in some true sense of his own.

So that we not only see the doctrine and practice of equivocation approved by
the Holy See, but all legal Authority among us utterly rejected as having no
jurisdiction over them. And all who allow this practice do thereby discover
that what they call Heresy does take away the civil Rights and Properties of
men. For if Heresy makes our Judges incompetent, by necessary consequence it
must deprive the King of the right to his Throne, it must take away all the
obligation of our Laws, and the title every man has to his estate. Such
pernicious consequences do follow the wisdom of the Serpent, where it is not
joined with the innocence and simplicity of the Dove: and not only pernicious
to Government, but to themselves too when these arts are understood and
discovered; for what security can there be from the most solemn oaths, the most
deep and serious protestations of those persons who at the same time believe
that none of these things do bind them, but by some secret reserve they may
turn the sense quite another way than we imagined, and when they pretend the
greatest simplicity and seem to renounce all equivocation, may then equivocate
the most of all? If men had invented ways to fill the world with perpetual
jealousies and suspicions of their practices and intentions, they could never
have thought of any more effectual than these two, that Heresy, or differing
in opinion from them, deprives them of their civil rights, and that they may
deny what is true, and swear to what is false, and promise what they never mean
to perform by virtue of some secret reservation in their minds. How can they
live as fellow subjects with others who do not own the same Authority, the same
Laws, the same Magistrates, who look on all Heretics in a State of Usurpation,
and all judicial proceedings against them as mere force and violence, and
parallel the case of answering in our Courts with that of oaths and promises to
Thieves and Robbers? Molan. de fide haeret. serve. l. 4. c. 8.
for upon these grounds all the bonds of Society are dissolved where what they
call Heresy prevails; and no obligation can lie upon them by virtue of any
Laws, or oaths, or promises. I do not say that particular persons may not, upon
common principles of honesty, make conscience of these things: but I speak of
what follows from these allowed principles and practices among them, and what
may be justly expected by virtue of them. How can we be sure that any man means
what he says, when he holds it lawful to reserve a meaning quite different
from his words? What can oaths signify to the satisfaction of others; when it
is impossible to understand in what sense they swear: and when they pretend the
greatest simplicity in renouncing all arts, may then by allowance of their
Casuists use them the most of all? Barns de d^quivocat. Sect. 23. n. 2. p. 194.
But can men upon sober reflections think it any part of true Wisdom to lose
all the force of their oaths and promises with those among whom they live? Will
they never stand in need of being believed or trusted? And then, if they desire
it never so much, how can they recover any credit without plain disowning all
such principles, and in such a way if such can be found out* which is incapable
of any mental reservation. Such kind of Artifices can only serve for a time,
but when once they are thoroughly understood, they fall heavily upon those that
use them. For although frost and fraud may hold for a while, yet according to
the true saying, they both have dirty ends. The sum of what I have to say is
this, That however Simplicity and sincerity of conversation may in some
particular circumstances expose men to greater danger and difficulties than
fraud and deceit may do; yet upon the whole matter considering the consequences
of both, it will be found much greater Wisdom always to preserve the innocence
of the Dove, than to use the greatest subtilty of the Serpent without it. Which
although it may seem to take off from the sineness of the Serpents Wisdom, yet
it adds very much to the safety and soundness of it.

III. Prudent simplicity lies in the practice of Meekness and Patience. The
Serpent does not employ its subtilty only in defending it self and avoiding
dangers, but in watching its opportunity to do mischief, Arist hist. Anim. l.
1. c 1. Genesis 49.17.
being both revengefull and insidious: therefore we read of the Adder in the
path that lies undiscerned in the sands, that biteth the horseheels so that the
rider shall fall backward. It does mischief secretly, spitefully and
artificially, by fit means and instruments. But Christ would have his Disciples
to be Wise to that which is good, but simple or harmless concerning evil; Romans
16.19.
so S. Paul explains these words of our Savior, Be ye wise as Serpents and
harmless as Doves. Which although they want no Gall, yet do not show that they
have any, whatsoever usage they meet with. Christ foretells his Disciples the
injuries and reproaches they were like to suffer under, that their condition
was like to be no better than that of sheep in the midst of Wolves;
notwithstanding he would not suffer them to be furious as wild Beasts, or cruel
and rapacious as the Birds of prey; but in gentleness and meekness and patience
to be as harmless as Doves. Not, as though Christianity did forbid men the just
and lawful ways of preserving themselves, but it takes away all malice and
hatred and revenge and cruelty out of men's minds; it softens and sweetens and
calms the tempers of men, and fills them with Kindness and Goodwill even to
their enemies, Matt. 5.44. Romans 12.31.
not being overcome with evil, but overcoming evil with good. Never any
Religion in the world was such an enemy to all kind of Malice, Revenge and
Cruelty as the Christian; that which we call good nature seems to come very
near that Divine grace which S. Paul calls Charity, and does so admirably
describe and so highly extol above miraculous gifts and some of the greatest
graces. Charity suffers long and is kind; 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not it self; is not puffed up; does not
behave it self unseemly; seeks not her own; is not easily provoked; thinks
no evil; rejoices not in iniquity but rejoices in the truth; bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, i. e. in
short, it hopes, believes, and does the greatest good; it modestly bears and
heartily forgives the greatest evil. And herein consists that Dove-like temper,
which Christ would have his Disciples remarkable for. Which however it may be
despised and scorned by furious and self-willed men, yet upon consideration it
will be found a great part of the Wisdom of living. Revenge is the pleasure
only of weak and disorderly minds: for what real satisfaction can another loss
or pain give to any considering man? The only pretense or color for it is the
preventing more mischief coming on ones self; and yet every act of revenge is a
fresh provocation; so that either quarrels must continue without end, or some
body must think it their Wisdom to forgive at last. And if so, I appeal to any
man's understanding whether it were not greater Wisdom to have prevented at
first all the vexation and disquie^, besides other inconveniences, which must
needs follow a continued quarrel. If any thing tend to make a man's life easy
and pleasant to himself and others, it is innocence and gentleness, and
patience, and doing good and virtuous things, whatever the world thinks of them.

And this was it which recommended the Christian Religion to the World, that
its great business and design was, to persuade the disobedient to the Wisdom of
the just; Luke 1 17.
1 Pet. 2.1.
by laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and all evil
speakings; 3.9*
not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; and if when they did well
they suffered for it, ^.20,
by taking it patiently; 21,
following therein the example of Christ himself, who did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth; 22,
who when he was reviled, 23.
reviled not again; when he suffered, he thr^atned not, but committed himself
to him that judged righteously. These are the instructions of S. Peter to the
primitive Christians, and the ways he judged most effectual to promote the
honor of their Religion, among those who were most apt to think and speak evil
of it. And because that was a very corrupt and a busy and factious age,
especially in those Cities where the Jews and Gentiles inhabited together,
therefore he advises the Christians not only to purity and innocence, but to a
quiet submission to Authority, and however the Jews looked on Heathen
Government as a mere appointment of men; 2.11, 12.
yet he commands them to submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake,
whether it was the Imperial, the Proconsular, or the Praetorian power, 13*
not considering so much the Persons employed, as the design of the
Institution, which was for the punishment of evildoers, 14
and for the praise of them that do well. 15
For so is the Will of God, that with this sort of well-doing, ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, who are apt to quarrel with Religion,
especially when it appears new, as that which gives occasion to many
disturbances of the Civil Government. And that there might be no color for any
such cavil against Christianity, no Religion that ever was, did so much enforce
the duty of obedience as Christ and his Apostles did, and that upon the
greatest and most weighty considerations, Romans 13.5.
for conscience sake, for the Lord's sake, for their Religions sake. For,
consider I pray, if the Doctrine of Christ had given encouragement to faction
and rebellion under pretense of it, if S. Peter himself had taken upon him to
dispose of Crowns and Scepters, or had absolved Christians from their
Allegiance, even to their greatest persecutors, what a blot this had been upon
the whole Religion, such as all the blood of the Martyrs could never have
washed off. For it would have made the condition of Princes more precarious,
and the duty of Subjects more loose and uncertain, and all Nations that
regarded their own peace and safety shy of entertaining a Doctrine which would
give so much countenance to Rebellion. And yet among all the causes alleged
for the persecution of Christians, this was never once suggested, which would
not have been omitted (if any such thing had been owned by the Christians) by
persons so jealous of their Power, as the Roman Emperors were. It is an
intolerable reproach to Christianity to impute their patient submission to
Authority to their weakness and want of force: Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
which is all one as to say, they would have resisted if they durst: this is
not to make them harmless as Doves, but to have too much of the subtilty of the
Serpent, in pretending to be innocent when they only wanted an opportunity to
do mischief.

But the security the Christian Religion gave to Government was from the
principles and precepts of it, the design of its Doctrine as well as the
practice of its followers. So that if their Religion were true, it did oblige
them to all acts of charity and kindness, to meekness and patience, to
peaceableness and a quiet and prudent behavior in all the changes of humane
affairs.

From what has been already said, it is no hard matter to understand the
Reason why our Savior gave such directions to his Apostles, and made choice of
such means to promote his Religion; because they would hereby see, that he sent
not his Apostles upon any ambitious or secular design, not to disturb
Governments upon pretense of setting up a new Monarchy in it either of Christ
or his pretended Vicar; but to prepare men for another World by the Love of God
and our Neighbor, by subduing our lusts and taking off our affections from
present things; and because he knew what persecutions would follow his
Doctrine, he advises his Disciples neither to suffer as Fools, nor as
evildoers, but to be wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves.

Let no man then think our Religion weakens their understanding, or impairs
their discretion, or puts men upon doing foolish and imprudent things. As it is
founded on the best reason, so it brings men to the best temper, and governs
their actions by rules of the truest Wisdom; not only as it provides for the
most desirable end in another world, but even in this, it secures most the
honor, interest and safety of men; and if circumstances happen to be hard
here, it gives the highest assurance of an infinite and eternal recompense. But
if men under a pretense of zeal for Religion do wicked things, and carry on
treacherous and malicious designs, if instead of directing men's Consciences in
the ways of innocence and goodness, they teach them the art of putting tricks
on God Almighty, Nicol. Faber apud Wendrock. in Epist. Provinc. 8. Not. 3.
(as one called the Casuistical Divinity of the Jesuits) or the way of
breaking his Laws by certain shifts and evasions; if instead of meekness and
patience they put men upon acts of revenge and cruelty; if instead of promoting
peace and tranquillity in the world, they plot mischief and stir up faction and
rebellion, we are sure whose Disciples soever they pretend to be, they are none
of Christ's; for although they should not all be capable of being wise as
Serpents, yet they are bound to be harmless as Doves.

SERMON VI. OF THE Mischief of Separation, Preached at Guild Hall Chapel Before
the LORD MAYOR, etc.
Phil. III.16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same things.


ALthough the Christian Religion does lay the greatest obligations on mankind
to Peace and Unity, by the strictest commands, the highest examples, and the
most prevailing arguments; yet so much have the passions and interests of men
oversway'd the sense of their duty, that as nothing ought to be more in our
wishes, so nothing seems more remote from our hopes* than the Universal Peace
of the Christian World. Not that there is any impossibility in the thing, or
any considerable difficulty, if all men were such Christians as they ought to
be; but as long as men pursue their several factions and designs under the
color and pretense of zeal for Religion; if they did not find Names and
Parties ready framed, that were suitable to their ends, the difference of their
designs would make them. So that till men's corruptions are mortified, and their
passions subdued to a greater degree than the world has yet found them, it is
in vain to expect a state of peace and tranquillity in the Church. We need not
go far from home for a sufficient evidence of this; for although our
differences are such as the wiser Protestants abroad not only condemn but
wonder at them; yet it has hitherto puzzled the wisest persons among us to
find out ways to compose them; not so much from the distance of men's opinions
and practices, as the strength of their prejudices and inclinations. What those
divisions of Reuben of old were, which caused such thoughts and searchings of
heart, Judges 5.15, ^6.
we neither well understand, nor does it much concern us: but the continuance,
if not the w^dning of the unhappy breaches among our selves do give just cause
for many sad reflections. When neither the miseries we have felt, nor the
calamities we fear* neither the terrible judgments of God upon us, nor the
unexpected deliverances vouchsafed to us, nor the common danger we are yet in,
have abated men's heats, or allayed their passions, or made them more willing to
unite with our established Church and Religion. But instead of that, some
rather s^and at a great distance if not defiance, and seem to entertain
themselves with hopes of new revolutions; others raise fresh calumnies and
reproaches, as well as revive and spread abroad old ones; as though their
business were to make our breaches wider, and to exasperate men's spirits
against each other; at such a time, when Reason and common security, and above
all our Religion obliges us to follow after the things that make for peace,
Romans 14.19.
and things wherewith one may edify another; and not such as tend to our
mutual destruction; as most certainly our divisions and animosities do. Yet all
parties pretend to a zeal for Peace, so they may have it in their own way: by
which it appears that it is not Peace they aim at, but Victory; nor Unity so
much as having their own wills. Those of the Roman Church make great boasts of
their Unity and the effectual means they have to preserve it; but God deliver
us from such cruel ways of Peace, and such destructive means of Unity as
Treachery and Assassinations, and an Inquisition. Romans 3.15, 16, 17.
Their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their ways;
and the way of peace they have not known. But it were happy for us, if all
those who agree in renouncing the Errors and Corruptions of the Roman Church,
could as easily join together in the great duties of our common Religion, that
is, in our Prayers, and Praises, and Sacraments, and all solemn acts of Divine
Worship. For this would not only take off the reproach of our Adversaries, who
continually upbraid us with our Schisms and Separations, but it would mightily
tend to abate men's passions, and to remove their prejudices, and to dispose
their inclinations, and thereby lay a foundation for a blessed Union among our
selves, which would frustrate the great design of our enemies upon us, who
expect to see that Religion destroyed by our own folly, which they could not
otherwise hope to accomplish by their utmost care and endeavor. And we may
justly hope for a greater blessing of God upon us, when we offer up our joint
Prayers and Devotions to him, lifting up, as St. Paul speaks, holy hands
without wrath and disputing. This is therefore a thing of so great consequence
to our Peace and Union, that tends so much to the Honor of God, and our common
Safety and Preservation; that no person who has any real concernment for these
things, can deny it to be not only just and sitting, but in our circumstances
necessary to be done, if it can be made appear to be lawful, or that they can
do it with a good Conscience.

And this is the subject I design to speak to at this time; and for that
purpose have made choice of these words of the Apostle, Nevertheless whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
things.

For our better understanding the full scope and meaning of the Apostle in
these words, we are to consider, that an unhappy Schism, or wilful breach of
the Churches Unity, had begun in the Apostles times, upon the difference that
arose concerning the necessity of keeping the Law of Moses. And that which made
the Schism the more dangerous, was, that the first beginners of it pretended a
Commission from the Apostles themselves at Jerusalem, and were extremely busy
and industrious to gain and keep up a party to themselves in the most
flourishing Churches planted by the Apostles. Act 15.^4
At Antioch they bore so great a sway, that St. Peter himself complied with
them, Gal. 2.12, 13.
and not only other Jews, but Barnabas also was carried away with their
dissimulation. Insomuch that had it not been for the courage and resolution of
St. Paul, all the Gentile Christians had been either forced to a compliance
with the Jews, or to a perpetual Schism, (of which St. Peter had been in
probability the Head, and not of the Churches Unity, if St. Paul had not
vigorously opposed so dangerous a compliance.) But finding so good success in
his endeavors at Antioch, he pursues those false Apostles, who made it their
business to divide and separate the Christians from each others Communion,
through all the Churches where they had, or were like to make any great
impression. He writes his Epistle to the Galatians purposely against them; he
warns the Christians at Rome of them. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them
which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, Romans 16.17.
and avoid them. And because he had understood they had been busy at Philippi
to make a party there too, therefore the Apostle, to prevent their designs,
makes use of this following method.

1. He exhorts the Philippians to an unanimous and constant resolution, in
holding fast to the faith of the Gospel, in spite of all the threats and
malice of their enemies: Phil 1.27, 28.
That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
says of the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your adversaries. If once the
^ears of troubles and persecutions make men afraid to own and maintain their
Religion; it will be an easy matter for their enemies first to divide, and
then to subdue them. But their courage and unanimity in a good cause baffles
the attempts of the most daring Adversaries, and makes them willing to retreat
when they see they can neither disunite them nor make them afraid.

2. He beseeches them in the most vehement and affectionate manner, not to give
way to any differences or divisions among them, If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1, ^.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love; being
of one accord, of one mind. As though he had said unto them, I have seen the
miserable effects of divisions in other Churches already; how our Religion has
been reproached, the Gospel hindered, and the Cross of Christ rendered of little
or no effect by reason of them; let me therefore entreat you, if ye have any
regard to the Peace and Welfare of your own Souls; if ye have any sense of your
duty ye owe to one another as members of the same body; if ye have any
tenderness or pity toward me, avoid the first tendencies to any breaches among
you; entertain no unjust suspicious or jealousies of each other, show all the
kindness ye are able to your fellow members; live as those that are acted by
the same soul ((...)) carry on the same design; and as much as possible prevent
any differences in opinions amongst you.

3. He warns them and gives cautions against some persons from whom their
greatest danger was, viz. such as pretended a mighty zeal for the Law: And very
well understanding the mischief of their designs under their specious
pretenses, he bestows very severe characters upon them, verse. 2. Beware of
Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the Concision. All which characters
relate to the breaches and divisions which they made in the Christian Churches;
which like Dogs they did tear in pieces, and thereby did unspeakable mischief,
and so were evil workers; and by the Con^ision S. Chrysostom understands such a
cuting in pieces as tends to the destruction of a thing; and therefore, says
he, the Apostle called them (...) because they endeavored to cut in pieces,
and thereby to destroy the Church of God. But lest they should give out that
St. Paul spoke this out of a particular pique he had taken up against the Law
of Moses, he declares that as to the spiritual intention and design of the Law
it was accomplished in Christians, verse. 3. For we are the Circumcision which
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh. And, for his own part, he had as much reason to glory in legal
privileges as any of them all, verse. 4, 5, 6. but the excellency of the Gospel
of Christ had so prevailed upon his mind, that he now despised the things he
valued before, and made it his whole business to attain to the glorious reward
which this Religion promises. This he pursues from verse. 7, to verse. 15.

4. Having done this, he persuades all good Christians to do as he did, verse.
^5. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect be thus minded. But because many
disputes and differences as to opinion and practice might happen among them, he
therefore lays down two Rules for them to govern themselves by.

1. If any happened to differ from the body of Christians they lived with, they
should do it with great Modesty and Humility, not breaking out into factions
and divisions, but waiting for farther information, which they may expect that
God will give upon a diligent and sober use of the best means; And if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. By leaving
them to God's immediate care for farther illumination, he does not bid them
depend upon extraordinary revelation; but requires them to wait upon God in his
own way, without proceeding with the false Apostles to the ways of Faction and
Separation, and in the mean time to go as far as they could.

2. For those who were come to a firmness and settlement of judgment upon the
Christian principles, he charges them by all means to preserve Unity and Peace
among themselves. Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
Rule, let us mind the same things.

Wherein the Apostle supposes two things.

I. The necessity of one fixed and certain Rule, notwithstanding the different
seize among Christians. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule.

II. The duty and obligation which lies upon the best Christians to observe it.
He does not speak to the ignorant and unthinking multitude; not to the
licentious Rabble, nor to the carnal and worldly Church; which some think are
only desirous of Uniformity; but to the very best Christians; to those who had
got the start of others (as the words here signify) that they would be an
example of Peace and Unity to their Brethren.

I. The necessity of one fixed and certain Rule, notwithstanding the different
seize of Christians. (...) which Phrase seems to be a continuation of the
former allusion to a Race. For, as Eustathius observes, (...). Iliad. 3
the first thing the Greeks were wont to do as to their Exercises, was to
circumscribe the bounds within which they were to be performed. That which
fixed and determined these limits was called (...) by the Greeks, and Reg^la
and Lineae by the Latins: thence transilire lineas in Cicero is to commit a
fault, to break the bounds within which we are confined.

All the question is, what the Apostle means by this Rule, whether only a Rule
of Charity and mutual forbearance, with a liberty of different practice; or
such a Rule which limits and determines the manner of practice. It cannot be
the former, because that is the case the Apostle had spoken to just before. If
in any thing ye be otherwise minded; therefore now subjoyning this with respect
to those who had gone beyond them, he does imply such an agreement and
uniformity of Practice as does lie in observing the same standing Rule. For
which we must consider, that they understood already what orders and directions
he had given them when a Church was first formed among them; and therefore when
the Apostle mentions a Rule, without declaring what it was, we have reason to
believe it was such a Rule which they very well knew which he had given to them
before. So we find elsewhere the Apostle referrs to such Rules of Government
and Order, which he had given to other Churches, and were already received and
practiced among them. For the Apostles did not write their Epistles for the
sounding of Churches, but they were already in being; only they took notice of
any disorders among them, and reformed abuses, and left some things to their
own directions, when they should come among them. 1 Cor. 7.3^. 1 Cor. (...)
And the rest will I set in order when I come. As the Lord, has called every
one, so let him walk; And so ordain I in all the Churches. Which shows that the
Apostles did not leave all persons to act as they judged sit, but did make
Rules determining their practice, and obliging them to uniformity therein. For
might not men pretend that these were not things in themselves necessary, and
might be scrupled by some Persons, and therefore were not sit to be imposed
upon any? But I do not find that the Apostles on this account did forbear
giving Rules in such cases, and to oblige Christians to observe them; and that
not on the mere Authority of Apostles, but as Governors of Churches, whose
business it is to take care of the welfare and preservation of them. There are
many things which seem very little and inconsiderable in themselves, whose
consequence and tendency is very great: and the wisdom of Governors lies in
preventing the danger of little things, and keeping the zeal of well-meaning
persons within its due bounds. For those who are engaged below, in the Valley,
fighting in small parties, and pursuing their advantages, do run into the
enemies Camp before they are aware of it, may receive an unexpected check from
their Commanders in chief, who from the higher ground epsy the hazard they are
in by their over-forwardness, and the arts which their enemies use in drawing
them into little Companies to fight separately, and the danger they may thereby
bring upon the whole Army; and therefore send them a peremptory order to give
over fighting by themselves and make good their retreat into the Body of the
Army: They wonder, they complain, they think themselves hardly used; but no
understanding man blames their Generals who regard their safety more than they
do themselves, and know the allowing them the Liberty they desire, would
endanger the destruction of them all. The Wisdom and Conduct of Governors, is
quite another thing from the Zeal and Courage of inferior Persons; who knowing
their own resolution and integrity, think much to be controlled; but those who
stand upon higher Ground and see farther than they can do, must be allowed a
better capacity of judging what makes for the safety of the whole, than they
can have: and such things which they look on in themselves, and therefore think
them mean and trifling, the other look upon them in their consequence, and the
influence they may have upon the public safety. It were extremely desirable,
that all good and useful men should enjoy as much satisfaction as might be,
but if it cannot be attained without running great hazards of unsettling all,
it is then to be considered, whether the general safety or some men's particular
satisfaction be the more desirable. And this is that which the example of the
Apostles themselves gives us reason to consider, for although there were many
doubts and scruples in their times about several Rites and Customs, yet the
Apostles did give Rules in such cases, and bind Christians to observe them; as
we find in that famous decree made upon great deliberation, Act 15 28
in a Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem; wherein they determined those
things which they knew were then scrupled, and continued so to be afterward,
wherever the Judaizing Christians prevailed. But notwithstanding all their
dissatisfaction, the Apostles continued the same Rule; and St. Paul here
requires the most forward Christians to mind their Rule, and to preserve Peace
and Unity among themselves.

But does not St. Paul in the 14 th Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans lay
down quite another Rule, viz. only of mutual forbearance in such cases, where
men are unsatisfied in Conscience?

I answer, that the Apostle did act like a prudent Governor, and in such a
manner, as he thought did most tend to the propagation of the Gospel, and the
good of particular Churches. In some Churches that consisted most of Jews, as
the Church of Rome at this time did, and where they did not impose the
necessity of keeping the Law on the Gentile Christians (as we do not find they
did at Rome) the Apostle was willing to have the Law buried as decently, and
with as little noise as might be; and therefore in this case he persuades both
parties to Forbearance and Charity, Romans 14.3, 6, 1^.
in avoiding the judging and censuring one another, since they had an equal
regard to the honor of God in what they did. But in those Churches, where the
false Apostles made use of this pretense, of the Levitical Law being still in
force, to divide the Churches, and to separate the Communion of Christians;
there the Apostle bids them beware of them, and their practices; as being of a
dangerous and pe^nicious consequence. So that the preserving the Peace of the
Church, and preventing Separation was the great measure, according to which,
the Apostle gave his directions; and that makes him so much insist on this
advice to the Philippians, that whatever their seize in Christianity
were, they should walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things.

II. We take notice of the Duty and Obligation that lies on the best
Christians, to walk by the same Rule, to mind the same things.

From whence arise two very considerable Enquiries.

1. How far the obligation does extend to comply with an established Rule, and
to preserve the Peace of the Church we live in?

2. What is to be done, if men cannot come up to that Rule? For the Apostle
speaks only of such as have attained so far; Whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule.

1. How far the obligation does extend to comply with an established Rule, and
to preserve the Peace of the Church we live in? This I think the more necessary
to be spoken to, because I cannot persuade my self that so many scrupulous and
conscientious men as are at this day among us would live so many years in a
known sin; i. e. in a state of Separation from the Communion of a Church, which
in Conscience they thought themselves obliged to communicate with. It must be
certainly some great mistake in their judgments must lead them to this; (for I
am by no means willing to impute it to passion and evil designs) and out of the
hearty desire I have, if possible, to give* satisfaction in this matter, I
shall endeavor to search to the bottom of this dangerous mistake, to which we
owe so much of our present distractions and fears.

But for the better preventing all misunderstanding the design of my Discourse,
I desire it may be considered.

1. That I speak not of the Separation or distinct Communion of whole Churches
from each other; which according to the Scripture, Antiquity and Reason, have a
just right and power to govern and reform themselves. By whole Churches, I
mean* the Churches of such Nations, which upon the decay of the Roman Empire,
resumed their just right of Government to themselves, and upon their owning
Christianity, incorporated into one Christian Society, under the same
common^ties and rules of Order and Government. Such as the Church of Macedonia
would have been, if from being a Roman Province it had become a Christian
Kingdom, and the Churches of Thessalonica, Philippi and the rest had united
together. And so the several Churches of the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, if
they had been united in one Kingdom, and governed by the same Authority under
the same Rules, might have been truly called the Lydian Church. Just as several
Families uniting make one Kingdom, which at first had a distinct and
independent Power, but it would make strange confusion in the world to reduce
Kingdoms back again to Families, because at first they were made up of them.
Thus National Churches are National Societies of Christians, under the same
Laws of Government and Rules of Worship. For the true notion of a Church is no
more than of a Society of men united together for their Order and Government
according to the rules of the Christian Religion. And it is a great mistake, to
make the notion of a Church barely to relate to Acts of Worship; and
consequently that the adequate notion of a Church, is an Assembly for Divine
Worship; by which means they appropriate the name of Churches to particular
Congregations* Whereas if this held true, the Church must be dissolved as soon
as the Congregation is broken up; but if they retain the nature of a Church,
when they do not meet together for Worship, then there is some other bond that
unites them; and whatever that is, it constitutes the Church. And if there be
one Catholic Church consisting of multitudes of particular Churches consenting
in one Faith* then why may there not be one National Church from the consent in
the same Articles of Religion, and the same Rules of Government and Order of
Worship? Nay, if it be mutual consent and agreement which makes a Church, then
why may not National Societies agreeing together in the same Faith, and under
the same Government and Discipline, be as truly and properly a Church, as any
particular Congregation? For is not the Kingdom of France as truly a Kingdom
consisting of so many Provinces; Rob. Coenalis Hist. Gallic. l. 2. p. 126.
as the Kingdom of Ivetot once was in Normandy, which consisted of a very small
territory? Among the Athenians, from whom the use of the word (...) came into
the Christian Church, it was taken for such an Assembly, which had the power of
governing and determining matters of Religion as well as the affairs of State.
For the Senate of 500 being distributed into fifties according to the number of
the Tribes, which succeeded by course through the year; and was then called
(...), Jul. Pollux Onom^st. l. 8. c. 9 Schol. in Arist. Acharn. Act. 1. (...)
every one of these had four (...), Regular Assemblies; in the last of which,
an account of the Sacrifices was taken and of other matters which concerned
Religion; as in the Comitia Calata at Rome. From whence we may observe, that it
was not the meeting of one of the single Tribes, was called (...), but the
general Meeting of the Magistrates of the whole City and the People together.
And in this sense I shall show afterward, the word was used in the first Ages
of the Christian Church, as it commprehended the Ecclesiastical Governors and
the People of whole Cities; and why many of these Cities being united under one
civil Government, and the same Rules of Religion should not be called one
National Church, I cannot understand. Which makes me wonder at those who say,
(...) desertion, p. 35. Separation ^et no Schism, p. 59.
They cannot tell what we mean by the Church of England; in short, we mean,
that Society of Christian People which in this Nation are united under the same
Profession of Faith, the same Laws of Government, and Rules of Divine Worship.
And every Church thus constituted, we do assert to have a just right of
governing it self, and of reforming Errors in Doctrine and Corruptions in
Worship.

On which ground, we are acquitted from the imputation of Schism in the
separation from the Roman Church, for we only resume our just rights, as the
British Nation did, as to civil Government, upon the ruin of the Roman Empire.

2. I do not intend to speak of the terms upon which Persons are to be admitted
among us to the exercise of the Function of the Ministry; but of the terms of
Lay-communion, i e. those which are necessary for all Persons to join in our
Prayers, and Sacraments, and other Offices of Divine Worship. I will not say,
there has been a great deal of art used to confound these two, (and it is
easy to discern to what purpose it is;) but I dare say, the Peoples not
understanding the difference of these two cases has been a great occasion of
the present Separation. For in the judgment of some of the most impartial men
of the Dissenters at this day, although they think the case of the Ministers
very hard on the account of Subscriptions and Declarations required of them;
yet they confess very little is to be said on the behalf of the People, from
whom none of those things are required. So that the People are condemned in
their Separation, by their own Teachers; but how they can preach lawfully to a
People who commit a fault in hearing them, I do not understand.

3. I do not confound bare suspending Communion in some particular Rites* which
persons do modestly scruple, and using it in what they judge to be lawful;
with either total, or at least ordinary forbearance of Communion in what they
judge to be lawful; and proceeding to the forming of separate Congregations,
i. e. under other Teachers, and by other Rules than what the established
Religion allows. And this is the present case of Separation which I intend to
consider, and to make the sinfulness and mischief of it appear.

But that I may do it more convincingly, I will not make the difference wider
than it is; but lay down impartially the state of the present Controversy
between us and our dissenting Brethren, about Communion with our Churches.

Peace Offering in the name of the Congreg^tional Party, A D. 1667. p. 10, 11.
Baxter's Defense of his Cure, p 64. Separation yet no Schism, p. 60.
1. They unanimously confess they find no fault with the Doctrine of our Church,
and can freely subscribe to all the Doctrinal Articles; nay they profess
greater zeal for many of them, than, say they, some of our own Preachers do.
Well then! The case is vastly different as to their separation from us, and our
separation from the Church of Rome; for we declare, if there were nothing else
amiss among them, their Doctrines are such, as we can never give our assent to.

2. Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church Peace and Unity, 1672. p. 84,
85, 86. See Corbet of Schism, p. 41. Baxter's Defense of his Cure, p. 38.
They generally yield, that our Parochial Churches are true Churches; and it is
with these their Communion is required. They do not deny that we have all the
essentials of true Churches, true Doctrine, true Sacraments, and an implicit
Covenant between Pastors and People. And some of the most eminent of the
Congregational way have declared; that they look upon it as an unjust Calumny
cast upon them, that they look on our Churches as no true Churches.

3. Many of them declare, That they hold Communion with our Churches to be
lawful. Yea, we are told in Print by one then present, that A. D. 1663. diverse
of their Preachers in London met to consider, how far it was lawful, or their
duty to communicate with the Parish-Churches where they lived, in the Liturgy
and Sacraments; and that the Relatour brought in twenty Reasons to prove that
it is a duty to some to join with some Parish-Churches three times a year in
the Lord^s Supper; after he had not only proved it lawful to use a Form of
Prayer, and to join in the use of our Liturgy, but in the participation of the
Sacrament with us; and no one of the Brethren, he adds, seemed to dissent, but
to take the Reasons to be valid. Such another meeting, we are told, they had
after the Plague and Fire, at which they agreed that Communion with our
Churches was in it self lawful and good. Plea for Peace, p. 240.
Who could have imagined otherwise, than that after the weight of so many
Reasons, and such a general consent among them, they should have all joined
with us in what themselves judged to be lawful, and in many cases a duty? But
instead of this, we have rather since that time found them more inclinable to
courses of separation, filling the people with greater prejudices against our
Communion, and gathering them into fixed and separate Congregations; which have
proceeded to the choice of new Pastors upon the death of old ones; and except
some very few, scarce any, either of their Preachers or People here, come
ordinarily to the public Congregations. And this is that which at present we
lament as a thing which unavoidably tends to our common ruin, if not in time
prevented; for by this means the hearts of the People are alienated from each
other, who apprehend the differences to be much greater than their Teachers
will allow, when they are put to declare their minds; and our common enemies
take as much advantage from our differences, as if they were really far greater
than they are.

But you may ask, what then are the grounds of the present Separation? for that
there is such a thing is discernible by all, but what the reasons of it are is
hard to understand after these concessions; yet it is not conceivable that
conscientious men can in such a juncture of affairs persist in so obstinate and
destructive a course of separation, unless they had something at last fit to
answer the twenty Reasons of their own Brethren against it?

I have endeavored to give my self satisfaction in a matter of so great moment
to the Peace and Preservation of this Church, and consequently of the
Protestant Religion among us; which I never expect to see survive the
destruction of the Church of England.

And the ^utmost I can find in the best Writers of the several Parties, amounts
to these two things.

1. That although they are in a state of separation from our Church, yet this
separation is no sin.

2. That a state of separation would be a sin, but notwithstanding their
meeting in different places, yet they are not in a state of separation.

And herein lies the whole strength of the several Pleas at this day made use
of to justify the Separate Congregations: both which I shall now examine.

Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity, p. 68.
1. Some plead, That it is true they have distinct and separate Communions from
us, but it is no sin, or culpable separation so to have. For, say they, our
Lord Christ instituted only Congregational Churches, or particular Assemblies
for divine Worship, which having the sole Church power in themselves, they are
under no obligation of Communion with other Churches, but only to preserve
Peace and Charity with them. And to this Doctrine, others of late approach so
near, that they tell us, Baxter's true and only way of Concord, A D. 1680. p.
111.
That to devise new species of Churches (beyond Parochial or Congregational)
without God's Authority, and to impose them on the world (yea in his name) and
call all Dissenters Schismatics, is a far worse usurpation, than to make or
impose new Ceremonies or Liturgies. Which must suppose Congregational Churches
to be so much the Institution of Christ, that any other Constitution above
these is both unlawful and insupportable. Which is more than the Independent
Brethren themselves do assert.

But to clear the practice of Separation from being a sin on this account, two
things are necessary to be done.

1. To prove that a Christian has no obligation to external Communion beyond a
Congregational Church.

2. That it is lawful to break off Communion with other Churches, to set up a
particular independent Church.

1. That a Christian has no obligation to external Communion beyond a
particular Congregational Church. Evangelical Love, etc. p. 49, 52, 54.
They do not deny, That men by Baptism are admitted into the Catholic visible
Church as Members of it; and that there ought to be a sort of Communion by
mutual Love among all that belong to this Body: and to do them right, they
declare, That they look upon the Church of England, or the Generality of the
Nation professing Christianity, to be as sound and healthful a part of the
Catholic Church, as any in the World. P. 59.
But then they say, Communion in Ordinances must be only in such Churches as
Christ himself instituted by unalterable Rules, which were only particular and
Congregational Churches.

Granting this to be true, how does it hence appear not to be a sin to separate
from our Parochial Churches; which according to their own concessions have all
the Essentials of true Churches? And what ground can they have to separate and
divide those Churches, which for all that we can see, are of the same nature
with the Churches planted by the Apostles at Corinth, Philippi or Thessalonica?
But I must needs say farther, I have never yet seen any tolerable proof, that
the Churches planted by the Apostles were limited to Congregations. It is
possible, at first, there might be no more Christians in one City than could
meet in one Assembly for Worship; but where does it appear, that when they
multiplied into more Congregations, they did make new and distinct Churches,
under new Officers with a Separate Power of Government? Of this, I am well
assured, there is no mark or footstep in the New Testament, or the whole
History of the Primitive Church. I do not think it will appear credible to any
considerate man, that the 5000 Christians in the Church of Jerusalem made one
stated and fixed Congregation for divine Worship; not if we make all the
allowances for strangers which can be desired: but if this were granted, where
are the unalterable Rules that as soon as the company became too great for one
particular Assembly, they must become a new Church under peculiar Officers and
an independent Authority?

It is very strange, that those who contend so much for the Scriptures being a
perfect Rule of all things pertaining to Worship and Discipline, should be able
to produce nothing in so necessary a Point. If that of which we read the
clearest instances in Scripture, must be the standard of all future Ages, much
more might be said for limiting Churches to private Families, than to
particular Congregations. For, do we not read of the Church that was in the
House of Priscilla and Aquila at Rome; Romans 16.3.5.
of the Church that was in the House of Nymphas at Colosse; Col. 4.15.
and in the House of Philemon at Laodicea? Philem. 2.
Why then should not Churches be reduced to particular Families, when by that
means they may fully enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences, and avoid the
scandal of breaking the Laws? But if, notwithstanding such plain examples, men
will extend Churches to Congregations of many Families; why may not others
extend Churches to those Societies which consist of many Congregations?
Especially considering, that the Apostles when they instituted Churches, did
appoint such Officers in them, as had not barely a respect to those already
converted, but to as many as by their means should be added to the Church; as
Clemens affirms in his Epistle; Clem. Ep. ad Cor. p. 55.
The Apostles, says he, went about in Cities and Countries preaching the
Gospel; and appointed their First Fruits, having made a spiritual trial of
them, for Bishops and Deacons, (...), of those who were to believe. From hence
the number of Converts were looked on as an accession to the Original Church,
and were under the care and Government of the Bishop and Presbyters, who were
first settled there. For although when the Churches increased, the occasional
meetings were frequent in several places; yet still there was but one Church,
and one Altar, and one Baptistery, and one Bishop, with many Presbyters
assisting him. And this is so very plain in Antiquity, as to the Churches
planted by the Apostles themselves in several parts, that none but a great
stranger to the History of the Church can ever call it in question. I am sure
Calvin, Unicuique civitati erat attribut^ cert^ regio, qu^ Presbyteros inde.
sumer^t and v^lut* corpori^ Ecclesiae illius acce^^seretur. Calvin* Instit. l.
4. c. 4. n. ^.
a person of great and deserved reputation among our Brethren, looks upon this
as a matter out of dispute among learned men, that a Church did not only take
in the Christians of a whole City, but of the adjacent Country too: and the
contrary opinion is a very novel and late fancy of some among us, and has not
Age enough to plead a Prescription. It is true, after some time in the greater
Cities, they had distinct places allotted, and Presbyters fixed among them; and
such allotments were called Titles at Rome, and Laurae at Alexandria, and
Parishes in other places: but these were never thought then to be new Churches,
or to have any independent Government in themselves; but were all in subjection
to the Bishop and his College of Presbyters, of which multitudes of examples
might be brought from most authentic Testimonies of Antiquity; if a thing so
evident needed any proof at all. And yet this distribution even in Cities was
so uncommon in those elder times, that Epiphanius takes notice of it as an
extraordinary thing at Alexandria; and therefore it is probably supposed there
was no such thing in all the Cities of Crete in his time. Petav. not. in Epiph.
har. 69. n. 1. Canon. Nicaen. 6.15, 16. Constable. c. 6. Chalced. 17.20, 26.
Antioch. c. 2. Codex Eccl. Afric. c. 53. c. 55.
And if we look over the ancicent Canons of the Church, we shall find two
things very plain in them; (1.) That the notion of a Church was the same with
that of a Diocese; or such a number of Christians as were under the inspection
of a Bishop. (2.) That those Presbyters who rejected the Authority of their
Bishop, or affected separate meetings, where no fault could be found with the
Doctrine of a Church, were condemned of Schism. So the followers of Eustathius
Sebastenus, who withdrew from the public Congregations on pretense of greater
sanctity and purity, in Paphlagonia, were condemned by the Council at Gangrae;
Council. Gangr c. 6.
so were those who separated from their Bishops, though otherwise never so
orthodox, by the Council at Constantinople, Council. Constable. c. 6. Council.
Carthag. c. 10, 11. Cyprian. Ep. 40, 42. Theod. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 22. l 2. c
24. c. 17. Vincent. c. 16.
and the Council at Carthage; wherein before S. Cyprian had so justly
complained of the Schism of Felicissimus and his Brethren, who on pretense of
some disorders in the Church of Carthage had withdrawn to the Mountains; and
there laid the Foundation of the Novatian Schism. But when false Doctrine was
imposed on Churches, as by the Arian Bishops at Antioch, then the people were
excused in their separation; so at Rome when Felix was made Bishop; and at
Sirmium when Photinus published his Heresy; but I do not remember one instance
in Antiquity, wherein separation from Orthodox Bishops, and setting up Meetings
without their Authority and against their consent, was acquitted from the sin
of Schism. Indeed some Bishops have sometimes refused Communion with others
upon great misdemeanors; as Theognostus and S. Martin with the Ithacian party
on the account of the death of Priscillian; but this does not at all reach to
the case of Presbyters separating from Bishops, with whom they agree in the
same Faith. The followers of S. Chrysostom, did, I confess, continue their
separate Meetings after his banishment, and the coming in of Arsacius: but
although they withdrew in his time, being unsatisfied in the manner of his
choice; yet when Atticus restored the name of S. Chrysostom to the Diptychs of
the Church, they returned to Communion with their Bishop, Baron. A. D 404. n.
41.412. n. 47.
as S. Chrysostom himself advised them (as appears by Palladius) which is far
from justifying the wilful separation of Presbyters and People from the
Communion of their Bishops, when they do agree in the same Faith.

2. But suppose the first Churches were barely congregational, by reason of the
small number of Believers at that time* yet what obligation lies upon us to
disturb the Peace of the Church we live in to reduce Churches to their
Infant-state* They do not think it necessary to reduce the first Community of
Goods, which was far more certainly practiced, than congregational Churches;
they do not think it necessary to wash one another feet, Joh 13.14.
although Christ did it, and bade his Disciples do as he did: they believe that
the first civil Government was appointed by God himself over Families; do they
therefore think themselves bound to overthrow Kingdoms to bring things back to
their first institution? If not, why shall the Peace of the Church be in so
much worse a condition than that of the Civil state? It is very uncertain
whether the Primitive Form were such as they fansy; if it were, it is more
uncertain whether it were not so from the circumstances of the times, than from
any institution of Christ; but it is most certainly our duty to preserve Peace
and Unity among Christians; and it is impossible so to do if men break all
Orders in pieces for the fancy they have taken up of a Primitive Platform. It
is a great fault among some who pretend to great niceness in some positive
Duties, that they have so little regard to comparative Duties: For that which
may be a duty in one case, when it comes to thwart a greater duty, may be none.
Mat. 12.7.
This Doctrine we learn from our blessed Savior in the case of the obligation
of the Sabbath; which he makes to yield to duties of Mercy. And can we think
that a duty lying upon us, which in our circumstances makes a far greater duty
impracticable? Is there any thing Christ and his Apostles have charged more
upon the Consciences of all Christians, than studying to preserve Peace and
Unity among Christians? Romans 14.19. ^ Thessalonians. 4.11. Phil. 3.15.^*3. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Heb. 13.17.
This is that we must follow after, even when it seems to fly from us; this is
that we must apply our minds to, and think it our honor to promote; this is
that which the most perfect Christians are the most zealous for; this is that,
for the sake of which we are commanded to practice meekness, humility,
patience, self-denial and submission to Governors. And after all this, can we
imagine the attaining of such an end should depend upon men's conjectures,
whether five thousand Christians in times of persecution could make one
Assembly for Worship? Or whether all the Christians in Ephesus or Corinth made
but one Congregation? On what terms can we ever hope for Peace in the Church,
if such Notions as these be ground enough to disturb it? What stop can be put
to Schisms and Separations, if such pretenses as these be sufficient to
justify them? Men may please themselves in talking of preserving Peace and
Love under separate Communions; but our own sad experience shows the contrary;
for as nothing tends more to unite men's hearts than joining together in the
same Prayers and Sacraments; so nothing does more alienate men's affections,
than withdrawing from each other into separate Congregations. Which tempts some
to spiritual Pride and scorn and contempt of others, as of a more carnal and
worldly Church than themselves; and provokes others to lay open the follies and
indiscretions and immoralities of those who pretend to so much Purity and
Spirituality above their Brethren.

5. Others confess, True way of Concord, Pa^^ 3. chapter ^ Sect ^^
that to live in a state of separation from such Churches, as many at least of
ours are, were a sin; for they say, that causeless renouncing Communion with
true Churches is Schism, especially if it be joined with setting up
Anti-Churches unwarrantably against them; but this they deny that they do,
although they preach when and where it is forbidden by Law; and worship God,
and administer Sacraments by other Rules, and after a different manner than
what our Church requires. This is not dealing with us with that fairness and
ingenuity which our former Brethren used; for they avow the fact of separation,
but deny it to be sinful; these owning it to be sinful, have no other refuge
les^ but to deny the fact, which is evident to all Persons. For do they not do
the very same things and in the same manner, that the others do; how comes it
then to be separation in some and not in others? They are very unwilling to
confess a separation, because they have formerly condemned it with great
severity; and yet they do the same things for which they charged others as
guilty of a sinful separation.

For, the Assembly of Divines urged their dissenting Brethren to comply with
their Rules of Church Government, and charged them with Schism if they did it
not; whereas they only desired to enjoy such liberty as to their separate
Congregations, as is now pleaded for by our dissenting Brethren. Papers for
accommodation, printed 1648 p. 16. p. 20, 21.
This, say they, would give countenance to a perpetual Schism and Division in
the Church, still drawing away some from the Churches under the Rule, which
also would breed irritations between the Parties; and would introduce all
manner of Confusion. And they thought it a very unreasonable thing for them to
desire distinct and separate Congregations, as to those parts of worship where
they could join in Communion with them: and they thought no person was to be
indulged as to any Error or Scruple of Conscience; P. 22.
but with this Proviso, that in all other parts of worship they join with the
Congregation wherein they live; and be under the Government to be established.
To this the dissenting Brethren answered, P. 25.
that such a variation, or forbearance, could neither be a Schism, nor endanger
it; and that the great cause of Schism has been a strict obligation of all to
Uniformity; that as long as in their separate Congregations they did practice
most of the some things, and the most s^bstantial in their Rule, it could not
be called a total separation, especially considering, that they professed their
Churches to be true Churches; P. 28, 29, 30.
and that they had occasional Communion with them, which is the very same Plea
made use of at this day among us. To which the Assemblies Party smartly
replied, P. 47.
That since they acknowledged their Churches to be so true, that they could
occasionally join in all Acts of worship, they conceived they were bound to act
with them in joint Communion by one common Rule, and not by different Rules and
in separated Congregations. And they add, P. 55.
that to leave all ordinary Communion in any Church with dislike, when
opposition or offense offers it self, is to separate from such a Church in the
Scripture sense; such separation was not in being in the Apostles times, unless
it were used by false Teachers; all who professed Christianity held Communion
together, as in one Church, notwithstanding differences of Judgment, or
corruptions in Practice; P. 56.
and that, if they can hold occasional Communion without sin, they know no
reason why it may not be ordinary without sin too, and then separation would be
needless. To which they subjoyn these remarkable words, which I heartily wish
our Brethren at this day would think seriously upon, To separate from those
Churches ordinarily and visibly with whom occasionally you may join without
sin, seems to be a most unjust separation. So that whatever false colors and
pretenses some m^n make use of to justify their present practice, if the
judgment of their own Brethren may be taken upon the most weighty debate, and
most serious deliberation, it is no better than plain and downright
separation. And, I must needs say, I never saw any Cause more weakly defended,
no, not that of Polygamy and Anabaptism, than that of those, who allow it to be
lawful to join in Communion with us, and yet go about to vindicate the
separate Meetings among us, from the guilt of a sinful separation. For
although they allow our Churches to be true, and that it is lawful to
communicate with them, which is the most plausible Plea they have, this is so
far from extenuating, that it does aggravate the fault; for as the Brethren of
the Assembly said, P. 71.
Though they do not pronounce an affirmative Judgment against us; yet the very
separating is a ^acit and practical condemning of our Churches, if not as
false, yet as impure.

But whatever may be said as to other Pleas for their present practices, my
Text seems to afford the strongest of all, viz. that men are to be pressed to
go no farther than they have already attained, and not to be strained up to an
uniformity beyond the dictates of their Consciences, but to be let alone, as
the Apostle directs in the foregoing verse, If any one be otherwise minded, he
must be left to God, and that manifestation of his Will, which he will be
pleased to give him.

The clearing of this will give a full answer to the second enquiry, viz.

2. What is to be done, if men cannot come up to the Rule prescribed.

To this therefore I answer in these particulars.

1. This can never justify men in not doing what they lawfully may do. For
this Rule of the Apostle makes Communion necessary, as far as it is lawful;
and that upon the account of the general obligation lying upon all Christians
to do what in them lies for preservation of the Peace of the Church. Therefore
as far as ye have attained walk by the same Rule, do the same things; which
words, says Cajetan, the Apostle subjoins to the former, lest the persons he
there speaks to should think themselves excused from going as far as they can
as to the same Rule. Which plainly shows that men are bound in Conscience to go
as far as they can; and I cannot see how it is consistent with that tenderness
of Conscience which our Brethren pretend to, for so many of them to live so
many years in a neglect of that Communion with our Church, which themselves
judge to be lawful.

I dare say, if most of the Preachers at this day in the separate Meetings were
soberly asked their judgments, whether it were lawful for the People to join
with us in the public Assemblies, they would not deny it; and yet the People
that frequent them, generally judge otherwise. For it is not to be supposed,
that faction among them should so commonly prevail beyond interest; and
therefore if they thought it were lawful for them to comply with the Laws,
they would do it. But why then is this kept up as such a mighty secret in the
breasts of their Teachers? Why do they not preach it to them in their
Congregations? Is it for fear, they should have none left to preach to? that is
not to be imagined of mortified and conscientious men. Is it lest they should
seem to condemn themselves, while they preach against Separation in a Separate
Congregation?

This, I confess, looks oddly, and the tenderness of a man's mind in such a
case, may out of mere shamefacedness keep him from declaring a Truth which
flies in his face, while he speaks it.

Is it that they fear the reproaches of the People? which some few of the most
eminent Persons among them, have found they must undergo if they touch upon
this Subject (for I know not how it comes to pass, that the most Godly People
among them, can the least endure to be told of their faults.) But is it not as
plainly written by S. Paul, If I yet please men I should not be the Servant of
Christ; Gal. 1.10.
as Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel? If they therefore would acquit
themselves like honest and conscientious men, let them tell the People plainly
that they look on our Churches as true Churches, and that they may lawfully
communicate with us in Prayers and Sacraments; and I do not question but in
time, if they find it lawful, they will judge it to be their Duty. For it is
the Apostles command here, Whereto we have already attained let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same things.

2. If the bare dissatisfaction of men's Consciences do justify the lawfulness
of Separation, and breaking an established Rule, it were to little purpose to
make any Rule at all. Because it is impossible to make any, which ignorant and
injudicious men shall not apprehend to be in some thing or other against the
dictates of their Consciences. But because what we say may not weigh so much
with them in this matter, as what was said on this Occasion by their own
Brethren in the Assembly, I shall give an account of their Judgment in this
matter.

The dissenting Brethren were not so much wanting to their Cause, as not to
plead tenderness of Conscience with as much advantage and earnestness as any
men now can do it. To which they answer,

1. That though tenderness of Conscience may justify Non-communion in the
thing scrupled, Papers for Accommodation, p. 51. V. p. 61.
yet it can never justify Separation.

We much doubt, say they, whether such tenderness of Conscience, as arises out
of an opinion, cui potest subesse falsum, (which may be false) when the
Conscience is so tender, that it may be withal an erring Conscience, can be a
sufficient ground to justify such a material Separation, as our Brethren plead
for; For though it may bind, to forbear or suspend the Act of Communion in that
particular wherein men conceive they cannot hold Communion without sin (nothing
being to be done contrary unto Conscience) yet it does not bind to follow such
a positive prescript as possibly may be diverse from the Will and Counsel of
God, of which kind we conceive this of gathering Separated Churches out of
other true Churches to be one.

P. 66.
2. That it is endless to hope to give satisfaction to erring Consciences. The
Grounds, say they, upon which this Separation is desired, are such upon which
all other possible scruples which erring Consciences may in any other cases be
subject unto, may claim the privilege of a like Indulgence. And so this
Toleration being the first, shall indeed but lay the Foundation and open the
gap, whereat as many divisions in the Church, as there may be scruples in the
minds of men, shall upon the self same equity be let in. P. 68.
And again, that this will make way for infinite divisions and sub-divisions;
P. 73.
P. 68.
and give Countenance to a perpetual Schism, and Division in the Church.

3. That scruple of Conscience is no protection against Schism; no cause of
Separating; P. 73.
nor does it take off causeless Separation from being Schism, which may arise
from Errors of Conscience as well as carnal and corrupt Reasons; and therefore
they conceive the causes of Separation must be shown to be such as ex natura
rei will bear it out.

4. That the Apostle notwithstanding the difference of men's Judgments did
prescribe Rules of Uniformity. For, say they, P. 111.
they suppressed the contentions of men by the custom of the Churches of God, 1
Cor. 11.16. and ordain the same practice in all the Churches, notwithstanding
our Brethrens distinction of difference of light, 1 Cor. 7.17. And did not the
Apostlis bind the burden of some necessary things on the Churches, albeit
there were in those Churches gradual differences of light?

5. That the Apostle by this Rule in the Text, P. 113, 114.
did not intend to allow Brethren who agree in all substantials of Faith and
Worship, to separate from one another, ^
in those very substantials wherein they agree. Is this, say they, to walk by
the same Rule, and to mind the same things, to separate from Churches in those
very things wherein we agree with them? We desire no more of them than we are
confident was practiced by the Saints at Philippi, P. 115.
namely, to hold practical Communion in things wherein they doctrinally agree.

6. That there is a great deal of difference between Tyranny over men's
Consciences, and Rules of Uniformity. Ibid*
For the dissenting Brethren charged the Assembly, with setting up an
Uniformity for Vniformity's sake, i. e. affecting Uniformity so much, as not to
regard men's Consciences; and without respect had to the varieties of Light in
matters of a lesser nature; which, say they, will prove a perfect tyranny, and
it is in effect to stretch a low man to the same length with a taller, or to
out a tall man to the stature of one that is low, for Vniformity's sake. To
which the others answer, That they do not desire Uniformity for the sake of
Tyranny, but only for order, and order for Edification. But for ought they
could perceive, any thing that is One must be judged the foundation of Tyranny
(which are their own words. P. 116.
) As to variety of light, they desired their Brethren to answer them in this
one thing, whether some must be denied liberty of their Conscience in matter of
practice, or none? If none, then, say they, we must renounce our Covenant and
let in Prelacy again; and all others ways; if a denial of liberty unto some may
be just, then Uniformity may be settled notwithstanding variety of lights,
without any Tyranny at all. P. 117.
As to their similitude, they grant it to be pretty and plausible; but such
arguments are popular and inartificial, having more of flourish than substance
in them. For did not they endeavor to raise lower Churches to a greater
height? would they permit other Church Governments if it were in their power,
because men must not for Vniformity's sake be pared or stretched to the measure
of other men? would they endure the lower suckers at the root of their tree to
grow till they had killed the tree it self? Ad populum phaleras.

From whence we see the Church of England's endeavor after Uniformity is
acquitted from Tyranny over the Consciences of men by the Judgment of the most
learned of the Assembly of Divines? for such we do not question they chose to
manage this debate, upon which the turn of their whole affairs depended.

3. A wilful Error or mistake of Conscience does by no means excuse from sin.
Thus if a man think himself bound to divide the Church by a sinful Separation;
that Separation is nevertheless a sin for his thinking himself bound to do it.
For S. Paul thought himself bound to do many things against the name of Jesus
of Nazareth, Acts 26.9.
yet he calls himself a blasphemer and the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13.15.
S. Joh. 16.2.
for what he did under that obligation of Conscience. The Jews thought
themselves bound in Conscience to do God service, but it was a horrible
mistake, when they took killing the Apostles to be any part of it. From whence
it appears, that men may do very bad things, and yet think themselves bound in
Conscience to do them. I do not hence infer that the pretense of Conscience is
not to be regarded, because it may be abused to so ill purposes; for no man
that has any Conscience will speak against the Power of it, and he that
declares against it, has no reason to be regarded in what he says. But that
which ought to be inferred from hence, is, that men ought not to rest satisfied
with the present dictates of their Consciences, for notwithstanding them they
may commit very great sins. I am afraid, the common mistating the Case of an
Erroneous Conscience has done a great deal of Mischief to conscientious men,
and betrayed them into great security, while they are assured they do act
according to their Consciences. For the question is generally put, How far an
Erroneous Conscience does oblige? And when men hear that they must not act
against their Consciences though they be mistaken, they think themselves safe
enough and enquire no farther. But if they would consider, that no man's
Conscience alters the nature of Good and Evil in things; that what God has
made a Duty or a Sin remains so, whatever a man's Conscience does judge
concerning them; that no man's Conscience can strictly oblige him either to
omit a Duty, or to commit a Sin; the utmost Resolution of the Case comes to
this, That a man may be so perplexed and entangled by an erroneous Conscience,
that he may be under a necessity of sinning, if he acts either with or against
it. Not that God ever puts a man under the necessity of sinning, (for then it
would be no sin to him, if it were unavoidable) but that by their own neglect
and carelessness, without looking after due information, and running on with
violent Prejudices, which was the case of S. Paul and the Jews (and I wish it
were not of many Christians) they may make false and rash judgments of things,
and so sin either in doing or not doing what their Consciences tell them they
are bound to do.

The most material Question then, in the case of an erroneous Conscience, is,
What Error of Conscience does excuse a man from Sin in following the Dictates
of it? For, if the Error be wholly involuntary; i. e. if it be caused by
invincible Ignorance, or after using the best means for due information of his
Conscience, though the Act may be a fault in it self, yet it shall not be
imputed to him as a Sin; because it wanted the consent of the Mind, by which
the Will is determined; but if men fall into Wilful Errors of Conscience; i.
e. if they form their Judgments rather by Prejudice and Passion and Interest
than from the Laws of God or just Rules of Conscience; if they do not examine
things fairly on both sides, praying for divine direction; if they have not
patience to hear any thing against their opinion, but run on blindly and
furiously, they may in so doing act according to their Consciences, and yet
they may be in as great danger of committing heinous sins as St. Paul and the
Jews were. Thus if men through the Power of an Erroneous Conscience may think
themselves bound to make Schisms and Divisions in the Church, to disobey Laws
and to break in pieces the Communion of that Church, which they are, or ought
to be members of, they may satisfy themselves that they pursue their
Consciences, and yet for want of due care of informing themselves and judging
aright, those very Actions may be Wilful and Damnable Sins.

Nothing now remains but to make Application of what has been said to our own
Case. And that shall be to two sorts of Persons, 1. to those who continue in
the Communion of our Church, 2. to those who dissent from it.

I. To those who continue in the Communion of our Church. Let us walk by the
same Rule, and mind the same things. Let us study the Unity and Peace, and
thereby the Honor and Safety of it. While we keep to one Rule, all People know
what it is to be of our Church; if men set up their own fancies above the Rule,
they charge it with imperfection; if they do not obey the Rule, they make
themselves wiser than those tha^ made it. It has not been either the Doctrine
or Rules of our Church which have ever given advantage to the Enemies of it;
but the indiscretion of some in going beyond them; and the inconstancy of
others in not holding to them.

Such is the Purity of its Doctrine, such the Loyalty of its Principles, such
the Wisdom, and Order, and Piety of its Devotions, that none who are true
Friends to any of these, can be Enemies to it. Let us take heed we do not give
too much occasion to our Enemies to think the worse of our Church for our
sakes. It is easy to observe, that most quarrels relating to Constitutions and
Frames of Government are more against Persons than things; when they are
unsatisfied with their management, then they blame the Government; but if
themselves were in place, or those they love and esteem, then the Government is
a good thing, if it be in good men's hands. Thus do men's judgments vary as their
interests do.

And so as to Churches, we find Uniformity and Order condemned as Tyrannical,
till men come into Power themselves, and then the very same things and
arguments are used and thought very good and substantial, which before were
weak and sophistical. Ans. to 2 Questions. 1659.
Those who speak now most against the Magistrates Power in matters of Religion
had ten substantial Reasons for it, when they thought the Magistrate on their
own side. Those who now plead for Toleration, did once think it the Mother of
Confusion, the Nurse of Atheism, the Inlet of Popery, the common Sink of all
Errors and Heresies. But, if there be not much to be said against the Churches
Constitution, then they are ready to lay load upon the Persons of the
Governors and Members of it; and thence pretend to a necessity of Separation
for a purer Communion. Let us endeavor to remove this objection, not by
recrimination (which is too easy in such cases) but by living suitably to our
holy Religion, by reforming our own lives, and redressing (what in us lies) the
Scandals and Disorders of others. Let us by the innocence and unblameableness
of our lives, the life and constancy of our devotions, the meekness and
gentleness of our behavior in our own Cause, our Zeal and Courage in God's,
add a luster to our Religion and bring others to a Love of our Church.

II. To those who dissent from our Communion. Whether they hear, or whether
they will forbear, I cannot dismiss this subject, without offering some things
to them, 1. By way of Consideration. 2. By way of Advice.


(1.) I shall offer these things to their Consideration.

1. Let them consider How many things must be born with in the Constitution of
a Church; They that are ruled must consider, that the best Policy or
Constitution, so far as it is of man's regulating, has defects and
inconveniences, and affairs will be complicated; and therefore they must not
be too unyielding, but bear with what is tolerable, and not easily remediable.
Corbet of the sound State of Religion, p. 75. 1679.

Ball against Can. p* 13.


which cannot be expected in this World to be without Spot or Wrinkle. And if
men will set themselves only to find faults, it is impossible, in this state of
things, they should ever be pleased. And if they separate where they see any
thing amiss, they must follow his example who pursued this Principle so far,
till he withdrew from all Society, lest he should communicate with them in
their Sin; in which condition he continued till his Children lay dead in the
house, and he became utterly unable to help himself; and because no humane
inventions were to be allowed about the Worship of God, he had cut out of his
Bible the Contents of the Chapters, and Titles of the Leaves, and so left the
bare Text, without Binding or Covers. This is the Case the rigid and
impracticable Principles of some would bring our Churches to, by cutting off
all Rules of Order and Decency, as encroachments on the Institutions of Christ.

2. I desire them to consider how impossible it is to give satisfaction to all,
and how many things must be allowed a favorable interpretation in public
Constitutions and general Laws; which it is hardly possible so to frame, but
there will be room left for Cavils and Exceptions. Yea, when the wisest and
best men have done their utmost, A discourse of the Religion of England in its
due Latitude, Sect. 19.
some of themselves confess, there may be dissatisfaction still; and if
Christian Humility, Charity and Discretion, will then advise persons to
acquiesce in their private security and freedom, and not to unsettle the
public Order for their private satisfaction: Why should not men practice the
same virtues themselves; which they do confess, will be necessary for some at
last?

Wise and good men will consider the difficulties that always attend public
Establishments; and have that esteem for Peace and Order, Such is the
complicated condition of humane affairs, that it is exceeding difficult to
devise a Rule or Model that shall provide for all whom Equity will plead for.
Therefore the prudent and sober will acquiesce in any Constitution that is in
some good sort proportionable to the ends of Government. A Discourse of the
Religion of England, etc.. 14. Printed 1667.
that they will bear with any thing tolerable for the sake of it. It is a very
hard case with a Church when men shall set their Wits to strain every thing to
the worst sense, to stretch Laws beyond the intention and design of them, to
gather together all the doubtful and obscure passages in Calenders,
Translations, etc. and will not distinguish between their approbation of the
use and of the choice of things, for upon such terms as these men think to
justify the present Divisions. I much question, whether if they proceed in
such a manner, they can hold Communion with any Church in the Christian world.
If men be disposed to find faults, See Baxter's Cure of Divisions, p. 264.
no Church can be pure enough; for something will be amiss either in Doctrine,
or Discipline, or Ceremonies, or Manners; but if they be disposed to Peace and
Union, then Charity will cover a multitude of failings; Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
and then according to St. Paul's advice, with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love, they will be endeavoring to
preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. And without the practice
of the former Virtues, no Metaphysical Discourses of Unity, will signify any
thing to the Churches Peace.

3. They would do well to consider, How Separation of the People from our
Churches comes to be more lawful now, than in the days of our Fathers. It has
been often and evidently proved, that the most sober and learned
Non-conformists of former times, Papers of accommodation, p. 52.
notwithstanding their scruples in some points, yet utterly condemned
Separation from our Churches as unlawful. And they looked upon this, not as a
mere common sin of humane infirmity, but as a wilful and dangerous sin; Ball
against Can. Praef. p. 2.
in that it is so far from tending to the overthrow of Antichrist, that it
upholds and maintains him; calling it a renting the Church, the disgrace of
Religion, the advancement of Pride, Schism and Contention, the offense of the
Weak, the grief of the Godly, who be better settled, the hardening of the
Wicked, and the recovery or rising again of Antichristianism; nay, even
persecuting the Lord Jesus in his Host, which they revile; in his Ordinances,
which they dishonor; and in his Servants, whose footsteps they slander, whose
Graces they despise, whose Office they trample upon with disdain These are the
very words of one of the most learned and judicious Non-conformists before the
Wars. And surely the mischiefs that followed after, could not make Separation
to appear less odious. Was it a sin? was it such a sin then? and is it none
now? Either our Brethren at this day, do believe it to be a Sin for the People
to separate, or they do not: If not, it must either be, that there are new and
harder terms of Communion, which were not then; which is so far from being
true, that they confess them to be rather easier for the People: or it must be,
that they are gone off from the peaceable Principles of their Predecessors,
which they are unwilling to own. If they do believe it to be a Sin, why do they
suffer the People to live in a known Sin? Why do they encourage them by
Preaching in separate Congregations? For their Predecessors did not think it
lawful, much less a Duty, to preach when forbidden by a Law: Bradshaw against
Johnson,. 40, 91. Gouges whole Armor of God, p. 570.
neither did they understand what warrant any ordinary Minister has in such a
case by God's word, so to draw any Church or People to his private Ministry in
opposition to the Laws and Government he lived under. They understood the
difference between the Apostles cases and theirs; and never thought the
Apostles, Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel, did extend to them; but
thought that silenced Ministers ought to live as private Members of the Church
till they were restored, and the People bound to hear others. Of which there
can be far less ground to dispute, when themselves acknowledge the Doctrine by
Law established to be true and sound.

4. Lastly, Let me beseech them to consider the common danger that threatens us
all by means of our Divisions. We have Adversaries subtle and industrious
enough to make use of all advantages to serve their own ends; and there is
scarce any other they promise themselves more from, than the continuance of
these breaches among our selves: This some of our Brethren themselves have been
aware of; Nothing that I know of in the world, does so strongly tempt some
sober conscientious men to think Popery necessary for the Concord of Churches,
and a violent Church Government necessary to our Peace, as the woeful
experience of the Errors and Schisms, the mad and manifold Sects that arise
among those that are most against them. Baxter's last Answer to Bagshaw, p. 30.

You little know what a pernicious design the Devil has upon you, in
persuading you to desire and endeavor to pull down the interest of Christ and
Religion, which is upheld in the Parish Churches of this Land: and to think
that it is best to bring them as low in reality, or reputation as you can, and
to contract the religious Interest all into private Meetings, Id. p. 31. n. 25.


and on that account have told the People of the danger of the Principles of
Separation, as to the interest of Religion in general, and the Protestant
Religion in particular among us.

Certainly, Nothing would tend more to our common security than for all true
and sincere Protestants to lay aside their prejudices, and mistakes, and to
join heartily in Communion with us: which many of their Teachers at this day
allow to be lawful. And how can they satisfy themselves in hazarding our
Religion by not doing that, which themselves confess lawful to be done?

(2.) But if we are not yet ripe for so great a mercy as a perfect Union, yet I
would entreat our Brethren to make way for it by hearkening to these following
Advices.

1. Not to give encouragement to rash and intemperate zeal; which rends all in
pieces, and makes reconciliation impossible. Those who see least into things,
are usually the fiercest contenders about them: and such eager Disputants are
fitter to make quarrels than to end them; for they can be contentious for
Peacesake, and make new differences about the ways of Unity. Wisdom and
sobriety, a good judgment, a prudent temper, and freedom from prejudice will
tend more to end our differences, than warm Debates, and long Disputations;
which as Greg. Nazianzen said once of Councils, seldom have had any good end.
But there is a more fiery sort of zeal, and more dangerous than this; which may
lie smothering for a time, till it meets with suitable matter and a freer vent,
and then it breaks out into a dreadful flame. This we have already seen such
dismal effects of in this age, that we should think there were less need to
give men caution against it again, were it not to be feared, that where Reason
cannot prevail, Experience will not. All that we can say to such persons that
may be like to move them, is, that if their blind zeal transport them, as it
did Sampson, to pull down the House over their Heads, they will be sure to
perish themselves in the fall of it; but here will lie the great difference of
the case, while they and their friends perish together, the Philistims without
will rejoice to make others the instruments to execute their designs.

2. Not to be always complaining of their hardships and persecutions; as though
no People had suffered so much since the days of Dioclesian; whereas the
severity of the Laws has been tempered with so much gentleness in the
execution of them, that others have as much complained of Indulgence, as they
of Persecution. It does not look like the Patience, and Humility, and Meekness
of the Primitive Christians, to make such noise and outcries of their suffering
so much, when they would have been rather thankful that they suffered no more.
Is this the way to Peace, to represent their case still to the world in an
exasperating and provoking manner? Is this the way to incline their Governors
to more condescension, to represent them to the People as an Ithacian
persecuting Party? Where are the Priscillians that have been put to death by
their instigation? What do such insinuations mean, but that our Bishops are the
followers of Ithacius and Idacius in their cruelty; and they of the good and
meek Bishop S. Martin, who refused Communion with them on that account? If men
do entertain such kind thoughts of themselves, and such hard thoughts of their
Superiors, whatever they plead for, they have no inclination to Peace.

3. Not to condemn others for that which themselves have practiced, and think
to be lawful in their own cases. What outcries have some made against the
Church of England, as Cruel and Tyrannical, for expecting and requiring
Uniformity? And yet do not such men, even at this day, contend for the
Obligation of a Covenant, which binds men to endeavor after Uniformity in
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship? But they want the ingenuity of Adonibezek, to
reflect on the Thumbs and the Toes, Judge. 1.7.
which they have cut off from others* and think themselves bound to do it
again, if it were in their power. Who could have been thought more moderate in
this way, than those who went upon the principles of the dissenting Brethren?
and yet we are assured, that even in New England, See Clark's Narrative of
New-England's Persecution, A. D. 1651.
when their own Church Way was by Law established among them, they made it no
less than Banishment for the Anabaptists to set up other Churches among them,
or for any secretly to seduce others from the approbation and use of
Infant Baptism. And how they have since proceeded with the Quakers, is very
well known. Nay, even these, notwithstanding the single Independency of every
man's light within him, have found it necessary to make Rules and Orders among
themselves to govern their Societies, to which they expect an uniform
Obedience; and allow no Liberty out of the Power and Truth; See Spirit of the
Hat, p. 12, etc.
as they love to speak. From all which it appears, the true Controversy is not
about the Reasonableness of Uniformity; but who shall have the Power of
prescribing the Rules of it. Is it not now a very hard case, that the Church of
England must be loaded with bitter reproaches, and exposed to the common hatred
of all Parties for the sake of that, which every one of them would practice if
it were in their Power; and think it very justifiable so to do?

4. Not to inflame the Peoples heats, by making their differences with the
Church of England to appear to be greater than they are. Let them deal honestly
and faithfully with them, by letting them understand that they look on our
Churches as true Churches, and occasional Communion at least with them to be
lawful: (and it is hard to understand, if occasional Communion be lawful,
that constant Communion should not be a Duty.) This were the way to abate men's
great prejudices, and to soften their Spirits, and to prepare them for a closer
Union. But if instead of this, they endeavor to darken and confound things,
and cast mists before their eyes, that they cannot see their way clear before
them; all understanding men will conclude, they prefer some little interests of
their own, before the honor of Christ and the Peace of his Church.

5. Not to harbor or foment unreasonable jealousies and suspicions in Peoples
minds concerning us. This has been one of the most successful arts of keeping
up the distance and prejudices that have been so great among us, viz. by
private whispers, by false suggestions, by idle stories, by unreasonable
interpretation of words beyond the intention and design of those who spoke
them. By such devices as these, great mischief has been done among us, and I
am much afraid, is doing still. For nothing sets men at a greater distance from
our Church, than the apprehending that we are not hearty and sincere in the
Protestant Cause: which although it be a most groundless and malicious calumny,
yet there have been some, who have had so little regard to Conscience, or
common Ingenuity, as not only to charge particular Persons, but our Church it
self with Marching toward Popery. What injustice, what uncharitableness, what
impudence is it, to fasten such an imputation upon a Church that has hitherto
continued (and long may it do so) the chief Bulwark of the Protestant Cause?
Little do such Persons consider, how much they serve the design of our enemies,
who cannot but be mightily pleased to find their most formidable adversaries
represented to the People as their secret Friends.

6. Not to run the hazard of all for a show of greater Liberty to themselves.
For under this pretense our Adversaries endeavor to make them their
Instruments to bring upon our Necks a Yoke which neither we nor our Fathers
were able to bear. An universal Toleration is that Trojan Horse, which brings
in our enemies without being seen, and which after a long Siege they hope to
bring in at last under the pretense of setting our Gates wide enough open, to
let in all our friends.

And then think with your selves what advantages they will have above others;
considering some men's coldness and indifferency in Religion; others uncertainty
and running from one extreme to another; others easiness in being drawn away by
the hopes and fears of this world; which have a wonderful influence upon
changing men's opinions, even when they do not think it themselves. So that
those seem very little to understand mankind, who do not apprehend the
dangerous consequences of a general Toleration.

Those who pretend there is no danger, because by this means the Folly of their
Religion will be exposed, do not consider what a catching disease solly is; and
how natural it is for men that are fancifull in Religion to exchange one solly
for another. If all men were wise and sober in Religion, there would need no
Toleration; if they are not, we must suppose, if they had what they wished,
they would do as might be expected from men wanting Wisdom and Sobriety, i. e.
All the several Parties would be striving and contending with each other, which
should be uppermost, and gain the greatest interest.

And what would the fruit of all such contentions be, but endless disputes, and
exposing the follies of one another, till at last Religion it self be sunk into
the greatest contempt; or men, And verily you will keep up the Papists hope,
that by an universal Toration, they may at last come in on equal terms with
you, or by connivence, be endured as much as you. And if they be equal in
England with you, their transmarine advantages will make them more than equal,
notwithstanding their disadvantages in their Cause, and their contrariety to
Kingly Interest. Baxter's last Answer to Bagshaw, p. 31.
through mere weariness of contending, be willing even to submit to Papal
Tyranny, because it pretends to some kind of Unity?

So that, upon the whole matter, if we would consult the Honor of God and
Religion, the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church we live in; if we would
prevent the great Designs of our enemies, and leave the Protestant Religion
here established to Posterity, we ought to follow the Apostle's Advice, in
walking by the same Rule, and in minding the same things.

SERMON VII. OF Protestant Charity Preached at St. Sepulchers Church, On
Tuesday In Easter-week, 1681.
Gal. VI.9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.


WHen Julian the Apostate designed (if possible) to retrieve the honor of the
Heathen Religion, Sozom. l. 5. c. 15.
he easily discerned that it was not enough for him to restore the Priesthood,
Hist Trip. l. 6. c. 29.
to open the Temples, to appoint the Sacrifices to be offered upon the Altars;
but he found it necessary for them to imitate the Christians in the strictness
of their Lives, in the solemnity of their Devotions, in the exactness of their
Discipline, and especially in the erecting Hospitals and taking care of the
Poor. For he that would not believe the Christian Religion to be from God,
thought himself bound to give some probable account, how a Religion so contrary
to the Interests and Designs of this World, should be able to prevail against
all the arts and power of its many and potent Enemies; and upon the deepest
search which could be made by himself, or the greatest Wits of the Heathens
then about him, they concluded the flourishing and propagation of it to be
chiefly owing to those things which he so much commended to the Heathens
imitation. And from hence they inferred, that if the same things could be
brought into practice among the Gentiles, they should be able to supplant
Christianity by its own methods, and restore Paganism by the same Weapons by
which it was overthrown. This was thought so subtle and artificial a device by
him whose great design was to extirpate our Religion in a soft and gentle
manner, without the blood and cruelty of former times, that he writes an
Epistle on purpose to Arsacius the chief Priest of Galatia, requiring punctual
observance of these Commands; and as to the chargeable and expensive part, he
offered large provisions out of his own Revenue to defray it.

But Saint Paul had been beforehand with him in Galatia, having planted
Churches with great success there; and Christianity, by his means, took so deep
root in men's hearts, that neither the rage and fury of former Persecutions, nor
the plausible arts and insinuations of Julian were able to root it out. It is
true, that these Churches, soon after their planting, were in great danger of
being overrun by the pernicious Errors of some Seducers of that time; (the
apprehension whereof put St. Paul into that astonishment which he expresses in
the beginning of this Epistle, Gal. 1.6.
I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace
of Christ unto another Gospel, etc.) yet by the early notice and care which he
took to prevent the spreading of these corruptions among them, the Galatian
Churches, recovered the soundness of their Faith, and have preserved a name
among the Eastern Churches, though under great variety of conditions, to this
day. Some take notice, that this is one of the sharpest Epistles written by St.
Paul. He appears indeed, by the beginning of it, to have been much surprised
and moved at the news of a great and sudden alteration among them; which he was
sure was not for the better. And by this plain dealing with them, he knew, till
they considered better, they would be offended with him; but withal he tells
them this did best become a Servant of Christ, who, like a good Physician, has
more regard to the Disease than to the Palate of his Patient; Gal. 1.10.
For if I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ. But having
vindicated his own honor, Chapter 1, 2.
which the evil reports of the false Apostles made necessary; and argued with
great strength and conviction against the imposers of the Law; Chapter 3, 4. part
of 5.
he betakes himself to the enforcing the practice of the general and necessary
Duties of Christianity upon these Galatians. If they had such a mind to keep
the Law, All the Law, says he, Gal. 5.14.
is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. It was a vain and foolish thing for them to contend about keeping the
Law, who did overthrow the main design of it, by their heats and animosities
against each other; which, instead of preserving the honor of the Law, was the
certain way to destroy one another. 15.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another. From hence he shows, that hatred, variance, 20.
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, are as much the lusts of the
flesh, 21.
as adultery, fornication, murder, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; and
as destructive to men's Salvation; of the which, says he, I tell you now, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And they that are true Christians must crucify the
flesh with all the affections and lusts thereof; 24
such as vainglory, love of contention, envying the reputation of others. 26
Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another. But the Apostle did not think the design of the Law, or the obligation
of Christianity was satisfied with abstaining from doing injuries to others;
therefore he proceeds to tell them what exercise of tenderness, compassion and
readiness to do good to others were expected from them by the Law of Christ.

(1.) If a man, through the frailty of humane Nature, or the sudden surprise of
a Temptation, be overtaken in a fault, do not, says he, trample upon him, nor
insult over him; but endeavor with the spirit of meekness to recover him from
his fall; considering that we carry about us the same load of flesh, and are
exposed to continual Temptations our selves. Gal. 6.1.


(2.) If we see others groaning under the heavy burden of their own
infirmities, or the pressures and calamities of the world, do not add more
weight to their afflictions; but put your own shoulders under to bear a part
with them, to make their burden more easy to them; for herein lies a great
deal of that duty which Christ has laid on all his Disciples. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

(3.) If it be impossible for men to attend the service of your Souls and the
affairs of this World together, never grudge nor repine at the exercise of your
kindness and liberality toward your spiritual Teachers, v. 6. Gal. 6.6,
Let him that is taught in the word communicat^ to him that teaches in all
good things. Which instances being mentioned, the Apostle subjoyns two things:

1. A general Proposition, viz. That every man shall receive in another World
according to the good that he does in this. Be not deceived, 6.7.
God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows that shall he also reap. 6.8.
For he that sows to his flesh, shall of his flesh reap corruption, but he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: i. e. He
that looks only after his present advantage in this world, and dares not
venture to do any thing out of hopes of recompense for it in another life, he
is said to sow to his flesh; but he that is good and charitable and kind to
others without hopes of any other advantage than what God will give him for it,
is said to sow to the spirit; the flesh and spirit being opposed as the two
Centres of the different worlds: the great thing to which all things tend in
this world being something carnal or that relates to the Flesh; and the great
principle of another world being wholly spiritual. And these two Flesh and
Spirit are placed as two Loadstones drawing our hearts several ways; the one is
much stronger, but at a greater distance; the other has less force in it self
but is much nearer to us, by which means it draws more powerfully the hearts
that are already touched with a strong inclination to it. But the Apostle uses
the similitude of two Fields, wherein the product of the Seed answers to the
nature of the Soil; so he that sows to the flesh, i. e. that minds only his
present interest in this world, his harvest shall be proportionable to his
seed, he may reap advantages to himself in this world suitable to his pains and
industry; but the utmost this world can yield is but of a short continuance,
being of a temporary, transient corruptible nature, he that sows to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit, i. e.
has so great a regard to the rewards of another life, that he is willing to
let go a present enjoyment and bury it under ground, casting it in as seed into
the earth in hopes of a future resurrection, however he may be condemned as a
weak and improvident man by the men of this world, yet as certain as there is a
life everlasting to come, so certainly shall all his good deeds yield an
abundant increase and meet with a glorious recompense then, if there be no
corrupt mixture in the sowing which may spoil the virtue of the seed, for he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. And let
not men deceive themselves; if they look only at themselves and the things of
this world, let their pretenses be never so spiritual, if they dare not do acts
of Charity so as to trust God for a reward, they do but sow to the flesh; and
though the world may be cheated, and men may sometimes deceive themselves, yet
God cannot be mocked; he knows the hearts and intentions, and secret designs of
men, and according to them their reward shall be; for whatsoever a man sows
that shall he reap. This I take to be the natural and genuine meaning of the
Apostle in those words.

2. A particular exhortation, not to be discouraged in well doing, which is the
same with sowing to the spirit before, and with doing good in the following
verse, both which are to be understood of the Works of Charity; and therefore
we ought to take it in that sense here. These are especially called good Works
in the new Testament; Dorcas is said to be a Woman full of good Works and
Alms-deeds which she did. Act. 9.36.
The Widow that was to be taken into Office in the Church must be well reported
of for good Works; 1 Timothy 5.10.
and these presently follow, the bringing up children, the lodging strangers,
washing the Saints feet and relieving the afflicted. In the Epistle to Titus,
Saint Paul gives him a strict charge, Tit. 3.8.
that he deliver it with great assurance ((...)) that they which believe in God
might be careful to maintain good Works; Tit. 3.14.
these things are good and profitable unto men; Where the same word is used in
the Greek, that is in the words of the Text. And to the same purpose other
words of a like signification are used, Heb. 13.16.
as (...), To do good and to communicate forget not; (...), Charge them that
are rich in this world -- that they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate. 1 Timothy 6.18.
That ye may abound to every good Work, says St. Paul; which he after
explains, by being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness. 2 Cor. 9.8.11.
So that although well-doing in the general may extend to every good action,
yet by the particular sense of that phrase in the New Testament, and especially
from the coherence of these words with the foregoing and following verses, it
appears that the well-doing here spoken of, is to be understood of Works of
Charity. Which the Apostle, as they were Christians, did suppose them to
practice, but being apprehensive lest the discouragements they met with in the
world, should make them grow cold and remiss in this great duty, he therefore
exhorts them not to faint or grow weary of doing it; and to that end he lays
down the most powerful Motive and Consideration; for in due season ye shall
reap if ye faint not; i. e. ye shall not miss of a reward from God.

So that from the words we may take notice of these two things which deserve
our consideration.

1. The many discouragements men meet with in the World, which are apt to make
them grow weary in well-doing.

2. The mighty encouragement which God gives to our continuance and
perseverance in it; for in due season we shall reap if we faint not.

I. The many discouragements men meet with in the World, which are apt to make
them grow weary in well-doing.

The Precepts of Charity delivered by our Savior and his Apostles are so
plain, so full, so many, so easy to be understood; and those Precepts enforced
by so just, and reasonable, and pious considerations, with respect to God, to
the World, to fellow Christians, to the honor of our Religion, and lastly to
our selves, from the comfort that is in well-doing, and the reward that follows
it; that a man must have great impudence, to profess himself a Christian, and
yet to think himself not obliged to do acts of Charity. But notwithstanding all
this, and much more which might be said to this purpose, there are too many
still who are ready to find out some plausible pretenses to excuse them from
well-doing; which being the greatest discouragements to men from continuing in
it; I shall make it my present business to examine them, and to show how little
weight there is in them, especially being compared with the Authority of him
who has made this our duty, and the reward we may justly expect for performing
it. And here I shall pass over the more common and trivial Objections, which
every one can easily answer that makes them; and rather argue an unwilling mind
to perform their duty, than one unsatisfied about the reasonableness of it; and
I shall therefore insist on those that carry a greater appearance of strength
in them: which are chiefly these two,

1. From the different state of our Times from those when these Commands of
Charity were given.

2. From the sad prospect of our own Affairs, which seem rather to call for a
Care of our selves than Charity to others.

1. The first pretense is from the difference of Times; There was then, say
such men, great reason for Charity which will not hold now; those were times of
persecution for Religion, and many were driven to great streights and
necessities on that account who deserved to be relieved, and the Christians had
been worse than Infidels not to do good to men that were brought to want merely
for Christ's and the Gospel's sake; the Laws then could take no care of these
poor and indigent persons; for the Laws made them so, being then opposite to
Christianity: but now our Religion is settled by the Laws; and we have many
Laws made for a competent provision for the poor, which will be sufficient if
they be put in execution, and if they be not, what Charity is this to relieve
an idle and disorderly sort of People who live upon Alms, when it is greater
Charity to such to make them work and to provide for their own subsiestnce?

This is the force of the Objection which seems to have a great deal of
strength and weight in it: but before I give an Answer to it I must acknowledge
the truth of some things contained therein.

(1.) That there is a great difference in the case of Charity, where our
Religion is settled by Law, and where it is persecuted by it. For a larger
measure and degree is justly required in a time of Persecution, in as much as
those are the truest Objects of Charity who prefer the keeping Faith and a
good Conscience before the good things of this Life. And we ought to look upon
it as an unvaluable blessing, that we have the Christian, yea the Reformed
Christian Religion settled by our Laws. And God grant it may ever so continue!

(2.) It cannot be denied that we have very good Laws for the maintenance of
the Poor, and that they might be sufficient for their common necessities, if
they were duly executed. And it is a very just and reasonable distinction which
our Laws make between the involuntary Poor, who are made so by the hand of
Heaven, either by Sickness, or Lameness, or Age, or Children, or Fire, etc. and
the voluntary Poor, who may help themselves but will not, being idle, dissolute
and slothful persons. These deserve rather the hand of Justice to punish them
than that of Charity to relieve them: For St. Paul himself is so far from
thinking this to be true Charity, that he hardly thinks it so to keep such from
starving if we take that Proverbial saying in its strict and literal sense, If
any would not work, 2 Thessalonians. ^.10.
neither should he eat.

(3.) I grant that it is greater Charity to put persons upon providing for
themselves than to relieve their present necessities. For that is the greatest
Charity which does a man the most good. And he that reduces a dissolute and
wandering Beggar to the taking pains for himself and Family cures an ill habit
of his Mind; puts him into the way of Virtue and Sobriety; gives him a lasting
stock for himself and Family (for diligence and industry is so) keeps him out
of the danger of the worst sort of Company; gains him more Friends, who will be
far more ready to help a person industrious in his Poverty than the most
clamorous and importunate Beggar. And therefore our Laws have wisely
determined, that Workhouses are the best Hospitals for the Poor, who are able
to help themselves. But after these concessions, I am far from thinking the
command of Charity to be swallowed up in our Laws for the relief of the Poor.
For,

(1.) If our Laws were the best in the World for this purpose, yet, if they be
not duly executed, they leave as much room for Charity as if there were none.
What if a Law were made that there should be no Poor at all among us; but that
immediate care should be taken, upon any man's falling into decay, that his
Stock should be supplied out of the superfluities of the Rich; If this Law were
not executed, men would be altogether as miserable in their Poverty, and as
great Objects of Charity as if there were no such Law in being. For the making
of a Law for their supply without putting it in execution, is but like the
Person in St. James, Jam. 2.16
who said to those who were naked and destitute of daily food, be ye warmed and
filled; but notwithstanding gave them nothing needful for the Body; what does
this profit? What advantage or satisfaction is it to a Man to starve with the
Law on his side? Or can men be better fed or clothed with the Words of a Law
than of any particular Person? If not, then if care be not taken for the relief
and maintenance of the Poor according to the Laws, there is as great need of
Charity as if there were none at all.

(2.) If we suppose the Laws for relief of the Poor to be duly executed, yet
there are many particular cases of Charity which often happen which the Laws
cannot be supposed to provide for. The Law takes care only of general, and
notorious, and common cases; but there are continual Instances of singular and
extraordinary cases where relief is as much wanted, but is rarely challenged.
How often is some men's Reputation a snare to themselves and Families; who had
rather sink silently into the gulf of Misery, than have their wants made known
to their insulting neighbors, among whom they have lived in as good fashion as
themselves? How many have been tempted rather to put an end to a miserable Life
than to be despised and contemned for their Poverty in their old Age! How many
are unwilling to make known their condition for fear of a repulse and being
thought Liars, or impudent and common Beggars! How hardly will some pinch
themselves and Families, before they will make known their necessities! and
some have been known to have brought themselves so low, that when their sad
condition has been discovered, they have been past all possibility of
recovery. I hope such Instances are not frequent among us. And yet we are
lately told in Print by a Member of this City, (...) for Imploym^nt of the
Poor, p. 29. 1681.
That he has reason to believe many hundreds have perished through want of
late years. If this be true, and their case was known; what a shame and
dishonor is it, in the midst of so much plenty and luxury, to suffer such a
reproach to Christianity to be among us? But if their case were not known in
time; the stain is not quite wiped off, because there ought to be in so great,
so rich, so well governed a City, a due care taken to find out as well as to
relieve the truly necessitous.

(3.) The obligations of Charity reach much farther than the force of our Laws
does. For how small a matter within this City does answer the Letter of the
Law, where Persons enjoy very great and plentiful Estates? And is that all
which their thankfulness to God, their love to their Brethren, and the regard
to our Savior's Commands will draw from them? Is this being merciful as our
heavenly Father is merciful? Luke 6.3^.
Is this giving our Alms in secret, Matt. 6.4.
that thy Father which sees in secret may reward thee openly? Luke 16.9.22.21.
Is this making to our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness? Is this
being rich toward God; 2 Timothy 6.18.
being rich in good works, being ready to distribute, willing to communicate?
Gal. 6.10.
Is this doing good to all men as we have opportunity? Is this feeding the
hungry, Matt. 25.35, 36.
clothing the naked, visiting the sick and imprisoned? Can we imagine that
will be a good answer at the great day, that we have paid our Rates to the
Poor? If the Christian Charity had extended no farther, Julian needed not have
been so solicitous to have the Heathens equal them?

The true Charity of Christians is a free and voluntary thing, not what men are
forced to do by the Laws; It is a largeness of mind, that disposes men to do
good to others, and embraces every opportunity for that purpose; It is the
flowing of a Fountain which runs freely, easily and constantly; and not like
the pouring water out of a narrow mouthed Vessel, where but little comes, and
with a great deal of noise. Charity spreads it self like the beams of the Sun,
and warms and enlivens the colder parts of the Earth; it pierces into the
bowels of it, and makes it self a passage to those secret and hidden objects
which are out of the view of the World. True Christian Charity has arms so
large to comprehend the whole World within them; but it is the Life and Spirit
of that Body whereof Christ is the Head; it passes from one Member to another,
emptying it self from the larger vessels into the less, and so by a constant
motion and course through the Body it keeps heat and union in all the Parts. To
do good because one cannot help it, is to obey the Law of Necessity and not of
Charity. He that resolves to go no farther in Charity than the Law requires
him, declares he would not have gone so far unless the Law had forced him;
which is in effect to tell the World, he has not so much as an inclination to
Charity.

(4.) Our Laws give great encouragement to the best, the noblest, Stat. de 39.
Eliz. c. 5. and 21. Jac. c. 1.14. Car. 2. c. 9. Co. 2. Instit. 723.
the most lasting Works of Charity; such as erecting Workhouses for the Poor
that are able to work, endowing Hospitals and Almshouses for the impotent,
distempered and aged Poor; setting up Free-Schools for the Education of Youth.
And I never yet met with any Objection against these that will not hold against
the best designs in the World. For it is possible they may be abused, and may
accidentally prove an occasion of Idleness to some Persons, and they may exceed
the due proportion of Persons fit for them, (although we yet see no great
danger of that.) Yet what design can the wit of Man pitch upon in a captious
and suspicious Age, that will not meet with Objections from those that have a
mind to cavil? The best Religion in the World, the best Church, the best
Government, the best Laws, the best Men cannot escape the censures of
ill-minded Men; and why should we think the best designs of Charity should? But
some men whose minds are set upon one particular way of Charity, are apt to
disparage all other ways to advance their own: which is the common Error of
Mankind, to think sufficient Right is not done to the thing they admire, unless
they undervalue all other things in comparison with it. But it is a part of
Charity to allow, approve and encourage all true ways of Charity; not to set up
bodily Labor against the improvement of the Mind; nor the learning of Arts and
Sciences to the disparagement of breeding men up for Trade and Business; nor to
cry down Hospitals and Infirmaries for the Lame and Sick and Aged in comparison
of Workhouses for the Young and Strong and Healthful. For all these are
excellent and most commendable ways of Charity, and have nothing of
contradiction or inconsistency with one another, if they do answer the ends of
their Institution. I do not go about to lessen the esteem of casual and
occasional Acts of Charity done to particular Persons in present Want; when our
Blessed Savior in the midst of all his Poverty took care of the Poor, for when
he spoke to Judas at the Table, the Disciples supposed it was that he should
give something to the Poor. Joh. 13.29.
What admirable Charity was this, when he had not whereon to lay his head, and
was at the expense of a Miracle to give an entertainment to the People, yet he
had an Officer, one of his own Apostles, to take care of the Poor! And when he
pronounces such Blessedness to those who do Acts of Charity to them, and
accounts them as done unto himself; which is the highest expression of his
gracious acceptance of such Acts from us, Matt. 25.34.40.
and of the great obligation that lies upon us to do them; since we ought not
to think much of any thing we do for the honor of our Lord and Savior, who
did and suffered so much for our sakes: Yet when we compare these with the
public Works of Charity before mentioned, being done for the same end; we
shall find these to exceed the other in some material circumstances, which add
much to the excellency of them.

(1.) In the Largeness and Extensiveness of their design. Other Charities are
for the present relief of some poor and indigent Persons, whose bowels are
refreshed, and backs are clothed, and hearts are eased, by the kindness of
others to them; but these are soon gone, and men's Charity cannot follow them
beyond the Grave. But public endowments of Charity are to last for ever, and
do good to the Poor of many Generations. The Ages to come will rise up and
bless their Memory who took care to do good to those whom they never saw; and
to provide for such, yea very many such, whom it was impossible for them to
know. When a man sees a great object of Charity, as the Widow and Fatherless
under extreme necessities, the Mother weeping and bemoaning her Children not
having bread to put into their Mouths, and the poor Children looking ghastly
and frightfully crying for want of bread, but not knowing where to get it, the
very uneasiness of a man's own mind at the sense of so much misery in others,
will extort some present relief to still their cries, and to put such an
unpleasing Idea out of his Fancy. But if the Object it self do not move, yet
importunity may: if that does not, yet custom, reputation, natural humanity,
recommendation of Friends may prevail on men to be sometimes liberal to Persons
whom they see under present Wants. But how much does all this fall short of a
fixed, certain, perpetual provision for the necessities of those, whom none of
those Arguments could excite men to show kindness to? The other is a more
sensible, natural, private Charity; this is a more rational, generous Christian
Charity; being built upon more free, and noble, and lasting considerations,
most agreeable to the design and honor of the Christian Religion, which puts
men upon doing the best things and which tend to the greatest benefit and
advantage of mankind. And in the comparison of things that are good, the
largest, the most public, the most lasting ought to have the pre-eminence.

(2.) In their Consequence and Usefulness; which ought to be especially
regarded in Acts of Charity. For true Charity must be accompanied with Wisdom
and Discretion. It is not a man's profuse liberality to every one that asks;
nor making himself poor to make others rich; it is not squandering away an
Estate among idle and indigent Persons, that makes him a charitable man; but it
is a wise dispensing the Gifts God has bestowed upon him for the benefit and
advantage of others. And the greater the Good is that is received the greater
is the Charity in bestowing it. The Schoolmen reckon up seven sorts of Corporal
Alms, and as many of Spiritual; Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo,
condo.

Consule, castiga, solare, remitte fer, ora. 2.2. Q 32. art. 2.


to visit the sick, to feed the hungry, to satisfy the thirsty, to cloth the
naked, to redeem the captive, to entertain the stranger, to bury the dead; are
the former: to teach the ignorant, to advise the doubtful, to comfort the
sorrowful, to correct the wicked, to forgive the injurious, to bear the
troublesome, to pray for all; are the Instances of spiritual Charity. But this
is rather a distribution of the different sorts of Charity, than any just Rule
and Measure of our obligation to the Acts of it. For although in the general,
spiritual Acts of Charity to men's Souls, are to be preferred before what
referrs only to their Bodies; yet in particular cases a man may be more obliged
to relieve their outward necessities than to give them good counsel for their
Souls; i. e. when those necessities are urgent and pressing, and by a present
supply they may have longer time and be in better disposition to receive
spiritual Advice. Some dispute if a bad man be in greater want, and a good man
in less want, which of these two is to be preferred? And the Casuists say, The
Work of Mercy is greater in the former Case, but the Work of Charity in the
latter. For Mercy only relates to another's misery; Cajet. in 2.2. Q. 32. art.
4.
but Charity takes in other considerations. So I say, when the competition lies
between the present supply of some in great want, and making a lasting
provision for more persons in less want, there may be more Mercy in the former
case, but there may be greater Charity in the latter: because the more public,
the more common, the more useful the Good is, the greater the Charity is in
doing of it. I will not dispute, whether the breeding up of youth to Learning
or Labor be among us the greater Charity? I know no reason why two such
excellent ways of Charity should be set at variance with each other. But
certainly we are not to judge of men's usefulness to the public merely by the
strength of their limbs, or the hardness of their hands, or the nimbleness of
their fingers. Is it not possible that by the charitable education of Children
in the ways of Learning and Knowledge some may arrive at a greater capacity of
serving God and their Country, than if they had been grinding in a Mill, or
tugging at an Oar all that while? It is not only keeping People to hard labor,
or to continual working, which is the design of Charity; but the most excellent
way of Charity, is to improve all Persons according to their several
Capacities, so as to make them more useful and serviceable to the Public.
This is not only doing Good to the particular persons, but to the whole Nation;
and Charity is not barely to be measured by the quality of its Acts, but by the
largeness of the circumference it fills. The breeding up some few great and
useful Persons to a Nation is a Work of Charity the public Good is more
concerned in, than in the manual labors of many industrious Artificers: who do
serve the Public too in their way; but there is a difference between those
lesser Stars in the Firmament, that wanted a Telescope to discover them, and
those great and splendid Bodies which influence the Earth, and direct men's
passage in the deep Waters. That is therefore the greatest and most useful
Charity, which tends to the improving mankind according to their different
Capacities; some for Labor, others for Trade, others to be useful to the rest
of mankind with a respect either to their Country or to their Estates, their
Bodies or their Souls: And which takes all possible care to prevent the
unspeakable and innumerable mischiefs which idleness and debauchery do bring
upon mankind.

(3.) In the Honor they bring to Religion. There are some cases, wherein our
Charity must be so secret, that our* left hand must not know what our right
hand does, Matt. 6.3.
i. e. when there is danger of vanity and ostentation in the doing of our Alms;
but when the honor of God and Religion is concerned, then let your light so
shine before men, Matt. 5.16.
that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. But how can men see those Acts of Charity which are done in secret, and
are industriously concealed from the knowledge of men? And if that were to be
taken as a strict command in all cases, then all the public Works of Charity,
which are most considerable for the Honor of God and Religion would be
forbidden by the Gospel. But where men do excellent and praiseworthy things
for great and good ends, without Pharisaical Hypocrisy, it is the general
concernment of Religion and the glory of God not to have such things kept from
the knowledge of the World. Joh. 15.8.
For herein, says our Savior, is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit,
so shall ye be my Disciples. So shall ye appear to be my Disciples, for Christ
had owned them for his Disciples before, but this would manifest their being so
to the World; which would bring the greatest honor to God and to the Christian
Religion. And it is certain nothing did more advance the reputation of it in
the World, than their singular and extraordinary care of the Poor. For they not
only relieved in the first place those that were Christians, according to the
Apostle's rule in the next Verse; especially to those of the Household of
Faith; but their Charity extended to the very Heathens: which Jubian takes
notice of with great Indignation: Jul Ep. ad Arsac.
Is it not a shame for us not to relieve our own poor, when the Christians not
only take care of their own but of ours too? And by the case of Lucian's
Peregrinus, it appears, that some pretended to be Christians on purpose that
they might be partakers of the great bounty and kindness which the Christians
showed to their Brethren. But such instances as these did not make them weary
in well-doing; but still as the Church increased in Riches by the free and
large oblations of the People; so greater care was taken for the erecting
Hospitals for the reception of the Poor, who could provide no habitation for
themselves; and this was then always looked on as a particular concernment of
Religion, and not as a mere political Constitution.

Thus the matters of Charity stood in the Christian Church, till men came to be
persuaded that by the Priest's saying so many Prayers for the dead, their Souls
might be removed out of Purgatory and translated to Heaven. And when this
notorious Cheat prevailed, the stream of men's Charity was diverted from the
Poor, to the making good bargains for their Souls. And who could blame men who
had spent all their days in Wickedness, or raised an Estate by Fraud and
Oppression, if at their death they took care to leave enough to have so many
Masses said for their Souls, as might by a reasonable computation serve for
their Redemption out of Purgatory at a marketable Price. When the laying open
these Cheats to the World, gave the first occasion to the Reformation, a mighty
outcry was every where made, that the Foundation of all good Works was
destroyed, and if the Reformation prevailed there would be no want of Faith,
when every one might choose what he pleased, but nothing like Charity was to be
expected. To remove the former Calumny, our Reformers published the Articles of
our Religion; and to take away the latter, they put that admirable Prince
Edward the Sixth upon the new founding the famous Hospitals of this City, (for
although there were some Hospitals before, such as St. Mary Bethlehem, Elsying
Spittal, St. Bartholomew's, yet they were inconsiderable in comparison of what
they have been since.) For by the care and Charity of the Governors and other
Members of the City, they have yielded a wonderful support to a mighty number
of poor Children, and wounded and diseased Persons both in Body and Mind; which
being joined with another Foundation of one single Person, this City may justly
vye with any other in the Christian World as to so many and so great
Foundations, for the best kind of Christian Charity, in the Education of Youth
and the Care of the Impotent and Diseased.

Our Religion teaches us better, than to have so vain and fond an opinion of
our good Works as to think we merit Heaven by them; but surely our Charity is
so much the greater, if we do these things out of a sense of gratitude to God,
than if we think to drive a bargain with him, and put our imperfect Works in
the balance with an infinite and eternal Reward. Those of the Church of Rome
may think they carry on a better Trade with Heaven than we do; and that they
have a mighty advantage in the overbalance of what they hope for in exchange
for what they part with; but they had best look well to the stating their
Accounts, the due value of their Works, and the reason of expecting such a
disproportionable return; lest at last they deceive themselves, and totally
fail of their expectations: For in the great day of account, all things will be
most exactly weighed; and although the greatest Benefactors rejoice in the
highest Acts of Kindness, yet when any thing is challenged in a way of Justice,
men do not love to be imposed upon or overreached in a Bargain. What madness
then is it, for any sinful Creatures to hope that any Acts of theirs, being
weighed by divine Justice, can bear any proportion in a way of Merit, with no
less than the Kingdom of Heaven? This we utterly disclaim, and owe all our
hopes of Heaven merely to the infinite Goodness and Mercy of God through his
Son Christ Jesus: and yet we think our selves never the less bound to be
fruitful in good Works; because we hereby testify our obedience to the Laws
of Christ; our sincere love to God and our Brethren; our readiness to do good
to others by the mercies which God has bestowed upon us; our sense of the
obligation we have to one another, as partaking of the same nature, and liable
to the same infirmities, and exposed to the same calamities; our expectation of
a blessed reward, though not due to the merit of our Works, but to the infinite
Grace and Mercy of God. And I do not see, but where men have a due regard to
God and Religion, such considerations as these do more effectually stir men up
to true Acts of Charity, than those mercenary and corrupt Doctrines in the
Roman Church; which look rather like cunning devices to pick the Peoples
Pockets than any real Arguments for Charity. And upon a careful examination,
it has been found, that our Protestant Doctrine was so far from stopping up
the Channel that ran so freely before, that within sixty years after the
Reformation more great and noble Works of Charity were done in founding of
Schools and Hospitals, than for some hundreds of years before; and some say
from the Conquest till that time of the Reformation. But this I have formerly
insisted more upon, on the like Occasion.

The sum of what I have said is this, that we have no reason to be weary in
well doing; on the account of our Laws for the common relief of the Poor;
because those Laws cannot provide for all cases of Charity; and because they do
suppose the greatest Works of Charity to depend upon the largeness and freeness
of those men's minds to whom God gives a heart to do great and worthy things
with the Estates he has given to them.

2. But there is another plausible pretense yet behind, viz. from the
consideration of our own Times. Were the times calm and fixed; had we a fair
prospect of things before us, that were a great encouragement to Charity; but
we live in perplexed and doubtful times and know not what may become of us
all; men's minds are strangely discomposed and full of Fears; and therefore this
is a very unseasonable Time to persuade them to Charity, when they ought rather
to lay up and secure something against an evil day.

To which I answer,

1. What times were those the Primitive Christians lived in, who so much
abounded in Charity? St. Paul tells us of himself and his Brethren, 1 Cor.
4.11, 12, 13.
they were hungry and thirsty, naked and buffetted, having no certain
dewlling place; laboring, working with their own hands, reviled, persecuted,
defamed; and yet nothing relating to this World was so much their care and
concernment as providing for the Poor. For when he went up to Jerusalem, and
there conferred with James, Cephas and John, Gal 2.9.10.
at his departure they had nothing to desire of him and Barnabas, but to
remember the Poor, the same which I also was forward to do; as St. Paul relates
it. And you may see how earnest he was in it, by his dealing with the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8, 9. chapter
when he persuades them to a liberal contribution to the poor Christians in
Judea, who then suffered much either through Famine or Persecution or both. St.
Paul had undertaken for the Churches of Achaia, (of which Corinth, being a
populous and trading City, was the chief) but the Collection not being yet made
among them, he sends some on purpose to Corinth to make all ready against his
coming to them, and persuades them to great liberality in their giving: for
which end he makes use of the most powerful and prevailing arguments and great
arts of insinuation. (1.) He sets before them the Example of the Churches of
Macedonia; 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
which is truly a very extraordinary instance of Christian Charity. They were
under great trouble and deep poverty at that time themselves, yet understanding
by St. Paul this occasion of more than ordinary Charity, they not only
straightened themselves even beyond their abilities, but did it with that
cheerfulness and satisfaction of mind, that they entreated the Apostle to
accept of what they had given, and to undertake the managing of so good a Work.
And St. Paul seems to speak of it with a kind of transport, Moreover, Brethren,
we do you to wit of the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia; how
that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy and their deep
poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality; for to their power I bear
record, yea and beyond their power they were willing of themselves; praying us
with much entreaty that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the
fellowship of the ministering to the Saints. Nothing can be added to the weight
of these words and the Emphasis wherewith they are penned. (2.) He lets them
know what a shame and reproach it would be to so famous a Church for other
Divine Gifts to come behind others in Charity. Therefore as ye abound in every
thing, in faith, in utterance, 2 Cor. 8.7.
in knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, (what artificial
insinuations are these!) see that ye abound in this Grace also. (3.) But lest
he should seem to press too hard upon them, he draws off again; I speak not by
commandment, v. 8
but by occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of
your love. (4.) Yet he has no sooner said this, but he comes on again with the
most prevailing Argument taken from the example of our Blessed Savior: v. 9.
For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor that ye through his poverty might be rich. Can
any thing be more moving to Christians than this? (5.) His design was not to
lay a burden upon them, but to excite mutual compassion in Christians to one
another. (6.) This would be a demonstration to the World of their kindness to
him, v. 13, 14.
and that he had not spoken great things of them without cause. (7.) They might
justly expect a retribution suitable to their Bounty; 2 Cor. 8.24.
But this I say, He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly; 9.6.
but he which sows bountifully shall reap also bountifully. (8.) This would
be the occasion of many thanksgivings and prayers to God for them. v. 12.
For the administration of this service, not only supplieth the want of the
Saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgiving unto God. 13.
(Whilst by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your
professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal
distribution unto them, and unto all men.) And by their prayer for you, 14.
which long after you for the exceeding Grace of God in you. 15.
Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. Wherein he supposes the thing as
already done, as believing it impossible for them to resist the force of so
many Arguments. And yet all this while St. Paul supposes their condition to be
such as in a little time they might stand in need of relief from others; which
he thought was so far from being an Argument against present Charity, that he
uses it the other way; that now at this time your abundance may be a supply
for their want, 8.14.
that their abundance may also be a supply for your want, i. e. Do not consider
what times may come upon your selves so as to hinder doing good while it is in
your power to do it; leave those things to the wise Providence of God; if he
think sit to reduce you to want, he that now excites your hearts to do good to
them, will stir up others to make up the same measure to you. So that while the
Christians either were under great persecutions, or in expectation of them,
through the Power of the Magistrates, or the Rage of the People; yet the
Apostles pressed them, and that with great success, to a free, cheerful,
liberal contribution to relieve those who labor under greater wants than
others.

2. This very consideration is used as an argument in Scripture to persuade men
to Charity, viz. That we do not know what times may come upon us. Give thy
portion to seven and also to eight; Eccles. 11.^.
for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. This seems to the men
of this World a strange way of reasoning, and it may be they suspect from hence
that Solomon was not so wise a man as they took him to be. What! give away what
one has because one knows not what times may come. No certainly, say they, we
ought to get what we can, and to save what we have, for that reason. The
difference of reasoning in this case proceeds upon the different Principles on
both sides. Solomon believed a Divine Providence and they do not. And he
thought that would be particularly concerned for the good of those, whom no sad
prospect of Affairs could discourage from well-doing according to their Ability
and Opportunity.

II. And so I come to the encouragement here given to patient continuance in
well-doing; for, in due season we shall reap if we faint not. Wherein are three
things considerable.

1. The certainty of a future recompense for well-doing. We shall reap.

2. The time of receiving it, not immediately, but in due season.

3. The condition supposed on our parts, which is continuance in well-doing. If
we faint not. Some understand it as relating to the reward, that we shall
receive it without fainting; reaping and harvest being a time of labor and
sickness; but the more natural meaning of (...), seems to be the taking the
participle, as implying the condition on our parts.

1. The certainty of a future recompense for well-doing. Heb. 6.1^.
God is not unrighteous, says the Apostle, to forget your work and labor of
love, which ye have showed toward his name; in that ye have ministered to the
Saints and do minister. Though it be a work and labor, though it may seem
uneasy and troublesome for a while; yet being a work and labor of love; it is
but the work and labor of sowing, which a man goes through the more cheerfully
because he expects a plentiful increase. He does not reap presently the very
same which he sowed, but a wonderful improvement of it, when the seed being
cast into a fruitful soil brings forth some thirty, some sixty, some an
hundred fold. And this Harvest does not depend upon the uncertainty of the
Weather; here are no fears of blasting and mildew, or locust to prevent the
joyful expectation of it; no danger of the seed rotting in the ground, or
being picked up by the fowls of the air; 2 Cor. 9.10.
but he that ministers seed to the sower, will multiply the seed sown, and
increase the fruits of their righteousness. His Word is engaged that they which
sow shall reap a plentiful increase; and therefore God will not be unrighteous
in not performing his Promise. This men may as certainly depend upon as that
Night and Day shall follow each other; for Heaven and Earth may pass away, but
the Word of God endures for ever.

2. The time of this retribution, in due season. Most men are unwilling to
trust God too long upon his bare Word; they would have something in hand, and
the remainder hereafter. And God by the course of his wise Providence, does
very often order things so in this World that the most charitable men, although
they may not abound with the greatest riches, yet generally meet with the
fewest difficulties; and in their straights find more unexpected assistance
than other men. David made it the observation of his own time, that in all his
days though he was then grown old, Ps* 37.25.
he never saw the righteous, i. e. the charitable man, forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread. And they have far more reason than other men to hope, that if
they do fall into trouble and sickness, God will have a particular regard to
them; (...) 1, 3.
and besides this, they have the natural or rather spiritual contentment that
follows doing good; and they have more satisfaction and ease in it, than others
have in hoarding up Wealth for they know not whom. But none of all these are
the reaping here mentioned: They are like Ruth's gleaning of handfulls in the
field of Boaz, Ruth 2.16.
which showed a more than ordinary kindness; notwithstanding which he said, v.
12.
The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God
of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. So it is here, they may
have better gleanings and fuller handfulls sometimes in the common Field of
Providence, but this is not the full recompense which the God of Mercy will
give to those that trust in his Word. That is only to be expected at the great
day when the Lord the righteous Judge shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father,
Matt. 25.34, 35, 36.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. For I
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was
a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye
visited me; I was in prison, v. 40.
and ye came unto me. For in as much as ye have done it to one of the least of
these my Brethren ye have done it unto me. O the infinite Goodness and
unexpressible kindness of our Blessed Savior, who in the day of Judgment will
interpret all Acts of Charity so much to the advantage of those that do them!
Who would deny any thing to a Servant of that Lord who takes all kindnesses to
them as done to himself, and rewards them accordingly? What other apprehensions
will covetous and hard-hearted Wretches then have of their sordid penuriousness
in heaping up riches, without any tenderness or compassion to the necessities
of their Brethren and Christ's representatives? How will they wish ten thousand
times, when it will be to no purpose to wish, that they had rather they had
laid out their money in doing good, than laid it up for those, who may go to
Hell the faster for the great Temptations they leave behind them. Neither let
the prodigal Fools think they shall escape better, for being so contrary to the
griping and stingy humor of the covetous; for it is not the vain and careless
squandring an Estate away in riotous courses will make a man's condition more
tolerable at that day; but it is the provident, seasonable, careful
distribution of our Charity for wise and good ends, which shall meet with so
glorious a reward.

3. Especially, in the last place, if we faint not, and do not repent of what
good we have done, but continue so doing to the end of our Lives. For this
reason I presume it is, that many reserve their greatest Acts of Charity to
their Deaths; but it is dangerous putting off their Repenting and doing Good
till they come to die, for fear their hearts, or those whom they trust deceive
them. But if men begin to do well in their health and strength, let them not
faint when they come to die; but continue charitable as well as faithful unto
death, and God will give them a crown of life.

And now my business is to make particular Application to this great Assembly
not to be weary in well-doing; and therefore I shall repeat to you, A tr^e
Report, etc.

You perceive by this relation, how much Good has been already done in the
care of the Education of poor Children, and in the cure of and provision for
the Maimed and Distracted, all which are very commendable ways of well-doing,
and it is a great advantage to me this Day, that I am only to persuade you not
to be weary in this well-doing; for in due season you shall reap if you faint
not. You have already broke through many discouragements, and since the sad
calamities of Plague and Fire, which made such desolations among us, you have
done even as to these charitable Foundations, what has been to the Admiration
and Astonishment of beholders. Which of us all who saw the City in its Ruins,
with so many Churches and Halls and Hospitals buried in its rubbish, could ever
hope to have lived to see them rise again with a much greater Glory; and our
new-built Hospitals to appear with that Magnificence, that strangers may easily
mistake them for Palaces? We have lived in an Age that has beheld strange
Revolutions, astonishing Judgments, and wonderful Deliverances; what all the
Fermentations that are still among us may end in, God alone knows; our
unanswerable returns to God for his great Mercies may justly make us fear, that
he has greater scourges provided for us; the best thing we can do for our
selves, is to amend our ways, and to bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of
life; not barely to own and profess the Protestant Religion, but to adorn it,
by holy and exemplary lives, and doing all the Good we can while we have
opportunity. And to that end I shall offer these considerations, and so
conclude.

1. The more Good ye do, the more Comfort you will find in the doing it.
Therefore be not weary in well-doing. There is a certain secret pleasure and
inward satisfaction that follows doing Good; which increases by exercise and
continuance. This is so far above the pleasure of the Covetous and Voluptuous
in pursuit of their ends, that it approaches nearest of any thing we can
conceive, to the satisfaction of the Almighty, who delights in doing Good. It
was a remarkable saying of our Savior, which St. Paul preserved, Act. 20.35.
It is more blessed to give than to receive. How happy do the poor think
themselves, when those who are Rich are bountiful to them! But the advantage
is on your side; they are the receivers but you are the gainers. What you
bestow on them you lay up in store for your selves: which will yield far
greater comfort when you come to die than having raised a vast Estate: for that
is only carrying a greater account into another World; but this is a great help
to discharge it.

2. Doing Good is really one of the best parts of our Religion. True Religion
and undefiled before God and the Father is this, Jam. 1.27.
to visit the Widow and Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the World. It is not giving a cold formal visit to the Widow and
Fatherless that makes any part of Religion, but doing all the good we can to
them, by advice and counsel, by supplying their wants and taking care of their
affairs. No Duty takes in so much of the substance of Religion as true Charity.
It is the fulfilling of the Law; Gal. 5.14. Tim. 1.5. Col. 3.14.
the end of the Commandment, i. e. of the Gospel; the bond of perfectness.
That, without which all other pretense to Religion is but flattering of God and
mere hypocrisy. For all our Prayers and Praises are but verbal
acknowledgments; that which he has put the trial of our love to himself upon,
is our love to our Brethren. For he that loves not his Brother whom he has
seen, Joh. 4.20.
how can he love God whom he has not seen?

3. Doing Good to others is taking the best care of our selves. We all seem
very apprehensive of dangerous times, and very fearful what may become of us;
the best course every wise and good man can take in difficult and uncertain
times, is to do his own duty and to leave events to God. And there is no duty
more unquestionable, more safe, more advantageous, to himself as well as to
others, than to do good, i. e. to be kind and obliging to all, to forgive
injuries, to reconcile enemies, to redeem captives, to visit the distressed,
and according to our abilities and opportunities to relieve those that are in
wants and necessities. This is the way to dwell safely, and to be quiet from
the fear of evil; for as long as God governs the World he will take care of
those who commit themselves to him by patient continuance in well-doing.

4. Doing Good does the most answer the obligations God has laid upon you by
the Mercies he has vouchsafed to you.

And now give me leave to plead with you the Cause of the Poor and Fatherless
Children, the Cause of the Wounded and Maimed, who cannot help themselves, the
Cause of those who deserve so much more pity because they cannot pity
themselves, being deprived of the use of their Understandings. If God has
provided well for you and for your Children, wherein can you better express
your thankfulness for such a mercy than by your kindness and charity to those
who are destitute of the means to make them Men. If you have reason to bless
God for your good Education, show it by taking care of theirs who may hereafter
bless God for your kindness to them. If God has blessed you with Riches and a
plentiful Estate in this City, and raised you beyond your hopes and
expectations, what can you do more becoming the Members of this City than to be
kind to the Children of those who have been such and reduced to Poverty?
Remember from what God has raised you; do not think much to consider what you
have been, as well as what you are. You can never take the just height of God's
Mercies to you unless you begin at the bottom; and let others measure your
height now, as some have done that of the Pyramids, by the length of your
shadow, by the refreshments they find under you. Think what God has brought
you to, and for what end; Was it for your own sakes, that you might be full,
while others are empty; that you might swim in abundance, while others are
pinched with necessities? Was it not rather to make you his Conduit-Pipes to
convey blessings and comforts to others through your means? When you are in
health and at ease, then think of the miserable condition of those who* lie in
Hospitals under aches and pains and sores, having nothing to comfort them, but
the Charity of good People to them. They cannot represent their own condition
to you, being unable to come abroad to do it. Be ye good Samaritans to the
wounded and hurt, bind up their wounds with your kindness, and help to defray
the charges of their cures. This is loving our neighbor as our selves, and
that is fulfilling the Law, and the great design of the Gospel. Lastly, when
you think what a blessing it is that you do enjoy the use of your Reason and
Understanding, pity the poor Creatures whom God has deprived of it. How
easily, how justly, how suddenly may God cast you into their Condition? Show
the esteem that you have of this Mercy of God to your selves, by the freeness
of your Charity to those that want it. Therefore, I conclude in the Words of
the Text, Let us not be weary in any of these ways of well-doing for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not.

SERMON VIII. OF THE Nature of Superstition. Preached at St. Dunstans West.
March 31, MDCLXXXII.
Coloss. II.23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.


SAint Paul was now a Prisoner at Rome for the sake of the Gospel, when he
wrote this Epistle to the Colossians, but his mind was at liberty; And the
compass of his thoughts and cares was so far from being confined within the
Walls of a Prison, that it reached not only to the Churches of Asia planted by
himself, as those of Ephesus and Galatia; but to those which had never seen
him, as the Colossians and Laodiceans. Coloss. 2.1.
For, says he, I would that you knew what great conflict I have for you, and
for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh.
Had not he trouble enough with the Churches of Rome and Greece, and those he
had conversed with in other parts, but he must take upon him to interpose in
the affairs of those Churches he had never seen? But such was the largeness of
the Apostle's mind, the fervor of his Zeal, the extent of his Charity, that
the care of all the Churches was upon him; but especially those which had been
planted by his means, although not by his personal endeavors; among which, in
all probability, this of the Colossians was one. For this Epaphras whom St.
Paul calls a faithful Minister of Christ to them, Coloss. 1.7.
was employed as an Evangelist under him; and particularly in the Cities of
Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse, which were not far distant from each other
in Phrygia; and for the Churches there settled, S. Paul testifies, that he had a
mighty zeal and concernment: From whence it arose, that hearing of S. Paul's
Imprisonment at Rome, 4.13.
he resolves to take a Journey thither to acquaint him with the State of those
Churches, and to desire his Advice and Direction in the present danger they
were in, of being seduced from the simplicity of the Gospel, by the plausible
insinuations of false Teachers, who pretended to give them a more refined
System of Religion, by a composition of Law and Gospel and Philosophy all
together. S. Paul understanding by him the dangerous circumstances they were
in, although Epaphras himself was made a Fellow-Prisoner with him; as appears
by the Epistle to Philemon, Philem. 23
sent at the same time with this; yet he finds means by Tychicus and Onesimus
to convey this Epistle to them. Wherein by an admirable art of insinuation, far
above the eloquent exordiums of the Heathen Orators, he lets them understand,
how passionately he was concerned for their welfare; and what an Agony he
suffered in his own breast for their sakes, lest under some artificial colors
and very fair pretenses, they should be drawn off from the Love and Unity and
Sincerity of the Gospel. For after he had told them what conflict he had for
them that had not seen his face in the flesh, he immediately adds, that it was,
that their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, Coloss. 2.2,
3.
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God and of the Father and of Christ. In whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And when he has thus set
forth the excellency and sufficiency of the Gospel; he then lets fall an
intimation of his design, V. 4.
And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words. But lest
they should suspect from hence that ill offices had been done them, and they
had been misrepresented to S. Paul; in the next verse he tells them, that at
that distance, V. 5.
he did rejoice, beholding their order, and the stedfastness of their faith in
Christ. And therefore exhorts them, As they had received Christ Jesus the Lord,
V. 6.
so to walk in him: i. e. to adhere to that faith which they at first embraced;
as he explains it, in the seventh Verse. Having thus removed all jealousy and
suspicion as to their present stedfastness, he does more openly address himself
to them; in giving them caution against the most dangerous and deceitful
Errors. V. 8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the
Tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. Not
as though there were the least prejudice to Christianity to be imagined by
men's searching into the Works of God, or the Nature of Moral Actions, or the
digesting our own thoughts or conceptions of things, which is all that is
understood by true Philosophy; but that the Model of Religion which they were
in so much danger of being deceived by, was made up, partly of Philosophical
Precepts, and partly of Jewish Traditions and ritual Observations; by which the
false Teachers endeavored to corrupt and adulterate the Gospel of Christ.
Accordingly in the following Discourse, the Apostle first disputes against the
necessity of keeping the Ceremonies of the Law, now under the Gospel, and sums
up the force of it, V. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body
is of Christ. And having thus dispatched the hardest Question about the
Obligation of the Law of Moses, he enters upon the debate about other
Inventions, which they endeavored to recommend to Christians.

(1.) About the Worshipping of Angels, as Mediators between God and Men; which
was an Opinion then generally received among the corrupters of Christianity,
the Gnostics and Judaizing Christians; who were not so vain in their
imaginations, to believe them to be supreme and independent Deities; for this
they utterly denied; owning one only supreme God the Father of all: but they
thought access to him was to be had by the Mediation of Angels, and therefore
they brought in the Worship of them. Baronius indeed denies, that the Gnostics
introduced any Worship of Angels; A. D. 60. n. 17. Christian. ^up. in Tertul.
de praescript. c. 33. Not. Alex. Saec. 1. p. 52. Tertull. de praescript c. 33.
Epiph. haer. ^1. p. 58.
but therein he is justly confuted by some late Writers of the Roman Church.
For Tertullian condemns the Gnostics for a Magical Service of Angels; and
Epiphanius says, that their impure Sacrifices were supposed to be offered up
by Principalities and Powers, to the supreme Father of all. Which does
evidently prove, that the Gnostics did give Worship to Angels as Mediators.
And although Baronius endeavors likewise to clear the Cerinthians from this
guilt (lest the Church of Rome should be found to tread in their steps) because
Cerinthus acknowledged one supreme Power above Angels, Bar. ib. n. 20.
and because he had a bad Opinion of the Angel which gave the Law; yet, why
might not they worship the Angels as Mediators between that supreme Power and
them; and even that Angel which gave the Law as well as the rest, since they
contended for the necessary observation of the Law? But besides, all the
Judaizing Christians were not followers of Cerinthus, there being different
Sects among them; as appears by Irenaeus, Epiphanius and others; n. 1^.
and Baronius himself grants that the Pharisaical Jews of that and following
Ages did Worship Angels as the Host of Heaven. And the Essens had their Angels
of Prayer; and made their prayers to the rising Sun, whom they looked on as on
the rest of the Stars, as animated and intelligent Beings. And why the
Judaizing Christians should not retain their former Superstitions, as well as
their other Traditions and Observations, I do not understand. Especially, since
Theodoret so expressly affirms, that those who then pleaded for the keeping of
the Law brought in the Worship of Angels, which custom, he says, continued a
long time in Phrygia and Pisidia; and at last the Council of Laodicea, made a
Canon against praying to Angels.

Those of the Church of Rome are so sensible of the force of this Testimony of
Theodoret against their practice, that they are driven to desperate shifts to
avoid it. Bellarmine says, that he speaks against the Gnostics; Bell. de S.
B. c. 20.
whereas Theodoret mentions only those who were for keeping the Law. Baronius
says in plain terms, Theodoret was mistaken, and that there were no such
Heretics then; but this is so gross, that Bellarmine and others contradict him
in it. Others therefore say, that the Worship of Angels here spoken against, is
the Worshipping of them as makers of the World. But that is more than St Paul
says, for he speaks against that Worship which arises from Humility, and
nothing so proper for that, as the Worshipping them as Mediators between God
and us. Some think it is when Angels are preferred before Christ, which is
likewise more than the Apostle says; and they who choose other Mediators, by
whom God is more accessible by us; do prefer them in Use, though not in
Dignity: Others, as the Jansenists in their New Testament, Jansen. Preface Ep.
Aux. Coloss.
say it is, When Angels are set up as Mediators in opposition to Christ; but
that cannot be the Apostles meaning; for then his great business would have
been to have proved Christ to be the true Mediator, and not Angels; and if any
Religious Worship of Angels had been agreeable with the Christian Doctrine, the
Apostle would never have thus in general condemned it, but with such
restrictions and limitations as made it to be evil. Therefore to avoid these
difficulties, some conclude that by the Worship of Angels is understood such a
Worship as was introduced by a pretended Revelation of Angels; but against
this, we have the concurrent Testimony of St. Chrysostom, St. Hierome, St.
Ambrose, Chrysostom. in l Hier. Algas. q. 10.
Oecumenius, Theophylact, who all agree that it is to be understood of the
Worship given to Angels. So impossible it is for those who either give
themselves, or justify and allow the giving by others, any Religious Worship
to Angels, to escape falling under the Apostles censure, of being Seducers and
corrupting the Gospel of Christ.

(2.) About stricter Abstinence and greater Severity of Life. For these
Seducers gave out that the Christian Churches were yet very defective in this
matter: And that there were several Societies of Men, both among the Jews and
Heathens, which went very far beyond them: as the Essens, the Pythagoreans, the
Gymnosophists and others; who far outstript the Christians in Watchings and
Fastings, in the hard usage of their Bodies, and a total abstinence from Wine
and Flesh, and other lawful Pleasures of Life. On which account these false
Teachers represented the Christianity, as yet received in these Churches, as
too soft and gentle an Institution, and not answering the Character that was
given of it; but if they had a mind to set it off with advantage, it would be
necessary for them to take in some of the strictest Precepts of those
Societies, especially relating to Meats and Marriage, Touch not, taste not,
handle not: which they magnified as the greatest Instances of true Religion,
Self-denial, Humility, Mortification; without which they despised the Christian
Institution as a mean and ordinary thing, requiring only the belief of some
great things done and suffered by Jesus Christ in Judea, and the adhering
thereto till Death, and doing those Offices of Humanity and Kindness to each
other, and those Duties of Religion to God, which all Mankind thought fit and
reasonable to be done.

But these pretended refiners of Christianity, were not contented with such
common things; they must set up for something singular, and extraordinary; so
Epiphanius observes of the Gnostics in the beginning, Epiph Haer. 23. p. 63.
that they condemned Marriage, and abstained from Flesh, that under these
pretenses they might draw others into their snares. And likewise of the
Ebionites, Haer. 30. p. 139.
one of the Sects of Judaizing Christians, that they carefully abstained from
all Flesh, and were every day Baptized, and celebrated the Eucharist only in
Water, for fear of being defiled with the taste of Wine; wherein they were
followed by the Encratitae, Aquarti, and several others, who affected something
out of the way, as a badge of more than ordinary Sanctity. And there are scarce
any of those who are mentioned as the Authors of great Mischief to the Church,
but were remarkable for something of this Nature; as appears by Marcion,
Montanus, Manichaeus, Severus, and others. And which is observable, this sort
of singularity prevailed no where more, than in these parts of Phrygia; where
the Encratitae very much increased and continued so to do in the days of
Epiphanius. Epiph. haer. 47. p. 339.
So very little effect had this wise and timely caution, given by the Apostle
in this place, upon those who were willing to be deceived in that, or following
Generations.

Cajetan confesses himself to seek what sort of Men those were the Apostle
discourses against; but it seems most probable to me, that they were a sort of
Judaizing Christians, who endeavored to introduce the Customs of the Jewish
Essens into the Christian Church. Philo p. 876.
For when St. Paul speaks of the Jewish Customs he mentions no other, but such
as were in esteem among them; he takes no notice of Sacrifices which were
disesteemed among them; Epiph. p. 42. V. 16.
But let no man judge you in Meat, which among them was only Bread and Salt; or
in Drink, which was only Water; or in respect of a Holyday or New Moon, or the
Sabbath Days; which as Philo relates, Philo p. 877, 899.
they were great observers of. And when he speaks of the Customs they would
bring among the Christians, they were no other than such as were strictly
observed among them, viz. great abstinence, hard usage of their Bodies, and
some Religious Rites with respect to Angels. Concerning which the Apostle
delivers his Judgment two ways.

1. He grants that these things have a show of Wisdom in them; i. e. that they
make so good an appearance to men, as is apt to raise an esteem of those
persons in whom it is. First, Because they seem to flow from a forwardness in
Religion, so I render (...), which we call Will Worship; but that being a thing
of an ill Name, does not so well answer to the show of Wisdow; for what show of
Wisdom is there in doing an ill thing? This is therefore a readiness of Mind to
do any thing in Religion which men think pleasing to God, whether required by
him or not. So Hesychius expounds (...) by (...); and (...) by (...). And other
Greek Words of a like composition, do imply no more than a voluntary
inclination; as in (...), which Plato uses for a service, out of good Will,
Plato Sym.
and free inclination: (...) is the same with (...) and (...) in Xenophon: Xen.
Cyr. Paed. 2.
And St. Augustine observes, that in his time, a Man that affected to be Rich,
was called Thelo-dives, Aug. ep. 59.
and he that desired to be thought Wise, Thelo-sapiens; so according to this
Analogy, a Man that would be thought very Religious, would then have been
called Thelo-religiosus; taking Religiosus in the sense of Massurius Sabinus,
A. Gell. l. 4. c. 9.
and not of Nigidius Figulus, i. e. in a good, and not in a bad sense. And so
(...), is a desire of appearing more Religious than ordinary; which is not a
thing evil in it self, but depends on circumstances. The next is (...),
Humility, a Virtue so graceful, so becoming Mankind, with a respect to God and
to each other, that whatever makes a Show of that, does so of Wisdom too. The
third is (...), not sparing the Body, but using it with hardship to keep it
under, (...). Which Words have such a hardness in their construction, as has
caused great variety of interpretations; which I shall not repeat. That which
seems most natural, is, that Honor implies a regard to the Body; and so it
only explains what was meant by (...); the sense being, not with any regard to
the Flesh for its satisfaction: which has a farther appearance of Wisdom, not
barely in the subjection of the Body to the Mind; but as it seems to argue a
Mind so elevated above the Body, that it has little or no regard to the
necessities of it.

2. Notwithstanding all this fair show of Wisdom, the Apostle does really
condemn these things as not pleasing to God, nor suitable to the Christian
Religion. For,

(1.) He says they have only a show of Wisdom. (...), says St. Chrysostom,
who certainly understood the force of the Words; the Show, says he, not the
Power, therefore not the Truth of Wisdom. Imaginem rationis, humanaeque
sapientiae, says St. Jerome. (...), says Theodoret; so that notwithstanding
the fair Show they make, they have no real Wisdom in them.

(2.) This new way of Worship, though it has such a specious show of Devotion
and Humility; yet it reflects on the Honor of Christ, as Mediator; and
therefore the Apostle charges the introducers of it, with not holding the Head.
V. 19.
If the Cerinthians did advance the Angels above Jesus Christ, they were so
much the more guilty; but if these Judaizers did only look on them as nearer
and more agreeable Mediators to us, yet therein they brought a great
disparagement upon him, whose Office it was to be the sole Mediator between God
and Men. Mankind was very excusable in comparison, for finding out other
Mediators, before God had declared to the World that he had appointed his Son
to be our only Advocate and Intercessor; but for those who own his
Mediatorship, to make choice of others besides him, is to call in question the
Wisdom of the Father, or the Sufficiency, Interest or Kindness of the Son. For
if God has appointed him for this end, and he be able to go through his work,
and willing to help all that address themselves to him; what need to call in
other assistants? yea, what a Dishonor is it for him to stand by, and
Applications be made to them to do that Office, which he was appointed alone to
discharge?

(3.) These new inventions though never so plausible, are a disparagement to
the Gospel, as not containing sufficient, or at least not the most sublime and
perfect directions for Humility and Mortification. For our Blessed Savior was
so far from being remarkable for these affected singularities, that the freedom
and easiness of his conversation, was a great offense to those who understood
little or nothing of Religion beyond these things. Mat. 12.19.
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a Man
Gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Not that he
gave way to any thing like Luxury, or Intemperance, who was the most exact
pattern of all true and real Virtues; but because they saw nothing
extraordinary as to the severity of his Life in these Matters, they looked on
him but as one of the common sort of men, making no appearance of more than
usual Sanctity, as to eating and drinking. And when John's Disciples who were
bred up with greater austerity, were really offended that Christ's Disciples
did not fast as they did: our Savior puts them off with a Parabolical Answer;
Can the Children of the Bride-chamber fast, Matt. 9.12, 13.
as long as the Bridegroom is with them? which answer might puzzle them more,
as not understanding why fasting should be inconsistent with his corporal
Presence; yet to let them see that he did not look on Fasting, as a Duty
unsuitable to his Religion, he tells them, the days would come, when his
Disciples should have their times of Fasting. But the Days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. So that it is
not Occasional or Anniversary Days of Fasting, which are condemned here by the
Apostle, as Will Worship, or neglecting the Body; but the imposing a new and
severer course of Life upon Christians, as a way of greater perfection of
Mortification, than what was required by Christ or his Apostles. This is that
which the Apostle calls being subject to ordinances; V. 20.
and living after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men. Theodoret observes
that he does not mean the Law by this, but the unseasonable Doctrine of these
seducers; and it is evident from the foregoing part of the 20th v. Wherefore if
ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the World, i. e. if ye are freed
from the Yoke of the Law, what reason is there ye should submit to another,
which depends only on the Authority and invention of Men? But what then? Does
St. Paul make it unlawful to submit to any Orders or Rites appointed by the
Church in which we live? By no means. For neither does the Apostle speak of
those who had lawful Authority, but of Seducers; nor does he speak of things
appointed merely for Order and Decency; but of such things which are supposed
by the Imposers to have more of true Perfection and Sanctity in them: more
Humility and Mortification; and consequently to be more pleasing to God, than
bare obedience to the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles. Whoever introduce
any such things into the Christian Church, and maintain any such opinions of
them, are justly censured by the Apostle here, and fall under the condemnation
of Seducers.

(4.) These things, whatsoever show of Wisdom and Humility they make, are
really the effects of Pride and Folly.

(1.) Of Pride: which appears,

1. By a great presumption of their great Skill and Knowledge in the Mysteries
of Religion, and of what is most pleasing to God; V. 18.
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. So that here was a great outward appearance of Humility and
Mortification; but within nothing but Pride and Vanity. It has been long
observed, that those who strive to exceed others in the outward shows and
appearances of Humility and neglect of the Body, have been most liable to the
Temptations of Spiritual Pride, i. e. to a high opinion of themselves, and a
contempt of others; which they have manifested by an invincible stiffness in
maintaining their own opinions; a readiness to impose them upon others; and
impatience of contradiction from any.

2. By an affectation of greater Humility, than appears in others. These
Seducers, we see, pretended to nothing more than Humility. Their Worship of
Angels was from Humility; their neglect of the Body from Humility too: they
made so much show of it, as gave reason to suspect Pride lay at the bottom. For
it is more real Humility to be contented to be thought Proud unjustly, than to
labor for such an opinion of more than ordinary Humility, as these Seducers
did.

(2.) Of Folly; in two things.

1. In placing the main of their Religion in things that would not bear the
weight of it, which the Apostle intimates in those Words, Which all are to
perish with the using, V. 22. Vid. Theod. Theophyl.
i. e. as the Greek Interpreters explain it, the matters of eating and drinking
are no such great things, that so much ado should be made about them. For as
our Savior says, Matt. 15.11, 17.
Not that which goes into the Mouth defiles a Man; for it goes into the
Belly, and is cast out into the draught. And therefore says the Apostle, Romans
14.17, 18.
The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost; for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved of Men.

2. In supposing the following their own Inventions to be more pleasing to God,
than the observing his own Commands. For this seems to be at the bottom of all;
these Seducers made no question, but they had found out ways much more pleasing
to God, than those which were in common esteem and practice in the Christian
Churches. So that which is call here (...), is by the Latins rendered in
Superstitione, i. e. in an opinion of pleasing God by some particular Rites of
their own; in making much of their Religion to lie in forbearing some things
and doing others, which God never required, and are made no parts of the
Christian Religion by Christ or his Apostles. So that here are two parts of the
Superstition here spoken of.

1. Forbearing some things as unlawful, which God never made unlawful by any
prohibition, Touch not, taste not, handle not. The root of their Superstition
did not lie, as some imagine, in supposing the things which they did forbear as
in themselves abominable, as some Heretics did; but in an opinion, that God
would be so much pleased with the mere forbearance of them, that those who
design to please God, were bound to abstain from them, although he had never
forbidden them. And there is a material difference between these three things.
(1.) Abstaining from things as in themselves unlawful to be used. (2.)
Preferring the Abstinence before the Use, on some particular Seasons and
Occasions. (3.) Making the forbearance of them as unlawful (though not
forbidden) as necessary to the pleasing of God. There were such who did utterly
forbid the use of Marriage and Meats, of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4.3.
And the Christian Church, as St. Augustine observes, does not fall under this
censure of the Apostle, when in some cases it prefers Abstinence from both.
Ille prohibet, says he, Aug. c. Faust. l. 30. c. 6.
qui hoc malum esse dicit, non qui huic bono, aliud melius anteponit. But yet
there may be a Superstitious Abstinence, without that Superstitious opinion; or
else the Christian Church had no reason to condemn the Abstinence of the
Montanists, who, as Tertullian pleads for them, Tert. de Jej. c. 15.
utterly rejected that opinion. Neither was it merely because Montanus wanted
Authority to make Laws of Abstinence. But Tertullian acquaints us with other
arguments against it, chiefly from the unsuitableness of it to the design of
Christianity. And to impose such Abstinence as necessary to the pleasing God,
is that which the Church condemned in Montanus; and the believing it is a
Superstitious opinion; though of another sort from that which made the Use of
them in it self unlawful. For they did it upon an extravagant fancy, that no
living Creatures were of God's making, but were produced by some other powers,
in opposition to him; as appears by the Gnostics, the Marcionists, the
Manichees, and the Encratitae. But the same reason could not hold as to those
Judaizing Christians, who believed the World and all living Creatures were
produced by the Power of God. Iren. l 1. c. 26.
For Irenaeus says, That the Ebionites did hold that God was the Maker of the
World; and therein they differed from the Cerinthians, as well as in some other
opinions, yet these Ebionites pretended to be Christians, and universally
abstained from Flesh, as Epiphanius says: Epiph. her. 30. p. 139.
not that they had any reason to account Flesh abominable; but they had learnt
from the Essens to abstain from it, and thought it greater Sanctity so to do.

2. Their Superstition did lie in supposing that God would be mightily pleased
with their doing some things of their own invention, as the Worship of Angels
was; which was so far from being commanded by God in the Law of Moses, that
they had thence many arguments against it: but notwith^^anding they thought
there was so much of Humility and Complement to God Almighty in it, that he
could not but be very much pleased with it. And when men lay a great weight of
Religion upon doing or forbearing things, neither commanded nor forbidden by
the Law of God, that is so far from being a pleasing Worship of God, that it
deserves no other name but that of Superstition and Will Worship; as they do
imply a show of Wisdom, without the Truth and Power of it.

But here arises the main difficulty; How shall we put a difference between
what is pleasing to God, and what is not; or between true Religion and
Superstition? For since the Apostle implies that some things may have a show of
Wisdom in them, i. e. may seem pleasing to God, which are not so; and other
things may be more pleasing to God, which do not make such a show of Wisdom to
Men; it seems to be a matter of as great difficulty as concernment to us, to
understand the just and true bounds between Religious and Superstitious Worship.

This is an enquiry of so great moment and consequence, for the easing our
minds of many troublesome dou^ts and fears, and settling in them a true notion
of Religion; that I shall from hence apply my self to the consideration of the
true difference between the reasonable Worship of God, and Superstition.

Superstition in the general, is nothing else but an unpleasing Worship of God,
I do not speak of that Worship which relates to a false object; which is more
properly Idolatry; but when that Worship is ultimately referred to a true
Object, as in the Worship of Angels as Mediators, then it is Superstition too;
it being an undue way of giving Worship to the true God. I shall not trouble my
self with an enquiry into the Etymology of the words in Greek or Latin, it
being Well observed by Aquinas, Aq. 2.2. q. 92.
that in this matter we are not so much to observe the Etymology of
Superstition, as the use of the Word. And that has been different according to
men's notions concerning Religion.

Those who believed no God at all, or at least no Providence, accounted all
Religion to be nothing but Superstition. And it is a weak and silly Apology a
late Commentator on Lucretius makes for his saying, Tan. Fabr. Not. p. 294.
so much mischief has been done by Religion; by Religion, says he, he meant
Superstition; for he accounted all Religion to be nothing else but
Superstition. And those in our Age, who can find no other difference between
them; but that one is allowed, Leviath. chapter 6. chapter 11.
and the other not; or one is what we like, and the other what we dislike; do
destroy any real difference between them; and make only Religion a Superstition
in fashion; and Superstition a Religion out of fashion. Whereas if there be a
God and Providence, there must be such a thing as true Religion: i. e. there
ought to be some Acts in us agreeable to the Conceptions we have of the Divine
Nature. For, His Majesty and Power requires our Fear; not an amazing,
confounding, unaccountable Fear, arising from a perplexity and disorder of our
imaginations; but a just, reasonable, prudent Fear, springing from our most
serious thoughts and deepest consideration of things. For, if it be impossible
for any thinking man to satisfy himself in the train of Causes, but he must
come to this thought at last, that there is some Cause, whereof there is no
former Cause, but is Eternal; which is that we call God; then it is impossible
if this man pursues his own thoughts, but the first Consequence from hence will
be, that if this God be the first cause of all things, his Power and Majesty is
so great, as to command a due Reverence and Fear from us his Creatures. This is
not such a Fear as Men have in a storm, or when a sudden calamity seizes upon
them, which makes them at their wits end, and to run they know not whither for
present help; but it is a settled, calm, composed temper of mind; a Fear
without consternation; an awe and Reverence of the Divine Majesty, without
terror and astonishment. For, as the mighty Power of God begets fear in us, so
the infinite Goodness and Wisdom of God, not only keep up Men's minds from
sinking into slavish Fear, and horrible Despair; but fills them with
comfortable hopes, and a patient and humble Trust and Confidence in his
never-failing Providence. And this is the Nature of true Religion in the minds
of Men.

But because it tends to the honor of our Maker, and the encouraging one
another to Acts of Piety and Devotion, that this inward sense of our Minds be
expressed by such external Actions as are agreeable thereto, from thence came
the necessity of the public Offices of Religion, wherein we offer up our
Prayers and Praises to the Divine Majesty in acknowledgment of our Dependence
upon him for what we have, or are, or hope for. And there is nothing in all
this, but what is highly just and reasonable, and this is true natural Religion.

But then we cannot deny, that there is too great a natural proneness in
Mankind to Superstition. For, when men cannot shake off the apprehension of a
Deity, and yet are conscious to themselves that they have offended him; the
very thoughts of him prove so uneasy to them, that they would be glad to
believe there were none at all, and give all the advantage to Atheistical
Objections which a willing mind can do: And as Plutarch observes of
Superstitious Men, they would be Atheists if they durst. But finding still an
inward dissatisfaction, and an impossibility of rooting out the fears of a
Deity; the next thing is, to think upon some ways to please him, and to
mitigate his displeasure against them. And we can hardly imagine any thing so
pompous and ceremonious, so mean and servile, so cruel and barbarous, so
ridiculous and foppish, but Mankind have made use of it to atone the anger of
their Gods. For, the first effect of Superstition, on Men's minds, was; that
they durst not make immediate Applications to the Supreme Being, as being too
great and powerful for them: therefore they pitched on some inferior Beings
to mediate, and to offer up their Devotions and Sacrifices to him, whom they
thought it too great presumption to approach. When thus Superstition in the
most proper sense of (...) had in a great measure supplanted true Religion in
the World; then it proceeded to find out such ways and methods of Worship, as
they thought would be most pleasing to these inferior Deities. They erected
Temples and Altars to them, and set out their Images with all the Art and
Splendour they were capable of; and upon extraordinary Occasions they were
carried with wonderful Pomp and Solemnity through the Streets, all Orders of
Men attending them with Supplications and Prayers and costly Sacrifices to
avert their Wrath and Displeasure. And they were not content with promiscuous
Sacrifices, but they studied by all possible means to find out what Sacrifices
would please them best; if they fansied it must be something very dear and
precious to them, they stuck not at offering up their very children to appease
them; and contrived by loud Music to stop their Ears from hearing the hideous
cries of their Children while they were roasting in the flames. And in their
ordinary Sacrifices, they were extremely scrupulous, lest any spot or blemish,
or number, or unfit season, or so much as color should be displeasing to the
Gods they offered them too: some must have white and uneven; others black and
even Sacrifices; some must have their Sacrifices offered at the rising, some at
the setting of the Sun; some must have one sort of Beasts, and some another;
and some no less than Man's flesh would satisfy; which inhumane Sacrifices on
some occasions, did almost universally obtain, before the Christian Religion
prevailed in the World. But again, other Deities were presumed to be so nice
and squeamish, that nothing was to be offered them but Milk, and Wine, and
Honey, and some Fruits of the Earth. It were infinite to relate the Rites and
Customs of their Sacrifices, and all the ways they used to please their Gods,
and to find out whether they were pleased or not; by the posture, the tongue,
the entrails of their Beasts; by the flying of Birds, the feeding of Chickens,
the falling of a staff, the holes of a sieve, etc. and innumerable ways of
Divination, by which they flattered themselves that they understood the good
Will and Pleasure of their Gods, which did not so much satisfy their
curiosity, as fill them with perpetual fears, and oppress them with the
horrible Bondage of Superstition; which exalted almost every thing to the
honor of a Deity, and made themselves miserable by seeking to please them.

But although this were the deplorable state of Mankind, forsaken of God and
left to their own inventions; yet such is the weakness and folly of Men, that
when God himself had given a Law to the Israelites to regulate their Worship,
with as much condescension to their weakness, as the Wisdom of his Law would
permit; yet so great was the Witchcraft of Superstition, that they were always
almost-hankering after the Dotage of their neighbor Nations. And although they
often smarted severely for it; yet the rod was no sooner off, but they were
ready to return to their former Superstitious vanities, and were so obstinately
bent upon them, that nothing could move them; not their former experience; not
the unreasonableness of the thing; not the terrible denunciations of God's
heavy judgments against them; till at last, when there was no remedy, the whole
People were carried into Captivity; from whence the greatest part never
returned, and their very memory is lost by a mixture with other Nations. Those
who returned, have been so wise ever since, as to abhor that provoking sin of
Idolatry; which their Ancestors suffered so much for: but by degrees they fell
into other kinds of Superstitions. For it was thought a mean thing among them
to keep to the Law; but the Traditions of their Elders were looked upon as
precious things; and happy was the Man that was strictest in the observance of
them. Their frequent Washings, their additional Fastings and Prayers, their
Garments, their Postures, their very Looks had such an appearance of Sanctity
above other Men's; that a man who kept only to the Law, was of no regard or
esteem for Piety and Devotion.

This was the State of Religion among the Jews when Christ appeared, who laid
open the foppery and hypocrisy of these great pretenders to extraordinary
Sanctity. He directed men to the love of God and their Neighbors, as the main
substantial parts of true Religion. And next to his making a propitiation for
the sins of Mankind by the Sacrifice of himself, his great end was to restore
true Religion to the World, which had been so long buried under the heap of
Superstitions. And there needed so great an Authority as his was, to assure
Mankind, that nothing was so pleasing and acceptable to God, as unaffected
Piety, and universal Goodness; which comprehends under it all the Duties of
Temperance, Righteousness and Charity. And it is one great Argument of the
Providence of God watching over his Church, that he has caused the Discourses
of our Blessed Savior to be preserved by the Writings of the Evangelists;
without which in all likelihood, the Christian Religion had been long since
lost in the World. For the Jewish Christians who corrupted Christianity, had
represented St. Peter so favorable to them; and so misrepresented St. Paul;
that unless Christ's Doctrine had been preserved in his own words, and that by
the concurrent Testimony of different Writers, the Christian Religion had
preserved little more than its name in the World.

And yet with all this advantage, such was still the fondness of Mankind for
their own Inventions, that even under the Apostles eyes, most of the Churches
began to be tainted with these corruptions; partly by the Judaizing Christians;
and partly by the followers of Simon and Menander. But they all agreed in
something new and mysterious, and more pleasing to God, than the dull and
common way of Faith and Obedience. After the Apostles decease, the corruptions
still multiplied, and any new pretense to Revelations and Mysteries, especially
being joined with greater Abstinence and Severity of Life, took wonderfully
among weak and injudicious Christians, and made them apt to despise the
Churches Devotions, as too cold and flat, and not having that Life and Spirit,
that Strictness and Austerity which appeared among the new pretenders. What
disturbance on this account did the Spirit of Montanus give to the Churches of
Phrygia, Galatia, and Cappadocia? The mere pretense to Revelation had never
done it, had it not been for the stricter Laws of Fasting and Mortification,
and greater Severity of Discipline than was used in the Catholic Church. It
was this which made Tertullian swallow the bait he had despised before; and the
force of all his Arguments against the Church is, we are stricter than you. But
notwithstanding all these pretenses, the Christian Church still kept it self
within its bounds, making nothing necessary to Salvation, but what Christ and
his Apostles had made so; yet recommending the Practice of Fasting, as there
were just Occasions, especially before the great solemnity of Easter; wherein
both the Sacraments were administered with more than ordinary Devotion, and the
Penitents reconciled to the Communion of the Church.

If we look at this day into the State of the Christian World; how great a part
of it is relapsed into almost Heathen Superstitions, in the Worship of Images,
and Saints, and Angels as Mediators? and no great difference in the outward
Solemnities and Processions, save that their Sacrifices are turned into a
Consecrated Wafer, which is carried in Procession, as the Heathen Gods were
wont to be. It is true, there are great pretenses to Will Worship, and
Humility, and neglecting the Body in several Orders of Men; and those are
looked on as ways of greater perfection, than living in the World, and doing
good in it. Which we have no reason to think agreeable to the Doctrine of
Christ or our Apostle here. But where there is not only Sanctity and Merit,
placed in such observations, but Supererogation too, they flatly contradict St.
Paul; for if that be true, these things have far more than the show of Wisdom;
for what wiser thing can any man do, than not only to provide for his own
Salvation, but for others too?

In the Eastern Churches, the best part, I fear, of their remaining
Christianity, lies in the strict observing the Fasts and Feasts of the Church.
They mightily despise the Fasting practiced in the Roman Church, as not
deserving the name of Fasting, because they end it at noon, and allow Wine and
Fish for their repasts. Although it is said that of late the Greeks break the
strict Fast at noon; Mich. Nau. Eccl. Graec. Effig. p. 260. Bas. hom. de jejun.
Chrysostom. hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch.
but in St. Chrysostom. and St. Basil's time they accounted it no Fast wherein they
did not totally abstain till night. The more Eastern Christians allow neither
Fish, nor Wine, nor Oil in their Lents, and they keep more in the Year than the
Latin Church V. Job. Ludolph. Hist. Ethiopic. l. 3. c. 6 n. 81. Thom. a Jesu de
Convers. omnium Gent. l. 7. c. 18. Cotovic, Itiner. Hierosolymit. and Syriac.
p. 207. Franc. Quaresm. Elucid. Terrae Sanctae l. 1. c. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58.
Eustrat. Zialouski de Eccles. Orient. Graec. p. 39. Metroph. Critopul. c. 18.
Haud scio, inquit Methodius Graecus (apud Mich. Nau. in Eccles. Graecae effigy
Dial. 13.) unde factum sit ut vos Latini a reliquis Christianorum Nationibus,
sic in jejunand^ recesseritis, ut nulla vobis ne Maronitana quidem, quae tota
vestra est, consentiat. Jejunatis sabbato, feria 4. Non abstinetis ab esu
Carnium; pisces, and quibusdam in locis, lacticinia, quadragesimali tempore
comeditis, solvitis meridie jejunium, etc.
.

In the Church of England, which approaches nearest of any in the World to the
Primitive Church, the Duty of Fasting is recommended upon its true Grounds, not
as though there were any peculiar Sanctity or Merit in it, which are
Superstitious Conceits, but to keep the Body in Subjection to the Spirit. It
lays no snares upon the Consciences of Men; it gives no Countenance to
hypocritical pretenses to Fasting; but it sets before us the example and
practice of the Primitive Church, and according to the Temper and Moderation
then used, leaves persons to judge of their own strength, occasions, times,
manner and degrees of Fasting; excepting the Fast on Good Friday or the true
Ante-paschal Fast (which some kept longer than others) which Tertullian says,
De Je^. c. 2.
was universally observed by the Christian Church, as a necessary Fast, and had
been so from the Apostles times; but as to other times a greater liberty was
allowed, Laxus ac liber modus abstinendi
Ponitur cunctis; Prudent. 1. Cath. him. post jejun. V. Tert. de jejun. c.
2.13. Hier. ep. 54. ad Marcel. Aug. c. Faust. Manich. l. 30. c. 5. ad Casul.
Ep. 86. Epiph. in expos. fidei Cath. n. 23. Socr. l. 5. c. 22. Victor. Antioch.
in Marc. 2* Cassian. Coll. 21. c. 30.
neque nos severus
Terror impellit; sua quemque cogit
Velle Potestas.
Yet even this Church, that is so wise, so moderate, cannot escape the charge
of Will Worship and Superstition, for the Orders that are observed in it. But
wherein is it that we are liable to this charge? Do we make the Orders of the
Church any parts of our Religion? Or think that God is any otherwise displeased
with others violation of them, than as it argues a froward, restless,
unpeaceable Spirit? But what is it then? God, say they, has not commanded
these things, therefore they are Will Worship and Superstition.

This is an Objection, which for the honor of our Church I must remove, before
I proceed to what remains. The true Case among us is this, the Church appoints
such Orders to be observed in it, which have no express command in Scripture;
some utterly refuse them as unlawful, though no where forbidden in Scripture;
the Question is, Whether of these two sorts, those who practice according to
these Orders, or those who utterly refuse, are liable to the charge of
Will Worship and Superstition?

To clear this, we must state the notion of Will Worship and Superstition as
they are here used by the Apostle, and then apply it to the present Case.

(1.) Will Worship I have showed, is nothing but a forwardness to do something
that relates to the pleasing of God; and is said by the Apostle to have a show
of Wisdom, and therefore can be no more evil in it self, than Humility, or
neglecting the Body; but whether it be good or evil is to be determined by
circumstances.

(2.) Those circumstances which make it ill are, when men make those things a
part of their Religion, which God has neither commanded nor forbidden; and
think God is pleased with their mere doing or abstaining from doing them, and
this is true Superstition. For there are two things necessary to the Notion of
it.

1. That the matter about which it is conversant relate to the pleasing of God.
Superstition I grant, has been taken by Plutarch and others from him, for a
dreadful apprehension of the Deity; but that is rather the foundation of
Superstition, than the definition of it. For a Superstitious Man does both
think God to be angry without just cause, and beyond reason; and to be pleased
again without reason. If he thought God inexorable upon his Displeasure, he
must presently despair; but because he thinks he may be easily pleased again,
therefore he bethinks himself in what way he may best do it; and so devises
several ways of his own, and uses any means suggested by others, though never
so unreasonable in themselves, in hopes to please God by them. Thence Plutarch
mentions such Men's, (...), uncouth ways of Worship; and he observes, that at
the same time, (...), they flatter and reproach God; they think unworthily of
him, as of one that is (...) very easily provoked; and yet that he is (...), as
easily changed; and that is the reason why a Superstitious fear puts men upon
finding out any ways and methods to please him, though never so unreasonable;
for they looking upon God as a peevish, angry, humoursome Being, they have no
certain Rule to judge what will please him, and therefore follow their own
fancy and imagination about it.

2. That they be mistaken in their judgment concerning what they believe to be
pleasing to God, that is, that they judge that to be so, which really is not.
So Superstition is an excess or overdoing in the matter of Worship; that which
does modum legitimum cultus superstare and excedere, says Vossius; which
Etymology he thinks much better than any other. Voss. Etym. Cic. l. 1. de N. D.
Cicero says, that Religion is pius cultus, Superstition timor inanis Deorum;
i. e. one is a reasonable, the other an unreasonable Worship. So A. Gellius
says, it is inepta and importuna Religio; a foolish and troublesome Religion.
Fest. v. Religios.
Festus applies it to those things which are done, praeter morem Civitatis;
against the Custom prescribed by Law. As those of the Church of Rome do, to
things done against the commands of the Church: and so not fasting upon
Saturdays, and fasting upon Sundays are both Superstitious in their account;
but all the Trumpery of the Mass, and Follies of their Worship are by no means
Superstitious, because required by the Church. Which however helps us with a
good argument to prove that the Worship of Images, and Saints, and Angels are
required by their Church; or else by their own confession they must be
Superstitious. Aq. 2.2. q. 92. Art 2. q. 98. Art. 3.
But their Divines do all agree with Aquinas, that men may be guilty of
Superstition in the Worship of the true God; i. e. when men make choice of
something unfit or unreasonable to express their Worship of God. Suarez de Rel.
tr. 3. l. 2. c. 1.
And Suarez quotes Cajetan, as allowing this Text to be extended to all
Superstitious Worship not founded in right reason. And Cajetan upon the place
says, that although they have a show of Wisdom; yet not in any honor, says
he, i. e. they deserve no esteem, being only for the satisfying of the flesh*
i. e. of a carnal desire as to these external observations.

(3.) The Superstition here condemned, lay in the supposing God to be pleased
with the forbearance of lawful things; touch not, taste not, handle not. Which
if we understand either of Meats or Marriage, was a forbearance of things in
themselves lawful; but they supposed God would be far better pleased with
their forbearance of them. I do not say, it is Superstition for any man to
abstain from doing what he apprehends to be unlawful by virtue of a general
command: For that is a Moral Duty, and obedience to those places of Scripture
which bid us abstain from all kind and appearance of evil. But yet it is plain
here was a Negative Superstition in the forbearance of lawful things: And so
it was in the dispute between Christ and the Pharisees about healing on the
Sabbath Day; Matt. 12.10.12.
they thought it unlawful: Christ declares it to be lawful to do good on the
Sabbath Days. Here was no positive observance on the Pharisees part; Yet here
was Superstition in them; and therefore the true notion of Superstition does
extend to the forbearance of things in themselves lawful as displeasing to God.

But how shall we know, when such a forbearance is Superstitious?

By these Rules:

1. If such a forbearance be thought to bring some special honor to God. For
then, even Dr. Ames himself grants it to be Superstition, Fresh Suit, p. 101.
to abstain from lawful things though accounted unlawful by the Persons who
abstain; when some singular service and honor is by that abstinence intended:
For then he grants it to be a kind of Ceremonious Worship. The question then
is, when this case happens; for our Abstinence from Popish or Mahumetan
Superstitions, is not any special Act of Service, or Honor to God. But if we
lived where those Acts of Worship were required by lawful Authority; and we
refused to comply with them, that would be a special Act of Honor aad Worship
to God; it being a declaration of our Minds, that we thought God dishonored by
such Acts, and therefore durst not comply with them. It was once a great
Question among the Papists, whether they might lawfully come to our Churches,
or not; and if not to our Prayers and Sacraments, yet to our Sermons, to avoid
the severe Penalties of the Laws. And after great debate both by a Committee of
the Council of Trent, and afterward at Rome; it was resolved in the Negative,
upon this Reason, because in our Circumstances, it was signum distinctivum
cultus, a mark of distinction as to Religious Worship, and therefore it was an
Act of special honor and service to God to forbear. To abstain from pouring
out Wine, and throwing Incense in the fire, is in it self no Act of Worship;
but when the Heathen Emperors commanded the Christians to do it, in token of
compliance with their Religion; their abstaining then from it, was a singular
Act of Worship to God. So in the present Case, when men are required by lawful
Authority, to do things which in themselves are lawful, to testify their
union and conjunction with us in Religion; their refusal in this Case is a
special Act of Worship; and being without Ground, is nothing else but
Superstition.

2. When men value and esteem themselves as more holy and more in the favor of
God on the account of such forbearance. As the Pharisees did on the account of
their Traditions, who believed that God had no such people upon Earth as they
were; and despised others who were far nearer to the Kingdom of God than
themselves, as mere Publicans and Sinners. And it is very natural to Mankind to
set a great value upon themselves, for the sake of their affected singularities
in Religion; and in a transport of pride and vanity, to tell God himself, as
the Pharisee did, That they are not like other Men: But this is a certain sign,
whatsoever they pretend, that they look on the forbearance of the things which
others do, as a part of Holiness; and if they do so, it is undoubtedly
Superstition. For, on this ground we charge the Papists with Superstition in
their Ceremonies, because they place holiness in them. It is true, they say
they are the Instruments to convey some degrees of holiness to them; but this
makes no material difference; for those who account themselves more in God's
esteem for the sake of such things, do attribute some real efficacy to such
distinctive Characters of themselves, as to the obtaining the favor of God.

3. When they forbear necessary Duties of Religion rather than comply with
others in lawful things, as Communion with the Church they live in, in Prayers
and Sacraments: which cannot be denied to be necessary Duties; but if men
resolve rather to forbear these, than to join in such Ceremonies and Prayers as
do accompany the performance of them, it is a sign they prefer the following
their own imaginations before the joining in Communion with the Church in the
most unquestionable Duties of Religion: As in the Case of the Encraticae of
old, who thought it unlawful to taste of Wine; and therefore refused to
communicate in the Eucharist, unless they might have it in Water alone. Was not
this a great Superstition in them, rather to forbear communicating with the
Church, than not to observe their own fancies in what they thought most
pleasing to God, as to the manner of doing it?

Now to apply this to our own Case.

We are often blamed for laying too great weight on the Ceremonies of this
Church. But certainly, never any Church laid less weight upon its own Orders,
supposing that it believes them to be just and reasonable. It places no
holiness, no merit, no efficacy in them, as to the obtaining the Grace and
Favor of God: It expects obedience only for Order and Peace-sake; It has
taken great care by Prefaces and Canons and Rubricks, to prevent any
misinterpretation of its intention and design.

But on the other side, those who dissent from us, lay so great weight on their
scruples, that they will rather hazard breaking a Church in pieces, ruining our
Religion by our differences, losing all the benefit of Communion with a Church,
whose Doctrine they approve in all the Duties of religious Worship; than they
will yield to the allowance of those circumstances of our Communion which our
Church requires. And now on which side the charge of Superstition more justly
lies, let all that are impartial judge.

So much I thought necessary on this Occasion to speak, in vindication of our
Church from this common imputation of Superstition, by those who so little
understand what it means.

Nothing now remains, but to make Application of all to our selves. You see how
much mischief the show of Wisdom was like to do in the Apostolical Churches;
let us all have a care of being deceived by it. It was long since observed by
Menander, That things which were like Truth were more easily believed by the
generality of Mankind, (...). Men.
than Truth it self. So I am afraid it is about Religion, which is the Wisdom
here spoken of, that which makes a great show of it to the World, is more apt
to prevail among persons of weak and well disposed Minds than true Wisdom. For
the show of Wisdom strikes more upon the fancy and inclination of such Persons,
than sober, calm and well-weighed Religion; which seems dull and flat to those
who have more warmth and zeal than judgment and discretion. And I do not at all
question, but many of the corruptions of the Christian Church came in, from an
apprehended necessity of complying with the heat of some over-zealous People;
who were not contented with the plain and excellent Religion of Jesus Christ;
but they must, as they thought, heighten and improve it, till they had mixed
with it the freaks of Enthusiasm, or the dotages of Superstition.

In the Church of Rome there is in many things a show of Wisdom, in
Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting the Body; And in some of our Sects,
that seem to abhor Will Worship so much, that for fear of it they will not give
civil respect to men; yet they pretend to show of Wisdom in Humility and
neglecting the Body, but after a different manner: others have a show of Wisdom
too in a wonderful, I had almost said, superstitious zeal, against what they
call Will Worship and Superstition. But what is to be done in this Case? How
shall we avoid being led aside by such a show of Wisdom, on every side? I shall
only lay down some Directions, and so conclude.

(1.) Fix a true Notion of God and the Christian Religion in your minds. If you
judge aright of the Divine Nature, it will ease your minds of many uneasy
thoughts, troublesome fears and superstitious fancies. He is not capable of
being flattered or deceived by us; God is neither taken with outward
appearances, nor is he pleased with any thing we do, merely because it is
displeasing to our selves, The righteous God loves righteousness; and he is
pleased best with the innocence, integrity and holiness of our hearts and
lives. And for the Christian Religion, take not your Notion of it from the
different and uncertain opinions of Men, but from the Doctrines of Christ and
his Apostles. Men do not read the Scriptures as they ought to do, with a design
to know their Religion by them; but to justify what they take to be Religion
from them. One would think it were impossible for any one that considered the
sayings of Christ or his Apostles, to place his Religion in being for or
against any particular Modes or Ceremonies of Worship; whereby he may so easily
see that it lies chiefly in an excellent temper of mind, holy, spiritual,
humble, calm, peaceable, charitable, and a suitableness of action to this
temper. This is so plain and easy to be understood, that he must read the New
Testament with a very ill mind, that does not find it out. And if you have
settled this Notion of true Religion, it will be a continual Touchstone about
you to judge of all Pretenders.

(2.) Set not an equal value on things that are good in order to other things,
that you do upon things that are good in themselves. For the one are but the
Instruments of Religion, the other are properly the Duties of it. Mich. 6.8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, viz. to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And this was spoken when very costly
Sacrifices were offered instead of it; no less than thousands, and ten
thousands; yea the firstborn, and the fruit of their Bodies. And therefore God
sets a high value on these Duties, and so ought we. No one that has any sense
of Religion can despise the immediate Duties of Divine Worship; it being a good
Saying of Pythagoras, mentioned by Cicero and Plutarch, Plutarch de Superst.
Cic. de Legib. l. 2. c. 9.
that we are never better than when we approach to God; or, as Cicero expresses
it, when we do rebus Divinis operam dare, are employed in the Duties of Divine
Worship: But yet to do good is better than Sacrifice, and to forgive an injury
than the fat of Rams. It is a wise Observation of Maimonides, Porta Mosis, p.
201.
That the intention of the Law of God is to keep men within the just Bounds of
Virtue; but when men found a stronger inclination to one extreme than to
another, they made use of remedies proper to reduce themselves from that
extreme, by great severities toward themselves, by Watchings, and
extraordinary Fastings, and other hardships: but when Fools saw Wise men do
these things, they imagined presently that there was an excellency in the
things themselves, and that if they did the same things, they should pass for
very good men, and be highly in the favor of God. Which, says he, is just
like an ignorant Fellow, who observing the Physicians prescribing Physic to
his Patients, and forbiding eating to them, and finding them to recover upon
it, should presently conclude, that surely it is the best way to live upon
Scammony and Aloes, and such like, and so keep himself with the same strictness
that was prescribed to the Sick; which instead of preventing a Disease, would
certainly bring one: so, says he, do those who use the remedies of diseased
minds in a state of health, they spoil a good constitution of their souls, and
make it uneasy and troublesome.

(3.) Judge of men's pretenses, not by their outward show and appearance, but by
the Spirit and Temper that goes along with them. This was the course the
Apostle here took; he regarded not their show of Wisdom and great appearance of
Humility and Mortification; but he pursued these things to their Fountainhead,
and there he found nothing but spiritual pride, and vanity of mind. We must not
judge easily nor rashly concerning this; Ver. 18.
but where the evidence is notorious, we have great reason to slight and
contemn the most sanctimonious appearance, i. e. if there be great
uncharitableness and censoriousness toward all who do not comply with them;
great scorn and contempt of all other ways but their own; great malice and
spite against all who go about to oppose them; where these are, whether in the
Church of Rome, or elsewhere, whatever the show of wisdom be, Jam. 3.15.
this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. Ver.
17.
But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and
without hypocrisy.

SERMON IX. Preached before the KING. February 15, 1683/4.
Job XXIII.15. When I consider, I am afraid of him.


THese Words were spoken by Job; not in his flourishing and prosperous state,
when that extraordinary Character was given of him, That there was none like
him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, Job 1.8.2.3.
one that feared God, and eschewed evil; but, after the Devil was permitted to
try that malicious Experiment upon him, viz. whether the changing his outward
condition, would not alter the inward disposition of his mind, as to God and
Religion. For he suggested, 1.9.
that nothing but Interest made him so religious, that all his Piety and
Devotion was owing to the wonderful Blessings of God upon him; and if these
were once removed, he would fly out into so much impatience as to curse God to
his face; 11.
i. e. to speak evil of his Providence, and renounce his service. And this
temptation prevailed so far on Job's Wife, that she became an Instrument to
carry on the Devil's design, when she said to him, Do thou still retain thy
integrity? Job 2.9.
Curse God and die: As though she had said, You see what all your Religion is
now come to, and what a condition the Providence of God, on which you trusted
so much, has brought you to; let them serve God, that have ease and plenty,
you have nothing left to do now, but in spite of Providence, to put an end to
such a miserable life. But as it was observed of the old Heathen Oracles, that
they had often a true meaning in them, but it was commonly misapplied (the
Devils own knowledge of future events being but probable and conjectural) so
here, it was a shrewd guess that so sudden a change would have such an effect
upon some person concerned in it: But he was very much mistaken as to Job; who
behaved himself with admirable patience and submission to the Will of God,
under all his severe afflictions; insomuch, that he did not suffer an indecent
expression to come from him, with respect to God and his Providence: In all
this Job sinned not, Job 1.22.2.10.
nor charged God foolishly.

Which was no doubt a great disappointment to the Devil, who made account he
should by Job's impatience have given a terrible blow to Religion, by making
the World believe, that it was nothing but a grave pretense of some men's
seeming to be better than their Neighbors. For if a man of so much Piety, as
Job was esteemed, should no sooner be pinched himself with affliction, but he
would be quarrelling at God's management of things, the Devil would have
inferred, that he did plainly discover, how little influence Religion had upon
the minds of those, who made the greatest show of it.

This had been a very dangerous snare in that Age, to the rest of Mankind,
among whom the example of so great a Person, as Job was in the parts of Arabia
where he lived (as appears by the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans his unkind
Neighbors) did give a mighty reputation to the practice of Religion, Job 1.15,
17.
especially among such a wild and ungoverned People as the Arabs were. And in
truth, the World is never so kind to Religion, to give a fair interpretation of
the failings of those who pretend to it; but how unreasonable soever it be,
they will make Religion bear the blame of all their miscarriages who wear its
livery. And Job himself tells us, 21.14, 15.
there were such profane Persons then in the World, who despised and contemned
all Religion, as a vain impertinent, insignificant thing, Therefore they say
unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is
the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit shall we have if we pray
unto him? i. e. they understood or valued nothing but what made for their
present interest; and they were content to let God alone with the disposal of
another World, so they might secure this to themselves. But it was not only
then a seasonable vindication of Religion, that Job behaved himself with so
much patience under his great Calamities; but it continues so to be as long as
the memory of his sufferings remains, which has lasted for so many Ages, that
some think the Book of Job the oldest Book in the World; (not in the supposed
translation into Hebrew, but in the Original Arabic or Syriac) and is now like
to be preserved, as long as the Christian Church endures; against which the
Gates of Hell will never be able to prevail.

But notwithstanding the general evenness of Job's temper, and his quiet
submission to Divine Providence, there were two things which touched him more
sensibly than all the other circumstances of his afflictions; and those were,

(1.) That God should seem so much displeased with him, as to single him out as
a mark to shoot at, when he was not conscious to himself of any such impiety to
deserve it, according to the common method of his Providence.

(2.) That his Friends should call in question his sincerity in Religion, and
suspect him guilty of Hypocrisy and secret Impiety; because they concluded that
such signal calamities could hardly fall upon any man, that was not guilty of
some such great crime toward God.

These were a trial of Job's patience indeed; that those from whom he expected
the greatest comfort, should prove his sorest Enemies; for if God were angry,
who could stand before him? and if he were false in his Religion, how could he
expect he should be his Friend? But in answer to both these, he owns his fear
of God's displeasure, and denies the charge as to his secret Hypocrisy, and
both in these few words of the Text, When I consider, I am afraid of him.

These words may be understood,

I. With respect to his apprehension of God's displeasure against him,
Therefore am I troubled at his presence, says he immediately before; not as
though Job were like those Eliphaz speaks of in the foregoing Chapter, which
said unto God, Depart from us, 22.17.
or that he endeavored, as profane Persons do, to keep God out of his thoughts
as much as he could: for what could Job have done under all his Troubles but
for God's presence to support him? And therefore he declares his firm
resolution never to let go his confidence in God whatever became of him; Though
he slay me, Job 13.15, 16.
yet will I trust in him. He also shall be my salvation; for an hypocrite shall
not come before him. But the Presence which troubled him, was the great
appearance of God's displeasure; of which again he speaks, v. 24. For God
makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me. As though he had said, All
other considerations make no deep impression upon my mind; but I am no more
able to bear up under the sense of God's anger, than the Wax is to forbear
melting before the Fire. And from this sense of his own utter inability to
stand before the Power of the Almighty, he elsewhere argues thus with him;
13.25.
Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? And will thou pursue the dry
stubble? Man being as unable to resist the Divine Power, as a leaf is to stand
before a tempestuous Wind, or the dry Stubble to stop the rage of a consuming
Fire.

But here are two things to be resolved to make this matter clear before I
proceed;

(1.) What it was made Job so afraid of God when he considered, seeing he
insists so much upon his own Integrity?

(2.) What apprehensions then ought we to have of God in our minds, when such a
one as Job said, When I consider, I am afraid of him.

(1.) What it was made Job so apprehensive of God's anger that he was afraid of
him, when he pleads so much for his own Integrity toward God and Man? Does not
this seem to lessen the comfort and satisfaction of a good Conscience, when
such a one as Job was afraid of God? For, from whence comes all the peace of a
good Conscience, but from him? And what content can there be from him, the very
thoughts of whom make us afraid? To that I answer,

(1.) Mankind ought always to preserve an humble and awful apprehension of God
in their mind. And that from the sense of the infinite distance between God and
us; as he is our Maker, and we are his Creatures; as he is our Benefactor, and
we his Dependents; as he is our supreme Lord, and we his Subjects; as he
infinitely exceeds us in all the Perfections of his Nature. For, what are our
shallow and dark and confused conceptions of things, to his Divine Wisdom? By
which he comprehends all the differences of times at one view; and all the
Reasons and Connexions and Possiblities of things are open and naked before
him. What is all the power of Mankind, if it were gathered into one, in
comparison with that Divine Power, which gave a Being to the World, when it was
not; and rules, and governs, and orders all things in it, with greater ease
than we can move a Finger? It is by that, God has spread out the Skies, Job
37.18.16.26.12, 7.
and balanced the Clouds, and garnished the Heavens, and divided the Sea, and
hanged the Earth upon nothing; as it is elegantly set forth in this Book of
Job. And therefore as Job says to his Friends, 13.11.
Shall not his excellency make you afraid, and his dread fall upon you? For as
Elihu speaks, 37.22.
With God is terrible Majesty: and therefore when we consider, we have reason
to be afraid of him.

(2.) The best of Mankind have guilt enough upon them to make them apprehend
God's displeasure under great afflictions. Job's Friends insist much upon this,
that God may see just cause to lay great punishments upon Men, although they
may not see it in themselves. For, 4.18.
if he charges his Angels with folly, as Eliphaz speaks, 15.15.16.
and the Heavens are not clean in his sight; How much more abominable and
filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water? i. e. whose natural
propensity to evil, is like that of the thirsty Traveller to drink of the Brook
that he meets in his way. But suppose some to have much greater care to
restrain their desires than others; yet says he, What is man, 14.
that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous? i. e. to such a degree as not to deserve afflictions from God. And
after all the protestations Job makes of his Integrity, he confesses, that
there is so much natural and contracted impurity in Mankind, that God may
justly cast them into the Furnace to purge and refine them. Job 14.4.7.20.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. And, I have sinned,
what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? For, 13.26.
thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of
my youth. He could not deny but he had sinned enough to deserve God's
displeasure: but according to the usual method of Providence, he could not but
think his Case very hard, to suffer so much for sins committed before he well
knew the nature or danger of his sins; for sins so long since repented of, and
forsaken (which is the only satisfactory sign of true repentance) and when so
many wicked men in the height of their impiety, and contempt of God and
Religion, go away here unpunished; whereas he had made it his business and
delight to serve him, as he speaks in this Chapter, My foot has held his
steps, 23.11.
his way have I kept and not declined; neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips: 12.
I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more than my necessary food. But after
all this, to find God's hand so heavy upon him, made him sometimes complain in
the anguish and bitterness of his Soul; 7.11.20.
Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self?
And elsewhere, I was at ease, he has broken me asunder; Job 16.12.
he has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for
his mark. Nothing sunk his spirit, till he thought God was displeased with him;
and then his heart and courage failed him; and he begged compassion from his
hard hearted Friends, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, 19.21.
O ye my friends: for the hand of God has touched me. Which makes good the
observation of the Wise Man, Prove. 18.14.
That the spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities; i. e. a Man's natural
courage will carry him through a great many troubles, but a wounded spirit who
can bear? i. e. when a Man's heart fails him, he becomes a burden to himself;
every thing adds to his trouble, and nothing can give him ease but what can
revive his Spirit. Now, no consideration in the World does so break in pieces
and confound and shatter the Spirit of a Man, like the apprehension of God's
wrath and displeasure against him for his sins; which made Job cry out, like
one wounded in the most tender and incurable parts, The arrows of the Almighty
are within me, 6.4.
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit; the terrors of God do set themselves
in array against me.

But after all this,

(3.) God may not be so displeased with such Persons as lie under great
afflictions, as they apprehend him to be. And this was the truth of Job's Case;
his sufferings were extraordinary, and such an unusual concurrence of so many
sad accidents, made him think he had great cause to apprehend an immediate hand
of God to be stretched out against him. But the main design of this Book, is to
show that all these afflictions were intended only as trials of his Patience,
and that God never loved him better than at this time, when he thought him so
much displeased with him; as he showed in the Conclusion. This is a very hard
thing for Persons under great afflictions to believe, and it is not necessary
they should; nay, sometimes the apprehension of God's displeasure against them
for their sins, is one of the most useful parts of afflictions: for without
this, they are apt either to inflame Men's minds with discontent and unruly
Passions; or to stupefy them with the dull and heavy Opiates of Chance or
Necessity: but when afflictions are looked on as coming from God's hand, this
rouses and awakens our minds, and makes us think it necessary to look about us,
to search and examine our ways, to find out the particular sins we have given
way to, which may have justly provoked God to show his displeasure against us.
As we have reason above all things, to be afraid of his anger; so it is our
Wisdom to apprehend the least change of his Countenance toward us, and to make
our Peace with him, and then we have no cause to fear any thing that may happen
to us: For the Wise God will then turn all our Crosses into such proper
Remedies for the Diseases of our Minds, that the sharpest afflictions will tend
more to the purging away our sins, and thereby to a more sound and healthful
state of our Souls, than all the sleeping Potions of the intoxicating pleasures
and vanities of this World would ever have done. For, Luxury and Epicurism,
with all the Arts of heightning the Pleasures of Life, are things not more
delightful to sense than dangerous to men's Souls. They are like too frequent
use of Spirits in a time of health, which weaken the force of Nature by raising
it too high. So that were it in the choice of a wise Man to have and enjoy as
much of this World as he pleased, he would see a necessity to restrain his
appetite, and to deny himself some of the lawful Pleasures of Life; were it
only to keep up the relish by variety; and by enjoying them less, to hope to
enjoy them longer. We have certainly then no reason to complain, if God thinks
sit to debar us at all times, any use of unlawful Pleasures, and an inordinate
use of any; since he leaves scope enough for the true contentment of Life; and
if at some times he judges it necessary to give us Physic as well as Food,
shall we not submit to his Will? For as Job says, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? as if
he had said, Shall we think much that our Father should be our Physician; that
he who has been hitherto so kind to us to please us, should now be so kind to
undertake our Cure? Shall we complain that our Physician does not humor our
Palates, when he designs our health? God knows what is better for us, than we
do for our selves; and that which seems most evil at present, may turn to the
greatest good. I confess afterward, Job being either sowred by the malignity
of his Distemper, or heated by the impertinency or bitterness of his Friends
Discourses (for if they had no relation to his Case, they were impertinent; if
they had, they were severe and uncharitable) does break out sometimes into some
expressions of impatience; but these arose from the Clouds upon his mind, which
made him then apprehend all these afflictions to come from God's wrath and
indignation against him; the thoughts of which he was not able to bear: but
therein he was wholly mistaken, and then only hit upon the truth of his Case
when he said, When he has tried me, 23.10.
I shall come forth as gold, i. e. more pure and refined, more bright and
glorious.

(4.) In the hardest condition good Men can be cast into, they have more
comfortable hopes toward God than other Men can have. Job was extremely
afflicted to think the best Friend he had in the World, and whom he desired to
please above all things, should become his Enemy, and set himself against him;
but he did not always think so, although his Friends represented his condition
to him in the blackest and most frightfull manner, which startled him and made
him resent his sufferings with great bitterness, and express it with a kind of
horror; yet he soon recovered himself out of those Agonies, and kept up his
trust and confidence in God. And there were two things which supported him
under all his dismal apprehensions.

(1.) The reflections of a good Conscience in the discharge of his duty to God
and Man; and therefore he tells his Friends, after all their sharp reflections
upon him, Job 27.5, 6.
Till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me; my righteousness I hold
fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
It was this which raised his Spirits, and made him stand his ground against the
opposition of his Friends, and the scorn of his Enemies: It was this, which
made him despise the meanness of those who courted, admired, and flattered him
in his former Greatness; but now despised and derided him, making him the
subject of their raillery and entertainments: Job 30.9.
And now I am their song, yea I am their byword; even theirs who but a little
before, as he at large describes it, kept their distance from him, and made way
for him as he passed the streets, 29.7, 8, 9, 10.
and admired all spoke as Oracles, and all he did as the perfection of Wisdom
and Virtue. But so wise a Man could not be surprised to see flattery turned
into scorn and derision; (for no Man thinks to gain by his flattery, who has
not a secret contempt of the person he flatters) and so good a Man could not
but forgive the unjust reproaches that were cast upon him, as long as he had
the inward satisfaction of his own Integrity. And therefore he gives so ample
an account of his whole Life and Actions, Chapter 30. and 31.
both in his public and private capacities; not to boast of his Virtues, but
to be a just vindication of his Innocence under all their aspersions; and to
let them see, that the comfort of a good Conscience does not fail, when Friends
do; and as the Wise Man speaks: When the back sliders in heart shall be filled
with their own ways; Prove. 14.1^.
a good man shall be satisfied from himself.

(2.) The expectation of a future recompense; either in this World, as he
seemed to hope, or at least in another. Some think, that Job spoke as to this
Life, when he said, Job 19.25.
For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the Earth; 26.
And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see
God: and so the meaning of these Words is, though at present his Case seemed
desperate, and his Life past hope, the worms eating through his skin; yet he
had a secret hope, that God would at last redeem him out of his troubles, and
that very loathsome Carcass of his would hold out so long as to see that Day.
But the Christian Church has generally understood them to referr to the Day of
Resurrection, when he was certain that God would reward his innocence and
sincerity: And of a future state, it is plain he had an undoubted expectation,
when he says, 27.8.
What is the hope of the Hypocrite, although he has gained, when God takes
away his Soul? which shows the great folly of Hypocrisy, which can never stand
a man in stead beyond this World, where he must leave all his Riches, and
Honors, and Hopes, and Happiness behind him; and the just expectation good Men
had, that God would reward them after this Life, though they were sufferers in
this. And therefore, although Job had such dreadful apprehensions of God at
present, yet he had very comfortable hopes as to his future condition, when he
calls God his Redeemer, even the same of whom he here says, When I consider, I
am afraid of him.

(2.) But if so good, so virtuous, so sincere a Man as Job, had such terrible
apprehensions of God, what can we wretched Sinners think of him? if when he
considered, he was afraid of him; have not we reason when we consider, to sink
into despair? Can we appeal to God as to the sincerity of our hearts in his
fear and service, as Job did? Can we say with Job, that we have not gone back
from the commandment of his lips, but have esteemed the words of his mouth more
than our necessary food? Have we not rather cast his most just and reasonable
commandments behind our backs, and esteemed our vanities, our superfluities,
our debaucheries, our follies, above the words of his mouth? But if we have not
despised his Laws, yet we cannot say, as Job did, that our feet have held his
steps, his way have we kept and not declined; for our Consciences cannot but
condemn us for the breach of his Laws; and our sins, our great and manifold
sins bear witness against us. What apprehensions of God then may we entertain
in our minds, when even Job was afraid of him? I answer,

(1.) None ought to look upon God as so terrible, as to make them despair.

(2.) Men ought to have different apprehensions of God, according to the nature
and continuance of their sins.

(1.) None ought to look upon God as so terrible, as to make them despair. For
when our apprehensions of God are such as drive us from him, they overthrow the
great end of Religion, which is to bring God and Man nearer together. None
ought to exclude themselves from mercy, whom God has not excluded from it; and
God excludes none whom he invites to repent, with a promise of forgiveness, if
they do it; and the goodness and long-suffering, and forbearance of Sinners, is
on purpose designed to lead them to Repentance. So that after all this, to
despair, is not only to reject the mercy which God offers, but to question his
Truth and sincerity, to slight his Patience, to disparage his Goodness, and to
look upon him as a most revengefull and implacable Being; which is, to
entertain most dishonorable and unworthy thoughts of the best, the wisest, the
most merciful and compassionate Being in the World; who has proclaimed
himself to be a God merciful and gracious, Exodus 34.6, 7.
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, i. e. to all that truly
repent of them. So that when we consider, we have no reason to be so afraid of
him as to despair.

(2.) Men ought to have different apprehensions of God, according to the nature
and continuance of their sins. For as on the one side, the Scripture assures
us, that God knows our frame, and remembers that we are dust; Psalm. 103.14.
and therefore will make all just and reasonable allowances for the unavoidable
infirmities of Humane Nature, and all circumstances that abate the wilfulness
of our evil Actions: so on the other side, at the same time when he declared
his infinite goodness, he adds, and that will by no means clear the guilty; not
of any kind of sin; for then none could escape, since all have sinned, and
therefore are become guilty before him: but the guilty are such, as add
impenitency and obstinacy to their sins; such as wilfully and presumptuously,
not only break; but contemn his Laws; not barely neglect their duty, but
despise it; such as are not merely cold and indifferent about Religion, but are
zealously concerned against it, and endeavor to expose it to scorn and
contempt. For a very judicious Interpreter says, This severity of God here
spoken of, H. Grot. in loc.
in visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, etc. is not to be
understood of all crimes, but of such as immediately concern the honor of the
Divine Majesty, such as Apostasy, Idolatry, and consequently Atheism and
Irreligion; which is a Plot against Heaven, an attempt to dethrone the Divine
Majesty, or to make his Government insignificant in the World. If faults are
justly aggravated among Men, not so much from other circumstances, as from the
dignity of the Person against whom they are committed, and from the tendency of
them: Will not the parity of reason so far hold, as to aggravate those sins
which are immediate offenses against the Divine Majesty, and which tend to
overthrow his Government of the World?

II. And so I come to the second sense of these Words, as they may be taken for
Job's Vindication of himself from the unjust charge of his Friends, as though
he were a secret Hypocrite, or a contemner of God and Religion, under a fair
outward show of Piety and Devotion. For, Eliphaz in plain terms, in the
foregoing Chapter, tells him, he was one of those who thought God was at too
great a distance to take notice of things upon Earth. And thou say, how does
God know? Job 22.13, 14.
Can he judge through the dark Cloud? Thick Clouds are a covering to him, that
he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of Heaven. Which is in short, to
charge him with denying the Providence of God; and reckon him with those that
said unto God, Depart from us? Job 22.17.
and what can the Almighty do for them? i. e. with such as would have nothing
to do with God or Religion, looking on it as a foppish useless thing: but
however, he gives him good counsel to repent of his folly, and to apply himself
yet to God; Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace, 21.
thereby good shall come to thee. Receive I pray thee the law from his mouth,
22.
and lay up his words in thine heart: i. e. be persuaded to be Religious in
good earnest, and to let the fear of God make a deep impression upon your Soul,
and you will find great benefit and advantage by it. If thou return to the
Almighty, 23.
thou shall be built up, etc. Job finding his Friends so often letting fall
expressions to this purpose, and knowing no imaginable reason for it, but a
groundless suspicion they had entertained, because of his unusual sufferings,
makes here in this Chapter a solemn protestation of the mighty value and esteem
he had for the Laws of God, 23.11, 12.
that he constantly observed them, and esteemed them more than his necessary
food. And to let them know that this was no sudden heat, he tells Eliphaz, that
the fear of God in him, came from the most weighty and serious consideration;
When I consider, I am afraid of him: as if he had said, I have spent many
thoughts about God and Religion, whether there be any just reason for Mankind
to apprehend and stand in awe of an infinite Being above them; and I do assure
you, the more I have fixed my thoughts upon this matter, and laid all things
before me, the deeper impression the fear of God has made upon me: or as some
render it, perpendo and paveo, I consider, and I fear him.

Wherein are two things implied.

I. That Men's disesteem of Religion does arise from want of Consideration.

II. That the more Men consider, the more settled and fixed will their minds be
in the esteem and practice of Religion.

I. That Men's disesteem of Religion does arise from the want of Consideration.

Which will best appear, by examining the most common and prevailing reasons of
Men's disesteem of it; which are chiefly these two;

(1.) Their looking on Religion as a matter of mere interest and design,
without any other foundation.

(2.) The unaccountable folly and superstitious fears of Mankind; which makes
them think more to be in it than really is.

(1.) Looking on the whole business of Religion as a matter of interest and
design; first started by some great Politicians to tame and govern Mankind, and
ever since kept up by a Company of Priests who lived upon the Cheat, and
therefore were bound to maintain, and to keep it up; which otherwise would sink
to nothing.

This is the worst can be said against Religion; and it is bad enough of all
reason, if it were true: and we should deserve all the scorn and contempt,
which such Men treat us with, if we were but accessory to so great a fraud and
imposture.

But is there such a thing as Reason among Mankind? Can we judge of what is
true and false; probable or improbable; certain or uncertain? Or must some
things be run down, without examining? and others taken up, without any other
color of reason, than because they serve to such a purpose?

For God's sake, and for our own sakes then, let us consider these things a
little better, before we pronounce against them; or entertain any doubt or
suspicion of them in our minds. And there is this great reason for it, that the
wisest, the best, the most considering, the most disinteressed Men have taken
the part of Religion, and been zealous Defenders of it; whereas on the other
side, the younger, the looser, the more debauched part of Mankind, have been
most inclined to Atheism and Irreligion.

But if we have not Reason of our side, we are content to give up the Cause,
and to be thought Deceivers (which goes very hardly down with an ingenuous
mind:) and if on the other side, there be nothing found but false and
groundless suppositions, or unreasonable suspicions; I hope, Religion may be
fairly acquitted from being thought a mere contrivance of Politicians, and we
from being the Silver-smiths to this Diana.

(1.) Those who make Religion to be such a contrivance, must suppose that all
Mankind were once without any such thing as Religion. For, if some crafty
Politicians did first start the notion of an Invisible Being among the rude and
unthinking Multitude, the better to awe them into Obedience to Government; then
Mankind must have lived before those Politicians appeared, with as little sense
of God and Religion, and with as much security and ease, as to the thoughts of
another World, as the very Beasts that perish. If this were true, these
Politicians were so far from consulting the interest of Mankind, that they were
the greatest Enemies to it; by filling their minds with such unconquerable
fears, as rob them of that undisturbed Tranquillity which they enjoyed before.
But when and where did this race of mankind live, whom these designing Men
first cheated into the belief of a Deity, and the practice of Religion? The
eldest Writings in the World, without all dispute, are those of the Holy
Scriptures; and among these, the Book of Job has been thought the most
ancient; for in all this Book we have not one word of the Law of Moses, or of
Circumcision; which makes it very probable to have been written before the
Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt; Greg. Abulfarai. hist. Dynast. p.
13. Hier. Trad. Hebr. in Genesis 22.
(and some Arabic Writers think that Job lived before Abraham; and others, at
least in the time of Jacob) however it be, this Book of Job gives an account of
the sense of mankind about Religion very early; and by it we find that the
great, and wise, and understanding men of the World, such as Job and his three
Friends were, (who as far as appears by the story, were all of them independent
Princes; such as were common then, and a long time after, in those parts about
Arabia) had a mighty sense of God and Providence, and the Duties of Religion
upon their minds. And they not only give an ample Testimony as to their own
times, but they appeal to all the Traditions of former times; Job 8.8.
Enquire I pray thee, of the former Age, says one of Job's Friends, and
prepare thy self to the search of their Fathers. For we are but of yesterday,
and know nothing. But what is it he appeals to Antiquity for, and the
observations of all former Ages? It was for this, viz. the bad condition of all
that were not sincere in Religion: So are the paths of all that forget God, Job
8.13.
and the hypocrites hope shall perish. And another of his Friends speaking of
the remarkable judgments of God upon the World, says to Job, 22.15, 16.
Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden; which were cut
down out of time, whose foundation was overthrown with a flood? i. e. the Men
of the old World. And what was their great and provoking sin? A contempt of God
and Religion, Which said unto God, 17.
Depart from us; and what can the Almighty do for them? This is the oldest, and
truest, and severest instance of such a profane and irreligious temper, and the
great mischief it brought upon the World; which shows, that this is not the
original disposition of Mankind, but the monstroudegeneracy of it. But if they
are unsastisfied with the Testimony of Job's Friends, let them produce any to
be mentioned the same Day with it, which can pretend to give a truer account of
the Religion of the first Ages of the World: I do not mention Moses (although
his Authority be unquestionable) lest he should be thought one of these
Politicians, who inspired the People of Israel with the Principles of Religion;
but I the rather choose this instance of the free Princes of those parts of the
East, who were under subjection to no common Authority, yet were so early
possessed themselves with such firm Principles of Religion, and assure us that
all good Men had the same; and that they were slighted by none, but such loose
and profane wretches, whom God set up for the Monuments of his Indignation.

(2.) Suppose we should allow that in a particular Nation, some great and wise
Man should think sit to reclaim a loose and barbarous People by the Principles
of Religion; how does this prove Religion to be false, or what does it signify
to the universal consent of Mankind? Is it any Argument that there is no
foundation in Nature for Justice, Charity, and common Humanity, because wise
Men have been put to use variety of methods to reduce Canibals to civility? And
it would be as good arguing against all Morality from thence, as against
Religion, because it was judged by wise Men a necessary instrument to civilize
Mankind. And as far as I can observe, Religion and Civility have risen and sunk
together. The Roman Orator made a bold Challenge, as to the then known World,
to name any Nation so barbarous, that they had no Religion among them. And
although the Romans knew but little of the habitable World in comparison of
what is now known; yet upon the whole matter, the new discoveries add force and
strength to the Argument; only with annexing this observation, That the more
improved and civilized any People have been, the more regard they have had to
Religion; the more ignorant, sottish, and barbarous they were, although they
were not wholly without Religion, yet it was in less esteem and honor among
them: and this observation will hold, as to all the Nations since discovered
both in the East and West Indies. But what a mighty number of Politicians must
spring out of the Earth at once, to scatter the seeds of Religion, in such a
manner, over all the face of the Earth? It is impossible that a few Men, though
never so subtle, never so experienced, should be able to captivate all Mankind
in so great a variety of Language, and distance of Countries. And such an
universal Effect must have some common and universal Cause; which the invention
of a few crafty Men could never be.

(3.) But suppose this to have happened in some one unlucky Age, when the Earth
brought forth such a fruitful crop of Politicians; yet how comes it to pass,
since these have so long been laid in their Graves, the effect of this Policy
should still remain all the World over? For, every Age is apt to condemn the
Policy of the foregoing; and whether the men of the present Age stand upon the
shoulders of the precedent or not, they are very apt to think they see farther
than they; how comes it then in so many Ages, as have passed since these deep
Politicians lived, that no other Persons have been able to lay open the
artifice of Religion so, as to free mankind from the pretended slavery of it?
It cannot be said, that there were none to attempt it; for that were to own an
absolute consent of all mankind as to Religion. And we know there were some
once at Athens, who set up with a design to overthrow Religion; but with so
very little success, whatever the Roman Poet boasts, that they were fain to be
very private in their meetings: and the City was so little moved with their
Discourses, that S. Paul says, Act. 17.22.
the Men of Athens, were in all things too superstitious. It cannot be said,
that there were none ready to join in such a design; for all bad men had rather
there were no Religion at all; and their number is never small, and never
unwilling to carry it on: How comes it then after all, that Religion still
prevailed, and the fears of a Deity could not be shaken off, no not by the
greatest Politicians themselves, who thought they understood all the Arts of
Government, as well as any that had been before them? Would not some of the
Roman Emperors, who had none to control them, have been glad to have eased
themselves of the fears of an invisible Power? But they found, after all their
strugglings, it was a thing not to be done; God and Conscience were so much too
hard for their loose reasonings set up against them, that where men had shaken
off the love of Religion, they could not shake off the fears that follow the
contempt of it. But where mankind have been imposed upon, when once the cheat
is discovered, all its force is for ever lost: for men do not love to be
deceived, especially in matters that so very nearly concern them; so that if
Religion had been a trick of so long standing, assuredly it would have been
hooted out of the World long ago; and nothing would have been so ridiculous as
to pretend to it. But thanks be to God, the credit of Religion is not yet worn
out of the World; which can be owing to nothing but to those invincible
Reasons, on which it stands. For there has wanted nothing of wit or malice in
profane Persons, to undermine and blow up the reputation of it. But the
foundations on which it is built, are so firm and stable, and have endured the
violent shocks, and secret attempts of so many Ages, that as long as reason and
civility hold up in the World, we need not question but Religion will. If once
I begin to see Mankind cast off all the reins of Civil Government, and run wild
and savage, quitting all the conveniences and pleasures of Houses, and Lands,
and Cloths, to live naked in the Woods, and to feed on Roots and Acorns,
because they suspect that all Civil Government, was a crafty design of some
cunning Men to get above others; I may then begin to think that such suspicions
about Religion, may prevail upon Mankind to cast off the most reasonable
obligations to maintain the profession and the practice of it. For although the
Reasons on which Religion is grounded, be independent on Civil Authority, such
as the train of Causes, the Motion, Order, Beauty, usefulness of all the parts
of the Universe; which remain the same in all Ages, and under all Revolutions:
yet the Principles of Religion do really give so much strength and support to
Civil Government, that none who have a kindness to the one, can be Enemies to
the other; and they who suspect Religion to be an Imposture, will be as ready
to suspect all Government to be no better: the consequence whereof will be
nothing but Barbarism and Confusion.

(2.) But it may be said, that although the Principles of Religion in general,
are reasonable enough in themselves; and the things we observe in the World, do
naturally lead men to own a Deity; yet when they reflect on the strange folly
and superstitious fear of mankind, they are apt still to suspect, that men
being puzzled and confounded, have frighted themselves into the belief of
Invisible Powers, and performing Acts of Worship and Devotion to them, as
appears by so many imaginary Deities among the Heathen; and the superstitions
which still prevail on so great a part of the World. But this way of reasoning
is just as if a man should argue that there is no such thing as true Reason in
mankind, because imagination is a wild, extravagant, unreasonable thing; or
that we never see any thing when we are awake, because in our Dreams we fancy
we see things which we do not. We cannot deny the follies of mankind about
Religion, either Ancient or Modern: but when was it given to all the World to
be wise? It were extremely to be wished, that nothing but pure and undefiled
Religion should obtain in the World? or at least that the Christian World were
purged from the follies of Enthusiasm and Superstition. But alas! the more we
consider all the wilful errors, and involuntary mistakes, vicious
Inclinations, violent Passions, foolish Opinions, strange Prejudices*
superficial Reasonings, and obstinate Resolutions which are incident to
Mankind, we shall see greater reason to wonder, that there is so much true
Religion in the world, than that there is no more. Nothing but the strong
impression God has made of himself on the Souls of Men; nothing but a Divine
Hand could have kept such a flame alive, in the midst of so many contrary Winds
of Men's different Passions and Interests, and such a rough and tempestuous Sea,
as the state of this World has generally been with respect to true Religion.
But if through the mercy of God it fares better among us, as to outward
circumstances (for which we ought to be very thankful) let not Religion bear
the blame of all the follies and indiscretions of those who profess it. It is a
hard Case, if the common weaknesses of Humane Nature, and those faults which
Men commit through the want of Religion, shall be laid to the charge of it. But
nothing is more apt to incline Men of better understandings, to ill thoughts of
Religion, than to see it made use of, to serve bad purposes and designs, to
cover ambitious projects; and to draw in People the more easily into Faction
and Rebellion; and while they look on this side of the Picture, and see there
nothing but the lamentable spectacles of the mischiefs which have been done in
the World under the pretense of Religion, they are far from thinking those
Politicians, that invented it; it being so easily turned upon the Government,
and being then so dangerous to it. (Which is a farther Argument to me, that it
could not be a contrivance of such Men: for then there would have been no other
Scheme of Religion owned in the World, but that of the Leviathan, which being
so great a Novelty, it is a certain sign, that Religion was not framed merely
to serve the ends of Government.) But however, that only true and holy Religion
which we profess, is so far from giving any encouragement to seditious
Practices, that it is not possible to contrive a Religion, which we must adhere
to whatever we suffer for it, that should more effectually recommend the Duties
of Quietness, Patience, and submission to Authority, than the genuine Religion
of our Savior does. As long therefore as the Rules of our Religion are so
plain and easy, so reasonable, so useful, and beneficial to Mankind, we ought
not to lessen our esteem of it, for the sake of any weak, or superstitious, or
hypocritical pretenders to it.

II. Having thus far showed, that Men's disesteem of Religion comes from the
want of Consideration, I now come to the last thing I designed, as the
Application of the rest, viz. That the more Men do consider, the more they will
esteem Religion, and apply themselves to the practice of it.

And now methinks, I may with greater assurance address my self to all sorts of
Persons, since all that I shall request, will lie in two very reasonable things.

1. To consider impartially what is fit for them to do in Religion.

2. To practice so much of Religion, as upon Consideration will appear fitting
to be done.

(1.) To consider impartially what is fit for them to do in Religion. I am not
going about to persuade you to leave your Estates and Employments, and to
retire your selves from the World and to give up your selves wholly to
Devotion. For I do not deny but that they who serve their Prince and their
Country, and follow their lawful Employments, with an honest and conscientious
diligence, and neglect no necessary Duties of Religion, do carry on the great
ends of Religion, as well as those, whose time and occasions will give them
leave to devote themselves more to Fasting and Prayer. But let none think the
matters of Religion to belong to others, and that they have business of another
nature to attend upon, as though paying their duty to God, were fit only for
those who had nothing else to do. While Job was in the height of his
Prosperity, and was the greatest of all the men of the East; Job 1.3.
he tells his Friends how much he was employed in doing all the good he could
by works of Justice and Charity; ^9.12, etc.
He was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and a father to the poor: and
the cause which he knew not, he searched out; 31.13, etc.
yet he esteemed the words of God's mouth, or the means whereby his Duty was
made known to him, more than his necessary food; 23.12.
he had his set times of offering sacrifice and prayer to God; 1.5. 16.17.
and upon extraordinary occasions, he required his Children to prepare
themselves for the solemn Sacrifice by Fasting and Prayer; which is meant by
sanctifying them. 1.^.
So that not only constant Offices of Religion, but more solemn Acts of
Devotion at certain seasons, are not only agreeable to the ancient practice of
the Christian Church, but to the most ancient Principles of natural Religion,
as they were understood and practiced in the time of Job; who was so great a
Person in God's esteem, that himself, who knew him best, gave that Character of
him, That there was none like him upon earth; and therefore we cannot follow a
better Example.

(2.) Let us then set our selves to practice all the known Duties of our
Religion, and the more we consider these things, we shall be more resolved to
do it.

(1.) That God infinitely deserves from us all the service we can do him.

(2.) That we cannot serve our selves better, than by faithfully serving him.

(1.) That God infinitely deserves from us all the service we can do him. Can a
man, says Eliphaz, be profitable to God, Job 22.2.
as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? i. e. he cannot: but yet if
God expects and requires such service from us, we have no reason to enquire
farther; for we are certain all we can do, falls infinitely short of the
obligations he has laid upon us For let us consider, Was it not God who formed
us in our Mothers Womb, and so curiously framed and fashioned all the parts of
our Bodies? Was it not He, that breathed into us the breath of Life, that first
set the Wheel in motion by the course of the Blood, and settled the Cistern in
the Heart to receive and disperse it, Eccl. 12.6.
and the Pitcher at the fountain, to take it at its return from the Veins? Was
it not He, that fixed the golden Bowl in the Head that covers the Brain, and
stretched out the silver Cord of the Nerves over the whole Body, for the
admirable use and service of all the Parts? Was it not He, that endued us with
those noble Faculties of Understanding, Reasoning, Reflecting, Remembering,
Discoursing with others, and Governing our selves? Was it not He, that made all
the Parts of the World about us so serviceable and beneficial to us? Was it not
He, that preserved us from so many and great Dangers which we have been exposed
to by open Violence, and secret Conspiracies; by Fire, and Sword, and Plague;
by storms at Sea, and upon Land too? Was it not He, that has so often
scattered the Clouds, that threatened us, when the face of the Heavens gathered
blackness, and all things seemed to tend to confusion? Is it not He, who still
wonderfully continues our Peace and Plenty, amidst all the sad complaints, and
miserable condition of our Neighbors? yea, who continues our Laws, our
Government, our Religion amidst all the Fears and Conspiracies which have been
among us? And shall we think much to serve so Wise, so Merciful, so Gracious a
God? Is it not He, that has exercised so much patience, and long-suffering,
and goodness totowards us in order to our Repentance? That still offers to us
the most unvaluable Blessings of the pardon of our Sins, and everlasting
Happiness upon our sincere Repentance? Yea, is it not He, that has given his
own Son to die for our Sins, and exposed him to the Reproach and Pain of an
accursed Death upon the Cross, that he might be a Sacrifice of Atonement for
us? And will not all these Motives prevail with us to fear and serve him, who
has deserved so much more from us, than the service of our whole Lives, in the
most perfect Obedience, would make a requital for? Shall we then grudge him
that proportion of sincere Obedience, which he is not only willing to accept
of, but has promised to reward with a Crown of everlasting Glory? Which is the
last thing to be considered.

(2.) That in serving God faithfully we do most effectually serve our selves
and promote our own Interest. Psalm. 49.18.
Men will praise thee, says the Psalmist, when thou do well to thy self.
Not, when thou pamperest thy Body, and thereby layest a foundation for Lusts
and Diseases; not, when thou heapest up Riches, and know not who shall
gather them; not, when thou give way to all the Vanities and Follies of a
deceitful World: but when thou take a just care of thy true and lasting
Interest. For as Job says, God looked on this as the proper Wisdom of Mankind:
Unto Man he said, Job 28.28.
The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. And
that is certainly our true Wisdom, whereby we secure our best Friend in all
conditions, we disappoint our greatest Enemies, we lay the surest foundation
for Peace and Tranquillity in our Minds while we live, and a Blessed Eternity
when we die. To which God of his Infinite Mercy bring us.

SERMON X. Preached at a Public ORDINATION AT St. Peter's Cornhill, March 15.
1684/5.
1 Timothy V.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man.


THese words are Part of the Charge given by St. Paul to Timothy, whom he had
entrusted with the Care of the Churches of the Proconsular Asia, when he
departed from thence into Macedonia. For, although St. Paul says, he besought
Timothy to abide still at Ephesus; yet we are not to suppose, 1 Timothy 1.3.
that his Care extended no farther, than to the Church in that City; seeing, by
means of St. Paul's Preaching there, St. Luke affirms, Act. 19.10.
That all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews
and Greeks: Which can neither be understood of the greater, or lesser Asia; but
of that Asia, which lay about Ephesus, and whereof it was the (...). Chrysostom.
in Ep. ad Ephesians.

Certum est celeberrimam illam civitatem primas semper tennisse inter omnes
hujus Dioeceseos Metropoles. Berter. Diatrib. 1. c. 2.

EPHECION PPOTON ACIAC, in Nummis Galieni, Saloninae, Gordiani apud Holsten.
not. in Steph. Byzant. p. 123.

(...) seu Primae vulgo Graecis dict^e quae Romany Metropoles, seu Gentis
Capita. Ezekiel. Spanhem. de Numism. dissert. 9. p. 885.


chief Metropolitan City, the Prima Civitas sed quae Proconsulis. Holsten.

Ephesum vero, alterum lumen Asiae remot^ores convenient. Plin Not. Hist. l. 5.
c. 29.


Roman Proconsul keeping his ordinary Residence there, and holding those Solemn
Courts, to which the Inhabitants of that Province were obliged to resort. But
withal, this was the Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 13.
Principal City in the Common Assembly of Asia, Strab. l. 14. Acistid. Orat. de
Concord. ad Civit. Asiat.
a Place of great Trading, the Seat of the most Magnificent Temple of Diana, H.
Vales. not. in Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13.
where the Citizens of Asia met to Worship; on all which Accounts, there was a
great Concourse of People thither from the parts thereabouts. It is no wonder
therefore St. Paul should fix his abode so long in this City Act. 20.31.
, for about the space of three years in all. And yet a long time for him,
considering the quickness of his Progress in other places, Bar. An. Dom. 46. n.
12.
some allowing no longer time to his first Peregrination, ( Usser. Annal. A. D.
45, 46. Jac. Cappell. Centur. prima Eccles. Christian. A.D. 43, 45.
others not so much) wherein he and Barnabas planted Churches in Act. chapter 13.
and 14.
Seleucia, Cyprus, Pisidia, Pamphylia and Lycaonia, Act. 14.23.
and ordained Elders in every Church with Fasting and Prayer: From whence it is
very reasonable to infer,

(1.) That this Church at Ephesus was certainly beyond the compass of a
particular Congregation; or else St. Paul had very little success in all the
Pains he took there; which he so Act. 20.20, 25.
particularly mentions in the solemn leave he took of the Elders of the Church
whom he sent for to Miletus. And St. Luke speaking of the Jews and Greeks
dwelling in Ephesus, says, Act 19.17.
That fear fell on them all, and the Name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 20.
So mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed. And St. Paul himself takes
notice, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9.
that at Ephesus a great and effectual Door was opened unto him. What, for one
single Congregational Church to be formed, in so great a City, with all the
success St. Paul had in his Preaching there; when, in far less time, he planted
so many Churches in other Places!

(2.) That the Extent of St. Paul's Care did reach beyond the Bounds of the
City: it being very improbable, that those of Asia should so long hear St. Paul
Preach at Ephesus, and yet no Churches be founded, by his means, in any of the
neighbor Cities.

But withal, it seems probable to me, that the Elders of those Churches were
not as yet removed from Ephesus, where St. Paul ordained them, with a design to
fix them in their several Stations; For it is observable, that Act. 10.17.20.
St. Paul sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church to come to Miletus;
whereas, if they had been dispersed, he would have sent to their several Places
of abode; and yet when they came to Miletus from Ephesus (which were not far
distant, If by Miletus that Place be meant, which is now called Figena, or
S^ala Nova, as some imagine, that lies but 10 Miles from Ephesus to the
South-west; but that rather seems to be the Phygela of the Ancients. The Modern
Geographers, who make it to be Melasso are certainly mistaken, not only
because of the too great distance from Ephesus, but because its Situation does
not agree with that of Miletus; for it appears by Livy and Solinus, Solin. c.
40.
that the Meander ran into the Sea, between Miletus and Priene; and but 10
Stadia from Miletus, Plin. l. 5. c. 29.
says Pliny; but Melasso is a great distance from it. Our latest Travelers
think it Palatsha; Voyage du Levant. To. 1. p. 359.
but Dr. Spon confesses that to be some Miles from the Sea; and therefore it
seems yet to lie undiscovered in its Ruins, as is well observed by Sir G
Wheler. Wheler's Voyage into the Lesser Asia, p. 272. Arr de Expedit. Alex. ^.
1.
Ferrarius places Ephesus at 30 Miles distance, between Smyrna and Miletus.
Spon says, It is a day and a halfs journey from Ephesus to Palatschia. Arrian
describes Miletus as not far from Ephesus, and very near the Sea.
he discourses to them of his Affairs from the time of his coming unto Asia; v.
18.
after what manner he had been with them at all Seasons, and had kept back
nothing profitable for them; v. 20.
but had showed them, and taught them publicly, and from house to house. Which
being spoken to the Elders of the Church, do imply a particular care he had
there of fitting Persons for the Pastoral Charge, besides, his Testifying both
to the Jews and to the Greeks Repentance toward God, v. 21.
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And, to these Elders, he not only
commits the Church of Ephesus, v. 28.
but all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers, i. e. all
that had been converted in Asia, through his means, during his abode there.
Iren. l. 3. c. 14.
Irenaeus understands St. Paul, as though he summoned them from the Neighbor
Cities as well as Ephesus; but St. Paul was in so great haste, v. 16.
that he would not so much as go to Ephesus, nor send any whither but to that
City; 17.
and yet those to whom he committed the whole Flock then in Asia, came from
Ephesus to Miletus; which makes it probable, that there St. Paul had raised a
Nursery for the Churches thereabout, as Clem. Epist. p. 54.
Clemens observes the Apostles were wont to do in Fruitful Soils; with a
prospect of such Churches as were to be formed. (...). Now where these were not
yet settled, such Persons, remained under the Apostles immediate Care and
Instruction, who by their Doctrine and Example, were still preparing them for
so great a Work. And Clemens takes notice that the Apostles were wont to pitch
upon their First Fruits, or most early Converts; and of these at Ephesus we
meet with Twelve Persons, upon whom Saint Paul, Act. 19.6, 7.
at his first coming, laid his hands, and the Holy Ghost came upon them, and
they spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied. And so were qualified, in an
extraordinary manner, to be Teachers of others; and might be in the number of
these Elders, whom St. Paul charges to take heed to themselves, and to all the
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers.

When St. Paul sent for these Elders to Miletus; Timothy was with him: For, we
find him amongst those who waited for his return at Act. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Troas, upon his coming back from Macedonia through Greece; and therefore his
leaving Timothy at Ephesus, was, when he first went into Macedonia, Act. 20.1.
being forced away by the Uproar that was raised against him there. And in his
return through Greece, where he abode three Months, he sends this Epistle to
Timothy, then at Ephesus, and taking Care of the Churches thereabout: As he
afterward left Titus in Crete, Tit. 1.5.
to set in order the things that were wanting and to ordain Elders in every
City, as he had appointed him. To this purpose he directs this Canonical
Epistle to Timothy; wherein he gives him very particular Directions about the
due Exercise of that Apostolical Office, which he was entrusted with the
management of; And especially about these things,

(1.) The great regard he ought to have to the Doctrine that was taught by
those, who were to instruct others; that thou might charge some, 1 Timothy 1.3.
that they teach no other Doctrine.

(2.) The due Performance of the Public Offices of Divine Worship; that
Supplications, Prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1.3.
Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all Men; for Kings and for all
that are in Authority, etc. And this order Timothy was to see observed in the
Churches under his Care.

(3.) The proper Qualifications of the Bishops and Deacons of the Church, as
the proper Officers of it under Timothy; Chapter 3.
who was to take care of fit Men, to succeed those who were then in being, or
to provide more.

(4.) The manner of proceeding in Church Censures against Elders and Widows,
and open Offenders: Chapter 5.1. to the 21 st.
Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses.
Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Which plainly
shows, that there was a Right of Judging and Censuring Offenders in Timothy, by
virtue of his Office.

(5.) The Caution to be used, in admitting Persons to these holy Functions, the
Qualifications whereof he had laid down before: And for this he gives a general
charge, to do nothing in these matters by Partiality; v. 21.
and then mentions the Consideration and Circumspection necessary in the laying
on of Hands; Lay hands suddenly on no man.

Some have thought these words relate to the Reconciliation of Penitents, and
not to the Ordination of the Bishops and Deacons before mentioned; because it
immediately follows, neither be partaker of other men's sins; but I see no
Cause to recede from the Sense generally received, for these Reasons.

(1.) Because St. Paul had not mentioned laying on of hands in relation to
Penitents; but he had done it in this Epistle, with respect to Ordination; and
that in Timothy's own Case; wherein St. Paul as the principal Person did in an
Authoritative manner, lay on his hands, as himself expresses it, in the second
Epistle; and the Presbyters assisted in laying on their hands, to manifest
their Concurrence and Approbation: 2 Timothy 1.6.
but the laying on of hands is no where in these Epistles, applied to the other
Sense; 1 Timothy 4.14.
nor in any other place of Scripture.

(2.) If these words do not relate to Ordination, St. Paul would have given
Timothy no particular direction, about that which was one main part of his
Office. As it is expressed concerning Titus, That he was appointed to ordain
Elders in every City: And no doubt Timothy had the same Commission, which is no
where intimated but in these words.

(3.) Supposing, laying on of hands then equally used in both Cases, yet the
Apostle gives no Rules concerning the Qualifications of Penitents, as he does
concerning Bishops and Deacons; and therefore we have more cause to apply it
according to the chief intention and design of this Epistle; but he says
nothing before, what Penitents were to be reconciled; and after what time, and
under what Conditions they were to have hands laid on them in token of
Reconciliation. And there is no concurrent Evidence of such a Practice, so
early in the Christian Church.

(4.) The following words are capable of a very good meaning, according to this
Sense. For then being partaker of other men's Sins, does imply, that as it is a
Fault in those who rudely, and inconsiderately, without due preparation of
mind, do rush upon so Sacred an Office; so those cannot acquit themselves of a
great share in their Guilt, who do not use their best endeavors, by due
Examination and Trial of the Persons, to keep them from entering upon it, till
they are prepared and qualified for it.

(5.) The great use of the laying on of hands in the New Testament, is for the
setting Persons apart for the discharge of a Sacred Office. So, when the Office
of Deacons was first instituted, it is said, Acts 6.6.
They were set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their
hands on them. And which is more considerable, when Barnabas and Paul, by the
particular appointment of the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.2, 3,
were to be separated unto the Work whereto God had called them; it is said,
And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away. Here it was not for miraculous Cures, Mark 16.18. Act. 28 8. Act.
8.15.15.19.6.
as the Apostles sometimes used it to Sick Persons; nor for conferring
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as at other times they used it; (and
probably this was the Gift of God which Timothy had, 2 Timothy 1.6.
by laying on of the Apostles hands;) neither was it a mere Rite of
Benediction, Genesis 48.14. Mark 10.26.
as Jacob laid his hands on the sons of Joseph; and our Savior on the Children
when he blessed them; but it was a solemn Rite of Dedication of particular
Persons to God, when they are set apart for the Exercise of a Function which
immediately related to his Service. I confess, that among the Jews, it was not
used in the Consecration of Priests; For, Exodus 29.9.10.15.19.
Aaron and his sons were to lay their hands on the Sacrifices that were offered
on that occasion, and particularly on the Ram of Consecration; but the Ceremony
was performed by putting some part of the Ram, and the Cakes, Lev. 8.14.18.22.
and the Wafer upon Aaron's hands, and his sons hands. For the Priesthood of
the Law being a Work of the hands, 26.27.28.
the Ceremony was very fitly applied to them; but that of the Gospel being more
intellectual and spiritual, the laying on of hands on the Heads of the Persons
devoted thereto, was more agreeable to the design of it. And this was an
ancient Custom among the Jews in employments of the highest nature. So Moses
laid his hands on Joshua; and then it is said, Numb. 27.18.23. Deuteronomy. 34.9
that he was full of the Spirit of Wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him:
and from hence it came to be an usual Ceremony among the Jews, in the Solemn
Designation of Persons for Sacred employments, either to be Rulers or Teachers
in their Synagogues. And from thence it was not only brought into the Christian
Church, but made use of to express that Right and Authority which Persons do
receive together with it, for the Exercise and Discharge of their Ministerial
Function.

So that from these Words, there are Three things considerable to be spoken to.

(I.) The Nature of the Office to which they are ordained, by laying on of
hands. (II.) The Authority here supposed in Timothy, to admit Persons to this
Office, by laying on of hands. (III.) The great Care and Circumspection
necessary for the right performing it; Lay hands suddenly on no man.
(I.) The Nature of the Office; which may relate both to Bishops and Deacons
before mentioned; But the principal parts of that Office, which is here chiefly
meant, are by St. Paul said to be these two; Ruling well, v. 17.
and Laboring in the Word and Doctrine.

(1.) Ruling well; Not, in opposition to Timothy, who was to Rule them well;
nor so as to imply, that the entire Power of Government was lodged in a College
of Presbyters then, Hier. comment. in Epist. ad Tit.
as St. Jerome imagines; for what had Timothy then to do in the governing them?
I cannot find any Argument of Force in the New Testament, to prove, that ever
the Christian Churches were under the sole Government of Presbyters. For what
St. Jerome alleges, does by no means prove it: I grant he proves, That the
Name of Bishop and Presbyter were at that time common to the same Persons; But
what then? Suppose the Bishop and Elder here in Timothy's Epistle were the
same: Does this prove, that these Governed the Church without Timothy? The true
Question is not about the Sense of Words, but about the Authority of these
Bishops or Presbyters, i. e. Whether the whole Care of their Churches were
committed to them, without any Superior Jurisdiction? What if it be yielded to
St. Jerome, Phil. 1.1.
That the Bishops and Deacons at Philippi were no other than the Presbyters and
Deacons; as long as the Apostle, either in Person, or by some other appointed
by himself, did rule over them? What, if the Bishops summoned to Miletus, were
no other than the Pastors and Teachers? Act. 20.28.
Did not St. Paul himself, at that very time, call them together, and give a
Charge and Direction to them, as one who had Authority over them? So that it
does no where appear in Scripture, that the Presbyters were invested in the
Supreme-Power over the Church.

But yet they were not excluded from all kind of share in the Government, for
then they could never be said to Rule well, who had nothing at all to do in
Government: And those who are under a Supreme may be called Governors, 1 Pet.
2.14.
and are to be obeyed according to the Nature of their Authority; which does
relate to men in another capacity, and for very different ends from what Civil
Government does.

For the Church is a Society in its Nature, Design, Duties, Offices, Censures,
really distinct from any mere Humane Institution. And no Christian who believes
that the Kingdom of the Messiah was to be an external, visible Kingdom, can be
of another Opinion. And although Christ be the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Revel. 17.14.19.16.
and therefore as Kings they are subject to him; yet that Authority which
Christian Kings do exercise over their Subjects, does not overthrow the Rules
and Orders which himself has established in his Church. For no Power derived
from him can void or destroy his own Laws and Institutions. Since then the
Church does subsist by virtue of Christ's own appointment, and that Church is
to have peculiar Officers to instruct and govern it, it must follow, that even
in a Christian Kingdom, the Church is a Society distinct from the Commonwealth.

(2.) Laboring in the Word and Doctrine. Not to distinguish them from another
sort of Elders, whom St. Paul never thought of: For he knew of none but such as
were set apart by laying on of hands, and therefore dedicated to the Work of
the Ministry; and if St. Paul's Bishop and Elder were the same, they must have
the same qualifications; and one of the chief of them is, that he be apt to
teach; so that they may as well plead for a Lay-Bishop, as for a Lay-Elder; or
else the Elder must be one apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.
if the same with the Bishop.

But some may say, There was then indeed great need of laboring in the Word
and Doctrine, when the Christian Doctrine was not well known, or understood in
the World; But what necessity is there of it now, when all People own the
Profession of Christianity among us? And this continual Preaching does but fill
the People's heads with too much Knowledge, and makes them more opinionative,
and less capable of being governed.

To which I answer,

If Christ appointed Preachers only for the Conversion of Infidels, this
Argument would have great force: But the Apostle tells us, That Christ has
appointed in his Church, not only Apostles and Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.^^* 12.
but Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, v. 13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Therefore as long
as the Church is in its imperfect State, as long as it may want Unity or
Knowledge, or Improvement, this Office of Teachers is to continue. And those
Elders will still deserve double honor, who do not perfunctorily and rarely
discharge this Duty, but who do labor in the Word and Doctrine.

There are indeed many sorts of Preaching, which the Church stands in no need
of, because they tend so little to Edification: Such are all fine Harangues in
the Pulpit, i. e. Words well put together without suitable Matter; All dry,
flat, insipid Discourses, about things of no great consequence to Men's
Salvation; All affectations of Jingling Sentences, Far-fetched Allusions,
Elaborate Trifles; All impertinent Disputes about needless, vain, intricate
Controversies; All Enthusiastic unintelligible Talk, which tends to confound
Men's Notions of Religion, and to evaporate the true Spirit of it into Fancies
and Eastern-Modes of speaking: Lastly, All Corrupt and Seditious Doctrine,
which poisons the Minds of People with dangerous Errors, or Factious
Principles.

But setting all these aside, there remains a Grave, Serious, Pious,
Affectionate, Convincing way of Preaching; which is profitable, in its degree,
for the same ends for which the holy Scripture is useful, 2 Timothy 3.16.
viz. for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, i. e. for the best purposes in the World. And can any think such
a Work to be now unnecessary, as long as men have Consciences to be awakened,
Errors to be confuted, Vices to be reformed, and stand so much in need of good
direction in the way to Heaven?

Can we be employed about a better or more useful Work than this? While the
Souls of those under our Care, are in such perpetual danger, either of being
overspread with Errors, or overcome with Temptations, or over-set with
Difficulties, or overwhelmed with Fears? When should the Pilots show their
Skill and Courage, and Diligence, but when the Sea is rough, and the Weather
tempestuous, and Banks of Sand appear on one side, and Rocks on the other, and
so many Wrecks before them; and the common Mariners are bold and unskilful,
unable to govern, and impatient of being governed? Is it time then to say,
There is no need of Pilots now, but they may lie in their Cabins and sleep, for
the Ship will steer it self well enough, and the Mariners cannot fail of their
Duty, as long as the Coasts are known, and the Rocks have been discovered to
them?

It is very true, that the way to Heaven is not now hard to find; but it is no
easy matter to bring men to look in earnest after it, or to keep them in it.
And here lies the main of our Work of Preaching; We are not to teach men new
Doctrines, but to Clear, Defend, and Apply the old, to the Consciences of men.
It is very easy to shoot over the People's heads, and to spend an hour to
little or no purpose; but it requires all our skill to Preach plainly without
flatness; and to set the matters of Religion in the best light, and to
recommend them to the minds of People, with the greatest force of Persuasion.
It is no hard matter to trifle away the time, but it is so to speak Suitably,
Warmly and Effectually to the Hearts of our Hears; to make them find the same
effect of our Preaching, which the two Disciples did, when Christ unknown was
discoursing with them; Luke 24.32
When they said to one another, Did not our hearts burn within us while he
talked with us, and while he opened to us the Scriptures? That is then the best
way* of Preaching, which has Light and Heat together; which clears the
Scriptures to the People's Capacities, and warms their Affections to Spiritual
things. And it is hardly possible to mistake, as to the best Method of
Preaching, if men do but judge aright concerning the End and Design of it. For
there must be Strength and Clearness to convince; and a close Application to
Men's Consciences, to excite and persuade them to the Practice of those things
which men can hardly be ignorant of, and yet are very backward to do. And
therefore this must be the chief Work and Business of our Preaching.

Which none ought to undervalue or be ashamed of, who do in earnest believe God
and another World; none ought to neglect, whose peculiar Office and Dignity it
is to take Care of Men's Souls; and none will be careless in it, who have a
regard to their own or others Souls. For in doing this, 1 Timothy 4.16.
says St. Paul to Timothy, speaking of his diligence in his Function, Thou
shall both save thy self and them that hear thee; as though a Man's own
Salvation, and that of his Hearers, went together. That is indeed the most
desirable thing in the World to be the Instruments of carrying Souls to Heaven;
Dan. 12.3.
for they who convert many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever: but yet, the most careful Endeavors do not always meet with
Success; and even our Blessed Savior's Preaching, who spoke as never man
spoke, was ineffectual to many; (What then may we expect!) But this is our
Duty, and the most likely way of doing good to Souls, as appears by our
Savior's own Practice; and if we do not meet with success to our desires, let
us not give over doing our Duty; and say, We have labour^d in vain, Isa. 49.9.
and spent our strength for naught and in vain; for surely our judgment is with
the Lord, and our Work with our God, as the Prophet speaks; and if we fail of a
Recompense in this World, we shall not in another.

II. And so I come from the Nature of the Office, to the Authority of
Conferring it; these words implying it to belong to Timothy, as being spoken
particularly to him, Lay hands suddenly on no man. For although he often speaks
of the Bishops and Elders before; yet he gives no charge about Ordination, but
only to Timothy.

True, some say, in this particular Case; but this was by virtue of an
Extraordinary Commission given to him, as an Evangelist by St. Paul: But what
is this to the standing Rule and Practice of the Church in succeeding Ages?
which is not to be governed by such Precedents, unless the Succession in the
same Office be made appear in the following Bishops of the several Churches.

To make this Matter as clear as I can I shall recommend these things to
consideration.

(I. Consid.) That from hence appears evidently, That the Apostolical Power of
Governing Churches, and Ordaining Elders in them, was not limited to the
Persons of the Apostles, but was capable of being communicated to others whom
the Apostle entrusted with it. And this is a very material Point, to Prove,
that this Power was not so peculiar to the Apostles, but it might be
transmitted to others, and therefore might be continued in the Church.

But the great Objection against Timothy's being a Pattern for Episcopal Power
is this; That it appears by Scripture, he was sent up and down to several
Places, as St. Paul thought fit. For he took him into his attendance at Act.
16.3.
Lystra; from whence he accompanied him through 6.
Phrygia, Galatia, Macedonia, and 12.17.1.10.
(there from Philippi to Thessalonica and Beraea.) And when he went to Athens,
he v. 15.
sent for Timothy to him, and sent him from thence back to Thessalonica; and he
returned from 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2.
Macedonia to him Act. 18.5.
at Corinth. From thence St. Paul went into 18.
Syria, and so to 19.
Ephesus and there again he sent Timothy into Act. 19.22.
Macedonia with Erastus; 20.1.
whither St. Paul went afterward himself. And upon his return to Miletus, he
speaks to the Elders, and not to Timothy, as their Bishop. From hence, they
say, St. Paul took him to Jerusalem, and so to Rome, as appears by the Epistles
Written from thence.

From this Series of the Story they conclude Timothy to have been only an
Evangelist, and not a fixed Bishop.

To which I Answer; That the frequent removes of Timothy, before this Epistle
to him at Ephesus, are not material to this purpose. But it is very material to
consider, what Power of Government St. Paul then committed to him. Which is a
certain Proof, that such a power was not so peculiar to the Apostles, by virtue
of their immediate Commission from Christ, but it might be delegated to others
in their stead. Whether for a longer or shorter time, whether while the
Apostles went up and down, or near their Decease, makes no difference, as to
the Point of Delegation. And if it be granted, that such an Apostolical Power
of Governing Churches might be committed to others and was actually so by the
Apostles; then there is no more to be done, but to enquire, whether upon their
Remove, or Departure, they did entrust any Persons in such a manner, as it is
certain from Scripture Saint Paul did Timothy, as to the Churches of Asia, when
he went into Macedonia.

Some think, that St. Paul's leaving Timothy at Ephesus, was upon his return
out of Macedonia, when he was going up to Jerusalem, knowing that they should
see his face no more? and that while he staid for him at Troas, he sent this
Epistle to him. But St. Paul's words are too plain to be avoided, that he left
him at Ephesus, (...), which can never be interpreted returning from Macedonia.
And there was as much need of one to look after the Churches of Asia, when St.
Paul was then absent in Macedonia, as when he went to Jerusalem: and so
Theodor. Praefat. in Epist. Pauli.
Theodoret understands it. But if Timothy were then with St. Paul, as appears
by his being at Act. 20.4.5.
Troas, when he went from thence to Miletus, that was sufficient Reason why he
did not address himself to him, but to the Elders which came from Ephesus; whom
he put in mind of their Duty by his Speech, as he had done Timothy by an
Epistle not long before directed to him.

Whose Office was no more superseded by this Charge given to them, than a
Proconsul's was by the Senates Instructions to his Legates, when himself was
present.

If it were evidently proved, that St. Paul then carried away Timothy with him
to Jerusalem, and so to Rome, there would be greater force in the Objection.
But how does that appear? Not from Scripture. For when St. Paul appeared at the
Temple, the Jews laid hold on him, because they supposed Act. 21.29.
he had brought Trophimus the Ephesian with him into the Temple, whom they had
seen so much with him in the City. How came Timothy not to be as much taken
notice of, if he were there? For, he being discovered by the Jews of Asia,
there was far greater Reason for them to have raised a Tumult about Timothy,
than about Trophimus.

After this, we find Act. 24.27.
St. Paul kept two years in Prison, and not a word of Timothy, whom we may
justly suppose exercising his Charge all that time at Ephesus. When Saint Paul
was carried to Rome, we find not Timothy in his Company; no mention being made
of him till he Wrote the Epistles to the Phil. 1.1.
Philippians and Coloss. 1.1.
Colossians, and then Timothy was with him. For St. Paul had sent for him from
Ephesus in his Second 2 Timothy 4.9.
Epistle; where, in all probability, he remained till that time. During his
stay at Rome those Epistles were Written, as likewise that to Philemon, and to
the Hebrews; in which it is said, Heb. 13.23.
That he had been Imprisoned and was then at Liberty; and intended shortly to
return into the Eastern Parts. From henceforwards we read nothing of Timothy in
Scripture. But Hier. in Catal.
St. Jerome himself makes him Bishop of the Ephesians, and so does Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.
Eusebius; Theod. in 1 Timothy 3.1.
Theodoret calls him, The Apostle of those in Asia; and St. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy
5.19. Hom. 15.
Chrysostom says, The whole People of Asia were committed to his Charge, i.
e. of this Proconsular Asia, which lay about Ephesus.

And now let any reasonable Man consider, whether there be not sufficient
Proof, that the Apostolical Power of Governing Churches was communicated to
others besides the Apostles themselves; and consequently there might be a
Succession in that Power, in as many as the Apostles thought fit.

It is confessed by some Wal^ Messal. c. 1. p. 40.50.81.
That there were Secondary Apostles, such as besides Timothy and Titus, Linus,
Clemens and Epaphroditus are said to have been; but these are called Itinerant
Preachers, and not fixed Bishops* But the same Persons observe from Theodoret.
in Argum. Epist. 1. ad Timoth.
Theodoret, not only that these were called Bishops afterward; but that the
Reason why St. Paul Wrote Epistles to some, and not to others, was, because
some he took with him, and others he entrusted with the Government of Churches.
(...), which can hardly agree to Itinerant Preachers.

But it is said, These Secondary Apostles were not sent by Christ, but by the
Apostles. And what then? Walo, etc. p. 50.
Would the Apostles betray their Trust, and commit part of that charge to
others, which was entrusted only to themselves? But if this Office were by the
Will of Christ appropriated to the Persons of the Apostles, they could not
commit it to others without breach of Trust. And if it were not so, then this
Power might be communicated to as many as the Apostles judged convenient; and
so (as I said before) we have nothing farther to do, but to enquire, whether at
their removal from particular Churches, they did not put this Power into the
Hands of others.

(II. Consid.) Whether the Apostles, upon their withdrawing, did pass this
Power over to others, as St. Paul did plainly in the Case of Timothy and Titus,
is a matter of Fact; and to be proved in such a manner as such a thing is
capable of. We find plainly, the Apostles had this Power in themselves, and did
convey it to some others; but whether Universally, and with a design to
continue this Order, must be proved by the best means we can do a matter of
Fact of so great Antiquity.

(III. Consid.) There can be no stronger Proof of such a matter of Fact, than
the general sense of the Christian Church in the Ages next succeeding the
Apostles.

Now, as to the finding out the general sense of the Church, as to this matter,
I shall premise Three things.

(1.) It is not necessary to prove from Scripture, that the Apostles did
observe the same method in all Churches; which we find, as to the Churches of
Ephesus and Crete. For we have no such particular account, as to the other
Churches; but we are certain St. Paul would do no irregular thing, nor
communicate an Office to others, which was to expire with themselves.

(2.) It is not at all necessary, to prove, that all the Bishops mentioned in
Scripture had this Apostolical Power; for the contrary appears in the Bishops
under Timothy and Titus; and therefore the Succession is not to be drawn from
the Bishops mentioned in the Epistles to them, but from themselves; the want of
considering this one Point, has caused more perplexity in the Controversy
about Episcopacy, than any one thing besides.

(3.) It is not necessary that the Succession in this Apostolical Power be made
equally clear in all Churches; since the Records of the Church may be more
doubtful and defective in some Churches which are not in others. But yet there
are these ways to make out the general Sense of the Christian Church as to this
point.

(1.) That the Evidence of the Succession is clear in the most conspicuous
Churches, by undoubted Testimonies.

(2.) That those who seemed most doubtful about the first Succession, do yield
the general Consent of the Church in the Practice of it.

(1.) As to the undoubted Testimonies of this Succession in the most
conspicuous Churches; I shall first appeal to Irenaeus and Tertullian, as least
liable to Exception. The former not only mentions a Succession of Persons to
the Apostles; but he says, Qui ab Apostolis ipsis instituti sunt Episcopi in
Ecclesiis -- quibus etiam ipsas Ecclesias committebant -- quos and Successores
relinquebant, suum ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
The Apostles committed the Care of the Churches to them; and left them to
succeed in their Places: Which implies that as the Apostles themselves had the
Care of the Church, so they committed it to the Bishops, whom they chose to
succeed them. Tertullian not only mentions those in general who succeeded the
Apostles, but particularly instanceth in Polycarp, placed by St. John at
Smyrna; and Clemens, by St Peter at Rome; and then adds, Proinde utique and;
caeterae exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici
seminis traduces habeant. Tertull. de praescript. c. 32.
That the other Churches had Bishops placed in them like to these. So that what
Authority Polycarp had at Smyrna, or Clemens at Rome, that Tertullian affirms
the Bishops had in other Churches. Now Irenaeus says, That Clemens had
Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae, i. e. the Episcopal Power of governing
the Church which the Apostles delivered to them. And St. Chrysostom says of
Ignatius, Chrysostom. To. 5. p. 499.
That he Received the Government of that Church from the Apostles own hands.
And the Commentatour on the Apocalypse, under St. Ambrose's Name, calls the
Angels of the Seven Churches, The Governors of those Churches. From all which,
we may ju^^ly infer, That this Succession was not in mere Presidency of Order,
but that the Bishops succeeded the Apostles in the Government over those
Churches. But as Theodore^ well observes, The Name of Apostles was not
continued, Theod. ad 1 Timothy c. 3.
out of Reverence to the Apostles; but the Name of Bishops was then
appropriated to the Successors of the Apostles; Which alteration of the Name,
has proved another great Occasion of the Confusion in this Controversy. But
that the Bishops did succeed the Apostles we have the general Consent of the
Ancient Cyprian. Epist. 3.66. ed. Ox. Hier. in Psalm. 44. ad Evagr. Ep. 85. ad
Marcellam. Aug. in Psalm. 44. Ambros. in Ephesians. 4.11. and in 1 Cor. 12.28.
Fathers, who were the most competent Witnesses in this Case; which is an
Argument, they believed the Apostolical Power, with respect to the Government
of Churches, did not expire with the Apostles, but was to continue, as long as
Christ had promised to be with them, i. e. to the end of the World. Mat. 28.20.


(2.) That those who seemed most doubtful about the Original of Episcopacy,
do yield the general consent of the Church in the Practice of it. Some few of
the Ancients must be allowed to have had singular Fancies and Opinions of their
own, about this Matter. And the not yielding this, has been another great
Advantage to the Enemies of Episcopacy.

But, as to those few among the Fathers, who have advanced singular Opinions
about the first Government of Churches, I desire these things may be observed.

(1.) That it is no wonder there should be different Opinions about the
Beginnings of things, which are generally very obscure; and therefore thinking
Men are apt to frame different Hypotheses about them. As about the Original of
Civil Government; some sounding it in Dominion and Property; others on Consent
of the People; others in a Natural Right of Sovereignty, which one preserves,
and the rest part with; others in Primogeniture; and lastly, others most
reasonably in Divine Providence and Institution. Whilst these things lie only
in Speculation, a difference of Opinions is hard to be prevented, and of no
such ill consequence to the World: but if Men, from those Speculations, draw
such Inferences as tend to disturb the Peace of the World, and to withdraw Men
from Obedience to Government; then such Opinions are to be looked on as
Dangerous and Seditious, and care must be taken to prevent their spreading. So
here about the Rice of Episcopal Government, if the Question were only a
matter of Curiosity, Whether the Apostles did first try the Experiment of
Presbyters governing in common, and upon the inconveniences of that Government
set up Bishops, as St. Jerome seems to think; or, Whether there were at first a
Succession in Course, as another of the Ancients imagined, till the
inconveniences of that made a Choice necessary: ^ub Nomine Ambros. in c. c. ad
Ephesians.
If it went no farther than bare Speculations, though these Opinions may be
both false, yet they are not dangerous: But when any from hence infer, the
Episcopal Government to be an Usurpation, and that Men are bound to restore the
Right of Presbyters in opposition to them, notwithstanding the Universal
Consent of the Church, from the Apostles times; then such Opinions change their
Nature, and become mischievous in their Consequences.

(2.) It is a great Argument against these singular Opinions, that they
contradict each other; and therefore the General Sense of the Church is to be
preferred before them. Hieron in Epist. ad Evagr. 85.
For St. Jerome affirms, That from St. Mark 's time, in the Church of
Alexandria, the Presbyters always chose one of their Body, whom they made their
Bishop: So that no such thing could ever be practiced there, as a Succcession
in Course, which the other affirms. And as it is the great Advantage of
Monarchy, that it had the General Consent of Mankind in the Eldest times; and
that those who would set up Popular Government, differ so much in the First
Principles and Fundamentals of it; So it is as to the Government of the Church
by Bishops, that even these who differ about the First Form, yet agree in the
early Change, and the Universal Consent in it.

(3.) If St. Jerome be understood of the setting up Episcopacy in the
Apostolical Churches, after the Apostles times, and a trial then made of
Governing by Presbyters, he cannot be excused from contradicting himself as
well as the rest of the Fathers. For what Experiment was there of that kind in
the Church of Alexandria, if from St. Mark 's time, the Presbyters set up one
above themselves, as an Army making choice of a General; which are his own
Expressions? Will any Man say, An Army is Governed by a Council of Inferior
Officers, when they have a General over them, though of their own choosing?
Hieron. ad Call 2 and in Script. Eccles.
So in the Church of Jerusalem, he says, St. James was the first Bishop; How
was that Church then Governed by a College of Presbyters? At Ephesus, he
confesses Timothy was Bishop there; In Catalog.
and Titus in Crete. At Rome he makes Linus and Clemens to succeed in the
Bishopric there. At Antioch, he says, Ignatius was Bishop, and he owns his
Epistles, and surely there is nothing like the sole Government by Presbyters in
them. At Smyrna, he says Polycarp was appointed Bishop, and had care of the
Churches of Asia. Where then, according to St. Jerome, is this Government by
Presbyters to be found after the Apostles times?

(4.) No Man lays down greater Reasons for the Change of this Government, than
St. Jerome does. For he says, Quod autem postea unus electus est, qui caeteris
praeponeretur in Schismatis remedium factum st, ne unusquisque ad se trahens
Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. Ad Evagr.

Ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis
Ecclesiae cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina tollerentur. In Comment. ad
Tit.


That Episcopacy was found necessary to prevent Schisms and Disorders, and
tearing the Church in pieces. What could be said more to the Advantage of any
Government than that it was brought in upon the best Reason for Government in
the World, viz. the preserving of Peace and Order in the Church? We need not
carry the matter so far, as to make St. Jerome charge the Apostles with
Indiscretion before, in not preventing the first Occasion of Schisms. For he
might think, the Presbyters would have thought themselves hardly dealt with, to
be excluded from Government till the Experiment were tried, and the Confusions
following convinced themselves of the Necessity of a Superior, and so made
them more willing to submit. St. Jerome seems to have had the same kind of
Notion of Church Government, which others have of the beginnings of
Civil-Government, viz. That at first there was a State of War among Mankind,
and the inconveniences of that made Men willing to part with their own Rights
for the sake of Peace; so these Presbyters, finding so much Disorder and
Confusion, by being left to themselves, were far better contented to yield to
such Government as would best keep the Church in Peace.

(5.) St. Jerome yields, that this Alteration of Government did Universally
obtain. For nothing less than that can be meant by his In toto orb decretum
est: He does not speak clearly, whether he means a Decree of the Apostles to
bind the Church, or a General Consent; but whichsoever be meant, he supposes no
difference, or opposition about it. If he had said it was done by the Apostles
in plain terms, he had taken away the force of his own Argument, which goes
upon the Apostles Times; but yet it is hard to conceive how such an alteration
should happen without the Apostles Act. For, if they had left the Presbyters in
full Power of Government, it is not to be imagined, they would so universally
part with it, without being obliged thereto, by those who had Authority over
them; but this St. Jerome leaves to be gathered by the Event.

(6.) St. Jerome never supposes this Alteration to have been made against any
Institution of Christ. All that he says, is, That there was a time when the
Presbyters were left to themselves, and so did Govern the Church by common
Consent. And at that time the Apostles writing to them suppose a Bishop and
Presbyter the same: but he never says that Christ had appointed, that none
should be set over them. For then there could be no Alteration without
Violation of a Law of Christ, which he could never suppose would so universally
obtain without opposition. And he never dreamt the setting up of this
Government to be any part of the Mystery of Iniquity then working; unless he
could imagine the preserving the Peace of the Church to be it. On the contrary,
St. Jerome makes this Government in the very same Places to bear an Analogy to
Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites in the Temple, to Moses and the LXX Elders,
under the Law: and in other Places out of the heat of Dispute, when the Roman
Deacons were not in his head, he makes the Bishops the Successors of the
Apostles. Fuerunt, O Ecclesia, Apostoli Patres tui -- Nunc quia illi
recesserunt a mundo, habes pro his Episcopos filios, quia te creati sunt; sunt
enim and hi Patres tui, quia ab ipsis regeris. Comment. ad Psalm. 44. Caeterum
omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt. Ad Evagr. Apud nos Apostolorum locum
Episcopi tenent. Ad Marcellam.
But if they had come in by Usurpation, he would have called them the
Successors of Simon Magus, of Diotrephes, of Caiaphas, and according to his
warm manner of Expression, of Lucifer himself.

(7.) St. Jerome concludes this Alteration to have been made on such good
grounds, that all Persons are bound to submit to it, and to be subject to the
Bishops as their Spiritual Governors: Nay, he makes the Peace and Welfare of
the Church to depend upon it. Esto subditus Pontifici tuo and quasi Animae
Parentem suscipe. Ad Nepotian.

Nec hoc dico quod istiusmodi Gradibus in Ecclesia non debeatis esse subjecti.
Quicunque enim maledixerit Patri aut Matri morte morictur. Et Apostolus docet
Praepositis in Ecclesia obediendum. In Mich. c. 7.

Ecclesiae Salus in summi Sacerdotis Dignitate pendet, cui si non Exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur Schismata,
quot Sacerdotes. Advers. Luciferianos.


And nothing more can be said in that respect for any Government, than even St.
Jerome speaks for Episcopacy.

(IV. Consid.) The Universal Consent of the Church being proved, there is as
great Reason to believe, the Apostolical Succession to be of Divine
Institution, as the Canon of Scripture, or the Observation of the Lord's Day.
We do not doubt but it is unlawful to add to, or to diminish from the Canon of
Scripture; and yet there is no plain Text for it, with respect to all the Books
contained in it, and some of the Books were a long time disputed in some
Churches; but the Churches coming at last to a full Agreement in this matter,
upon due search and enquiry, has been thought sufficient to bind all
after-Ages to make no Alterations in it. And as to the Divine Institution of
the Lord^s Day, we do not go about to lessen it, but only to show, that some
Examples in Scripture being joined with the Universal Practice of the Church in
its purest Ages, has been allowed to be sufficient ground not only for
following Ages to observe it, but to look on it as at least an Apostolical
Institution. Now it cannot but seem unequal, not to allow the same force, where
there is the same Evidence And therefore our Church has wisely and truly
determined, That since the Apostle's times there have been three Orders, of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and in a Regular, well constituted Church, are to
continue to the World's End.

III. The last thing to be spoken to, is the Care and Circumspection necessary
in admitting Persons to the Exercise of this holy Function here mentioned, Lay
hands suddenly on no man. And that will appear very reasonable on these
accounts, because the Welfare of the Church* the Honor of Religion, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls depend so much upon those who are admitted to holy
Orders; and therefore it is not only Negligence and Stupidity, but
Unfaithfulness to the Trust reposed in them, if through their Fault they suffer
unfit Men to take upon them to be the Ministers of holy things.

(1.) The Welfare of the Church is so much concerned in it. It is true, some
have higher Places, greater Authority, more powerful Influence on the State of
the Church than others have; but yet every Wheel must be in its due Order and
Motion, or the whole may be easily disturbed. A loose, irregular Clergy have so
great Influence on the Minds of some People, with respect to the whole Church,
that they will never think well of that Church where such Persons are employed.
For they will not distinguish the Good and Bad, where it is more suitable to
their Interest, and Prejudices not to do it.

And we find, by too sad Experience, if those who are disaffected to our Church
have met with unfit Persons in their Places, though very obscure and remote,
what perpetual Clamor they make with it all their Lives after; and what
Insinuations are given, that the rest were alike; and this is still pleaded,
how unjustly soever, as the most popular Argument for Separation. So that a
Scandalous Clergyman does unspeakable Mischief, not only to his own and others
Souls, but to the whole Church he owns himself to be of. And very many good
Examples do not signify so much to the Benefit of a Church, as a few bad ones
do to the Mischief of it.

(2.) The Honor of Religion lies at Stake too; which suffers very much, when
those who pretend to Teach others the way to Heaven, are seen going themselves,
and drawing others into the broad Way to Destruction. Our Preaching to the
People their Duties, does but make them more narrowly watch and observe our
Lives, to see whether we live agreeably to the Directions we give them. And if
we slight in our Practice what we Preach in the Pulpit, if we act our selves
just contrary to what we require from them, it will be hardly possible to
convince them we are in earnest, and believe any thing of Religion our selves.
And how can we imagine they should regard what we say in the Pulpit, if they
plainly see we regard it not our selves when we are out of it? It was
Aristotle's observation long ago; Fab. Quintil. l. 2. c. 16. l. 12. c. 1.
That it is not what Men speak, which moves the People so much, as the Opinion
they have of the Person that speaks: and therefore the Orators of old put into
the Definition of one fit to persuade the People, that he must have the
Reputation of a good Man; otherwise all he speaks will be thought only Art or
Design.

I know no way to have the Reputation of a good Man, like being so: and we are
infinitely more concerned to be so, than those, whose great Business was to put
false Colors upon things. We speak the Words of Truth and Soberness; let us
not then make the People question them, by not finding the due effects of them
in our own Conversations. They are very apt to suspect we look on Preaching as
our Trade, and mind it no more than the Silver-smiths did the Shrines they made
for Diana, Act. 19 24.
which they set off to the best advantage, not for the Reverence they had for
Diana, but for the Gain she brought to the Crafts men. We have no such
effectual Way to convince our Auditors, that we mean what we say, as when they
find us to be great Examples our selves of the Duties we press upon them, viz.
of Devotion, Humility, Charity, Sobriety, Mortification, Contentedness,
Peaceableness, and Universal Holiness: and when the People see our Light
shining before them, by the good Works we do, we shall thereby excite them to
glorify God, to think better of Religion, and to follow our Example.

(3.) The Salvation of Men's Souls depends very much upon the Care and Conduct
of those who are to be their Guides to Heaven. For, if they lead them astray,
whom they think they are bound to follow, their destruction will be
unavoidable. When the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the Ditch; but
yet the blind leader falls first, and falls heaviest and deepest, and the other
falls upon him, and sinks him lower. It is a sad thing to have the Guilt of
other Men's sins, as well as our own to answer for; when by our wilful Neglect
of our known Duty, or by our Examples, or by our Erroneous Doctrine, we prove
the occasion of damning those Souls, which were committed to our Charge to
conduct them to Heaven.

The Care of Souls would be a dreadful thing indeed, if we were to answer for
all the Miscarriages of the People committed to our Charge: But if they are
such as happen through the voluntary and plain Omission of the Duty laid upon
us; or our being accessory to their Commission of them, they may be justly
charged on our Account.

With what Care and Caution then ought all Persons to enter upon so weighty, so
holy, so tremendous a Charge? What Preparation of Mind is necessary to consider
it! What Fasting and Prayer to obtain God's Assistance in it! What Wisdom, and
Piety, and Resolution to discharge it!

But let us not be disheartened; we serve a Gracious Master, and in the best
Employment; and although we may meet with many Difficulties, within and
without, and on all sides, yet let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the Work of the Lord, for as much as we know, that our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

