(...) The Pastors Charge, AND THE Peoples Duty.

A SERMON (for the most part) Preached at the Assembly of Ministers AT EXON,
June 7. 1693.

By Samuel Stoddon.

Ezekiel. 34.2. (...)

LONDON, Printed for Jonath. Robinson in St. Paul's Churchyard; and are to be
sold by Robert Osborne Bookseller in Exon. 1694.

TO My Reverend and Dearly Beloved Brethren, the United Ministers of Christ in
the County of Devon; Grace and Peace in, and from our our LORD Jesus Christ.
Reverend Brethren,
IN compliance with your Affectionate Importunity, and Obedience to your
Acknowledged Authority, I now humbly offer you, what few others in the World,
but your selves could have wrested from me. I confess it has always been
accounted an Ill Omen, when the Victim comes unwillingly to the Altar: But
Conscience can avouch this for me, That I have not come unwillingly to any
Work, wherein I have had a prospect of serving the glorious Ends of my
Ministry. 'Twas your Unanimous Vote, that laid the Injunction of this
Pulpit-work upon me; to which (though conscious of my own Unfitness) I readily
enough yielded. But when, after my utmost Endeavors to prevent it, you so
irresistibly desired its Publication, I could not but be troubled. Yet not from
any sullen Aversion to the Press, as the Over-modest Humor of some is, that
are eminently better qualified to serve the Churches of Christ that way; but
from the unpreparedness of the Discourse for Public View, and the little Time
or Strength that I have to fit it better.

It being, for the most part, Sermo ad Clerum; and willing to speak a little,
as I could, to what my Text so naturally directed me to, I took the liberty to
offer you the bare Skeliton, without those Exegetical or Inculcative
Enlargements, which, in a ruder Auditory, might have been more necessary.

Wherefore now (not without your leave) I presume to present it both to You,
and to the World, in a second Edition, with a few, and but a few Additions, and
necessary Variations; whether for the better or the worse, I cannot tell. I did
once hope to have buried it in the faithful Ears and Hearts of my then present
Auditors, and never have concerned my Pen any further about it. But seeing it
is your pleasure to send it further abroad, you have made your selves Sponsors
with me, for all the Infirmities and Faults of it; and have given me the
Confidence now, to Claim the concurrence of your Prayers; That God will pardon
the many Defects, and prosper the good Design of it; to his own Glory, and the
Spiritual Good of all those, into whose hands it shall come. And which is the
fervent Desire of,

Your unworthy Brother and Fellow Servants in the Gospel of Christ, S. S.
Sidbury, August 15. 1693.
THE Pastor's Charge, AND The Peoples Duty.
John 21.15, 16, 17. -- Feed my Lambs.
-- Feed my Sheep.
-- Feed my Sheep.

CAP. I. The Text opened.
MY Reverend and Dear Brethren! Unto us these words are spoken; unto whom they
were first, and immediately directed; by whom; on what occasion; and with what
Argument they are enforced, I need not tell you: The bare Reading these three
Verses at length, will make all this plain and obvious to the meanest
Understanding.

So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, Son of Jonas,
love thoume more than these? He says unto him; yea LORD; thou know I that
love thee. He says unto him; Feed my Lambs.

He says to him again the second time; Simon, Son of Jonas, love thou me? He
says unto him; yea LORD; thou know that I love thee. He says unto him;
Feed my Sheep.

He says unto him the third time; Simon, Son of Jonas; love thou me? Peter
was grieved because he said unto him the third time; love thou me? And he
said unto him, LORD, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee:
Jesus says unto him; Feed my Sheep.

You see 'twas our LORD Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, and
whose Own they are, that spoke these words with his own mouth, and left this
thrice inculcated Charge with his Disciple Peter, unto whom in the name of all
the rest, he was wont to direct his speeches, not as Princeps, but as This
notion will need a little explication in a more proper place.
Primus Apostolorum; and with whom, all the other, not only of his then present
Brethren; but of all their future Successors in the same Office, were included.
And this after his Resurrection from the Grave, wherein he had paid the full
Price of our Redemption; and having laid down his Life for his Sheep, had
victoriously triumphed over his and their last Enemy Death, and was now about
to leave the World, and go to the Father. And knowing that he must leave his
poor Flock, whom he had purchased at so dear a Rate, in the midst of the Wolves
and wild Beasts of this Wilderness; he thus charges his Servants concerning
them, unto whom he committed the Care and Oversight of them; Feed my Lambs;
Feed my Sheep. And, lest this should be too little, he strengthens his Charge
with the most obliging Argument, that could possibly be urged; Love thou me?
And this three times repeated; which argues an extraordinary Earnestness, and
particular Emphasis, that he would put upon it. There are some, that think this
was three times repeated in personal reflection on Peter, for his thrice
denying him; and perhaps there may be something in that: But what was said to
Peter, was said to all the Rest, both Them and Us; and his thrice repeating it,
was but to let us know, how dear his little Flock was to him; what Jealousy he
had for them, lest they should be neglected; and what an Account he will
require of us concerning them in the Day of our Accounts.

And here, if I may not be thought too curiously to criticize upon the Text, I
would observe these two things in it.

The Order Of the Charge. The Matter Of the Charge.
1. The Order. We see the Lambs are first mentioned, then the Sheep. Though
these Names are sometimes, in Scripture, promiscuously used; yet in propriety
of speech, there is a difference, though not of Kind, yet of Age at least; and
the Terms are not convertible. Though all Lambs are Sheep, all Sheep are not
properly called Lambs. And where we find both words used, as in the Text, it
plainly intimates a distribution of the Flock into these two constituting parts
of it.

By the Lambs here, I understand only what the plain use of the Metaphor
directs to; viz. the Younger sort; Younger, either in respect of Years, or in
respect of Grace. And why are these first mentioned? Some use may be made of
this; though not that use, which Bellarmine foolishly and falsely suggests. But
they may be first named in our LORD's Charge to us.

1. Because they are the weaker part of the Flock; which does by so much the
more recommend them to our tenderest Care and Inspection: They are worst able
to defend, or provide for themselves; they are weak in Judgment, and weak in
Experience; and weak things are soon lost. Therefore especial provision must be
made for them.

2. They are first in the Charge, because they are first in the Order of
Nature. They are Lambs before they are Sheep; and herein they seem to claim a
precedence. Therefore first, Feed my Lambs.

3. They are Spes Gregis; The Hope of the Flock. Though the weaker, yet
commonly the sounder part; though the more Ignorant, yet the more Teachable. O
Sirs! if we lose them while they are Lambs, 'twill be hard, perhaps too late to
cure or recover them, when they are grown more wild, or more rotten. The
greatest hope of the success of our work lies here. But where common Experience
says so much, I need say the less.

4. They are Fundamentum Gregis. By whom the Stock is maintained, and a
Succession preserved in the Earth. The Seminary and common Fund of the Church.
To lose the Lambs, is the ready way to lose all.

5. They are the most Innocent part of the Flock. There is a kind of (...), an
innate Principle of Dearness and Affection in every ingenuous Breast for such
as these. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child? She will sooner forget all the
rest, than her Little one. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd; he shall
gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young, Isa. 40.11. This was spoken of Him, by whom the
words of my Text were spoken. No wonder then that he takes the first care for
these. Yet though the Lambs are first, we find them but once mentioned in the
Text; but the Sheep twice. Is it because the Sheep are more in number, or more
in value? or does it not seem rather to tell us; That though the Lambs call for
our first Care; the Sheep are they that cost us double Labor? while they are
young and tender, they are more ductile, and teachable; their Minds are a
Tabula rasa, not prepossest with Opinion or Prejudice; their Affections green
and complying, and not actually preingag'd; their Consciences untoucht in their
natural Virginity: I do not say in their Original Purity. But when they are
grown up, and have imbibed a few Religious Notions, and are grown fond of them;
or have proselyted themselves to a Party; how hard is it convince them, or to
rectify their Errors in Judgment? When they have tasted the sensual sweets of
sin; or entangled their hearts in the Cares of the World, or espoused their
Christian Profession to a Carnal Interest; or, under a Form of Godliness, are
come to settle in their Lees; O how hard, and next to impossible is it then to
move them? when strayed among the wild Beasts, to reclaim them? when rotten, to
recover them? Here Is double Labor with these.

Or else they are twice mentioned, because they are capable of Pastoral
Inspection, in one point beyond what the Lambs are. Of which I shall take a
little notice in the next. Thus much for the Order of the Charge.

2. We are next to consider the Matter of it: Wherein I shall not use the old
Logical Terms of dividing; but briefly take notice of the Charge it self; and
the Argument, that is here used to enforce it.

1. The Gharge is; Feed my Lambs, and my Sheep. My Lambs, (...). My Sheep,
(...). I would not querere nodum in Scirpo, seek for Subtilties, where the Text
neither intends, nor needs any. I know the words are often synonymously used;
yet if we look into their Etymology, we shall find some difference; and which,
to me, seems to be designed here; (...) signifies only to feed, so as to make
fat, saginare; but (...), is not only to seed, but to rule and govern; to
exercise the Office; not only the Care, but the Power of a Shepherd over his
Flock. So then, here is the Reason of what I just now hinted at. The Lambs are
but once mentioned; and the Charge concerning them is only to Feed them; these
being not capable of Pastoral Discipline and Government. But with the Sheep,
there is the double labor, both of Feeding and Ruling.

I shall not now trouble you with the Popish Questions, that have been
controverted on this Text, as being alien to the design and proper work of this
Day. Only let me say again; That what was here spoken to Peter, was spoken to
every one of the other Apostles; wherein both They, and We. that have succeeded
them in their ordinary Work and Office of the Ministry, are personally and
equally concerned. And though the Lambs and the Sheep make up the whole Church
of Christ upon Earth; it cannot be understood, that the Church Oe^umenical was
here committed to the Charge of every, or of any one individual Pastor; such a
Work being loaded with Moral Impossibility. But the Charge, being given
personally and particularly, it must be understood of the Church
Congregational; that is, that Part, or Congregation of the Church, whereunto
every one is particularly, and according to Gospel Order, called, and set as
Pastor, or Over seer. Thus you have the Charge it self.

2. Here Is the Argument, wherewith our Savior enforces it; which is threefold.

1. The Relations he has to them: They are My Lambs, and My Sheep. Mine, whom
you call your LORD, and your Master; yea, your Redeemer, and your Savior:
Therefore feed them for my sake.

2. The Propriety he has in them: They are Mine, and not Yours; the work of my
hands, the Lot of my Inheritance, the Objects of my Care and Delight, the Price
of my Blood, and the Fruit of the Travel of my Soul; for whose sakes it is,
that I have thus humbled my self: Therefore take heed how you neglect the least
of them.

3. The other part of the Argument is concomitant to the Text; Love thou me?
q. d. If thou love me, as thou professest to do; show thy Love to Me, in thy
Care of Mine. Let my poor Lambs taste the Fruits of my Love in thee. Let my
Sheep be assured that thou love Me, by thy Love to Them. It is like a careful
and prudent Husband's passionate recommending the Care and Rule of his dear
Children and Family, when about to leave them by Death; or a long Journey to
his beloved Wife. If ever you had any Love for me; if these Children be mine,
as I believe them to be, see that you carry your self in all respects as
becomes a discreet and loving Parent toward them: Take my Estate; fill up my
room, and discharge the Offices of my Relation to them; and let them want
nothing, for my sake. This is that which is wont to be used as the last and
most overcoming Argument amongst dearest Friends. If you love me, do so, or so:
a kind of adjuring them by all the Bonds of Love and Friendship that are
between them.

And now, Sirs, you see, here is a Foundation for a much larger Discourse, than
time or strength will at present bear. I shall contract my self into as narrow
a Circle, as I am able, that I may not too far transgress the Bounds assigned
me.

CAP. II. The Doctrinal Proposition Stated and Cleared.
THIS practical Text appears to be very pregnant of practical Doctrine; which
might be distributed into several Branches. But he that studies brevity, must
avoid all unnecessary division. I shall offer but these three.

Proposition I. That Believers are Christ's own mystical Flock, and He their
great Shepherd. Prop. II. That the Ministers of the Gospel are they, to whom
the LORD Jesus Christ has committed the Care and Rule of this his mystical
Flock. Prop. III. That a Ministers want of Care and Concern for the Flock of
Christ, is an indication of the want of Love to Christ himself.
Either of these singly, would fill up more time than is allotted me for this
Action. The second Proposition is that, wherein the stream of the Text seems to
run; and unto which both the other will, without forcing, come in to its
Improvement. Wherefore I shall lay down this for the Basis and Bound of my
following Discourse.

That the Ministers of the Gospel are they, to whom the LORD Jesus Christ has
committed the Care and Rule of his Mystical Flock.

In the Prosecution of this Truth, I shall briefly answer these four Questions.

1. What this Flock is, concerning which this charge is given, or, who they
are, whom our LORD would have us to understand by His Lambs, and His Sheep? 2.
Why these Names of Lambs, and Sheep are given them? 3. Who the Ministers of the
Gospel are, with whom this charge is left? 4. What the Duty is that is required
of them; or what our dear LORD and Master would have us to understand by
Feeding them? And then shall conclude all with some useful Inferences, both to
Ministers and People.
Quest. 1. What this Flock is, concerning which this Charge is given; or whom
our LORD would have us to understand by His Lambs, and His Sheep?

Sol. The Question needs not many words. The general sense of this common
Scriptural Metaphor is obvious. But that which makes the question, is that
distinguishing (if it be here a distinguishing) Relative My Sheep, Mat. 25.32,
33. We have there all the World divided into two sorts, Sheep and Goats, i. e.
Believers and Unbelievers. Wherefore by Sheep, in that Scripture, and with whom
the Lambs are also included, being opposed to the Goats, we may understand no
other than true Believers. The sound and sincere part of Professors which is no
larger than the Church Invisible. These indeed are His Sheep in the most proper
and peculiar sense. But that the Word in the Text must not be so restrained, is
certain; because our Commission would then be unintelligible, and lose its
ends; it being impossible for us to be assured, who are the Sheep, and who the
Goats, till the Judgment of the Great Day determine and reveal it. Who then are
My Lambs, and My Sheep? If I may expound my Text by that of Matthew. 28.19. the
question will wellnigh be answered. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations.
That Teaching here, is the same with Feeding in the Text, I suppose will be
granted. All Nations, i. e. those of all, and of any Nation, that are willing
to receive the Gospel, and to be taught by you. And that all Nations are His,
both as Creator and Redeemer, I hope will not be denied. But then, how are all
Nations called His Sheep, and His Lambs? I have already said, that all Nations,
are those of the Nations, that would receive the Gospel; of which sort Christ
has had some in all Nations. Besides, many of those that are not actually his
Sheep, are Potentially and Electively so. The extent of the Commission and
Command seems to run thus. Feed all those, both Young and Old, that will be fed
by you; of what Nation, or Country, or Place soever they be; that those that
are not yet actually my Sheep, may be made so, and then cared and provided for
as such. This is the general Call of the Gospel. If any man thirst let him come
unto me and drink, Joh. 7.37. And him that comes to me I will in no wise cast
out, Joh. 6.37. All that will, may, and must be fed. But yet, not all alike. As
there are Babes, and Strong Men in Gods House; so there is Milk and stronger
Meat, that which will cherish one, will choke another. All Ordinances may not
be indifferently administered unto all. In the Old Temple, there was the Inner
and the Outer Court; so there is in the New. But this being a matter of Order
and Discipline, may be recognized in a more proper place. This little may now
be enough to be said on this first question.

Quest. 2. Why are these names of Lambs, and Sheep given them?

Sol. We find it is a Metaphor, that the Spirit of God in Scripture delights
much in. Were it expedient, 'twere easy enough to illustrate the Analogy in
many particulars; But that it becomes not the present occasion. I shall but
suggest these two general Reasons.

1. To mind us what we are of our selves. 2. To teach us what we should be.
1. To mind us what we are of our selves. The Sheep, as one observes, is of all
Cattle the most silly, Franz. Histor. Animal Sacr.
Fearful, Weak, and Unprovided for self-defence; none so subject to Diseases,
and to be Infected of one another. Nor any other Creature more apt to go
astray, or so unapt to return, without the help and care of the Shepherd. No
other kind of perfect Animal so unable to subsist, and to preserve it is Species
in the Earth, without the care and conduct of Man, as is the poor Sheep;
therefore no other Metaphor more proper to express the Nature and Condition of
the Church of Christ in the World by; which without the Wisdom, Power,
Providence, Faithfulness, Love, and All Sufficiency of our Heavenly Shepherd,
the LORD Jesus Christ, must inevitably and eternally perish.

2. It Is to teach us what we should be. The Sheep, you know, is that Creature,
which was of old, in a more especial manner dedicated to God, and offered to
him in Sacrifice; and made a Type of Christ, our great Propitiatory Sacrifice.
The first Offering to the LORD, that we find honored with his Acceptance, was
that of Abel, of the Firstlings of his Flock, Genesis 4.4. Besides, the Sheep is a
Creature, not only Ceremonially clean, but is naturally cleanly, and delights
not in the Mire and Dirt as the Sow. It Is a Meek, Innocent, Patient Creature,
and used as a common Emblem of Patience. It Is one of the most profitable of
Cattle; of which there is nothing, but is, one way or other, useful to all the
purposes of humane Life. And, which is very remarkable, they have a natural
Instinct of vehement Love and Regard for their own Shepherd; Pastores suos
vehementer amant. Fr. ib.
as if they were Conscious of their own weakness and need of him. The bare
mention of these things being enough to direct the Spiritual Mind to their due
application, I shall wave all manner of further enlargement here.

Quest. 3. The Third Question is this. Who the Ministers of the Gospel are,
with whom this Charge of our dear Savior is left?

Sol. One would think, the Solution of such a Question as this, should not be
hard; nor is it so in Thesi, wherein the clear light both of Scripture and of
Nature, is so concurring and convincing. And yet we find there is hardly any
one thing, wherein Professors (such of them as are too apt to be led by the
factious Principles of Ignorance and Prejudice) are more uncharitably disagreed
in, than in this. How miserably the poor Church of Christ, by the malice and
subtilties of the common Enemy, and the Carnality, Pride, and blind Passions of
Professors, is torn into Rags of Divisions and Subdivisions, is too well known,
for me to inform you. And of all these, every Party is magnifying their own
Teachers, as the only Ministers of Christ; and ready to condemn all others as
Hirelings, False Teachers, Schismatical Intruders, etc. This is a Lamentation,
and let it be for a Lamentation. But could we return to a right Understanding
of our plain rule in this Affair, how easily might the Case be brought to its
due Issue? I know but these two things, that essentially denominate a Man to be
a Minister of Jesus Christ:

Qualification, and Commission.

And neither of which is singly sufficient. I am sensible, that I am now in a
large Field, and in a ready way to be lost in Controversy; but that I have more
practical and necessary work before me. Yet, I beseech you, bear with me, while
I explain my self a little on these two heads; and I will be very short, the
Truth being commonly best seen in a few plain words.

1. There must be Qualifications. But what? Of special, sanctifying, saving
Grace? This indeed is needful, and most desirable, and morally conducive to
the happy and glorious ends of the Ministry, both as to our selves, and those
that hear us; absolutely necessary as the sine qua non, unto Salvation; but not
so to Ministerial Qualification. A man may be lawfully a Minister, that is not
Spiritually a Member of Christ. The Sealed of the Tribe of Levi were but a
Remnant, as of, any one of the other Tribes. Those that in our Savior's Time,
sat in Moses's Chair, were, for the most part of them, far enough from Moses's
Spirit; and yet our Savior owns them in their Office. Judas was a Disciple,
and sent forth with a Commission to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, even by
Him, who knew him to be inwardly a Devil and a Traitor. But this is no new
Doctrine, nor needs any proof to one that has not a mind to be contentious. But
the Qualification here required, as absolutely necessary, is Ministerial. That
whereby a Person is competently fitted for the discharge of all the work and
duties of this sacred Office, Orthodoxy in Doctrine, ability and aptness in (at
least) the gift of Preaching and Praying; skill and moderation in ruling, etc.
And certainly there is a great difference between Ministerial G^^s and saving
Grace. (...) the particulars of (...) refer you to Paul's (...) 1 Epist. chapter 3.
and to Titus chapter 1.

2. There must be Commission. No man takes this honor unto himself but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. No man takes (...) No man
undertaketh, accepts, or assumeth to himself, and of himself; that is, no man
ought, or can without Sin, any way take, or receive this Honor, or usurp this
Office, but he that is called of God, that is delegated and commissioned by
Gods Authority, and in the way of Gods appointment; though not in that immediate
and extraordinary manner as Aaron was, unless in like extraordinary cases; yet
by a Power and Dispensation, legally and orderly derived from him, through such
Hands as he has appointed and empowered to this end. Qualification without
Commission makes not a Minister of Jesus Christ; but such a thing, as he calls
a Thief and a Robber, a Sacrilegious Intruder; such as were Corah and his
Accomplices; and such, as are too many in our days. And Commission without
Qualification, makes what the Prophet calls an Idol-shepherd, or Dumb-Dog, a
Blind Guide. And who are they that have right authoritatively to examine and
judge of Qualification, or to conveigh Commission to others, for the
Conservation of a Succession in this sacred Office, but those that are
themselves both duly Qualified and Commissionated? And that too not singly,
privately, or arbitrarily; but according to the Rules given in this matter, by
and from our supreme LORD and Master Jesus Christ in the New Testament.
Methinks this should not amount to a Question, with any that have but read the
Holy Scriptures, and own their Truth and Authority: or that have not abandoned
the conduct of common reason; by whose light it is easy to see the equity and
expediency of the Scripture directions in this case.

Quest. 4. We are now come to the last Question. What the duty is, that is
required of them? Or, What our dear LORD and Master would have us to understand
by Feeding his Lambs, and his Sheep?

Sol. The Flock, you see, is divided into two parts; the Lambs, and the Sheep.
So is the Ministerial Work that concerns them. Feed, and Rule, both which are
equally, and inseparably enjoined parts of this work, as appears in several
very plain Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be accounted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor, or they laboring, i. e.
on the account of their laboring in Word and Doctrine, (...). This is a Text
that has been sufficiently vexed by men of different Sentiments and Interests.
I know no reason we have, from this Scripture, to infer two distinct. Orders of
Ruling and Teaching Presbyters; seeing what is mentioned here, both of Ruling
and Laboring in Word and Doctrine, are but the essential and required
Functions of one and the same Sacred Order and Office; than which, I am not
concerned at present to look any further into any Truths, that are plainly
enough stated in it, or any questions, that have been vainly enough started on
it. And with which, there are several other Scriptures that agree in the same
Hypothesis, 1 These. 5.12. We beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the LORD, and admonish you. Here are the same
words applied to the same Persons and Things, (...), that are over you, or set
and appointed over you in the LORD, i. e. according to the LORD, and in the
things of the LORD, to rule in his Church; and who they are, but the (...),
those that labor among you and admonish you? So Heb. 13.7. Those that Rule are
the same with those that Preach the Word, and ver. 17. They are said to Watch
for Souls; which as it may imply other work, so it must import Preaching the
Word; in which sense the word is ordinarily used in Scripture: And here the
Rulers and the Watchmen are the same. Many other Texts there are that freely
offer to avouch this Truth; but these are enough to prove what I aim at: That
the work of a Minister of Christ, is both to Teach, and to Govern the People
committed to his charge. And he that is not fit to Govern, is not worthy to
Teach them.

But to obviate any scandalous Reflections, that Ignorance or Envy may make on
this Position, and Claim of our Governing Power in the House of God, which is
his Church: We heartily declare our Abhorrence of all those Popith Tenets and
Pretensions, which are any way derogatory to the just Power and Authority of
the Civil Government under which we live, and unto which we profess our
cheerful and constant Obedience, both as Men, and as Christians. Our Spiritual
Government of Gods Spiritual Kingdom, in our respective Charges, being no more
prejudicial to that of Temporal States and Kingdoms than is the Despotical,
which is the Natural Right of every Family. Yea, so far from prejudicial, that
it is accumulative, both of their Honor and Security; as the Experience both
of the Primitive, and of the best Reformed Churches have unquestionably proved;
and which might, in many particular instances (were it necessay) be
demonstrated. From what has been now thus briefly said, I conclude this
Question: That Feed my Lambs, and my Sheep, implies these two things, Teach
them, and Rule them: wherein the whole works of the Ministerial Office is
included. But to tell you how they must be taught, and how they ought to be
ruled, will need much more time than is here allotted me, or is now convenient
for me to take. Yet this being the Main of my Errand to you, something must be
spoken to it, as time and strength will serve, in the Applicatory part, to
which I now proceed.

CAP. III. The Doctrine improved by way of Instruction.
THIS Doctrine would be useful, more ways than I shall be able now to apply it.
Yet give me leave to suggest some of the more necessary things, under these
three general Heads.

Instruction. Exhortation. Encouragement.
1. By way of Instruction; and that in these eight particulars.

1. In the Right and Propriety, that Christ has in his Church. They are his
own Sheep, Joh. 10.3.4. No Shepherd in the World ever had, or can have that
absolute, undefeasible, supreme, independent, and natural Propriety in his
Flock, as Christ has in his. They are His, both as God, and as Redeemer. His
by right of Creation, Donation, Purchase, Regeneration; and their own voluntary
Choice and Self-dedication. His Portion, His Inheritance, His peculiar
Treasure. Nothing is nearer, nothing dearer to him than they. His Mark and his
Name is upon them; his Spirit, his Nature, his Image, his Glory shines in them.
The Scripture is full of his Claims to them; and by which they are
distinguished and separate from all the rest of the World, Joh. 15.19. And this
is the ground of that Caution. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the Flock of God, which is
among you -- Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage. (...) Ruling, but not
Domineering; Governing, but not Tyrannizing, more Regio imperantes; as Deputies
and Rulers in trust, not as Lords and Kings. Non Regnum, sed Cura Presbyteris
commissa est; beccause they are not Yours, but God's Heritage, his Clergy;
whether Ministers or People; for the word, in the use, as well as derivation of
it, reaches both. Church-Tyranny is an Encroachment upon Christ's peculiar
Right. To Rule with a Lordly Grandeur, with Rigor, or Arbitrariness, to
Monopolize the Power, which ought to be more equally distributed, is very
injurious, not only to the Flock, but to him, who is the LORD of it, and whose
Servants and Stewards we profess our selves to be And, which is a guilt that
the proudest He upon Earth will not have the hardiness to own before his Judge
another day.

2. In the tender Affection and Care he has for them. Nothing is more apt to
endear a thing to us, than Propriety. That which is our own, we love; though it
be not as it should be, nor as we wish, yet because it is our own. And those
that do otherwise, are justly reckoned among the (...), without natural
Affection, and worse than Infidels. But should I begin to tell you, what
dearness of Affection the LORD Jsus Christ has for his poor little Flock,
where should I end? Eternity will be little enough, with admiration and praise
to recount the glorious Soul-ravishing Instances of this Love. He loved them
so, as to leave the Eternal Throne of his Glory, and the sweet Repose he had
from Everlasting in the Bosom of the Father, for them: So, as to humble and
abase himself to the vile Rags of our Humane Nature; to the Miseries and
Necessities of an indigent life; to the proud Scorns, and blasphemous
Indignities of a wicked, and horridly ungrateful World; to the foul Temptations
and Buffettings of Satan; to the imputation of Sin, the only thing so abhorrent
to his pure and sinless Nature; to the Bondage, Obedience and Curse of the Law;
to the Wrath of God, which he never in the least, for himself deserved; and
which, to any one else, would have been utterly unsupportable; to the most
ign^^^inious, torturous and accursed Death of the Cross; and to the power of
Death, his own Servant and common Executioner, for a time. And all this his
Love to them overcame, and sweetened to him. Yea, and having loved them, he
loves them still, and will love them to the end, yea, without end. And
therefore delights to speak of them, always with some Intimations of their
dearness to him; as his Friends, his Brethren, his Children, his Lambs, his
Spouse, his Members, etc. for all which I had no need to quote you the
Scriptures. And as is his Love to them; so is his Care of, and Provision for
them. When he saw it expedient for them to depart from them, as to his bodily
presence, and to leave them here in a Militant state, exposed to the Rage of
his and their Enemies, both Temporal and Infernal; to be hated, and tempted,
and persecuted to the death for his sake; O how did his Soul pity them! with
what compassion did he embrace them! and seal his unchangeable Love to them!
what a stream of endearing Affection and Care does there run through his parting
Discourses with them! Joh. 14.15. and 16. How sweetly does he counsel and
comfort them there! and is so concerned for them, that he seems to take no care
for himself! though he knew that dreadful Hour was now come, wherein that Wrath
must be poured out upon him, which none but the Omnipotent could stand under!
And then how affectionately does he recommend them to his Father! Chap. 17.
Leaves his written Word, his sealing Ordinances, and his Ordained Ministers,
whom he strictly charges with them; yea, gives his holy Angels a charge
concerning them; sends his Holy Spirit, as a Sanctifier, and a Comforter to
them; goes before, to prepare a Place for them; Negotiates all their Affairs,
as a Faithful, Powerful and Prevalent Intercessor with the Father, in their
Names and Nature; and assures them, that he will come again, and in due time
receive them into the Eternal Possession of his own Glory and Joy, with Himself
and the Father in Heaven; and in the mean time will, in an invisible manner, be
with them always, even unto the end of the Word! LORD! what is (...) Homo
mortalis and Miser. Rad. secundum Eusebius. (...) oblivisci.
Enosh, wretched, worthless, guilty, sin-sinful Man, that so forgets Thee, and
deserves to be for ever forgotten of thee, that thou art so very mindful of him?

3. That the Ministers of the Gospel, i. e. Those that are duly qualified, and
commissioned, are the LORD's deputed Shepherds: They have both their ability
and authority, originally and fundamentally from him, the only truly Catholic,
Infallible and Supreme Shepherd, and Head of his Church. And in this sense, we
may without vanity say with the Apostle; Gal. 1.1. That we are the Ministers,
not of men, nor by man; but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him
from the dead. We are appointed of him to be in his stead, to the Flock; and he
has promised to be with us, to direct us in, and to conduct us through both
the Duties and the difficulties of our Work, to the end of the World.

Suffer me now (my dear Brethren) to make a few short Remarks on this Head,
both for my own Admonition and yours.

1. These only are Shepherds, that are duly qualified and called; I sent them
not, says the Lord, yet they prophecy a lie in my name, that I might drive you
out, and that ye might perish, ye and the Prophets that prophecy unto you, Jer.
27.15. God never sends a Messenger without his Errand: Whatever the
Qualification seem to be, if the Call be not of God, be sure there is a lie of
one kind or other, in the Prophecy; for if God have no Errand in it, the Devil
has.

2. It Is no contradiction, nor Solocism in this case, for the same person to be
both a Shepherd, and a Sheep; nay, nothing is more congruous. He that is a
Captain had need to be a Soldier, yea, one of the best of Soldiers. Our great
Shepherd is the Lamb of God, and his deputed Shepherds should not be Goats, nor
Wolves. For a man to be a Teacher of others, and himself a Cast away, What is
there more shameful, or more dreadful.

3. Those that are Shepherds but by deputation, be sure must give an account:
The great Proprietor will not be defrauded: Of my hand, did thou require it,
whether stolen by day, or stolen by night, Genesis 31 38. What miscarries, through
the Shepherds neglect, the Shepherd must account for: If thou do not speak to
warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but
his blood will I require at thy hand, Ezekiel, 33.8. And of the greater value the
Flock is, the more severe will the account be.

4. Shepherds must cum Ovibus pernoctare, and excubias agere; be the LORD's
Watchmen: While the Shepherd is sleeping, the Fox and the Wolf are waking and
walking. O let not a night of security so soon eclipse our dawning from the
night of our late adversity! Morning naps are sweet, but in this case most
dangerous. Our Enemy knows that we are apter to slumber in a calm, than in a
storm; and it is easy, though sad to see what advantage he begins already to
make of it. How can we forget what an Emphasis our dear LORD has set on that
Word (...), Watch therefore, Mat. 24.41. Chap. 25.13. Chap. 26.41. Mark 13.35.
and 37. Luke 21.36. and alibi. On that miraculous Deliverance at the Read Sea
it is said, then believed they his words, they sang his praise, they soon
forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel, Psalm. 106.12, 13. Are not
the Songs of our deliverance yet in our mouths; and a deliverance but begun, as
was that of theirs? O let us not sing our selves asleep.

4. It informs us how necessary the Ministry of the Gospel is. What becomes of
a Flock without a Shepherd? of a Family without a Steward? Of the Blind,
without a Guide? Of the Infant, without a Nurse? Of the Sick, without a
Physician? Of an Army without an Officer? Of a City without a Governor and a
Watch man? In a worse condition than any of these, is a Church, were it proper
to call it a Church, without a Teacher and a Ruler. The Devil is aware of this,
and very well knows where the stress of his Interest lies. If he can but
effectually smite the Shepherd, the Sheep are his own; Therefore like the King
of Syria, he commands his Captains and Legions, To fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22.31. And hence are all his
Intrigues and Attempts by force and fraud, to disgrace, discourage, divide, or
corrupt, and any way to destroy the purity and the power, and were it possible
the being of the Ministry of the Gospel in the World; Were it not for that
promise, and that power and faithfulness that has, and will always make it
good, Matt. 16.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail. It might have been
written long ago, on the universal ruins of God's Zion: THIS WAS ONCE THE
CHURCH OF GOD. If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, now may Israel
say Then they had swallowed us up quick, Psalm. 124. beg. But O how sottishly
unsensible are the most of men, even of those that are called Christians; What
a blessing and privilege the Gospel Ministry is? yea, is it not a burden with
too many? Thou have been weary of me, O Israel, Isa. 43.22. some on one
account, and some on another, are ready to look on the Ministry of the Gospel,
as an encumbrance, an unnecessary charge, which might better be spared, and to
say in their hearts, from the principles of Judas's frugality; To what purpose
is this waste?

Had I not many other things yet to speak to how readily would my Pen run
beyond the bounds assigned it, in commenting on the inestimable usefulness of
this glorious blessing of the Gospel; and the shameful Atheistical,
Heaven-tempting ingratitude of those that are weary of it? O that a wanton,
wrangling, self-willed, Gospel-glutted Generation, may not, after all that the
God of patience has done for us, provoke him to testify against us; that he is
as weary of us, as we are of him!

5. It informs us, what an honorable work the work of the Gospel is. It Is so
both in its self, and with relation to its Author, its Object, and its Ends:
How contemptible soever it be in the eyes of some, and how unworthy and vile
soever, some of those are, that are admitted, or thrust themselves into it, to
the reproach of it. It Is not only a Work, but an Office, and an Office of the
highest dignity; on the account of its Author, the LORD Jesus Christ, who is
exalted above all Principalities and Powers, and has a Name above every Name;
The LORD of Lords, the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God;
and unto whom every Knee shall bow; No man takes this honor unto himself, but
he that is called of God: It Is an Honor too great for any but God to bestow;
an Honor more immediately derived from the Everlasting Fountain of Honor,
than any other Office in the World. On the account of its Object; the Mystical
Flock, and spiritual Kingdom of Christ; the Noble Family and Household of God.
Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, not Pages nor Porters, though that were an
honor, but his Ambassadors and Representatives, 2 Cor. 5.20. The Stewards of
his House, 1 Cor. 4.1. The Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1.20. He has put his
own Honor upon them, and has told the Word, That what is done to them, he
takes as done to himself; and has required his Churches to honor them, for
his, and for their Work sake; (...). Let them be accounted worthy, or let them
be dignified with double honor. The honor of respect and maintenance is due
to all that are faithful; but a double or greater degree of honor and
authority to those that are best qualified for, and most laborious in their
Work. Where, by the way you may take notice, that Ministers do not live, as
perhaps some are ready to think, and to upbraid them too, on the Peoples Alms.
Their maintenance is of God's allowance and precept; Non Eleemosinae, sed
Honoraria; not Alms, but Rewards, by Divine Right due to them; I say, Divine
Right, in genere, though not in specie.

But of this I would not now have once opened my lips but for your sakes, who
are the people, that no guilt of this kind may rest on any of you, and that you
may not have any unbecoming thoughts of us on this account.

Lastly, it is honorable too on the account of its ends; The conversion,
edification, and salvation of Immortal souls, The destroying the Works of the
Devil in the World, and the pulling down his strong holds, the repairing the
ruins of mankind by the Fall, and the restoring the Image of their Maker upon
them, the negotiating the grand Affairs of a Peace between God and man, and of
all the concerns of the Kingdom, of the Mediator upon Earth, the highest trust
that ever was committed to mere Creatures; The great Work and Design which the
God of Heaven has espoused to glorify all his Attributes in, and which the Son
of God was sent into this lower World for. What are Earthly Kingdoms and
Dominions, and Interests to this? this is that swallows up all.

Sirs, It Is not without regret that we should be compelled, as Paul once was,
To magnify our Office, and to become fools in glorying, 2 Cor, 12.11. It Is an
honor that we acknowledge our selves infinitely unworthy of; yet it is the
honor that our God has put upon us, both for his own, and for your sakes.

6. It informs us what a Burthensom Work the Ministry is. Burthensom, not only
in respect of the Labor of it; wherein if that faithfulness and diligence be
used, as is necessary and required, it is the heaviest of all Employments in
the World, and that which spends the strength both of Body and Spirit more than
any other. It Is true, there are too many that live idly, and work easily enough
in this Laborious Calling, whose praise is not great in the Churches, and whose
comfort is not like to abound in the day of account; but those that love their
Master, and their Work, and are duly sensible of their Charge, can find little
time to be Idle.

Alas, Sirs, what you see and hear of our Pulpit Work, is, or should be the
least part of our Labor. Besides, it is a burthensom Work in respect of the
many Temptations, Oppositions, and Discouragements that attend it; both from
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. God knows, we are (the best of us) men,
and but men subject to like Passions as others are; We that teach others, must
teach our selves: We that carry the Light before you, have as much need of the
Light as you. Not as though we had already attained, or were already perfect,
Phil. 3.12. The boldest Officer is in himself no more shot-free than the Common
Soldier, though his dangers may be greater. Pity us then, and pray for us, when
you see a Temptation too strong for us. We are more the Butt of the Dragon's
Envy, and the Mark that his Rage aims at, than you, which makes our Post by so
much the more difficult,

Again, It is a burthensom Work, in respect of the unsuccessfulness of it;
neither is this the least part of our Burden. How very gladly would we spend,
and be spent in the Service of our dear Flocks? We would not think the labor
of our Brains, or Breasts, our Studies, or Watchings; our Travels, or Cares;
our Reproaches, or Sufferings; no, nor our blood too much for them, could we
but be comforted by them, with the good success of all this: But when after
all, our pains and adventures, and Prayers, and Tears, we see so little of the
good Fruit we long for; so little Humility, so little Charity, so little
Self-denial, so little Mortification to the World; so little regular and
discreet Zeal for God; this is that breaks our hearts, and makes us to walk
heavily.

Lastly, It is a burthensom Work in respect of the consequence of it, both to
our hearers, and to our selves. To our hearers. Their Souls and Eternal
Happiness (and what have they dearer, what have they more?) is bound up in this
burden. To our selves. O the tremendous Charge, not only of our own, but of
our Peoples souls, and the Account that will shortly be required of us, when
the time is come, that is at hand, that we may be no longer Stewards! The
serious consideration of this is astonishing; O that it may now be awakning!
Well might the Apostle cry out, (...); Who is sufficient for these things?

7. It shows us the Sin and danger of intruders into this Office. It Is
dangerous both to themselves, and to the Flock. To themselves, in respect of
their Usurpation, which is highly Sacrilegious, in respect of their Ends; which
are wont to be base, vainglorious, and selfish; and in respect of the Account,
they must at last give for the blood of souls, which will be dreadful and
damning; dangerous to the Flock. The Thief comes not but to steal, and to
kill, to divide and scatter the Flock, and to serve his own Lusts on it,
whatever his flattering pretenses may be. The Shepherd that comes not from God,
and of God's sending, tho in Sheeps Clothing, comes not to do God's, but his
own and the Devils Work. I need not endeavor to prove that, which the dismal
Experience of the Churches has in so many pernicious Instances, in all Ages
more than sufficiently proved; in whom Christ, and his Apostles Predictions are
fulfilled, Matt. 24.24. Acts 20.29, 30. 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 Timothy 3. begin. etc. Whose
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and whose damnation slumbereth not.

I would not speak this to the discouragement of any, whose hearts God has
stirred up to put their hands to the work of the Temple; but for the caution of
those, who for base and low ends, or on wrong and mistaken Principles, are
ready to run when they were never sent; tho the Tribe of Levy be numerous, and
the Ministry, as well as many other Professions among us, seems to be
overstock'd; yet have we still need to pray the Lord of the Harvest to send
forth more Laborers into his Harvest; such as are both willing, and wise, and
fitted for the Work of God, whereunto they are called; and then accordingly
succeeded in it.

8. Lastly, It informs us of the Sin and danger of abusing, opposing,
slighting, or any way discouraging the least of those, whom Christ has sent
and set to feed his Flock. To affront an Ambassador is all one as personally to
affront him that sent him. You know how dear, and doleful an Experiment Hanan
and his people made of this, in the case of David's Messengers, 2 Samuel 10. To
abuse an Herald of War from a potent Enemy, is daring, and disingenuous; but to
deal injuriously with the Messenger of Peace, is most provoking; none that has
power to do it, but will avenge such a villainy to the uttermost. This is the
case; We are sent by the Lord Jesus Christ as the Ambassadors of Peace to the
World, with the Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. Let them that now
herein oppose, or malign us, see to it, how they will justify themselves at
that Bar, where they and we must shortly appear together indeed, as men, and
as common Christians: we neither deserve, nor expect any other than what is due
to such: But as we are the Ministers of Christ, be assured that he very
critically observes how we are treated; who they are that receive us; and who
they are that receive us not: he observes not only how our Doctrine, but how
our persons are entertained; as every thing that is done for us, even to a Cup
of cold Water: So every thing that is done, or said, or contrived against us,
is on record with him. You know what a caution he has given; Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. He that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8. and what a Woe to the world he has
denounced, because of offenses, Matt. 18.7. To wrong us in our persons, or
personal concerns, will not be taken well by him: But to oppose or hinder us in
that regular and faithful discharge of our Work and Office, and be resented by
him with a far greater indignation.

Alas, Sirs, The trampling on us, as we are in our selves poor sinful Worms, is
hardly worth our complaining: what are we better than our fellow Mortals? But
to trample on Christ in us; as we are not only his Children, but his Stewards,
and Ambassadors, and bear his Authority, is a guilt that will make the stoutest
and securest heart tremble, and cry to the Rocks and Mountains another day. Nor
will the reproachful Names, of Schismatics, or Separatists, wherewith they now
salsely load us, justify them in that day.

CAP. IV. The first part of the Pastor's Charge, viz. To Feed the Flock.
THE next Use that I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be of Exhortation;
which I shall direct 1. To Pastors. 2. To People.


1. To Pastors. Reverend! and Beloved! Gods Providence, and your Call having
laid this duty upon me, the unworthiest and unfittest of all my Brethren; I
dare not but be faithful, according to my measure, both to my self, and to you:
as my own Monitor, and your Remembrancer.

Are we indeed some of those, to whom the Charge of Feeding and Governing the
Flock of Christ, both his Lambs, and his Sheep, is committed? O let us then
take heed to the Ministry, which we have received in the LORD, that we fulfill
it. You know whose Admonition this was, and to whom, it was sent, Col. 4.17.
Nor need I tell you, that it as much concerns us, as ever it did Archippus. The
Ministry which we have received in the LORD. In the Name, and by the Authority,
and in the House of the LORD; and the concerns of his House. Or from the LORD,
and for the LORD: that we fulfill it; discharge every part of it with fullness of
diligence, fidelity, and care, to the utmost of our Understanding and Power,
with all impartiality, assiduity, and perseverance to the end. But this is yet
too general. The Object of our Charge, you see, is double. (...), The Lambs,
and the Sheep, and so is the Act double; (...), Feed and Rule, as was before
expounded.

I shall first consider the Object, and then suit my Exhortation according to
the Act that respectively concerns it. And,

1. The Lambs. The younger sort, both in respect of Age, and in respect of
Grace. Here I would fain spend some time; but considering to whom I am
speaking, I can the more contentedly contract my self. Sirs! you see, our LORD
will not have these neglected; but has given them first in his Charge to us.
Feed my Lambs. Every wise Shepherd is wont to be very fond of his Lambs, and
knows it is his Interest so to be, and should not we? Our LORD himself the Great
Shepherd, gathers them with his Arm, and carries them in his Bosom, and should
not we do so? He showed a peculiar delight he had in Little Ones, while he was
here in the Flesh, Mat. 19.13, 14. Mar. 10. 13, 14. Luke 18.15, 16. chapter 9.47,
48. Mat. 21.16. And should not we be herein, like our LORD and Master?

1. Then, let us take them as one special, I had almost said, the only hopeful
part of our Charge; I mean, as to converting work, and put them into our daily
Prayers and Intercessions at the Throne of Grace, if so be there may be hope in
our End, and the next Generation may be better than their Fathers have been.
There are some, who are Ignorantly enough influenced by Anabaptistical
Principles, that will hardly allow the Lambs, in this sense, to be any part of
our Charge. I shall not meddle with that Bone of Contention now, and hope there
are no Deliriums of this kind in any of our Brains. Though those that are under
their first Convictions, and are young in the Faith, may, improperly, be called
Lambs, yet these are they, who, in Scripture Language, are said to be with
Young, and are plainly distinguished from the Lambs, Isa. 40.11. It Is strange
that any, but the Devil, should quarrel at this part of our Work.

2. As part of our Charge, let us take all proper and rational Methods, that
lie within our reach, and their capacity, to teach and instruct them in all the
necessary points of the Christian Religion, both Doctrinal and Practical. This
was the Command of God by Moses, and the constant practice of the Conscientious
in that Church. And herein the first and purest, the best settled and most
thriving Churches of the Gentiles have been exemplarily diligent, and eminently
successful; nor was there ever any Age more plentifully furnished with such
helps, and plain Catechistical Systems of sound words to this purpose, than is
the Age we live in, which, if diligently and duly improved, may yet save us a
Remnant, and be as a Nail given us in his Holy Place: a happy presage of a work
of Reformation, if not in this, yet in the next Generation. But here these five
words of caution may be necessary.

1. That their memories be so employed, as not to be over burdened, a due
regard being had to that insuperable difference, which Nature has made in the
distribution of this Faculty. Though sloth or dullness ought not to excuse, yet
the burden should not be made too heavy. We must drive as Jacob did, Genesis
33.13. as the weak and tender of the Flock can bear. Prudence must be applied
here.

2. That they do not rest in the bare exercise of Memory, as Children are
exceeding apt to do; but that our best endeavors to be used, to conveigh the
Notions of Divine Truths, as they are capable, into their Understandings, which
will be no little help and advantage to a weak Memory. And herein should our
skill and condescension appear in plainness and familiarity of expression; yet
with that seriousness, sweetness, and gravity, as does become our Persons and
Office. And in order hereto, an account should be taken of them, by such other
easy questions, as are not formally learnt, but plainly included in, and may
readily be answered by what is so learnt, for the trial and exercise of their
Intellectuals. Of which kind also we have made ready to our hands, the useful
labors of diverse, who have traveled in this Province, on that excellent
Compendium of Theology, composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at WEST
MINSTER: and which has deservedly obtained the general acceptance of all the
Orthodox in the Protestant Churches.

3. Because we know, that the Devil will be Catechizing the Heart, in these
Young Ones, while we are Cathechizing the Ear, and the common Understanding;
and will be digging his Countermines against us, in the hidden parts of the
Soul, and doubling his Fortifications on the Ground of a depraved Nature; we
should endeavor, with all our Holy Art, to make them sensible of their
particular and real concern in these things of God, and of their Souls; so that
their Consciences may be awakened and roused, and the happy Foundations of a
serious, as well as early Religion be laid in them. And perhaps we may find
greater success herein than we are aware of, or are apt to hope for. Conscience
is as natural to them as Reason, and should be nourished up with it, and as we
find in all other things, the younger, the more tender, and easy to be wrought
upon. Though Fear be said, by the Atheistical Philosopher, to be that which first
made, that it (in their sense) fancied and imagined, God, in the World; yet
were it not for this Connatural Principle of Conscience, Fear would not make
that clear and abiding Impression on the Rational Nature, as it does. Unless we
manage our work with them so, as is proper to effect the grand Design of their
Conversion, we do nothing to any good purpose; but lose our properest and most
acceptable time of doing their Souls that good, for which they may bless God
for us in the upper World.

4. We should rest with them, in the Doctrinal, or Theoretical part; but
especially insist on the Practicals of Religion; and with such plain and
suitable applications, as are more obvious to their weak Understandings; that
so they may come to perceive the end and use of their Instruction and
Knowledge, and a Harmony may be formed in them betimes, and abovo, between
their Principles and their Practices Which is the most hopeful way to obviate
that common Cavil of the World against Early Piety, grown into a Proverb, A
young Saint, and an old Hypocrite.

5. Our Carriage toward them, and Care for them should in all respects be
such, as may engage their Affections; which are naturally more early and
readily exerted, than acts of Judgment and Understanding; that they may, as
soon as possible, come to taste the sweetness of the ways of God. By such an
advantage as this, you know, it is, that our Enemy, the Devil, is wont to be
beforehand with us; by inflaming the sensual Appetite, and engaging the
Affections, and corrupting the Will with the carnal pleasures of Sin, and the
Lusts of the Flesh, before the Judgment is enlightened, or the Conscience
awakened to discern, and to resist the Temptations, wherewith he is too hard
for them. Herein then it is good policy to prevent him. When we have gotten the
Hearts of our Little Ones, with what pleasure, and zeal, and innocent emulation
will they go on in their work, which will make it much the easier both to
themselves, and to us. I could enlargehere; but that I know to whom I am
speaking, Verbum satis sapientibus.

2. The other part of our Charge are the Sheep; and here, as I have said, is
double work. These must both be Fed, and Ruled.

1. They must be Fed. It Is my comfort, that I am now speaking to such, as God
has made both able and apt so to do; and who, I hope, have no need of my
Directions in it, or Spurs to it. Wherefore I shall only hint at some few more
general heads of the things you much better understand than my self.

1. They must be fed with wholesome Food; The sincere Milk of the Word, (...),
sound, pure, and inadulterated Doctrine, Divine and Scripture Truths; the Bread
of Life, of Heavens preparing; and not the visions of our own Hearts.
Unwholesome Food breeds Diseases, and sometimes ends in Death. The Shepherd
were as good starve his Flock, as poison it. O how dangerous then is blindness,
or giddiness, or self-will in a Spiritual Guide! What need have we with
unprejudiced minds, to study the Holy Scriptures, to take heed of rashness, or
singularity in the ^otions that we espouse? To Watch and Pray for that Spirit
of Truth, which is promised us of God to guide us into all Truth, that we do
not gather wild Gourds, instead of wholesome Herbs for the Pot? Mistakes in
matters of Doctrine, wherein the Life of Souls is concerned, are of very evil
consequence.

2. They must be fed with plain Food. The plainest food, so that it be
wholesome, clean and duly prepared, is the most healthy and nourishing. The
true Substantial Houshold-bread is fittest for the Household of God. Not Airy
Notions, nor doubtful Questions of Polemical, or State Divinity, which foment
Factions and vain janglings, and fill our Auditors with Wind and Ashes. How
jealous was the Apostle of the Churches which he had planted in the plainness
and simplicity of the Gospel, lest any should spoil them through Philosophy? Col.
2.8. The Churches of Christ have been but little beholden to School Divinity,
which has proved but as a Garment of Linen and Woollen, or as an Ox and an
Ass in Gods Plough. Alas! my Brethren, our poor Auditors, for the most part of
them, cannot digest these quaint Terms and critical distinctions; they are Husks
and Stones to them, and not Bread; that which may nourish, or at least please
us, will choke them; what may be Orthodox in it self, and in our sublimer
sense, may be Heterodox, and worse to them, because they cannot reach it: and
this may be one reason among others, why our LORD chose not his Apostles out of
the Schools of the Learned, but from among the Fisher Boats and poor
Mechanics; that the simplicity of the Gospel might not be lost in the Airy
Clouds of vain Philosophy. Neither does the affected curiosity of flo^id,
enticing words of man's Wisdom, become our Sacred Function. These are things
too carnal, to be blessed with the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power.
It Is true, a genuine elegance of Speech, and readiness of utterance is a gift,
that deserves not to be despised, but the more it is, or seems to be affected,
or studied, the more it looks like a vain Pomp of Words, and loses both its
value and efficacy.

3. Their Food must be suitable and seasonable; else it will breed a Nauseam,
flatulent Crudities. and Surfeits. Herein is seen very much of the Wisdom and
Faithfulness of a Steward, to give to the Household, their meat in due season,
Mat. 24.45. With what strength of Argument does Paul cloth this advice of his
to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman
that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth, aptly and
seasonably applying to every one his Portion. A word fitly spoken, (...) super
rotis suis, rotunde, rempestive, and quibus modis dici debet, with the prudent
observation of present circumstances, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver. Nothing can be more lovely, or acceptable. This is spoken of Christ, as
one eminent part of the glory and excellency of his Gospel Ministry, Isa. 50.4.
The LORD GOD has given me the Tongue of the learned, that I know how to speak
a word in Season to him that is weak. A healing word to the broken in Heart; a
word of Instruction to the Ingnorant; of Conviction to the Secure; of
Confutation to Seducers; of Reduction and Confirmation to the Seduced, and
Weak; and of Terror to the Obstinate and Impenitent, and to all these, so
seasonably, suitably, and prudently, that it may not be the casting of Pearl
before Swine. To this end a Pastor must study Men and Things, as well as Books
and Notions. Must know, and observe, and suit himself to the state of his
Flock; and the particular tempers of those whom he has to do. Of some have
compassion, making a difference. And others save with fear, pulling them out of
the fire, hating even the Garments spotted by the Flesh, Jud. 22.23. What will
heal one, will but exasperate another; and what will inflame one will but
awaken another; and what will be hearkened to at one time, will be rejected at
another. Herein is need of your Wisdom, Fidelity, Patience, and indefatigable
Industry.

4. Their Food must be gently cleansing and healing; like the Leaves of the
Tree of Life, which were for the healing of the Nations; Rev. 22.2. The LORD
knows, the Flock is feeble and sickly; daily liable to a thousand diseases and
disasters. Whenever we walk among them, we hear their complaints; or, which is
worse, we see, to our grief, the evident symptoms of the foul and dangerous
diseases they lie under, and hardly sense enough to complain. Their Food must
be Medicinal, as well as Nourishing. We had need to be Physicians, as well as
Shepherds: Yea, all the Shepherds of Christ's sending are so. Men will not
commit the Care of their Flocks to such, as can only drive them, and fleece
them; but to such as understand what is healthy and best for them, and what
their common Maladies are, and how to cure them: And is not Christ as tender of
his Flock, as Men are of theirs? See Ezekiel. 34. per totum. There you may read
what God says in this case, both of his Shepherds, and of his Sheep: The
diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick,
neither have ye bound up that which was broken -- but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them; v. 4. Therefore I am against the Shepherds; and I
will require my Flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the
Flock; v. 10. O my Brethren! the Charge of our LORD's Flock is tremendously
great and weighty: Immortal Souls are of an inestimable value. And if we
consider the present State of the Churches; the lamentable Breaches, and
Spiritual Diseases of all kinds, that are upon them, and the great Displeasure
that is signified from Heaven against them; how can it but kindle our
Compassions, and quicken our Zeal, not only to bewail the hurt of the Daughter
of Zion; but to apply all those proper Remedies, that lie within our respective
capacities; and humbly to implore the Divine Assistance, to make all our
Medicines and Methods succesful? But in dangerous and complicated Cases, how
wary and very watchful must that Physician be, that makes Conscience of
shedding Blood! Healing without cleansing, will but make them the more rotten;
and cleansing without healing, will exasperate the ill humors, and cast them
out of one Disease into another, and perhaps worse. But I design not, and hope
I need not to multiply words to you, my Brethren, who are fitter to give, than
to receive Advice in this case, from such a one as I. And all this must be done;

1. Impartially; both as to Persons and Things. An allowed partiality is
inconsistent with sincerity; and as great a stubling block, in some cases, as
we can lay before the feet of those, that are apt to stumble. I know it is hard
to Flesh and Blood, to walk upright on so uneven a ground as we have, now a
long time, been treading; and cannot but dolefully resent the Temptations that
too many are exposed to, through the hard circumstances of their conditions in
the World. Though all that looks like partiality, be not so; Prudence
directing, and that with warrant from Scripture, to make a difference, and not
to use the same Measures with one, as with another; yet the selfish Spirit of
Envy, Censoriousness and Ignorance, that is in the World, is always ready to
take offense, where there is none given. It concerns us therefore, that with
holy watchfulness and unbyassed resolution, abandoning all base Respects, and
private Interests, we so comport our selves in all cases, and toward all
persons, as that our hearts may have no cause to reproach us so long as we live.

2. Experimentally and Practically. Thou that teach another, teach thou
not thy self? Our Sermons, in their most pressing and practical Applications,
should be first, and especially Preached to our own hearts; that from the heart,
they may warmly reach the hearts of our Hearers. Like good Nurses; we should
first taste and chew the Meats that we feed our Children with. It Is shameful
and dreadful, for one that is called a Minister of Christ, to be able to speak
of Spiritual things only by hearsay, or by Books. Every Scribe which is
instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is an
householder, which brings forth out of his Treasure things new and old, Matthew.
13.52. (...), the good Treasure, or Treasury of the heart; as cap. 12.35. A
Jewel in the head, and Poison in the heart, is worse than a Toad in God's Eye.
Turpe est doctori, etc. The Ministers of Christ must be Ensamples to the Flock,
1 Pet. 5.3. And wherein? In Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, in Purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. Their Lives must teach, as well as their Lips.
They must Lead, as well as give the Word of Command; that they may be able to
say, Be ye followers of us, as we are also of Christ.

3. Prudently. The imprudent management of a Trust, is one way of betraying it.
Those that live in a Subtle and Serpentine Age, had need to be wise as
Serpents. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant? (...), Matthew. 24.45. Where
these Qualifications are well met, they make the happiest conjunction in the
Heavens of the Church. A Man may be learned, and yet not prudent; witty, and
yet not wise; honest, and yet not discreet; good Scholars, and yet no good
Pilots; zealous, but not according to knowledge. It Is pity that Christian
Prudence should be abused; that so noble and generous a Virtue should be
enslaved, and degenerate into Vice; or that which is so eminently useful, and
absolutely necessary, should get an ill name. But though it do indeed too often
deserve to be so censured; yet it is apparent enough, that those that have the
least share of it, are the most forward, and the most unreasonable in their
uncharitable Censures. It Is as natural and common for the weak (who are worst
able, and have least reason) to Judge; as it is for the strong, to Despise. It
concerns us then to be very wary that we steer aright between the two Extremes
in this case. Let our Prudence be founded in an holy Integrity, and exercised
with due regard to the Rules of Charity; and then we need not value the
Censures of Men, nor fear any just Censures of Conscience.

4. Diligently. An Office of great Trust and Importance, requires great
diligence. Where there are many Enemies, there must be the more watching. No
Office in the World is of like importance to this Are Princes God's Vicegerents
upon Earth; the Representatives and Upholders of his Authority amongst Men? It
is but in Temporalibus, and circa Sacra. The Faithful Ministers of Christ are
his Ambassadors, represent his Person, and execute his Office, in the concerns
of an higher nature. Better there were neither Princes, nor People, nor Sun,
nor Moon, nor Stars, nor Visible Heavens, nor Earth, than that there should be
no Gospel Preached to fallen Man; no way of Salvation opened by and through a
Savior; and no Means discovered of escaping the Miseries, and obtaining the
Happiness of that Eternal State in the next Life. Better no Temporal Kingdom of
Men, than no Spiritual Kingdom of Christ in the World. Nor is there any other
Office, or Interest in the World that has such, and so many Enemies. That
Spirit of Malignity which was breathed from Hell, through that crooked Serpent in
Paradise, has leavened the whole Mass of Mankind, and is still working in the
Children of Disobedience. The Dragon and his Angels are engaged in this War;
Enemies that never slumber nor sleep; that never tire, nor desert. The Earth is
full, and the Air is full; yea not only the Heathen World, but the Church it
self is full of these Enemies. And more ways they have to make their Assaults,
and to prosecute their Destructive Counsels, visibly and invisibly, by force
and by fraud, than it is easy to enumerate, or to discover. And alas! what are
we in opposition to such an Enemy, but as Israel before the Syrians, like two
little Flocks of Kids, but the Syrians filled the Country? 1 King. 20.27. How
many ways might I easily enlarge on the greatness of this Importance? But I
will not pretend to instruct my Instructers. Where the Enemies are mighty, and
many, and vigilant, the strength, or stratagems to oppose them small, the time
short, the consequence everlasting, and the loss irrepairable, there is need of
Diligence.

5. Courageously. The Ministry is a Warfare; a Service of hardships and
hazards. Courage becomes a Soldier; much more an Officer. The Coward is not
far from a Traitor. They are commonly principl'd alike, and there is but the
odds of a Temptation between the one and the other. Courage is the Life of a
Soldier, and one of the surest Pledges of Victory. When God sent forth his
Servant Joshua, and gave him a Commission to lead his People over Jordan, to
their promised Possession; though he had assured him of his special Presence
with him; yet knowing what is in the heart of the best of Men, he saw it
needful to inculcate this Charge on him, no less than three times in one short
Speech; Josh. 1.6. Be strong and of a good Courage. Only be thou strong and
very courageous. Verse. 7. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong, and of a good
Courage; be not afraid, Verse. 9.

This may serve to caution us, both of giving way to our own fears; and of
presuming on our own strength. Bold Peter was as easily overcome, as one of a
more dastardly spirit could have been. My Dear Brethren! I know I need not read
you a Lecture of Christians Courage. You have seen the high and terrible hand,
wherewith our God has led us these thirty years, through many Temptations and
Trials of Affliction, that have befallen us in this Wilderness: We will not
spit on God's Rod now, nor aggravate our past Sufferings to the reproach of the
guiltiest of Instruments; but will here set up to the LORD, our Eben-ezer, who
has hitherto helped us. And from the times that have passed over us, let us
receive instruction for whatsoever does yet abide us. It Is necessary that our
Faith and Patience have (...), their perfect work, their perfecting and
crowning work: O let not the present Calm effeminate our Courage, nor transport
it to any wrathful Indecencies; but let us press on, with our Loins always girt
in the way of our duty, if the will of God be so, prepared with an unshaken
resolution for hotter Services, and sorer Trials, than yet we have been called
unto.

6. Compassionately. O Sirs! what Object is there in the World, that so cries
for our pity and help, as the wretched Soul that is perishing by his own hands?
That is ready to starve, and die eternally for want of Bread? That is blind,
and running on ignorantly, and presumptuously on everlasting destruction, and
sporting with his own damnation? That is caught in the snares of the Devil, and
cannot escape? Or, that is held on the torturing Rack of a self-condemning
Conscience? That is plunged in the amazing Horrors of Despair, and would give
all the World for one glimpse of hope, whose groans and complaints are able to
break an heart of Flint? And is it not with such as these that we have to do?
Are not the most of Men in one or other of these Extremes? either senseless, or
raving? too confident, or too diffident? Are not such as these to be pitied?
How can our bowels but be in pain for them? Have we our selves had the
experience of such a case, and can we make light of it? Yea, the Relation
wherein we stand toward them, calls for our compassion, as we are their
Fathers, their Nurses, their Shepherds, their Physicians. And what a pattern of
Compassion have we in our dearest LORD and Master! wherein it is our Duty and
Glory to imitate him, as Paul did, Phil. 1.8. For God is my record, how greatly
I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. The less of Compassion, the
more like the Devil.

7. Patiently. We are hence called of God, as Soldiers, to militate in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ; and we must expect to endure hardness, as
our LORD, for our sakes, and for our Example has done before us, No sort of
Men in the World have more need of Patience, than we; and that not only with
relation to them without; but to them within. From those without; what scorn
and contempt, what slanders and reproaches, what envy and opposition, what
plottings and persecutions, and railing and rage must we look for? How hard and
how long must we labor to recover one dead Soul to life? What difficulties
must we break through to rescue one poor Sheep out of the Dens of the Thieves, or
of the Beasts of Prey? O what need have we of Patience, to deal with blind,
proud, graceless, hardened Sinners! Would we give the World the Journals of our
Warfare; we might produce a Piece of the same kind with that of the Apostle; 2
Cor. 11.23, etc. But besides those things that are without, that which comes
unto us daily, the Care of the Churches committed of God to us: How many weak
ones? how many froward, passionate, selfish, lukewarm and disorderly ones have
we to exercise our Patience with? When God's time was come, according to his
Promise, to lead that froward, murmuring, unstable People out of Egypt, he
chose one of the meekest and patientest Men then upon Earth to do it, Numb.
12.3. Is not this one of the most glorious and useful Pieces of our Spiritual
Panoply, both as Christians, and as Ministers? Which is given us in particular
Charge? 1 Timothy 6.11. Titus 2.2. And which we should keep bright by daily
exercise? O what sad work shall we make, if Impatience once get the Reins of
us? And has not long Experience to our sorrow tought us, that whatever the
provocations be, fretting, and storming, and passionate youthful heats, or
capricious repartees, are a poor kind of revenge, and as unsuccessful, as it is
an irrational way to help it. A man's prevailing Passion is his weakness;
which, if one have charity for himself, he will be careful to suppress and
conceal: much less should he, that is a Teacher of others, defile the Pulpit
with the proclamation of it.

8. Lastly, Perseveringly. He that has put his hand to God's Plow, must not
look back. Tho the work be hard and painful, the difficulties great, the
discouragements many; yet we must hold up, and hold on, and hold out, knowing
that we shall reap in due season, if we faint not. We, unto whom this sacred
Office is, according to Scripture Order committed, have our Ears bored to the
Posts of God's Sanctuary, for service, durante vita; nor can any Creature or
Authority upon Earth legally dissolve this Bond, or supersede this Commission,
unless it be in case of a Criminal forfeiture, as was that of Abiathar, 1 Kings
2.26, 27. or of a Natural or Moral Incapacity of discharging the Duties, and
answering the Ends of the Office. The Reason is plain; because the Office and
Commission is primarily, and fundamentally from God, and not from man. Neither
may any one that is lawfully called to, and invested with it, voluntarily
desert, or alienate himself from it, without the dreadful guilt of Sacrilege,
Apostasy, and Perjury: A dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me, says
St. Paul, and a necessity is (thereby) laid upon me; therefore, Woe unto me, if
I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. As for any particular Exceptions in
some rare and extraordinary cases: See Mr. G. T. Pastor's Care and Dig. p. 14.
Wherein it may be lawful for a man to lay aside his Ministerial Function. I
shall not here mention, nor shall I now examine how far, and in what cases it
is both lawful, prudential, and expedient for the Churches peace and safety, to
give way to the torrent of a Tide, and for a season to suspend the ordinary
acts, and exercise of the Ministry; which is a case that has been, and for
ought we know, or for ought we have at God's hands deserved, may again be.

But I shall wave this Question, unless I were particularly called to it, and
shall conclude this Chapter, with the Sixth Petition of our LORD's Prayer: Lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; (...).

CHAP. V. The Second Part of the Pastor's Charge, viz. To govern and rule The
Flock.
2. THE other, and indeed the more difficult and obnoxious part of our
Ministerial Work, is to rule, to exercise the Authority that is given us of the
Lord, as Shepherds over his Flock.

This was what I had neither time, nor mind to discourse of in the Pulpit; and
should now dismiss it with the same brevity, and general hints (being conscious
of my own weakness, and apprehensive of the use that some are like to make of
what I must say, if I say any thing) did not the sense of my Duty oblige me to
accept of the Burden that is laid upon me, and to discharge it with that
sincerity, and impartiality (according to the measure that is given me of God,
for his Churches Service) as does become one that desires to be found faithful.

I confess my heart cannot but shrink at the thoughts of entering into this
rough and thorny Province, this Seat of War, where I see so many Parties
engaged, and Swords drawn at one another.

God knows, and my Brethren are my Witnesses, that this is not a Work of my own
seeking; nor am I come as an Advocate of any of the contending parties, but
with an earnest desire, and design of Peace and Truth: In the prosecution
whereof I shall purposely (as far as possible) decline any use of the
sentiments, or suffrages of such as have been at sharps on this Argument; and
confine my self to those Oracles of the divinely inspired and revealed Truth in
the Holy Scriptures; the Rule which at last we must be determined by, if ever
we be well determined. The word that God (this way) puts in my mouth, that
shall I speak, as he shall please to give me understanding, and utterance: and
let those that are otherwise minded, consider before they censure.

Should I pretend to assume the whole Question of Church Government, it would
swell into a volume; whereas I intend only this one short Chapter, for what I
shall now say on this Subject; and therein as little as I can; which yet to
some perhaps may seem too much; and to others too little.

I shall not spend any time in writing an Encomium of Government, either in
general, or particular, which has been done by many others, of the usefulness
and necessity, whereof the whole rational world is experimentally sensible.

But of Government there are diverse kinds; according to the diversity both of
the matter and form of it.

That which we are now to consider, is the Ecclesiastical, or the Government of
the Church, and House of God in the World. The Apostle tells us, There is no
Power but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.1, 2. The Powers (...)
Potestates. Governments that are amongst men, are God's Ordinance, tho all the
evil ways of climbing into it, and maladministration of it, or imprudent
circumstances in the constitution of it, be not of God, but of men. But if all
the Powers and Governments of the world be of God, then has he not left his
Church, which is his peculiar Kingdom, without Government. But the Question is
not, Whether Ecclesiastical Government in the general be jure divino; but
whether there be any particular Form of this Government that is so, and what
that Form is.

This is the (...), the Nodus vindice dignus.

There are some that deny there is any Form of Church Government, appointed of
Christ under the New Testament, but that it is left to be modified by the Rules
of Human Prudence, and Discretion: But then such would do well to let us know
when, and where, and to whom the Lord Jesus Christ has committed this Power of
Legislation, and establishing the Forms of Government to his Churches. It Is
true, there are some Circumstantials of Government, that are, and must be left
to the Discretion of Governors, to be adapted, pro re nata, to the present
state of the Governed. But if the Essentials of Government be left to the
wisdom and will of men, then are the Churches in a very ill case. Nor do I know
how we shall be able to prove, That as Moses was faithful in all the house of
God, as a servant, so Christ much more, as a son over his own house, Heb. 3.
begin. But that he was so, de facto, in the business of Government and
Discipline, as well as in Doctrine and Worship, and satisfaction to God, as our
Redeemer, is well enough to be proved from the Scriptures. Whence I conclude,
that the Government of the Church is appointed of Christ in the Holy
Scriptures, in specie, as well as in genere.

Of those that are thus far agreed, there are yet diverse Opinions, and Parties;
some are for this Form of Government; others for that; the Reasons of which
disagreement are commonly some such things as these.

1st. An invincible ignorance of the true sense of the Scriptures in this
Point; and the very mind of Christ, and his Apostles in them.

Charity obliges me to believe, that there are very many of most of the
contending Parties, that would readily, and cheerfully acquiesce in the
Sentiments of their Opposers, could they but overcome the Reasons, which they
think they have truly and rightly drawn from the Scriptures, to be otherwise
minded: And yet it is most certain, that there is gross and affected ignorance
enough among the Contenders of all sides: And these are the persons that are
wont to be most fierce and confident. The mind of Christ is in it self but one,
and can be no more; therefore our disagreement about it necessarily concludes
our Ignorance, or something worse on the one side, or the other.

2. The natural fondness that men have for their own Ways and Lusts.

Though there is no Government in the World of so pure a nature, or firm a
texture, or constitution, but that it may be abused to the service of base
ends, and private interest; yet there are some Modes and Forms of Government,
that are in themselves more directly accommodated, by the Policy of the
Compilers, and Founders of them to such purposes: And such are they especially,
that are of men's devising, and obtruding on the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ.
For Usurpers (be sure) will always frame their Laws, and Methods, in favor of
their own Designs: And were there nothing else but private Interest and Design
among the Parties concerned, that difference that is amongst men, on this
account, must needs be an occasion of contention. But much more must such as
are acted by Principies of true Conscience and Integrity, think themselves
bound to protest against all such politic and carnal Forms of Government.

3. The Gross Abuse, and Degeneracy of a good and well ordered Government.

The purest and most durable Metal, if not well kept, will in length of time
grow foul and rusty, and look very unlike it self, and then it will be
questioned and quarreled at, and denied to be what in truth it is: And the
same fate are the best Governments in the World subject to. As was the Kingly
Government among the Assyrians in the days of Sardanapalus; and among the
Romans, in the days of Tarquinius Superbus: And so it has been of several
other Forms of Government amongst men. The best and most sacred Constitutions
that ever were in the Earth, by their abuse have fallen under the Odium and
contempt of the more inconsiderate part, that are apt to lust after new things,
and know not how to restore the old to their Original rectitude; as befell the
Theocracy of God's own appointment, 1 Samuel 8.5 and 7. But were the Argument
good from the abuse of a thing against the use of it, 'twere easy to argue our
selves into the grossest Absurdities in Nature.

Now if we would rightly understand what that Form of Government is, that
Christ has chosen for his Churches under the Gospel, we must consider what the
Subject of the Government is, or the matter which is to be informed by it. It Is
not enough to say the Church, which is vox ambigua; but we must distinguish:
Nor is it necessary for me to take notice here of all the Distinctions the Word
is capable of, or that have been, by some others, imposed on it. As,

1. The Church Ecumenical; to which the Pope so arrogantly and fasly lays a
claim of Supremacy. Or,

2dly. The Church National; of which that Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Baxter
has given so Rational, and Scriptural an account; and which (that I know) is
not by any one, as yet, answered. Or,

3dly. The Church Provincial; which is the Constitution and Union of the
particular Churches, within the limits of the Province, into one distinct
Political Body, or Sacred Polity, under the general inspection and Authority of
one Ecclesiastical Head, either single, or collective. Or,

4ly. The Presbyterial, Classical, Collegiate, Diocesan, etc. which I take as
Synonimous, and includes all the particular Congregations within the bounds of
such a Division. Or,

5ly. The Congregational, made up of one Pastor, with his people, and necessary
Officers.

These are the Distinctions given according to the Common Division that has,
for Order sake, been made of the Church.

But the only Distinction which I shall now a little animadvert upon, is this;

The Rulers of the Church, and the Ruled; and shall speak to the Last first.

The Ruled. And herein shall answer these three Questions.

1. Who they are they must be ruled. 2. By whom they must be ruled. 3. By What
Laws they must be ruled.
Q. 1. Who they are that must be ruled?

S. The Answer, in general, is what Paul gives; loco cit. Romans 13.1. (...)
every Soul. He that is not subject to the good Government of that Political
Body, civil, or sacred, whereunto he stands related as a Member, and by which
he ought to be comprehended, is (...) the Lawless and Disobedient, for whom the
Bridle and the Rod of the Law is made; and so both Rulers and Ruled are equally
subject to the Laws, though not the same Laws of Government; but according to
the different capacities, orders, and Relation wherein they are placed in the
Economy of the Church. Though the Rulers and the Ruled cannot be the same, sub
codem respectu; yet in diverse respects they may, and ought; Those that are
Rulers of some, must be ruled by others: So then the Ruled part, of which I am
first to speak, is twofold; the Clergy and the Laity; or the Ministers and the
People; according to the duplicity of the Government; to which, as
Church Members they stand related; which is either general and common, or
special and proper.

The Rulers and Officers of the Church, as those of Armies, and Commonwealths
or Kingdoms, are, or ought to be (...), men under Authority, and the Laws of a
Polity, that is proper to them as such, as well as the people, whom they govern
by the Laws that are fitted for them: I say, under Authority, and that not
only, and immediately unto Christ, but also unto men; even such as Christ, the
Supreme Legislator, and Lord, has Commissioned to rule for, and under him, in
his Church. This seems to me to have been one great mistake, and the ground of
a thousand more; That the Ministers of the Gospel have, and hold their
Authority in the Church, only from Christ in capite; so as to conclude an
equality, and co-ordination of Pastors. It Is true, the general Patent and Grant
of the Office is originally, and immediately from Christ; but the particular
distribution of Commission is not so, but from such hands as are entrusted and
authorized by him to bestow it on others; and unto whom, they that receive it,
ought to be accountable for their well, or maladministration of it. All those
that are duly qualified, and called to the Ministry, are equally Ministers of
Christ, i. e. one is not more a Minister than another; nor merely, as such,
have they greater power one than another; as all men in the World are equally
men, God's Creatures, and partakers of Human Nature: But from hence to deny a
subordination of one to another, in point of Government, is to pluck up all
Government in the World by the roots, and turn the whole Creation into Anarchy,
and worse than its first Tohn vebohu; which is one of the maddest Principles
that ever was suggested to the Rational Nature, by that grand Author of
confusion. Let it be considered, that the Officers of the Church of Christ, or
the Clergy, as for distinction they are commonly called, are a particular
distinct Company and Society of men, as the People or Layity are another; and
so they ever were, and were to be accounted by God's own appointment, both
under the Old and New Testament: And as it is in all regulated Armies, and
other secular Governments in the world, the Officers are a separate Political
Body and Community of themselves, distinct from the rest; and if so, then they
ought to have their proper Polity and Government as such: a Government peculiar
and distinct from that of the common people, and which is called Hierarchy,
only (...). And that it ever has been, and always must be so, is not hard to
prove.

1. That it has been ever so, since Christ has had a Church upon the Earth; I
say a Church, organically constituted, and politically governed. Such was the
Jews under that of the hands of Moses and Aaron; That the Ministers under the
Old Testament, the Priests and Levites, were a distinct Body, yea, and to avoid
confusion, a distinct Tribe, purposely so chosen of God; and that they had
their distinct Polity and Government, of God's own appointing, and that with a
great deal of caution and particularity, even to very minute circumstances, in
all the Orders, Degrees, and Courses of their Consecration, and Ministration. I
would think it needless for me to spend time to demonstrate; Those that have
any acquaintance with the Sacred History of that Church, cannot be ignorant of
this. And this was both the beauty, and the strength and security of that
Church: the Hedge that God made about his Vineyard. And as they were a distinct
Body, as Clergy, separate from all the other Tribes; so they had their proper
Government and Economy; the Priests of the House of Aaron, the Rulers; and the
rest of the Levites the Ruled. And that it was so under the Gospel too from the
beginning, is very evident. Our blessed LORD, when he began, with his Ministry,
to lay the Foundations of the new Jerusalem, the Gospel Church, what could be
more plainly distinguishing, than his choosing the select number of Twelve, as
one Superior Order of Ministers; and of Seventy, whom he sent forth to Preach
the Gospel, as an Order inferior to the Twelve? Though their general Office and
Commission, as Preachers, were both the same, which made them of one Body and
Society as such, but of a different Order and Degree; and these as plainly and
politically distinguished from the Body of the common Disciples, as any one
political Society, or Company of Men in the World is from another. And thus
they have been ever since, with all the reason in the World, taken as a
particular Company and Body of Men, on the account of their Holy Calling,
separate and distinct from the Common People; and as such, have a Government,
of Christ's own Institution, proper and peculiar to them. I do not think that
the exact number of Twelve, or of Seventy, does at all concern us Gentiles; but
that which is in it common both to Jews and Gentiles concerns us as well as
them. What the Priests were to the Levites, that the Twelve were to the
Seventy. Yea and among the Twelve there seems to be a difference both of Order
and Degree. Though Peter was not the Princeps Apostolorum, he was the Primus
Discipulorum, the Seniour of that School, or Collegium Presbyterorum, and next
in Dignity, under Christ his LORD and Master; for we find that Peter was the
Person, unto whom Christ did immediately direct all his Speeches that concerned
them in common: that when the Twelve, or any part of them are mentioned, if
Peter were one, he was always named first. Yea, and Matthew, in his Catalogue,
does not only name him first, but gives him the Title of (...), which, for
ought I know, is as much as (...), or Praeses. Neither, though this be granted,
will it at all strengthen, or favor the arrogant claim of the Bishop of Rome,
to be Peter's Successor. For Peter himself was called the (...), not with
relation to the Church Universal, of which Christ alone is the Head; but with
relation to that particular Society, or Collegium, of which he was then a
Member. For when the frame and Economy of that particular Society was
dissolved, as it was by the Death of Christ, Peter was no more a (...), a
Primate or President, than any of the other Eleven were.

2. That it must be always so. And great reason there is for this.

1. Because Christ has instituted it by his own practice, and example, as
appears by what has been now said; and what Christ has once instituted, may
not by man be abrogated, or altered.

2. Because there is perpetual need of it: I need not descant upon this;
Doleful Experience tells us, to our shame, that there is no Society, or Body of
men in the World, that have more need of the Reins of Government, than the
Ministry. Has every Company of Physicians, Surgeons, Merchants,
Apothecaries, Tailors, Drapers, Shoemakers, Victuallers, Vintners, Bakers,
Brick-layers. etc. need of a Government peculiar to their respective Companies
and Professions, in the best governed Towns and Corporations? I would I could
say, that Ministers have not much more; whose Errors and Miscarriages are of
sadder consequence than any of theirs aforementioned. If every Minister, as
such, be immediately under Christ, as to Government, (which cannot be, unless
they had their Commission immediately from him, as the Apostles, had) then is
he accountable to none else, but is absolute and independent in his Office.
What grosser principle of Tyranny can there be than this? What wider Gate can
there be opened to the most Licentious Arbitrariness? And in what a case then
are the poor Churches? This is to pull down one Tyrant, and to set up many
thousands, and to make every Novice a Lord over Gods Heritage.

Quest. 2. By whom must they be ruled?

Sol. Not by themselves sure, that is plain Anarchy, and utterly inconsistent
with any Form of Political Government; (which the Quakers themselves would soon
be weary of (as in Pensilvania, they say, they begin to be) were they not, in
despite of their irrational Principles, preserved from the mischievous
consequences of them by the common benefit of the Government they here live
under) but they must be ruled by the Authority, which God has set over them,
and every one, both Pastors and People, by their own immediate Officers. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13.17. And who
are they whom Christ has set to Rule and to Govern in his House; but those
whom he calls his Stewards his Ministers, into whose hands he has committed
the Keys of Government? Neither has he shared the Ruling Power, or any part of
it between them and the People; nor could it have been consistent with the
honor of his Wisdom, or the Interest and Peace of his Churches to have done
it. I will give unto Thee (not one, but both) the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 16.19. That these are the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline, appears
by the explication of it in the next words. Whatsoever thou shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, which is the exercise of the Authority given
him. Neither is this Power of Government given to Peter exclusively, nor as a
private Disciple, but as a public Minister, and public Officer in the Church
of Christ; and with him to all the rest of his Brethren in the same Office, for
them and for their Successors, Mat. 18.18. Who is it that Christ means by the
faithful and wise Steward? Lu. 12.42. Is it not the same, that the Apostle
means, 1 Cor. 4.1. The Ministers of Christ; and Tit. 1.7. A Bishop must be
blameless, as the Steward of God. And this is the Steward, whom his Lord shall
make Ruler over his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due season.
So that the Government of his Church is established by Christ, in the hands of
his Ministers, on whom he breathed the Holy Ghost, to qualify them for, and
carry them through all the work, both ordinary and extraordinary, whereto he sent
them, Joh. 20.22. By this it appears in the general, in whose hands,
immediately under Christ, the governing power does lie; not in the People, but
in the Ministers of the Gospel, who alone are his Stewards, and unto whom, at
his departure, he delivered the Keys of his House, and of all the Provisions
and Treasures in it. And who are sometimes, in the New Testament, called his
Ambassadors, or Messengers; sometimes Bishops, or Overseers; sometimes
Presbyters, or Elders; sometimes Proestotes, or Rulers, which are but several
Names and Titles given to one and the same sort of men. I know no point in
Scripture more plainly asserted, than this, viz. That Christ has joined the
Teaching and Ruling Authority together, and committed it, in conjunction, to
the same hands. But what God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Quest. 3. By what Laws must they be ruled?

Sol. Not by Laws of men's devising; which they are wont to accommodate to the
service of their own Inclinations and Ends; but by the written Laws of his own
prescription. The Economy is Spiritual and Divine, and so must the Laws be, by
which it is administered. Other Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. The Foundation of Government and
Discipline, as well as of Doctrine and Worship, is laid by Jesus Christ; and
whoever lays any other Foundation in either of these, entrenches on Christ's
Prerogative, and shall do it to his own peril. Though in the necessary
Circumstantials of all these, humane Prudence and Authority has a determining
power, for the Order, Peace, and Edification of the Church; but not to its
destruction, or disturbance. I say, the necessary Circumstantials; but
unnecessarily to multiply Circumstantials, under the Notion of Indifferents,
and on pretense of Decency or Authority, is a very unacceptable, and offensive
piece of Superstition; and to impose them, as the indispensible terms of
Communion, on such as are not satisfied about them, is not the least Instance
of Church-Tyranny. Church Officers are but Christ's Deputies, and not Lords of
Gods Heritage; and therefore must rule by Christ's Laws; For he is our Judge,
our Lawgiver, and our King, Isa. 33.22. Our Power is but to execute; it is he
that must make, and give the Laws. And what these Laws are, and where to be
found, I need not say the Holy Scriptures are his Statute-Book; If they speak
not according to this Rule, it is because there is no light in them.

2. The Rulers. If there be some to be ruled, there must be others to Rule.
Relata se simul ponunt and tollunt; and qui novit unum Relatorum, novit and
alterum. Yet here it will be enquired, who are those that are to Rule?

I shall not take notice of the Regal Power, or how far, it being Christian, it
extends both over Pastors and People, not only as Civil Subjects, but as
Christian Churches; and not only in the things of men, but in the things of
God; but shall refer my Reader for this to Mr. Baxter, of National Churches,
and to others that have written of it, it being foreign to my present Text.
But as Pastors and People are two distinct Political Bodies, so there must be
two distinct Forms of Government proper to each of them. I shall speak,

1. Of the People. These are to be ruled, and not to rule in the House of God.
I know this is an hard saying, and that there are many that can badly bear it;
nor would I thus displease them, could I help it, and yet be faithful. Those
that are for a Democracy, seem to be guided by the same Spirit, as they were,
Numb. 16.3. Who gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron,
and said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation is
holy, every one of them. Wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the
Congregation of the LORD? That the Tribe of Reuben should be guilty of such a
thing was not so strange; but great pity it was, that any of the Tribe of Levi
should conspire with them. There is no Minister of Jesus Christ, that can
consent to such an Usurpation, and be innocent, and true to the Trust,
committed to him. Let those that are for the Peoples ruling in the Church of
Christ, show us when and where the Keys of Government, or any one of them, was
put into any of their hands. Where did our LORD make them partners with us in
the Government of his Church? Or what part of the Governing Office and Work was
it that he assigned to them? Herein I am sorry that I must dissent, not only
from Men of an inferior Note, and more Heterodox Principles, but from the
Learned Calvin too, and almost all that follow him. For I could never yet find
in Scripture any such Officer as a nonpreaching ruling Elder, appointed of
Christ, or of his Apostles in the Church. The one and only Officer that Christ
himself made, was the Minister of his Word, the Evangelical Pastor, whose work
was to feed and to rule the Flock. To which the Apostles afterward added the
Office of the Deacons, as Servants to them, and Helps in the meaner part of
their work, as may be seen, Act. 6. begin. and as Moses did, for the ease of
his Government, by the advice of Jethro, Exodus 18.18, etc. Which, though it be
Apostolical, yet cannot be said to be Primarily, but only Secundarily Jure
Divino. The Scriptures that are alleged in favor of this Ruling Lay Elder, do
not (as I think) prove any such conclusions; which I shall now examine, and
leave all to the consideration of such, as can without prejudice, weigh what I
am now bold to offer. One Text we have, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. To which I have this
exception. If the (...), He that rules be here mentioned as a distinct Officer
in the Church, then why not all the rest? of which we have these seven in this
one Scripture, viz. he that prophesies: he that ministers: he that teaches:
he that exhorts: he that gives: he that rules: and he that shows mercy.
But if we go to work in this way, how will Offices be multiplied in the Church,
beyond all that was ever intended or imagined? And then, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30.
where we have no less than nine mentioned, among which we find (...), which
they would have to signify the Ruling Lay-Elder; and so we would believe too,
could they prove, that all the rest here mentioned were so many Offices in the
Church. They insist very confidently on these words of sanction, (...), God
has set and appointed; but why this word, which has undeniably an equal
relation to all, should make, or prove one to be an Office, and not another, I
confess is a depth that I am not able to fathom. Here (as I think) the great
mistake lies; that Gifts and Offices are confounded. The Apostle 1 Cor. 12.4,
5, 6. very plainly distinguishes between Gifts, Administ ations, and
Operations, (...). Where by Gifts are meant the Abilities bestowed upon the
Offices, or Administrations in order to the operations, or effects of them, to
the edifying of the Church. Now in the forementioned Scriptures we find a
diversity of Gifts and Operations; but Gifts and Offices are not the same.

But there is one Scripture more, which has been already quoted, on the
Doctrinal part of this Discourse, which seems to speak more fully to their
purpose, and to make a distinction between Preaching and Ruling Elders, viz. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that Rule well be accounted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. Much use has been made of
this Text to little purpose; I shall not now mention any of all that I have
seen, and read of it; but give you, as God has enabled me, the true sense of
this Scripture, and let the unprejudiced Reader judge.

And that we may understand the mind of Christ in it, we will consider,

1. By whom, and to whom this Direction was given.

It was by the Apostle Paul, the great planter of the Churches of the Gentiles;
and who, as an Apostle, had Power and Authority to order and determine all the
affairs that concerned the Discipline and Government of the Churches of his own
planting. Both this, and the other Epistle was written by him to Timothy, whom
he left as his Substitute, or Surrogate with Apostolical Power under him in the
Church of Ephesus, to ordain Presbyters as there should be occasion, and to
dispose of the Dignities and Revenues of the Church to such as were most worthy
of them, and would best improve them to the Glory of Christ, and the Churches
benefit. And for the same end it was that he left Titus in Crete, as his
Substitute, or Overseer in that Island, as appears Tit. 1.5. So that this
advice was not sent to the people, nor to the Inferior Presbyters, who were to
be ordered by it, but to one in a higher Sphere of Authority, and by whom they
were to be ordered; whether for distinction sake he be called Evangelist, or
Bishop, or President, or Moderator; the difference is but verbal.

2. What does the Apostle mean by the double honor here?

There are two things that seem to bid fair for the Sense, which will both come
to one in the issue.

1. The Honor of Maintenance: and so we find the word sometimes used in
Scripture; as ver. 3. of this Chap. Matt. 15.6. Acts 28 10. and the following
words of the Apostle in this Scripture, seem to look this way: and then the
Sense must be this: Let those Officers of the Church that best discharge the
Duties of their Office in ruling, but especially in Preaching (which is the
more noble and necessary part of their Work) have the greatest encouragement on
this kind; i e. Let not the Revenues of the Church (which were then but small
and uncertain) be bestowed promiscuously, much less partially, (...); but so as
may best subserve the Churches good Government, and the grand Design of
preaching the Gospel.

2. The Honor of Authority and Obedience.

And this is the prime sense of the Word, as it is used in the Fifth
Commandment; Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, Exodus 20.12. is the same with,
Obey your Parents, Ephesians. 6.1. And obey them that have the rule over you, Heb.
13.17. and so is the word used, Heb. 5.4. No man takes this Honor unto
himself: i. e. this Office, this Dignity, this power and authority

And this indeed is much more worthily and properly called Honor, than a rich
worldly Revenue, or a fat Benefice or Bishopric (things unborn in those days)
which men too often abuse, both to God's dishonor, and their own.

Now if this be the Double Honor here intended, as to me seems most probable;
at least, that it is included, as the most eminent part of it; then the sense
will be this: Let those Presbyters or Ministers that appear, on experience and
trial, to have a Spirit of Government; but especially with it, an eminency of
ability and diligence in preaching the Word, be made Rulers, and
Superintendents over the inferior part of the Clergy; let such be taken into
the Collegium, Presbyterorum regens; the Regency of the Church. So that it is
not the distinction of Office, but the qualification of the Officer, that the
Apostle gives this direction for.

3. We must consider the persons, on whom this double honor is to be
conferred; or who are thus to be dignified as the word (...), properly
signifies; and these are Elders; described, 1. In genere; by their Office. 2.
In specie; by their Qualifications.


1. By their general Office, (...), which is a word always used to denote the
Ministers of the Word in the Gospel Church; as Act. 11.30. chapter 14.23. chapter 15.2,
6, 22, 23. chapter 16.4. chapter 20.17. chapter 21.18. Tit. 1.5. Jam. 5.14. 1 Pet. 5.1. 2
Ep. John 1. and Epist. 3.1.

2. By their special Qualification; which is double.

1. They much be such as Rule well; (...), which is another Title, peculiarly
given in the New Testament, to the Ministers of the Word, whose Office it is to
Rule as well as to Preach.

2. They must be (...), such as labor in the Word and Doctrine. So that the
word (...), does not distinguish, as I have said, between two Offices; but
between the twofold Qualifications of one and the same Office. There were in
the Church of Ephesus (which was a Collegiate, or Presbyterial Church) many
Presbyters, the Talent of whose Gifts lay diversely, as we find it does in all
other Churches; some were fitter for Government, others for Preaching; some
excelled in one Gift, others in another. Now the Apostle advises Timothy how to
make his choice of Persons for Government in the Presbytery; whom to prefer to,
and entrust with a double honor, or higher degree of Dignity and Power in this
kind and sphere of Government; and tells him, they must be such, as have
behaved themselves well in the Pastoral Government of their particular Flocks
and Congregations; and especially such of them as are most eminent and
laborious in Preaching the Word; whereby they purchase to themselves a good
Degree; as it is said of the Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.13. (...), a place of higher
Honor and Trust, from a Deacon to a Presbyter from a Presbyter to a President.
Preferments ought to be dispensed according to every ones Qualifications and
Merits. Whence it appears, that there are Degrees in the Ministerial Office:
And this is that the Apostle here gives this Direction about; not at all
countenancing a Non-Preaching Ruling Lay-Elder; but discountenancing a Lordly,
Lazy, Non-Preaching Bishop, or Superintendent. That the Preaching Elder or
Minister of the Gospel is to Rule, as well as to Preach the Word, is so plainly
asserted in Scripture, that, I think, cannot by any be denied. But if this
Ruling Power were divided by Christ, or his Apostles, between Them and the
People, or any part of the People; can any one give us a reason, why neither
Christ nor his Apostles should ever speak a word, to direct us, how the
Division of this Ruling Power must be made? What must be their part, and what
ours? How they must be qualified, as well as we? and the Deacons, for which
they were careful to give the necessary Rules? Yea and how they must be
maintained too? For to lay the burden of an Office on a Man, and to make no
provision for his Maintenance, seems hard, and not very honorable to him whose
Servant he pretends to be; especially considering, that they could not but know
and foresee, how tender all Men naturally are in the matters of Honor and
Maintenance; and of what mischievous consequence the leaving such a Question as
this in the dark, and undetermined, would be: That it would involve the Church
in endless strifes, and quarrels, and confusions. But will the Lay-Elder lay
his Claim to a Maintenance, from that word in the Text, viz. double Honor;
taking it for the Honor of Maintenance? Let him then read on the next verse
there; For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out
the Corn: And the labourer is worthy of his reward. The first of these
Scriptures you have, Deuteronomy. 25.4. which the Apostle makes use of, 1 Cor. 9.9.
And you may see how he there applies it, only to the Ministers of the Gospel;
Those that sow unto the People spiritual things; v. 11. That minister about
holy things, and wait at the Altar; v. 13. The other Scripture you have, Matthew.
10.10. The workman is worthy of his meat: Which are Christ's own words to the
Twelve, when he sent them forth to Preach the Gospel. Here Is never a word of
the Ruling Elder in all this, nor any provision made for him. And this one
thing is enough to clear the sense of the precedent verse, that there is no
such thing as the Ruling, Non Preaching Elder intended in it; but the double
Honor is for those that tread out the Corn, and labor in the LORD's Harvest
in Word and Doctrine. And these are the only Persons spoken of in that, 1 Timothy
5.17.

So then; The Rulers of the People are their Pastors, who are to Rule, every
one over his own particular Flock, or Congregation, in the things of God, and
of their Souls; who, for the ease of their Government, and the advantage of
their Ministerial work, have warrant from Scripture to ordain and appoint
Deacons under them, and other necessary servile Officers, who derive their
power immediately from their Pastor; are accountable to him; and may, and ought
to be despos'd by him in case of Maladministration; as every Captain in an
Army; Every Mayor in a Corporation; every Master in a Family have the proper
power over their own Companies, Buroughs, and Families, and all the inferior
Officers in them, to dispose and govern them for their good, according to the
known and common Laws of that Superior Government, under which they live, and
unto which they themselves are accountable.

2. The Rulers of the Pastors or Officers of the Church. I am very apprehensive
that this is a tender Point, wherein, I even tremble to think, that I must be
either sinfully silent, or declare my dissent from so many of my dear Brethren,
whom I know to be otherwise Orthodox, Learned, Pious, and with whom I dare not
compare my self. But I have said, and O that daisy and doleful Experience did
not proclaim it to the World, to the grief of some, and the shame of others,
that there is no Company, or Society of Men in the World, that have more need
of the strictest Government, than the Men of our Function; without which, we
are, of all Mankind, in this respect, the most miserable; and the poor Church
of Christ in the forelornest case of any of God's Creatures upon Earth. But
certainly he that has so provided for the Government of the Kingdoms of the
World, has not left his own mystical Kingdom, wherein so much of his special
interest lies, without such a Government, as is every way adequate to all the
parts and concerns of it. He that has taken such care to enclose and fence out
the wild Commons of the World, has not designed to leave his own Garden
uninclos'd; Nor his Vineyard without a Hedge about it, and a Wine Press and a
Tower in it.

How weak and insatisfactory is this, to say, that we are all the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, and Brethren to one another; that we have our Commission, as
Ministers of the Gospel, from him (though not immediately from him, which indeed,
if it were so, would alter the case) who is the Supreme Legislator? That we
have our Bibles in our hands, and therein the unalterable Rules of our
administration, both in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; the Laws, by which we
are to Govern both our selves and the Churches; that we have the promise of the
Holy Spirit to guide us into all truth; and an Unction from the Holy One, and
know all things; that our Office and Work is Sacred and Divine; of God and not
of Men; alas! will all this make us Infallible, or Absolute and Independent;
exempt from all Laws and Bonds of an Ecclesiastical Polity; were we made the
Ministers of Christ to rule, and not to be ruled? O that men would consider the
dismal consequents of such an Hypothesis, which I delight not now to aggravate.

But if there must be a Government among Pastors, considered as a distinct Body
from the People; then, it will be said, there cannot be an equality, the Notion
of Co-ordination of Pastors and Churches is subverted, this being inconsistent
with Government. But let wise Men consider what that is that must needs lie at
the bottom of this Levelling Principle. And yet Government does not destroy the
Equality and Coordination of Pastors, or Churches, as such, or per se; but only
secundum quid; or in respect of Order; e. g. All the Captains in an Army, as
Captains, are equal; so are all the Colonels, and all the other Officers, that
are of one and the same Order; but between a Captain and a Colonel, there is
an inequality: And as it is in a well Regimented Army; so it is in the Church
of Christ, which is as an Army with Banners, Cant 6.10. And it is supposed too,
that this subordination of Pastors and Churches will conclude a necessity of a
Supreme Papal Head and Governor. This I take to be the great stumbling block;
the plain sense whereof is but this; That if every Minister be not allowed to
be a Pope over his own Congregation, then there must be one Pope over all the
Congregations and Pastors in the Christian World. Both which extremes are
equally wide from the Truth, and perhaps equally pernicious to the Church. But
to defend the Truth from both the Horns of this Dilemma, we will examine what
is the true Scripture notions of a Church.

We find in Scripture that the Churches which the Apostles planted, are
reckoned by the great Towns, or Cities, which they chose to begin to gather
their Churches in, as appears both by the names that are given them, and by
comparing Act. 14.23. with Tit. 1.5. where the ordinary Elders in every Church,
is the same with Ordaining Elders in every City. Neither do we find any
Organical Church of the Apostles founding, any where mentioned in the New
Testament, but it bears the name of the Town or City, in which it was; besides
those Domestic Churches of Priscilla and Aquila, of Nymphas and Philemon,
which were equivocally called Churches, because some Congregations of the
Believers did either occasionally, or statedly assemble to worship God there;
or, as others think, because all of these Families were converted to
Christianity, and so became Churches or Houses of God, which is little to our
present Question. Besides, these Churches, thus planted by the Apostles in
Towns and Cities, did still retain their first names and singularity: For one
may always observe, that where the Scripture speaks of the Churches of a whole
Province, or Country, it speaks of them as of different and distinct Churches,
in the plural number, as the Churches of Judea, 1 These. 2.14. the Churches of
Asia, 1 Cor. 16.19. the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, Act. 15.41. the Churches
of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16.1. and Gal. 1.2. and the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.
1. because all these were large Countries, in which were many great Towns and
Cities, in which the Churches were distinctly planted; and according to which
they had their names and number. But when it speaks of the Christians in one
Town, or City, it speaks of them as one Church, in the singular; as the Church
of Jerusalem, Act. 8.1. the Church of Antioch, Act. 13.1. the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. So when the Churches of Asia are spoken of together, they
are the seven Churches, according to the number and names of the seven great
Cities of Asia, in which these Churches were planted; but when written to
singly, it is the Church of Ephesus, and the Church of Smyrna, and the Church
of Sardis, etc. And it is to be observed,

1. That this account never once fails in all the New Testament, which proves
that it is not spoken indifferently, but industriously, and for our instruction.

2. That Churches were thus reckoned in the times of John, when he was in
Patmos, which was 64 years after Christ; in all which time, it is incredible,
that all the Christians, in one of these great Cities, were no more than would
make up one Congregation.

3. That there is no mention in the Scripture of any Churches planted in the
Countries adjacent to these Cities and Towns; yet it is rational to suppose,
that there were many Converts, and some Congregations too in the
Country-Villages, as well as in the great Towns; and therefore that these made
up but one Church with that of the Town or City. Hence I conclude, that (these
things being written by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, for our admonition)
a Church, and a Congregation are, in the language, and account of Scripture,
two things. And that it is very unreasonable and unwarrantable to alter the
first Constitution or Denomination of the Churches, as they were left us by the
Apostles, as far as they went, and therein a Rule given us to do the like. It Is
true, the Universal Church was once but one single Congregation at Jerusalem,
and from which all the other Churches sprang, as so many Daughters, on which
account she is called the Mother of us all; but when other Churches were
formed, that at Jerusalem was no more the Universal Church; but only an
integral part of it, and coordinate with other Churches; for its Universality
was not of the Essence; but only a sperable adjunct of it; nor did she
propagate these Churches, which afterward sprang from her, as she was
Universal; but as she was a Church. And so all the Churches of the Apostles
planting, were at first but single Congregations; yet it does not thence
follow, that every single Congregation is a Church. I mean, that which, in the
Scripture is honored with the name of a Church; that is, the Presbyterial,
Synodal, Classical, Diocesan, or Collegiate Church. I would not be thought to
deny to the Congregational, or (as now they are called) Parochial Churches, any
thing, either of name, or of privilege, that is their right; but will call
them, for distinction sake, Pastoral Churches, and grant that they have a power
of governing themselves, as such; as every Family has a power and right to
govern it self, and every Troop and Company in an Army, by their own proper
Officers within their own Spears, and cannot be legally imposed on by other
Family-Masters, or other Captains, with whom they are equal. But what Families
are to Corporations, and these to Kingdoms, or Commonwealths; and what Troops,
and particular Companies are to Regiments, and these to Armies; such are
Congregations to Churches; that is, Presbyterial Churches, and these to the
Universal. I am not now concerned to speak of the Church Universal, which is in
Scripture called The Church; but of the Presbyterial, which alone is that,
which in Scripture is called a Church, that is, a perfect and adult Church,
that has power by its Officers, to propagate and constitute other Churches and
Congregations, and to overruled all the particular Pastors of the Charges and
Congregations, that are within its bounds and limits. This Presbyterial, or
Collegiate Ruling Church must consist of a pars Regens, and a pars Regenda, all
cannot be Rulers here, nor equally interessed in the Power of Government; that
were Democracy, and but one little remove from Anarchy; neither can the Power
rest in one single Person, that were absolute Monarchy, which is the common
Parent of Tyranny; but it must therefore be a select number or Collegium of
such of the Presbyters, or Ministers of the Gospel, as are best qualified with
Age, Gravity, Experience, Learning, Piety, and especially Humility, Charity,
Moderation and Contempt of the World, with an Holy Zeal and Diligence; which
are the Qualifications the Scripture in this case requires. And this company of
Ruling Presbyters in every such Church, must have one Head, or President, which
is the Episcopus Episcoporum, or else it were a Monster, an heap of confusion
and unororganiz'd matter. This Head must be One; else there can be no union nor
consistency of the parts, nor attainment of its ends. This One Head must be
fixed and constant, and that in the same Person, till there be just cause to
change; else the Government cannot be steady, but is dissolved and broken, and
consequently the Church, with all its particular Congregations, most
dangerously exposed And this is that Government which is called Aristocracy,
and may as properly be called a mixed or limited Monarchy; which I take to be
most agreeable to the Pattern given us in the Mount of the holy Scriptures. And
is so far from intrenching upon the Right, or infringing the Liberty or
Government of the Church Congregational, that it is the best Defense to it, and
as a strong Wall about it. It Is true, it may be abused; and what is there in
the World that may not? but to plead against any Form of Government only from
the Abuse of it, is Cavil, and not Argument.

From what has been said, I conclude, that the Presbyterial and Diocesan
Church, in the Essentials of their Constitutions, are one and the same thing.
Though there be many Words and Names of things, that are become of ill Fame,
through the Idolatry, Heresy, Superstition, Tyranny, and Immorality of a
degenerate Age, yet the things that are signified by them are, in themselves
good and necessary, and perhaps the very same that others plead for under other
Names and Titles. And, could they be but once again duly purged of these
defilements, would be as glorious and useful, as of old they were in the
Apostles and Primitive times. And if ever it be the good Will of God that the
Church of England be once again Reformed, in the Government and Discipline of
it, according to Scripture, it must not be by plucking up and destroying that
which is good; but by purging that which is foul and removing that which is
burdensome and superfluous.

I am sorry to see, how cunningly some men's Logic can argue, from this
Subordination of Congregational Pastors to Presbyterial, or Diocesan
Presidents, or Super-intendents, a necessity of one Universal Papal Head, and
not by the same Rules of their Logic argue it as consequentially necessary,
from the Sub-ordination of Officers in an Army, or Commonwealth, that there
must be one Universal Humane Head and Monarch over all the Armies, or all the
Nations in the World.

I confess, this Chapter has drawn out more words, than I, at first, thought
it should have done. Nor have I altogether pleased my self in the Method of it.
For any accidental mistakes in the Manner of expressing my intended sense, I
beg the pardon of my more critical Reader. But if any thing, on calm and
impartial examination, appear, in the Matter of it, Heterodox to the Truth
revealed and taught us in the Holy Scriptures, I shall readily acknowledge my
error, and not take it as a shame to be made wiser.

The sum of what I have herein aimed at, I shall now wind up in these eight
Positions.

Posit. I. that our LORD Jesus Christ has not left his Church in the World,
without a proper Government, of his own appointment for it. Pos. II. That this
Government is to be managed for, and under him, and by his Laws and Authority,
by those into whose hands he has delivered the Keys. Pos. III. That Ruling
Elders, distinct from all Preaching Elders and Deacons, are no Divine Ordinance
in the Church of God, now under the New Testament. Pos. IV. That every Pastor,
lawfully ordained, and called to the Charge of a particular Congregation, has
a Divine Right of executing the whole Office of a Pastor in and over that
Congregation. Pos. V. That every Pastor of a Congregation, as such, is under
the governing power of that Classical Presbytery, whereof he is, or ought to be
a Member. Pos. VI. That the Classical, or Diocesan Presbytery ought to be but a
select number, and not the whole Body of that Classis, or Diocese. Pos. VII.
That the Form and Power of Ruling Presbyteries ought to be fixed and constant,
and not occasional only and intermittent. Pos. VIII. That every Classical
Presbytery ought to have a single Head or President, and which ought to be
continued in that Office, quam diu been se gesserit.
CAP. VI. A few words of Counsel and Encouragement to the Lambs, the younger
sort.
I Am now come to the last part of my present Task; to speak a little to the
Flock, over which our LORD has set us; and

1. Will begin, as he himself has taught me, with the Lambs: And O that I
could now pour out my Soul into their bosoms, and offer something that may
awaken and engage their chaste affections to an early and serious minding of
Christ, and of their own Souls! I am not speaking to those, who through want of
years are incapable, but to such as are able to apprehend the words and
counsels of God from the Pulpit, or the Press. My dear Lambs, you see what care
our LORD Jesus Christ has taken of you.

1. He calls you His, what an Honor, what a Happiness is this? If you be his,
he will be yours, yours to all gracious ends and purposes; yours to love you,
yours to provide for you, yours to protect you, yours to bless, to guide, to
instruct, to own, to sanctify, to save you. He will be a Friend, a Father, a
Husband, an All, and better than all to you. Let who will forsake you, your God
is unchangeable, he will never forsake you; yea, when all others forsake, then
will he be every way best to you; you shall never want a Friend, while you have
a Friend in Heaven. But remember, you cannot be so His, nor He Yours, without
your voluntary, hearty, unreserved self-dedication to him. He will not be
yours, without your deliberate choice, and free and full consent. If he be
yours, it must be by Covenant, and by a Covenant of Salt, you must be his
Covenant-Servants, and that for ever. He that puts his hand to Gods Plough
must not look back. Yea, you must be so his, as to be no more your own. If
Christ be yours, he must be your LORD to rule and command you; his Will must be
your Will, and his Word your Rule, and his Work your delight. O that this may
help now to oblige and encourage you to offer your first, your best, your
Bodies, your Souls, your all to the LORD!

2. He calls upon his Lambs. The Lambs are the Hope of the Flock, and the Joy
of the Shepherd. None so welcome to him, as those that seek him betimes, that
devote the first fruits of their youth, and strength, and affections to him. It
was John, the youngest Disciple that was the beloved one. I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, Jer. 2.2. Sirs, this is the
day of your Visitation, behold now is the accepted time (...), tempus
complacentiae, and gratuitae receptionis: Behold now is the Day of Salvation.
This is your season, the day of Gods special Grace; which is true, not only of
the day of the Gospel in general, but especially of the day of youth; this is
the day of your greatest advantage, on very many accounts. Now is your time to
lay the Foundations of your future Eternal happiness. If you lose this Season,
you are, for ought you know, lost for ever. If you now be before hand with the
Tempter, you will the more easily have him under your feet as long as you live.
I have written unto you young men, says the Apostle, because ye are strong, and
have overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.13, 14. if you do not now overcome him,
you will be worse able to do it hereafter. As the Enemy grows stronger, you
will find your selves grow weaker; yea, the more calls of God you reject in
your youth, the nearer you are to that Curse, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. O do not presume on the leisure of Old Age! how many thousands are
there that once refused to give God their youth, that are now spending their
wretched old age in Hell? It Is as damnable a piece of Atheism as any, to
account the dregs of our time and strength good enough for God, and for our own
Souls. Be not deceived; though there were some called at the ninth, and at the
eleventh hour, they were only such as had not been called before. Certainly
it is a most dangerous, and almost desperate adventure to neglect the offers of
Grace that are made in the days of youth. And O what care should you now take,
how you lay your foundations! Youth is in this respect, the most critical part
of our lives; as the foundation is that is then laid, such is the
superstructure like to be. O 'twill be hard plucking up old Foundations, when
once they are settled! What is begun in Hypocrisy, is wont to end in Apostasy.
Let not that reproachful Proverb be verified in you, to the shame of your
Profession, and the eternal ruin of your own Souls, Young Saints, and old
Devils. If your first works be not sound as to the Principles both of Faith and
Love, your end is like to be very sad and shameful. My dear Lambs! are you
Christ's? how should this oblige you to carry your selves, in all things, as
becomes your relation to him? Has he picked and chosen you out of the World,
and set his love upon you, and made a difference between you, and others? O do
not walk, nor talk, nor attire your selves then like the vain ones of the
World! if the difference between you and others, as to your Spiritual Estates
be real, let it be visible too in your Carriage and whole Conversation. As
obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to the for me lusts in
your ignorance. 1 Pet. 7.14. (...); not decking and moding your selves
according to the humors and manners of those, whose lusts are their rule, and
whose exalted heads do but proclaim the folly and pride of their hearts. O let
not Christ's lambs be the world's apes! Let the world behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3.2. The 7th Commandment is violated by
the unchastity of habit and gesture, as well as by words or actions: there is a
whorish Attire, as well as a whorish eye and a whorish tongue, and a whorish
heart. It Is not enough for Christ's lambs, not to be such, but they must not be
like them. Abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. Hating even the
garment spotted by the flesh, Jud. 23. As the Menstruous Garment was
ceremonially unclean under the Law, so is the Meretricious Garment much more
spiritually, or morally unclean under the Gospel; Whose adorning let it not be
that outward adorning of pleating the hair, and of wearing of gold, and of
putting on of apparel; but let it he the hidden man of the heart, in that which
is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. I do not think that the Apostle
does here declaim against the use of these things, nor that he does advise that
Christians, or Professors should have a mode or fashion in their Apparel
different from all others. Clothing is appointed of God, not only for
covering, but for decency and ornament, and for distinction of Sexes and
Callings, and degrees amongst men; but he forbids and condemns that immoderate
care, and cost, and cariosity that is used in these things, to the neglect of
the better part, which is of infinitely higher concern: And he forbids too,
their imitating and symbolizing with the world in the cuts and fashions, and
gallantry of their immodest pride and vanity; as the Lord did of old forbid his
people to be like the Idolatrous Heathen, in the trimings of their heads and
Beards, Levit. 19.27. Ye shall not round the corners of your heads; neither
shall thou mar the corners of thy beard. Not but that this fashion was in it
selfindifferent, but because it was the manner of the Idolatrous Nations, and
particularly of the Egyptians, from whom he had now delivered them; therefore
he would not suffer his Israel to be herein like them. It Is not simply the
fashion, but the height and extremity of it, wherein the pride and levity, and
consequently the sin does lie.

I am loath to raise Objections for you; but perhaps you have heard some that
are willing to plead for this Idol, say, that there is evidently as great a
pride in those, that are at the widest distance from the Modes and Fashions of
the Times, as in those that are fondest of them. It may be so; but alas, is
this Argument, or Recrimination? How unreasonable is it to think to justify the
pride, and sin of one extreme by that of another? Or, would you say, That you
have herein the Example of many very pious, ferious and knowing Christians? I
shall only reply thus; The more pity. But that which I doubt more of, is this;
You are afraid you shall be censured and talked of; yet how poor a thing is
this? let those that will laugh at you now, laugh if they can at last, when you
shall stand on the right hand, and they on the left. But he or she that cannot
bear a flout, or a jear, or scorn for Christ, from the Fools of the World; that
will not be persuaded to part with a pin, or a rag for him, is very unworthy of
him. O let not the Daughters, nor the Sons of Zion, in such a day as this,
wherein God has been so long, and so many ways humbling us; when his hand is
lifted up, and his Sword drawn, and bathed in the blood of the slain; when he
is so loudly calling us to Sackcloth and Ashes, and deep humiliation, tempt him
to execute the Threatenings of Isa. 3. upon the Wantons of this Generation. Let
not the Foreheads, that should be marked with weeping and mourning, be marked
with the provocations of divine indignation.

3. He has charged us to feed his Lambs. And in obedience to his commands, and
compassion to your souls, we are willing, and always ready to draw out our
Breasts to you. O how pleasant is it to suckle our little ones! what a comfort
is it to hear you enquiring after God, and asking us the ferious questions,
that savor of a work of grace upon your hearts! How does this endear you to
us, and make us even proud of you? of whom we may say, as the Apostle of his
beloved Thessalonians, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing, are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? For ye are our glory, I say. It Is a comfort to us to hear you so
readily and cheerfully answering our questions, in what you have learnt, either
from your Catechises, or from our Sermons; but it would be a greater comfort to
us to answer your Questions; either for the information and rectifying of your
Judgments; the regulation of your Practice, or the satisfaction of your
doubting Consciences. By this we should see how you grow and improve in the
Faith, and that our Labors with, and for you, are not in vain in the Lord.

4. He has charged us, as we love him' to have an especial care of you. May
not this assure you how dear you are to him? and should not this both engage,
and encourage you in your work? My dear Children, It Is our love to Christ, and
to your souls, that alone is able to sweeten our work to us. Tho we travel in
birth again with you, till Christ be formed in you, yet never did your Mothers
more willingly endure the pains of their Travel for you, nor more joyfully
embrace you, from the Womb of the natural birth, than we would do from the Womb
of the New Birth. As there is joy in a Family at the living birth of a Son, or
of a Daughter, so there is joy both in Heaven above, and in the Heaven of the
Church here below, at the conversion of a sinner unto God. O let us share in
this heavenly joy over you, and be able to say, in the day of his coming;
Behold, we, and the children whom the Lord has given us. But I must not insist
here.

CHAP. VII. The Peoples Duty.
BEar with me while I speak a few words to those whom I mean by the Sheep; the
more adult, and aged sort of professors: Which I shall comprize as briefly as I
can, in these six Particulars.

1. Does Christ own you for his Sheeps Should not you then own him for your
Shepherd? And if so, should you not know his voice, and be able to discern it
from the voice of a stranger? Sirs, your Shepherd is but one, tho your inferior
Pastors and Teachers be many, and his voice in them all is one and the same: If
they speak not with his Voice, they are not of his sending. There are many
Thieves and Robbers in the world, that come in Sheeps clothing, and wear a
rough garment to deceive; and many there are that are deceived by them: 'T was
so from the beginning, ever since Satan has transformed himself into an Angel
of Light; and so it will ever be, 'till he be bound, and cast into the
bottomless pit. But those that are his, know his voice, and a Stranger will
they not follow. This is one of the Propria quarto modo of his Sheep; they have
an Unction from the holy one, and know all things; that is, all things that are
absolutely necessary to salvation. Not that they are infallible, as to the
Circumstantials, and lesser matters of Religion; herein they may be, and too
often are deceived. Hence are those diversities of opinion that are among them,
and those scandalous unbrotherly dissentions, that are the effects of them: But
this diversity is not in the Shepherd's Voice, but in their apprehensions, and
the measures of their capacities, and seize: But the more perfectly the
Shepherd's Voice is known, the less there will be of this diversity of
apprehension and strife about it. And yet this variety of opinion in the
Circumstantials, would hardly deserve to be accounted a blemish in the mystical
body, were it not for that selfishness, that is commonly the root, and that
uncharitableness, that is the fruit of it. But besides this, it is shameful and
sad to consider, how many there be, that have been all their lives, even to old
age flocked and folded among the Sheep of Christ, under the same ordinances,
and spiritual enjoyments with others, and yet understand very little of the
Shepherds voice, that are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. That for want of Principles, are like
children tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of Doctrine; or
whose minds are like sieves, that retain nothing, but the earthly grosser sort
of things. Who for the time, ought to be Teachers, but yet have need that one
teach them again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb.
5.12. Such Sheep are the shame of such a Shepherd.

Again; If you are his Sheep, should you not hear, and hearken to his Voice,
and delight in his Presence with you? Should you not come at his Call, and go
at his Bidding, and his Word be a Law with you? My Sheep hear my Voice, and I
know them, and they follow me, Joh. 10.27.

2. Is he your Shepherd? O how should you love him then? It Is natural for Sheep
to love their Shepherd; but though in this case, it be indeed supernatural, yet
it is, of all things in the World, the most reasonable. He is not only your
Shepherd, to feed, and to protect, and provide; but your Savior, and Redeemer,
to die for you. I am the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd gives his life for
the Sheep, Joh. 10.11. We must have perished eternally, but for him. 'Twere
endless to enumerate all the reasons we have to love him; which way soever we
look upon him, in his Person, in his Offices, in his Graces; in what he has
done, in what he has suffered, in what he has purchased, in what he has
promised, in what he has prepared for us; he is altogether lovely. Yea, as the
Sun is all Light; so is Christ all Love to his Saints. His Word are his
Love Letters to them; his Ordinances his Love Feasts with them; and all his
Providence, both Crosses and Comforts, are the Seals of his Love to them. The
more we seriously think of him, or of our selves; the more we shall see it both
reasonable and necessary to love him. We cannot love our selves truly, unless
we love him sincerely. If any man love not the LORD Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. One of the most accursed Wretches, that are
out of Hell. O love the LORD, all ye his Saints; for the LORD preserves the
faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer, Psalm. 31.23. It Is our Duty;
it is our Interest; and, if we are Saints indeed, it is our Property to love him.
God is Love; where there is most of Love, there is most of God, and most of a
Christian. Where Love dwells, there God dwells; and where God is, there is
Heaven. The glorified Life above is a Life of perfect Love. Love will make you
a Heaven upon Earth; a Heaven of Holiness, and a Heaven of Joy and Peace. O in
what holy Order is every thing kept, in that heart, where the Love of Christ
reigns! every inordinate Affection, and irregular Passion suppressed; every
Temptation easily resisted and repelled; the whole Frame and Economy of the
Soul under the power and sweet Influences of Love. And O the heavenly Peace and
Serenity that is there! what a calm is there, where the Love of Christ commands
all! What a Banquet of Spiritual Joy is that Soul feasting on with her Beloved!
her heart is at rest in him; all the burden of her cares and fears are devolved
upon him; the poor Soul rides safely at Anchor, and is careful for nothing. O
Sirs! It Is not so where the Love of the World, and the Lusts of the Flesh rule;
there is the Hell of vile affections, spiritual filthiness, ungodly counsel, and
courses: There are the storms and tempests, the restless, foaming waves of
carnal desires, and worldly cares, and fears, and fretful discontents: It Is a
miserable life that the worldling lives. The wicked are like the troubled Sea,
when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20. And it is
our sin and folly, that we are so like them. The Love of Christ would help all
this. Yea, do you not profess to love him? and would you not be offended with
him that should question it? But what is Profession without proof? If you love
him, you will obey him, and none of his Commandments will be grievous to you.
Love is bountiful; nothing will be too much, or too dear for him: The Love that
is genuine, is generous, If you love him, you will love all of him. his Image,
his Company, his Ordinances, his Ministers, his Ways. But I must refer you to
others, for the Marks of the Sincerity of your Love to him.

3. Are you his Sheep? Should you not then love one another? The Sheep is a
sociable creature, extremely fond of their fellows. O let not Christ's Sheep be
Wolves and Tigers to one another. A new Commandment I give you, that ye love
one another, as I have loved you; that ye also love one another; Joh. 13.34. Be
ye followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love, as Christ has loved
us, and has given himself for us; Ephesians. 5.1, 2. See that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently; 1 Pet. 1.22. We know that we have passed from
death into life, because we love the Brethren. He that loves not his Brother
abides in death; 1 John 3.14. There has been enough spoken and written on
this Subject. One of the commonest Themes, of a most contentious Age. But alas!
words are wind, and the wind has but blown the Coals. And Love is no
Salamander; it cannot live in the Fire; yea, though it be it self a fire, it is
from above, of another nature and original, whose flame will not unite, nor
conspire with those heterogeneous smothers which are from beneath. How partial
and private-spirited is the Charity of most of the hottest Zealots in every
Party? that cannot overcome the prejudices of their Ignorance, Interest or
Education; but with pettish Jonah, think they do well to be angry. O that men
knew better what spirit they are of. The Flock of Christ are not all of one
complexion, nor of one Drove, nor of one manner of Discipline in
Circumstantials. Those that have many Sheep, have some fat, and some lean; some
that are kept more strictly in their fenced Fields, others that feed and range
at greater liberty, on the course, and cold, and short Downs, and Commons; yet
have they all but one common Nature, one Name, one Mark, and one Master. So it
is with the Flock of Christ in this their imperfect state: There are some that
are not so clean, nor so sound as others; yet they are Sheep, and his Sheep,
and must, as such, be loved and pitied, and not hated, or scorned, or disowned
by us. I have sometimes wondered at the reason, why Dissentions on Religious
accounts are always wont to be most fierce and implacable: It cannot be because
Man, in this his lapsed estate, is so Religious a Creature; no, it is the Enemy
that has the most deep and mischievous Design in it; it is Pride, and Envy, and
Superstition, that is the Fomes of the Mine, to which the Devil lays his Train,
under color of Religion, to blow up Religion, and all that depends upon it in
the World. The Enemy fears not much what hurt Religion can do his interest in
the world, if he can but blow up the charity of those that profess it: For what
does Faith signify without love, by which it works?

4. Are you his Sheep? should you not then be very tender of your own Lambs?
There is hardly any kind of Creature, but is fond of their young; and if in any
case they will be fierce, it is in their defense. Even the Sea Monsters draw out
the breasts, they give suck to their young ones, Lam. 4.3. O let not those that
are called Christians, be like the Ostriches in the Wilderness, and forget that
their poor Children have souls as well as bodies to be cared for. Those that
are evil know how to give good gifts to their Children. They know how to feed
them when they are hungry; how to cloth them when they are naked; how to
physic them when they are sick; how to instruct them in their worldly
business, and how to bestow them for their worldly advantage: And herein there
are few so unnatural, but that they are diligent enough according to their
ability and understanding; and if this be all you do for yours, what do ye more
than others: You rejoice perhaps in that they are born, and you can call them
yours, but what can you hope for from them? what comfort can you promise your
selves in them, if they be not new born? If you provide only for their bodies,
their baser and mortal part, what do you for them more than for your Hogs, or
Cattle, which you are careful to feed, and make fat for the day of slaughter?
Can you without terror think of their being damned? Should you not do your
utmost then to prevent it? Do you not know that they are by Nature the Children
of Wrath? And that you were the Instruments of bringing them into this
condition? Are you not bound in Justice then, with all your Care and Diligence
to endeavor their Deliverance? How can you believe this, and not be concerned
for them? It Is true, we your Pastors are bound by the command of Christ to feed
them; but are not you equally bound both by the Bonds of Grace and Nature, to
begin, and to assist with us in that work? Time forbids me, though my bowels urge
me to enlarge here. O let not Reformation dye, at half way, with this
Generation; but let what we have striven, and prayed, and suffered, and so long
waited for, be, by Gods blessing on your faithful diligence, and utmost
endeavors conveyed, with advantage, to the next. Tho God can, of Stones, raise
up Children unto Abraham, yet you may not expect, that he shall work Miracles
for those, that live in the neglect of known duty.

5. Are you his Sheep, and committed by him, who is both our LORD and Master
and yours, to us, to feed and to rule for him? Should you not then hearken to
us, and own the authority, wherewith we are entrusted for your good? Remember,
we must give our accounts shortly, and so must you. Whether ever I shall meet
you again in this Place, God knows; but am sure, that we shall one day meet
again in a far greater assembly than this. When the sight of them that have
here, or elsewhere, labored with and for you, will be either very comfortable,
or unexpressibly terrible, on the account of the Testimony, that must then be
produced by them, either for or against you. It Is true, we are not Lords over
you, nor do we pretend so to be; yet are we appointed of Christ to be your
Officers, not only to teach, admonish, reprove, rebuke, exhort, and encourage
you; but to lead, and rule, and govern, to warn, and charge and command you in
the LORD, in all things that concern our Office. If every transgression and
disobedience, under the Law of Moses, received a just recompense of reward, can
you hope to escape under the Gospel? Sirs, it has been for your sakes, that we
have endured the contradictions of men; have been ejected, deprived, banished,
imprisoned reviled, etc. and wherein you your selves have suffered with us; yet
all this we have born with patience, and desire from our Hearts to forgive and
forget; but O let not your hands be now against us; this will be worse, and
harder to be born, than all the evil that has befallen us from our youth, nor
can you hope that it will be taken well by our common LORD and Master. While we
were removed into corners with you, we seemed to be very dear to you; but, let
me tell you, if you once more provoke him to remove us, he will, I doubt put us
farther from you, where you shall never see us more. If your Liberty be a Snare
to you, you may expect that God shall, to your sorrow, break this Snare for
you. We have been your Servants, and so we are still, and delight to be, the
Servants of your Faith; but God forbid, that any thing should ever tempt us to
be the Servants of your Lusts, or of your evil humors; this we are required to
declare and protest against, and to exercise the Rod of Evangelical Discipline;
for our LORD has put the Keys of his Kingdom, and Rod of his Government into
our hands, to rule under him, and for him, in the affairs of your Souls; the
Government is His, and not Ours; if you will not that this man shall Reign over
you; if you will yet kick at his Yoke, and break his bonds; look to it, for,
evil is before you. O give glory to the LORD your God before he cause Darkness,
and before your Feet stumble on the dark Mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the Shadow of Death, and make it gross darkness. But if
ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in secret places for your Pride, and
mine Eye shall weep sore, Jer. 13 16, 17. But I hope God will have mercy yet,
for his own sake, upon the Remnant of his People, and will at length bow their
Hearts to the obedience of the Gospel.

6. Once more; Are you his Sheep, whom he has committed to our Pastoral care?
Let me tell you, We shall not, we cannot, be with you always. Your Fathers,
where are they? And the Prophets, do they live for ever? There are enough, you
know, that wish the World were rid of us, in whose account we are the troublers
of Israel. It would send our Gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave, to think with
whom we should leave these few Sheep in this Wilderness, were there not a
prospect of a Succession. You know where the Curse of Eli's House lies; Put me,
I pray thee, into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a piece of Bread.
But where there is no Preferment, there is no Ambition. There are few that
offer themselves with us, to the work of the House of the LORD, but those that
have nothing but an Heart, and a good Will to offer. And indeed, these are
they, may we but have enough of these, that are most likely to do Gods Work.
Had Avarice and Ambition never found any such thing, as a Bait, or Temptation
of this kind, in this Sacred Office, further than the double Honor, that is
due to double Merits, it might have been much happier with the Churches, than
now it is. 'Twas Worldly Riches and Grandeur, which the Clergy, of all men in
the World, are worst able to bear, as that which is most unsuitable to the
Nature of their Holy Calling, that was the great Engine; which through the Pride
and Covetousness of Prelates, and the blind Zeal and Superstition of Princes
and Bigots, first overthrew both the Purity and the Peace of the Churches. Nor
is the Fire ever like to go out, while the fuel holds. But God has delivered
us from this Temptation; and perhaps this is not the least of the Mercies we
have to bless him for; at least, if he have taught us therewith to be content,
and to live by Faith for our daily Bread. But when we are laid in the Dust, as
shortly we shall, who are they that shall fill our Places? God will provide,
but not from among the Dead, nor by Miracle. You know on whose Pious Zeal and
Ability, under God, this Succession necessarily depends. If then you be not
weary of us as of your Burden; if you account us faithful, and serviceable;
that our Light and Labors among you have been of any good Use, or Value, to
save you hitherto from that black Night of Superstition and Idolatry, that has
so long hovered over us; And if this be a blessing, that you would entail to
your Posterities after you; then set your Hearts and Hands to this Work, and
lay out something, to your power, as God has blessed you, and as you hope for
his blessing, for the Souls of your Children and Survivors, though you should
(and yet you have no reason to doubt you shall) have the less to lay up for
their perishing part. O Sirs, it is for Christ's and for your lakes, that we
have denied our selves, as we have done; had we aimed at our worldly advantage,
and taken up the Ministry for a Livelihood, we were of all men in the World,
some of the most mistaken and worst advised; we might easily have found other
ways enough, to have bestowed our time, and strength and learning on, to better
purpose that way; but in the service of your Souls we are ready to Sacrifice
these our Worldly Interests and hope that you will never give us cause to
repent of it. And if we have laid down our all at your feet; it is but
reasonable and just, that you should lay down something, as the primitive
Christians did, at the Apostle's Feet, for the necessary Use, and Service of
the Church; that so when we, who are now grown old, and going out of the
Vineyard, shall dye, that which you now profess to prize as your Privilege and
Happiness, may not dye with us. It Is for your sakes, and not my own, that I
have now mentioned this thing.

CAP. VIII. The Consolatory Conclusion.
I Shall now conclude all, with a word of encouragement, both to Ministers, and
People,

1. To Ministers; and that on a double account.

1. In that God has accounted us faithful, and put us into the Ministry, and
called us unto this Heavenly work, than which there is none greater, none
sweeter in the World. That he has taken us so near to him, and entrusted us
with the Bread of his Family, the care of his Children, and all the precious
Jewels of his House, the unsearchable Riches of Christ. O what an honor is
this! that poor, despised, unworthy we, should be called, not the Sons of God
only, but the Stewards, the Ambassadors, the Angels of the Most High; that we
should be taken into so near a relation to him, made the keepers of his
Counsels, his Treasurers, his Orators and Intercessours, the deputed
Governors of his Spiritual Kingdom in the World. Behold what manner of love is
this, what a happiness, what a Privilege is it? There are some of us, who, for
ought we know, had never been sincerely and savingly serious, had not our Holy
Calling given us the blessed occasion. How had we been buried in the dirty
business, and cares and snares of the World, had not the LORD set his merciful
eye upon us, and chosen us to walk with him? What were we better than the rest
of Mankind? what has he foreseen in any of us, that he should make this
difference? Blessed be Christ Jesus our dear LORD for this, Be it hard, yet
it is happy work. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to
dwell in the Tents of wickedness; rather a Porter there, than a Potentate in
the Earth. The Church is Gods lower Heaven as contemptible as it is in the eyes
of blind and prejudiced Men; and the lowest place in this Heaven is, on many
accounts, preferrable to the highest Worldly Seats among the Children of Men.

2. Has our LORD and Master taken care for his Lambs, and for his Sheep, and
will he not also care for us? Must we feed his Flock and will not He feed us?
Has he not done it for these 30 years and more, and that beyond what we had
any visible grounds to have hoped? When I sent you without Purse and Scrip, and
Shoes, lacked ye any thing? Luke 22.35. When there were so few that would
adventure to know us, and fewer that could relieve us; did we want our daily
Bread? Though our Tables were not spread, as once they had been, yet were they
ever sweeter to us than then? In our Exilements, in our Prisons, was not our
God with us still? When we were walking through the valley of the Shadow of
death, did not his Rod and his Staff comfort us? yea, when was it better with
us than when we had least of the World? and after all this sensible experience,
shall we not trust him? Fear not, he that will have his Sheep fed, will not
have his Shepherds starved. The World has seen the effect of our Water and
Pulse, let them still see that we can be content with a little, that we have
not taught the Doctrine of contentment to others, further than we are willing
to practice it our selves. And O that nothing that has the appearance of a
covetous or ambitious humor may ever be found any more in any of us. Let our
Masters work be our grand concern, and then we know we have reason to trust him
for all these little things.

3. To the People: With what confidence of Faith, and gladness of heart may you
even in this Wilderness, sing David's Psalm. 23. The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want. The Charge here given in my Text was, and is intended to run
parallel with all succeeding ages. As long as Christ has a Flock in the World,
he will find or make those that shall feed it: Let the Enemy show his skill,
and the gates of hell do their worst, there is never a soul of Christ's
purchasing shall perish. He would not have bid you to pray the Lord of the
Harvest to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, had he not a mind to answer
those Prayers. Only remember; he that has taught and encouraged you so to
pray, expects that you shall second your Prayers with your best Endeavors. You
may not hope that God shall send you Laborers our of Heaven at free cost; but
your hands must evidence the good agreement between your hearts and lips, in
these your Prayers. It Is for the Elects sake that the World continues to this
day, and while God has a world here, he will have a people in it; and unto
whom he will always provide those that shall break the bread of Life; tho he
may, and sometimes sees it good to distress, yet will he never desert them: He
may free 'em, but will never forsake them, never forget them. Comfort ye one
another with these words.

FINIS.

