SEVERAL CONFERENCES Between a Romish Priest, A Fanatic Chaplain, AND A DIVINE
OF THE Church of England, Concerning the IDOLATRY OF THE CHURCH of ROME: Being
a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G.

LONDON, Printed by M. W. for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1679.

Imprimatur, Guil. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sac. domest. May 6. 1679.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Discourses contain a full and distinct Answer to the late
Dialogues of T.G. wherein the Reader may perceive what an easy Victory, Truth,
when it stands its Ground, will obtain over Wit and Subtilty. When the man who
fell in the Olympic Games, endeavored by his Eloquence to persuade the
spectators he was never down, it is possible he might meet with some weak and
others partial enough to believe him; but the Judges could not but smile at
their folly who did not discern the difference between the firmness of the ones
standing and the others artificial rising; the one might show more art and
dexterity, but the other had more strength or some other advantage. I shall
leave the Reader to judge in these combats who maintains his Ground best, and
who seeks chiefly to avoid the dis-reputation of losing it. He that keeps close
to his Adversary, declines no difficulty, uses no reproachful language, or
disingenuous dealing, has certainly greater assurance of the Goodness of his
Cause and more hopes to prevail; than he that studies for shifts and evasions,
avoids the strongest arguments, and flies out into impertinent cavils and
personal reflections; which are great signs that the man is conscious of the
badness of his Cause, and despairs of success by any other means. And the
Author of these Discourses desires that his Adversary and himself may stand or
fall according to these measures.

As to the manner of writing here used, viz. by way of Dialogue, it is that
which his Adversary led him to; and possibly, where the decency of it is well
observed, it may make Controversy go down more pleasantly than otherwise it
would. For there appears more life and vigor in a Discourse carried on by
several persons of different humors and opinions, than in one continued
deduction of Reason. And the Author declares he intended no reflection on any
sober party of men among us in the representation made of the Army-Chaplain,
who bears the third Part in the Conferences; but only to show the advantage the
Popish Party takes from the weak and peevish exceptions which some men have
made against the Church of England; and how they insinuate themselves into them
on the account of their prejudices against it, and have made use of their
indiscreet zeal to compass their own ends.

Which is so far from being a Romance or Fiction, that besides the footsteps
which may be yet traced of these transactions, by the means and instruments
which were employed about them; we find that one of the most busy ^actors of
the Roman Church, when he most confidently denied the other parts of the late
horrid design, did not stick to avow and own this, that they did hope to
prevail at last by joining their strength with the obstinate Dissenters in
procuring a General Toleration; which was all the Visible Design they were
carrying on, when these Discourses were written. Since which, the face of
things has been so much altered among us, and the times appeared so busy and
dangerous, that it was thought more advisable to respite the publishing of
these Controversial Discourses till men's minds were a little calmed; lest the
Author of them should seem guilty of the impertinent diligence of Archimedes,
viz. of drawing lines in the Dust, when the enemy was ready to destroy us.

Had the Author had any occasion to have run away from the Argument under
debate between him and his Adversary, he did not want a fair opportunity in the
present state of things, to have put him in mind of something very different
from an Irenicum. But he desired me to acquaint the Reader that he does so
perfectly abhor this impertinent and disingenuous way of writing, especially
about matters of Religion, that he could neither be provoked nor tempted to it,
no not by so great and fresh an Example as he had all along before his eyes.

May that Wise and Gracious God who has hitherto defeated the cruel and
malicious designs of our Churches enemies, still preserve it under the shadow
of his Wings, and continue it a praise in the Earth.

THE CONTENTS.
First Conference, Concerning the sense of the Church of England, about the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
THE Introduction to it page 1 An account of T. G.'s late Dialogues p. 10 Of
the genuine Sons of the Church of England according to T. G. p. 11.19 Of his
intention about the sense of the Church of England in this matter p. 15 Of the
nature of the Testimonies produced by Dr. St. p. 20 The argument from the
Homilies defended p. 22 This charge of Idolatry proved to be no heat in the
beginning of the Reformation. p. 26 The argument from the Rubric for kneeling
at the Communion at large considered. p. 34 No color for Idolatry in kneeling
at the Eucharist. p. 35 T. G.'s sense of the Rubric examined. p. 46 Of
material and formal Idolatry. p. 52 How far the Real presence is held by our
Church. p. 56 Bertram's Book not the same with that of Joh. Scotus. p. 63 Of
the Stercoranists. p. 64 Of Impanation. p. 65 Of a Corporeal Presence. p. 68 Of
B. Abbots being a Puritan. p. 74 How far the Church of Rome is chargeable with
Idolatry. p. 79 Mr. Thorndike vindicated from suspicion of Popery by a M S. of
his own writing here published. p. 85 Archbishop Whitgifts Testimony cleared.
p. 93 Of the distinction between parts and circumstances of Worship. p. 100 How
far the charge of Idolatry is agreeable to the Articles of our Church. p. 103
Second Conference, About the Consequences of the Charge of Idolatry. p. 113
THE Introduction, concerning the restoration of Learning, being the true
occasion of the Reformation. p. 115 Of the validity of Ordination on
supposition of the charge of Idolatry. p. 121 Authority goes along with the
power of Orders by the principles of the Roman Church. p. 125 Of the indelible
Character. p. 129 The distinction between the power of Order and Jurisdiction
examined. p. 134 Of excommunication ipso facto on the charge of Idolatry. p.
141 Dr. St. proved to have no design to undermine the Church of England. p. 145
The design of his Irenicum cleared. p. 148 How far the Being of a Church and
the possibility of salvation consistent with the charge of Idolatry. p. 151 A
large Testimony of B. Sanderson's to that purpose. p. 153 No necessity of
assigning a distinct Church in all Ages. p. 158 No obligation to Communion with
the Roman Church. p. 161 No parity of reason in separating from the Church of
England, and in her separation from Rome. p. 168 A passage in the Irenicum
cleared. p. 170 How far Idolatry consistent with owning the fundamental
Articles of Faith. p. 175 T.G.'s shuffling about the sense of the second
Commandment. p. 186
Third Conference, About the Nature of Idolatry. p. 195
AN abstract of the Design of Dr. St.'s general Discourse of the Nature of
Idolatry. p. 196 Of the manner of T. G.'s answering it. p. 200 The postulata
granted by him. p. 203 Many material omissions in T. G.'s Answer. p. 205 Of the
Patronus Bonae Fidei and the service he does the Papists. p. 208 The disparity
between bowing toward the Altar and the Worship of Images at large cleared. p.
211 Of the difference between Reverence to sacred Places and Worship of Images.
p. 215 The arguments of the Patronus Bonae Fidei, against bowing toward the
Altar, answered. p. 222 The supposition of Transubstantiation does not make it
more reasonable. p. 227 Of Idolatry in the nature of the thing. p. 233 Of the
Sinfulness of Idolatry antecedently to a positive Law. p. 235 T. G.'s
principles justify the Worship of God in any Creature. p. 242 Relative Worship
condemned by the Primitive Church. p. 248 As great danger in the worship of
Images as of Gods Creatures. p. 252 T. G.'s trifling about Meletetiques and
Mystical Theology. p. 255 The incongruity of Worshipping Christ by a Crucifix.
p. 257 Of the Nature and Kinds of Certainty. p. 258 Why the certainty of
Religion called Moral. p. 265 Several sorts of Certainty of the Christian
Faith. p. 266 Of the impossibility of falsehood in it. p. 268 Dr. St.'s charge
of Idolatry reaches to definitions of Councils and practices generally allowed.
p. 270 The parallel about bowing toward the Altar, farther answered. p. 273
His Fidelity in citations justified against T. G.'s cavils. p. 276 The citation
of Lugo defended. p. 277 The parallel between Reverence to sacred places and
things, and the Worship of Images fully disproved. p. 284 The Citation of Greg.
Nyssen entered upon. p. 286 The parallel between the Arian and Romish Idolatry
defended. p. 288 T. G.'s exceptions against it answered. p. 293 Greg. Nyssen's
Testimony cleared. p. 303 The difference of the practice of Invocation of
Saints in the Church of Rome, from the addresses in the fourth Century showed
in several particulars. p. 306 T. G.'s answer to the Council of Laodicea
examined. p. 314 The testimony of Arnobius rightly cited by Dr. St. p. 325 Of
relative Latria being given to Images. p. 327 Of inferior Worship as distinct
from Latria, and neither of them showed to clear the Church of Rome from
Idolatry. p. 337
Fourth Conference, About the Parallel between the Heathen and Romish Idolatry.
p. 349
T. G.'s notion of Heathen Idolatry. p. 350 How far Jupiter's being the Supreme
God relates to the main Controversy. p. 351 In what sense Jupiter might be
called an Unknown God. p. 354 S. Augustine makes the true God to be truly
worshipped by the Athenians. p. 357 T. G.'s exceptions answered. p. 359 The
distinction between Jupiter of Greet, and the supreme Jupiter. p. 365 The place
of Romans 1.19, 20. not answered by T. G. p. 369 Aquinas his Testimony cleared.
p. 371 The state of the Controversy about the Fathers. p. 373 Justin Martyr no
friend to T. G.'s hypothesis. p. 377 Athenagoras at large cleared. p. 379 A
threefold Jupiter among the Fathers. p. 380 Theophilus Antiochenus not to T.
G.'s purpose. p. 387 Tertullian vindicated. p. 388 Clemens Alexandrinus. p. 400
Minucius Felix. p. 405 Other Testimonies rejected as impertinent. p. 415 T.
G.'s Accounts of Heathen Idolatry examined. p. 419 First, In taking their
Images for Gods, at large disproved. p. 420 (2.) In worshipping many false
Gods, that likewise disproved. p. 429 T. G.'s arguments answered. p. 431 The
absurd consequences of this notion of Heathen Idolatry. p. 440 T. G.'s pitiful
evasions as to the modern Idolaters. p. 443 (3.) In worshipping the Creatures
instead of God; the Nature of that Idolatry enquired into. p. 457 Worshipping
the Creatures with respect to God as Soul of the world, justifiable on the the
same grounds with adoration of the Host. p. 461 Why it is Idolatry to give all
external worship to the Creatures. p. 467 A twofold hypothesis of Heathen
Idolatry. p. 470 The parallel as to the Church of Rome defended. p. 473 Of
Appropriate Acts of Divine Worship. p. 478 What error of judgment the act of
Idolatry implies. p. 491 Lugo's Testimony cleared. p. 495 Whether the Church
has power to discriminate Acts of Worship? p. 499 How far circumstances
discriminate Acts of Civil and Religious Worship? p. 501 Whether the Church of
Rome does appropriate any Act of external adoration to God. p. 522 That the
very Sacrifice of the Mass is offered in honor of Gods Creatures, and
consequently is not appropriated to the honor of God. p. 526 Dr. St. does not
differ from the Divines of the Church of England about the Sacrifice of the
Mass. p. 540 How far the Sacrifice of the Mass may be said to be the Act of the
People. p. 542
ERRATA.
PAge 108. Line 11. dele not. p. 161. l. 21. dele not. p. 215. l. 7. r.
savouring. p. 232. l. 13. r. declares. p. 234. l. 4. r. as so Sacred. p. 246.
l. 15. for no, r. do. p. 261. l. 4. for not so, r. so. p. 308. l. 17. for
Fallo, r. Fullo. p. 319. l. 1. for Idolatry, r. Idolaters. p. 334. l. 7. for I
not, r. I do not. p. 511. l. 5, 6. for matters, r. matter.

First Conference, Concerning the sense of the Church of England, about the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
Romans P. YOU are well met at this Auction of Books. I have been present at many
of them beyond Sea: but I never was at one in England before. How go the prices
of Books here?


Fan. Chapter Very dear methinks, by the Books I have bought; but I find they are
so catched up by our Brethren, that if we will have them, we must pay dear for
them.


R. P. May I know what they are Sir?


F. C. Only some few choice pieces which I have picked out of this great
Catalogue; such as, Nepthali or the Groanings of the Church of Scotland; Cooks
Monarchy no Creature of Gods making; but the things I most value are the
Pamphlets, such as Sermons before the Long Parliament in several volumes. And a
rare Collection of Authors about Liberty of Conscience.


R. P. Are there so many Books to be had about Liberty of Conscience?


F. C. Yes; a great many have written for and against it.


R. P. Who are they who have written for it?


F. C. To tell you the truth, some of the same who wrote against it heretofore;
but they are now more enlightened; as those who wrote against Separation when
time was, are now the greatest advocates for it. For, there are some
providential Truths, which vary according to circumstances. Do not we see the
Papists, who were thought the greatest enemies to toleration in the world, now
plead most vehemently for it? and are even angry with us for not acting
sufficiently in this cause against the Church of England. But because I take
you for a friend by your enquiring after these Books, I must tell you, it is
yet a disputable point among us, how far we may join with Antichrist, to
promote the interest of Christ; And some insist on that place to prove the
unlawfulness of it, Be ye not unequally yoked; others again prove it lawful,
because it is said, Yet not altogether with the Fornicators of this world -- or
with Idolaters: whence they observe, that they may join with them in some
things, or for some ends; but not altogether, i. e. they must not join with
them in their Idolatries, but they may against the Church of England.


R. P. This is too public a place to talk of these matters in: but may we not
withdraw into the next room; for I have a great mind to set you right in this
main point of present concernment. And if the Papists should be found not to be
Idolaters, a great part of your difficulty is gone. Do you think, it is not fit
for you to be better informed in this matter, when a thing of so great
consequence depends upon it, as your deliverance from the persecution of the
Church of England? which you know, we have all sighed and groaned for, a long
time. It is in vain for any of you to expect favor from thence, as long as she
is able to stand. For if the Bishops were never so much inclined to it, how
could they possibly give ease to you without destroying themselves? And since
the dissenting parties are so different among themselves in their light and
seize, it is impossible to please any one party, without displeasing all
the rest. Comprehension is a mere snare and temptation to the Brethren, being a
design to prefer some, and to leave the rest in the lurch. Let us all join our
strengths together, to pull down this Church of England, and then, though there
be a King in Israel, every one may do what seems good in his own eyes.


F. C. I doubt you are not well seen in Scripture; for the Text is, In those
days there was no King in Israel, and every one did what seemed good in his
own eyes: whence you may observe a special hint by the by, that Toleration
agrees best with a Commonwealth. But this to your self: and you might justly
wonder at this freedom with you; but that I remember you many years ago, when
you and I preached up the Fifth Monarchy together in the Army. Those were
glorious days! Ah the Liberty we then enjoyed! Did we then think, the good old
Cause would ever have ended thus? Well! It is good to be silent in bad times.
But methinks you and I however may retire and talk over old stories, and
refresh our memories with former outgoings together. For here is little at
present for us to do.


R. P. Whereabouts are they now in the Catalogue?


F. C. Among the Fathers; those Old Testament Divines. What lights have we seen
since their days! We need not trouble our selves about them. But I observe the
Church of England men buy them up at any rate. What prices do they give for a
Justin Martyr, or Epiphanius or Philo, who they say was a mere Jew? How must
they starve their people with the Divinity of these men? How much of the good
Divinity of the late times might they have for the money? We cannot but pity
their blindness. But I see we cannot be here so private as we wished; for
yonder sits a Divine of the Church of England, who I suppose, is the person,
who bought so many Fathers at the last Auction, as though he had a mind to
write against the Papists.


R. P. Sit you by a while; and we will talk of our matters another time. I have
been much abroad since you and I were first acquainted, and have lately brought
over a new Book from Paris. You shall see how I will handle him; and if you put
in upon occasion, you shall find by this experiment, what success our united
forces would have against the Church of England.


F. C. Do you begin; and you shall see how I will second you, when occasion
offers it self.


R. P. Sir, I perceive the Divines of the Church of England, do buy up the
Fathers very much at Auctions. I wonder that any who read the Fathers can be
for the Church of England.


Pr. Div. And I do more wonder at you for saying so. For therefore we are for
the Church of England, because we read both Scripture and Fathers.


R. P. To what purpose is all this charge and pains, if there be an infallible
Church?


P. D. Therefore to good purpose; because there is no one Church infallible.


R. P. Is there not a Catholic Church?


P. D. Do you think I have forgotten my Creed?


R. P. Which is that Catholic Church?


P. D. Which of all the parts is the whole? Is that your wise question? Do not
you know the Christian Church has been broken into different Communions ever
since the four General Councils, and continues so to this day? What do you mean
by the Catholic Church?


R. P. I mean the Church of Rome.


P. D. Then you ask me, which is the Church of Rome? but what need you ask
that, since you know it already?


R. P. But the Roman Church is the Catholic Church.


P. D. You may as well say, London is England, or England the World. And why
may not we call England the World, because the rest of the world is divided
from it; as you the Roman Church the Catholic Church; because the other
Churches are separated in Communion from it?


R. P. I mean the Roman Church is the Head and Fountain of Catholic Doctrine;
and other Churches are pure and sound as they do agree with it.


P. D. Your proposition is not so self-evident, that the bare knowing your
meaning, must make me assent. I pray first prove what you say, before I yield.


R.P. Was not the Church of Rome once a sound and Catholic Church?


P. D. What then? so was the Church of Jerusalem, of Antioch, and Alexandria;
and so were the seven Churches of Asia. Were all these Heads and Fountains too?


R. P. But S. Paul speaks of the Church of Rome.


P. D. He does so; but not much to her comfort; for he supposes she may be
broken off through unbelief, as well as any other Church?


R. P. Does not S. Paul say, that the Roman faith was spoken of throughout the
World?


P. D. What then I beseech you? does it follow that faith must always continue
the same any more than that the Church of Philadelphia must at this day be,
what it was when S. John wrote those great commendations of it? These are such
slender proofs that you had as good come to downright begging the Cause, as
pretend to maintain it after such a manner. The faith of Rome was not more
spoken of in the Apostles days, than its errors and corruptions have been
since.


R. P. These are general words; name me one of those errors and corruptions.


P. D. For this time, I will name the public and allowed Worship of your
Church, which after all your shifts and evasions I cannot excuse from Idolatry.


R. P. How is that? Idolatry? God forbid. I did not expect this charge from a
Divine of the Church of England. I was prepared to receive it, from my old
Fanatic acquaintance here: he would have thundered me with the Texts of
Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon, and have quoted half the Book of the
Revelations against me, before this time, if we had not espied you in the Room.
But I perceive though your Artillery may be different, your charge is the same.
I pray tell me, how long is it since you of the Church of England have
maintained this charge? For, I have been often told, that only one late
Defender of your Church, has advanced two new charges against the Church of
Rome, viz. Fanaticism and Idolatry, and that the true Sons of the Church of
England disown them both*


P. D. Whoever told you so has deceived you; but it is not the only thing they
have deceived you in. I never yet saw so much as a tolerable Answer to the
Charge of Fanaticism. And for that of Idolatry, the Author you mean, has
proved beyond contradiction, that it has been managed against the Church of
Rome, by the greatest and most learned Defenders of the Church of England, and
the most genuine sons of it, ever since the Reformation.


R.P. But have not you seen, what T. G. has said to all that, and how he has
showed that his Witnesses were incompetent?


P. D. I have both seen and considered all that T. G. has said, and compared
it with Dr. Stillingfleets Reply in the General Preface to his Answers. And I
must declare to you, that if the sense of a Church may be known by the
concurrent sense of her most eminent Divines, or by her most Authentic Acts,
as by the Book of Homilies, Forms of Prayer and Thanksgivings, Rubricks,
Injunctions, the Judgment of Convocation, even that of MDCXL, Dr. St. has
made it evident, that the charge of Idolatry is agreeable to the sense of the
Church of England.


R. P. You thought T. G. would have quitted this Post upon Dr. St's second
charge; but you are mistaken in him; for I have brought over a Book of
Dialogues from Paris, wherein T. G. undertakes again to prove this to be only
the Charge of Fanatics, and not of the Church of England nor of the Genuine
Sons of it.


F. C. It is true; we whom you call Fanatics do charge the Church of Rome, or
rather the Synagogue of Antichrist, with Idolatry; for, Is it not said, And
they Worshipped the Beast? But you must know for your comfort, that we do
likewise charge the Church of England with it. For what are all their bowings,
and kneelings, and crossings, but vain imaginations? and the Worship of them is
as bad as the Worship of Images. And do not they make an Idol of the Common
Prayer?


P. D. This is not fair, Gentlemen; but one at once I beseech you. As to your
charge of the Church of England, I shall be ready to answer it, when you can
agree to bring it in. I now desire to know, what evidence T. G. brings to prove
the Charge of Idolatry not to be agreeable to the sense of the Church of
England. Has he brought other Homilies, other Injunctions, other Rubricks,
other Convocations, or at least other Divines, generally received and owned for
the Genuine Sons of this Church, who have from time to time freed the Church of
Rome from Idolatry, and looked upon the charge, not only as unjust but
pernicious and destructive to the Being of a Church? Nay, can he produce any
one Divine of the Church of England, before the Convocation MDCXL, that ever
said any such thing, or did wholly acquit the Church of Rome from this charge?
If not, let him not think, we have a new Church made after another model, and
upon new principles, or that those can be esteemed the genuine Sons of it, who
contradict the sense of the Church ever since the Reformation. If there be any
such among us, they ought first to be proved to be true Sons of our Church,
before their testimony be allowed, which if I be not mistaken, will be much
harder, than to prove the Charge of Idolatry to be agreeable to the sense of
it. But what method does T. G. take in this matter?


R.P. T. G. like a wary man disputes in Masquerade. For he does not think fit
to appear in his own Person; but he brings in a Conformist, and a
Nonconformist arguing the point. And the Conformist speaks T. G.'s sense in
acquitting the Church of Rome; and the Nonconformist vindicates Dr. St. and
makes a pitiful defense of him.


P.D. It was very wittily done. And the Scene was well enough laid, if the plot
were only to represent Dr. St. as a secret enemy to the Church of England, as I
suppose it was. But to what purpose are all those personal reflections: and
some repeated over and over, with so much appearance of rancour and ill will,
as does not become a man of any common ingenuity? Can the Catholic Cause be
maintained by no other Arts than these? Methinks T. G. might have let the
little Whifflers in Controversy, such as the Author of the Address to the
Parliament, and of that precious Pamphlet called Jupiter Dr. St's supreme God,
etc. to have made a noise at they know not what; crying out upon him as an
enemy to the Church of England, (because he defends her cause to their great
vexation) and as a friend to Pagan Idolatry, (because he has laid open the
folly of yours.) These are such weak assaults as expose your cause to the
contempt of all wise men; who expect reason should be answered with reason, and
not with calumnies and reproaches: which in my apprehension Dr. St. ought to
rejoice in as the marks of victory; for while they have any other ammunition
left, no enemies will betake themselves to dirt and stones. When I read through
the First Part of T. G.'s Dialogues, and observed how industriously he set
himself to bespatter his Adversary, and raked all the Kennels he could for that
purpose, (especially that of the Patronus bonae Fidei, etc.) I could not but
think of an animal, which being closely pursued and in great danger, gets
himself into the most convenient place for mire and dirt, and there so lays
about him with his Heels, that no one dares to come near him. It was certainly
with some such design that T. G. has at last taken sanctuary in a bog; hoping
his Adversary will never pursue him thither. But notwithstanding this project
of his, we will try, whether in spite of his heels we cannot bring him to
reason. Therefore I pray let us set aside all rude and unbecoming reflections,
and calmly consider, how T. G. proves that the Charge of Idolatry is not
agreeable to the sense of the Church of England.


R. P. Hold Sir; You are a little too nimble, Dial p. 13.
T. G. says, his Intention was only to show, that Dr. St. had not sufficiently
proved it to be the sense of the Church of England, from the Testimony he then
produced, whatsoever he might or could do from other Acts or Authors of that
Church. And he elsewhere says, that T. G. did not dispute ex professo, p. 10.
whether it were the sense of the Church of England, that the Church of Rome is
guilty of Idolatry or no? nor, whether Dr. St. dissented from the sense of his
Church? but what he undertook to show was no more than that two parts of the
Authors there cited by the Dr. were Puritans, or Puritanically inclined, by
the confession of other Divines of the Church of England; and therefore
according to Dr. St 's own measures (if they were good,) their Testimonies
ought to be looked on as incompetent to prove what he asserted; and for the
other six, that what they charged with Idolatry, was not the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, but some things which they conceived to be great abuses in the
practice of it. And this, he says, is the true state of that Controversy.


P.D. If it be so, I cry T.G. mercy. For, I thought he designed to prove this
charge of Idolatry not to be agreeable to the sense of the Church of England.
But you say T. G. now denies it; and if I were as Dr. St. I would thank him for
it. For, would any man say this, that thought it could ever be proved to be
against the sense of the Church of England? And what could have been more
material to his purpose than this, if it could have been done? Well fare T.
G.'s ingenuity for once! that finding it impossible to be done, he now denies
that he ever attempted the doing it. But the first question in a fray is, how
fell they out? we shall better judge of T. G.'s design by the occasion of it.
Dr. St. affirmed that in the charge of Idolatry he did not contradict the sense
of the Church of England. Did he, or did he not? If he did not, Dr. St. was in
the right: if he did, why did not T. G. show it? But after this yielding up the
main point in effect, it is easy to prove that T. G. did design to show, as
well as he could, that the charge of Idolatry was against the sense of the
Church of England; but finding it would not do, he now disowns it. For (1.)
Does not T. G. appeal to the Articles of the Church of England for the most
authentic declaration of her sense? and because the Church of Rome is not
there charged with Idolatry, does he not hence dispute ex professo, Cath. no
Idol. p. 197.
that it was against her sense? To what purpose was that ingenious Criticism,
of being rather repugnant to the word of God; which he interprets as though the
composers of our Articles had done their endeavor to find a command against
the Worship of Images, but could not. What do you think of this argument? what
did T. G. intend to prove by it? Is it not as clear as the Sun, that it was to
show that the charge of Idolatry was against the sense of the Church of
England? Why then is T. G. ashamed now of it, and denies he had any such
design? There must be some more than ordinary cause of a man's denying what he
once so openly avowed to do. Nay, in these very Dialogues, after repeating his
former words, T. G. says, Dial. p. 62.
Thus clearly has T. G. evinced the sense of the Church of England in this
matter. Say you so? and yet never designed to dispute ex professo, whether it
were the sense of the Church of England or not? Who is it I pray has the knack
of saying, and unsaying; of affirming and denying the very same thing in a few
leaves? or did T. G. never intend any such thing; but the Church of England of
her own accord, knowing T. G.'s good affections to her, stepped into the Court,
and declared her sense? Have we not the best natured Church in the world that
is so kind to her enemies, and expresses her sense to be on their side,
whether they will or not? Our Church then is like the Country man's River which
comes without calling; alas! what need T. G. dispute ex professo, what her
sense is; she offers her own Testimony, and desires to be heard in the dispute
whether T. G. will or not. Let any man judge by these words what T. G.'s design
was then, whatever he thinks fit to own now. (2.) He shows, that if it had been
the sense of the Church of England in the Articles, Preface to Cath. no Idol.
that the Church of Rome were guilty of Idolatry in the Worship of Images,
Adoration of the Host, or Invocation of Saints, all those who denied it, would
have incurred excommunication ipso facto, as appears by the Canons. What was T.
G.'s design in this, if it were not to prove the charge of Idolatry to be
against the sense of the Church of England? Is this only to show the Witnesses
Dr. St. produced to be incompetent? What a benefit it is, for a man to forget
what he has no mind to remember! And then to deny as stoutly as if the thing
had never been done. (3.) Is it not T. G. who in terms asserts that Dr. St.
betrayed his Church in advancing such a medium, as contradicts the sense of
that Church, (mark that.) It is true, he adds, if it be to be taken from the
sentiments of those, who are esteemed her true and genuine Sons. Was it T. G.'s
design then, not to dispute what was the sense of the Church of England; nor
whether Dr. St. dissented from it? I will not meddle with that, whether T. G.
be a competent judge who are the true and genuine Sons of the Church of
England. No doubt in his opinion, those who come nearest the Church of Rome are
such; and advance such speculations as lay the charge of Schism at her own
door. But true Sons are no more for laying division to the charge of their
Mother, than the true Mother was for dividing the Son. Those are certainly the
most genuine Sons of our Church, who own her doctrine, defend her principles,
conform to her Rules, and are most ready to maintain her Cause against all her
enemies. And among these there is no difference, and there ought to be no
distinction. But if any frame a Church of their own Heads, without any regard
to the Articles, Homilies, and current doctrine of our Church, and yet will
call that the Church of England, and themselves the only genuine Sons of it, I
do not question T. G. and your Brethren would be glad to have them thought so,
to lessen our number and impair our interest; but none that understand and
value our Church, will endure such a pernicious discrimination among the Sons
of the same Mother; as though some few were fatally determined to be the Sons
of our Church, whatever their Works and Merits were; and others absolutely cast
off, notwithstanding the greatest service. I should not mention this, but that
I see T. G. insinuating all along such a distinction as this; and crying up
some persons on purpose as the only genuine Sons of the Church of England, that
he might cast reproach upon others; and thereby foment animosities among
Brethren. But whose Children those are who do so, I leave T. G. to consider.


R. P. Whatever T. G.'s intention was, yet you cannot deny that he has proved
two parts in three to be incompetent Witnesses according to his own Measures.


P. D. Not deny it? I never saw any thing more weakly attempted to be proved,
as Dr. St. has showed at large in his Preface. Bishop White being rejected as
a Puritan, because condemned by that party. Bishop Jewel, because K. Charles
said he was not infallible. Bishop Bilson, because of his errors about Civil
Government, though a stout defender of the Church of England. Bishop Davenant,
because he was none of the Fathers. Bishop Usher, because his Adversary gives
an ill character of him. By this you may judge, what powerful exceptions T. G.
made against two parts in three of the Witnesses.


R. P. T. G. says, That Dr. St. rather waved the exceptions by pretty
facetious artifices of Wit, Dial. p. 9.
than repelled them by a downright denial, out of the affection Catharinus
hopes he bears still to the Cause, which had been honored by such learned and
godly Bishops as Jewel, Downham, Usher, the two Abbots and Davenant: which are
recorded among the Puritans by the Patronus bonae Fidei.


P. D. You might as well have quoted Surius and Cochlaeus for your Church; as
this Patronus bonae Fidei for ours. For he is an Historian much of their size
and credit. But of him we shall have occasion to speak hereafter: T. G. filling
page after page out of him. Let the Reader judge whether Dr. St. did not show
T. G.'s exceptions to be vain and srivolous, and consequently these remain
substantial and competent Witnesses. And as to the cause of the Church of
England, which these learned and pious Prelates defended and honored, Dr. St.
will rejoice to be joined with them, though it be in suffering reproach for the
sake of it.


R. P. Let us pass over these single Testimonies, and come to the most material
proofs which Dr. St. used, and T. G. declares, he is not yet convinced by them;
that the charge of Idolatry was the sense of the Church of England.


P. D. With all my heart. The First was from the Book of Homilies, not barely
allowed, but subscribed to, as containing godly and wholesome doctrine very
necessary for these times; which owns this charge of Idolatry not in any
doubtful, or single passage, but in an elaborate Discourse intended for the
Teachers, as well as the People. To which he added, that the Doctrine of the
Homilies is allowed in the thirty nine Articles; which were approved by the
Queen; confirmed by the subscription of both Houses of Convocation, A. D. 1571.
And therefore he desires T. G. to resolve him, whether men of any common
understanding would have subscribed to the Book of Homilies in this manner, if
they had believed the main doctrine and design of one of them had been false
and pernicious? If, says he, any of the Bishops had at that time thought the
charge of Idolatry unjust, and that it had subverted the foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority, would they have inserted this into the Articles, when
it was in their power to have left it out? and that the Homilies contained a
wholesome and godly Doctrine, which in their consciences they believed to be
false and pernicious? He might as well think, he says, that the Council of
Trent would have allowed Calvin's Institutions, as containing a wholesome and
godly Doctrine, as that men so persuaded would have allowed the Homily against
the peril of Idolatry. And how is it possible to understand the sense of our
Church better, than by such public and authentic Acts of it, which all
persons who are in any place of trust in the Church must subscribe and declare
their approbation of? This Homily has still continued the same, the Article
the very same, and if so, they must acknowledge this has been and is to this
day the sense of our Church. And to what T. G. says, that this does not evince
every particular doctrine contained in the Homilies to be godly and wholesome,
because the whole Book is subscribed to as containing such doctrine; he
answers, that there is a great deal of difference to be made between some
particular passages and expressions in these Homilies, and the main doctrine
and design of a whole Homily: and between subscribing to a whole Book as
containing godly and wholesome doctrine, though men be not so certain of the
Truth of every passage in it; and if they are convinced that any doctrine
contained in it is false and pernicious. Now those who deny the Church of Rome
to be guilty of Idolatry do not only look on the charge as false, but as of
dangerous consequence; and therefore such a subscription would be shuffling and
dishonest. From these things laid together, in my mind Dr. St. has not only
clearly proved that the charge of Idolatry was not only owned by the composers
of the Homilies, but by all who have honestly subscribed to the Articles from
that time to our own. And I would be glad to hear what answer T. G. gives to
all this.


R. P. He answers, first by repeating what he said before; and then by showing
that subscription is no good argument, Dial. p. 15.
considering what had been done and undone in that kind in the Reigns of K.
Henry 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, not to speak of latter times.


P. D. What is this, but in plain terms to say the subscribers of our Articles
were men of no honesty or conscience; but would say or unsay, subscribe one
thing or another as it served their turn? If this be his way of defending our
Church, we shall desire him to defend his own. But yet, this does not reach
home to the Doctors argument, which proceeded not merely on their honesty, but
their having common understanding. For here was no force or violence offered
them, they had the full power to consider the Articles, and to compose the
Homilies, and would men of common sense put in things against their own minds,
and make and approve and recommend Homilies which they did not believe
themselves? This evidently proves the composers of the Homilies and Convocation
at that time, did approve the doctrine of these Homilies, for it was in their
power not to have passed them. Thus far it is plain that was the doctrine of
the Church then, and why should we suppose any subscribers to take them in any
other sense, than the Church did then mean them? Nay, Dr. St. challenged him,
to produce any one Divine of our Church, who through the long reign of Q.
Elizabeth did so much as once question the truth of this charge. Does T. G.
upon so long consideration of this matter name any?


R. P. Not any that I find.


P. D. But that will be best seen by considering Dr. St.'s second Argument of
the sense of the Church of England in this matter, viz. from the current
Doctrine of the Church ever since the Reformation, the injunctions of Edw. 6.
of Cranmer, of Q. Elizabeth; the Form of Thanksgiving, A. D. 1594.


R. P. To this T. G. answers, Dial. p. 17.
that this was a heat in the beginning of the Reformation; but after the Crown
was settled upon K. James, whose title was unquestionable both at Rome, ( at
home I suppose he means) and abroad, the dangerous consequences of the charge
of Idolatry, began to be more calmly and maturely considered; and were so
thoroughly weighed in the time of K. Charles I. that as Heylin says, Bishop
Laud hindered the Reprinting the Books containing Calvinian Doctrines. Which
evidently shows, says he, that that party never looked upon the expressions of
Idolatry contained in those injunctions as the dogmatical sense of the Church
of England.


P. D. A very likely story! that our Church should vary in its doctrine,
because K. James his title to the Crown was unquestionable. It seems before,
the Church of Rome was guilty of Idolatry, because Q. Elizabeth's title was not
owned by the Pope. What a fine insinuation is couched under all this? viz. that
our Church depended wholly on the Queens pleasure, and fitted her doctrines to
serve her Turn; and when that was over, the Tide turned, and that was
pernicious doctrine now, which was wholesome before; and wholesome now, which
was pernicious before; and yet there were the same Articles, the same Homilies,
the same subscriptions which were before.


R. P. But he quotes a Doctor of your own Church for what he says, P. Heylin,
and delivers it in his Words.


P. D. P. Heylin speaks not one word in that place of the charge of Idolatry;
Cypr. Anglic. p 364. 1 Ed.
(although T. G. seems to represent it so) but of those who reviled the Church
of Rome it self, and all the Divine Offices, Ceremonies and performances of it.
Which it is plain he there speaks of the Genevian party; for but just before he
mentions the Geneva Bible, and the dangerous positions contained in the
Annotations printed with it. Now these persons whom he there speaks of, looked
upon the Church of Rome as a mere Synagogue of Satan and no true Church; and
all the Offices and Ceremonies of it to be so defiled, that no use could be
made of them; and on that account they rejected our Liturgy and Ceremonies as
taken from the Church of Rome. Although therefore, says he, Q. Elizabeth might
suffer such things to be printed in her time, yet B. Laud would not allow the
Reprinting of them; because Q. Elizabeth might out of State policy suffer the
violent transports of irregular zeal, by reason of her personal quarrels with
the Pope; yet now those reasons being over, B. Laud would not suffer them to
come abroad again. But that this expression cannot be understood of the charge
of Idolatry, I prove by these arguments. (1.) Pet. Heylin himself preaching
before K. Charles I. and Archbishop Laud, did in plain terms charge the Worship
of Images with most gross Idolatry: as appears by the words cited at large in
Dr. St.'s general preface. What says T. G. to this?


R. P. I do not find a particular answer to this, but I suppose he reckons him
with those six of whom he says, P. 3^.
that they do not charge the Church of Rome it self, but the opinions of School
Divines and abuses in practice.


P. D. That cannot be, for Pet. Heylin goes farther; saying, that they who
observe the manner of their Worship of Images, with what Pilgrimages,
Processions, Offerings, with what affections, prayers, and humble bendings of
the body, they have been and are Worshipped in the Church of Rome, might very
easily conceive that she was once again relapsed into her ancient Paganism.


R. P. He says, they might conceive so; but he does not say, they might justly
conceive so.


P. D. This is very subtle, and like T. G. himself. But I pray observe, P.
Heylin when he gives an account of the Worship of Images, says, when the
Doctrine, which first began in the Schools came to its growth, what fruits
could it bear, but most gross Idolatry, greater than which, was never known
among the Gentiles? Mark that for your satisfaction. What fruit could the
doctrine bear, and that after it came out of the Schools to its growth. And
when he says, they might conceive that Rome was once again relapsed into her
ancient Paganism; the meaning is, Those that saw their Worship of Images in
modern Rome, and compared it with what was done in old Rome, would see no
difference; the Idolatry was so gross in both, that if there were nothing else
to make a distinction, a man might easily conceive Rome was relapsed into her
ancient Paganism.


R. P. But what other argument have you to prove that P. Heylin could not speak
this of the charge of Idolatry?


P. D. Because in his Introduction he owns the doctrine of the Homilies as to
this point of Idolatry; and that the compilers of the Homilies were the more
earnest in this point of removing or excluding Images, Necessary Introd to the
History of B. Laud. p. 14.
the better to wean the people from the sin of Idolatry, in which they had been
trained up from their very infancy. And after, he adds, the people of this last
Age, being sufficiently instructed in the unlawfulness of worshipping such
painted Images, they may be lawfully used in Churches, without fear of
Idolatry. What can this signify, if he did not take the Worship of Images to
be Idolatry? and therefore he could not look upon this as a heat in the
beginning of the Reformation; and which was quite spent in the time of B. Laud;
since not only P. Heylin, but the Archbishop himself says, Conference with
Fisher. p. 277.
that the Modern Church of Rome is too like Paganism in the Worship of Images,
and driven to scarce intelligible subtilties, in her servants writings that
defend it; and this without any care had of millions of souls unable to
understand her subtilties or shun her practice. And in his defense against the
charge of the Commons, he said, History of his Trial. p. 472.
that he had written against the adoration and superstitious use of Images as
fully as any man whatsoever. What think you now Sir? was this a heat in the
beginning of the Reformation; and when men in Archbishop Lauds time, more duly
weighed the consequences of this charge, they grew both cooler and wiser? what
evidence does T. G. produce for this? When the very person he produces for it,
is so far from it, that he says the contrary; and are we not like to meet with
very hopeful Demonstrations in the scientifical way from him? But I have one
argument yet more, to prove there was no such change as to this matter, in
Archbishop Lauds time; which is from the Convocation, A. D. 1640. wherein no
one questions the influence and direction of Archbishop Laud, and the
concurrence of those of his Party, as T. G. calls them; and yet in that very
Book of Pet. Heylins, Cypr. Angl. p. 435^
he might have seen that Canon, wherein they acknowledge the Idolatry of the
Mass; and T. G. could not pretend any ignorance of this; for Dr. St. had quoted
this very Canon to this purpose, to show that this was the sense of
Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy in Convocation so lately; and so long after the
first heats of the Reformation. But what answer does T. G. give to this, which
is so material a Testimony, and so destructive to all he says, upon this
matter?


R. P. I do not remember he takes notice of it; but if you please I will look,
for I have his Book about me.


P. D. Not take notice of it? It is impossible. What! does he pretend to
answer, and pass by the plainest and strongest arguments, as if they had never
been brought? This is a very satisfactory way of answering, and becoming the
ingenuity of T. G.: but I pray Sir look again, I am afraid you wrong him. I
suppose you never read Dr. St.'s Books, but only the Answers to them, and then
I do not wonder you applaud the Answers, if they leave out the hardest
arguments.


R. P. You have a little startled me with this omission; I have turned over all
the Leaves which relate to this matter very carefully, and I cannot find one
word about it: surely it was an involuntary omission.


P. D. How could that be involuntary, when it was produced and urged with great
force, to show that this was no Puritanical charge; no heat at the beginning of
the Reformation; no private opinion of particular persons, but the sense of our
whole Church representative even in A. D. 1640.


R. P. I confess, I know not what to say more for him, but that it was an
omission.


P.D. No Sir, that is not all; for there is a fault of commission too; for he
does not only leave out this, but he advances an hypothesis which he might
easily see the falsehood of, from this single testimony; viz. that the charge of
Idolatry was only a heat of the beginning of the Reformation, which was
disowned in the time of K. Charles and Archbishop Laud, when at the same time
he could not but see the plainest evidence to the contrary by the Convocation
of A. D. 1640. Is your cause to be supported only by such tricks as these?


R. P. You are too like Dr. St. whom T. G. charges with being too Tragical upon
such slight occasions; Dial. p. 28.
and flinging and laying about him unreasonably for a thing of nothing; as when
T. G. mistook Robert Abbot for George.


P. D. Call you this a thing of nothing? methinks it is rather making nothing
of a very substantial thing. As to the other mistake, I suppose we shall hear
of it ere long. I pray let us proceed in order.


R. P. Dr. St.'s third Argument is from the Rubric at the end of the
Communion; the words are these, Whereas it is ordained in this Office, for the
administration of the Lords Supper; that the communicants should receive the
same kneeling.


F.C. Hold there I pray; what! receive the Communion kneeling! Give me leave to
come in now; for I perceive you are hard pressed, and we ought to give friendly
assistance to one another against these Church of England-men; and therefore I
will prove them guilty of Idolatry in receiving the Sacrament kneeling.


P. D. This will be a digression, but I always owe so much service to the
Church of England, as to be ready to defend it from so unjust a charge;
therefore to your business.


F. C. Mr. Case in his Sermon before the Long Parliament at a General Fast, on
such a day says thus --


P. D. I pray Sir speak to the point, I am not now at leisure to hear Mr. Cases
Sermon repeated.


F. C. I hope you will not interrupt me.


P. D. Not, when you speak to the business: Do you understand what Idolatry is?


F. C. That is a question to be asked indeed; as though I did not know what the
cup of fornication means, that is Idolatry; and to bow at the name of Jesus,
and to bow to the Altar, that is Idolatry; do you think I do not know what
Idolatry is? Methinks you should have more reverence for a man of my years,
than to ask me such a saucy Question; have I preached this thirty years and
more in the Army and in private Congregations, and live to be asked such a
question by you? Sir I knew what Idolatry was before you were born.


P. D. Then I hope you can tell me, now I am of Age to understand it.


F. C. Why, have I not told you already?


P. D. I pray sir let us talk calmly, and understand one another, which we
shall never do unless we agree what is Idolatry. I pray give me the definition
of it.


F. C. The definition! When I was a young man as you are, I had as many
definitions in my head as any Body; but we that are upon constant duties of
another nature cannot trouble our Heads with Definitions or such idle notions.
But alas we grow old; and such things are soon forgotten. I remember in my
younger days I read Bucanus, Polanus, and Amesius; nay, there was not a good
Systeme of Orthodox Divinity to be had, but I read it, and noted it; but I lost
my notes in the time of the Wars, and could never recover them.


P. D. This is a little off from our business; I hope you are better at
application of the point than at explication of it. What is it in the Church of
England you do charge with Idolatry?


F. C. Kneeling at the Sacrament.


P. D. For what reason?


F. C. Stay a little: I thought I had my arguments at my Fingers ends; but see
how strangely good things slip out of our memories! But now I remember, I have
some short notes about me which I took out of Mr. Gillespie's Idolatry of the
English Popish Ceremonies; and let me tell you, he was a mighty man in his
days against the Church of England, and this Book of his did great execution
upon the Bishops in Scotland. I can remember, how much it affected the Brethren
in England, and how we compared him to one of David's Worthies that killed the
Giants of the Philistines.


P. D. Sir, at this rate of talking it will be night before you come to the
Question, methinks you seem to have nothing to say against us of the Church of
England.


F. C. I nothing to say against you! who ever heard me, without having
something to say against you? I tell you Sir, I look upon your Church as the
younger sister to the Whore of Babylon: never a barrel the better herring; only
we can have liberty of Conscience with one, and not with the other. It is all
one to me to bow to an Image, and to bow to the Altar; to worship Images, and
to kneel at the Sacrament.


P. D. I am in hopes you are now coming to the point, I pray keep there without
any farther rambling.


F. C. Call you this rambling? You know Amesius says, even in controverted
points, much respect ought to be had to the experience of Gods people; I tell
you, I have found it thus with me, and you ought rather to hear me teach you,
than dispute with me.


P. D. All this shall not serve; I must have your arguments since you urge me
thus.


F. C. Why look ye now, do you see how petulant and malapert these Divines of the
Church of England are. But since nothing will satisfy you, but arguing, I have
an argument ready for you will do your business. To Worship the Bread is
Idolatry;

But to kneel at the Sacrament is to Worship the Bread.

Ergo.




P. D. I am glad to find you come to any kind of Reasoning. I deny, that in
kneeling at the Sacrament, we do worship the Bread; for our Church expressly
declares the contrary in this Rubric.


F. C. What do I care for your Church or her Rubricks? I say you do worship the
Bread and prove it too. That which you kneel before and look toward, when you
worship, you do give the worship to:

But you kneel before and look toward the bread when you worship.

Ergo.




P. D. I begin to be afraid of you now; for you do not only prove by this
argument kneeling at the Sacrament, but reading the Common Prayer to be
Idolatry; For if that which we kneel before and look toward when we worship,
must be the object of our worship, it is plain we must indeed make an Idol of
the Common Prayer; for every time we read it we kneel before it and looks
toward it when we worship.


F. C. Look you to that, I always took the Common Prayer for an Idol, but I
did not think, I had proved it now.


P. D. I shall endeavor to undeceive you in this matter. Since we are not pure
spirits, but must worship God with our bodies, by kneeling and looking toward
something in our Acts of Worship; we must not determine that to be the object
of our Worship which our bodies are bended toward, or we look upon in our
worship, unless there be some other reason for it; for then Idolatry would be
necessary and unavoidable. For we cannot kneel with our eyes open, but we must
look upon some creature, which according to your way of arguing, must be the
object of our Worship. I pray Sir, without being angry, give me leave to ask
you, whether a man kneeling in the Fields and praying with his eyes lifted up
to Heaven be an Idolater or not?


F. C. I think not.


P. D. Yet he kneels toward some creature, and looks upon some creature when
he worships; therefore you must prove by some other way, that we do make the
bread the Object of our Worship. But this we utterly deny; and say the doing it
is Idolatry and to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. And will you make us
worship it, whether we will or no?


F. C. But you use the same postures which the Papists do, and yet you charge
them with Idolatry?


P. D. Because this is a thing many of you stumble at, I will make the
difference of our case, and theirs plain to you. In all moral Acts we are to
have a great great regard to their circumstances, from whence they take a
different denomination. He that kills a man by accident, and he that kills a
man out of malice, do the very same thing as to the substance of the Act; yet
no man will say it is the same act upon a moral consideration. We kneel, and
the Papists kneel: but we declare when we kneel, we intend no adoration to the
Elements: but the Papists cannot deny that they do give proper adoration to
that which is before them; which we say is bread, and they say, the Body of
Christ under the species of bread; and yet not merely to the invisible Body of
Christ, but taking the species of bread as united to that Body of Christ, and
so directing their worship to these two together as the proper objects of
divine adoration. And to make this evident to you, their adoration is performed
at the Elevation of the Host; and at the carrying it about in processions, and
at the exposing it on their Altars; and not merely in the participation of it.
Whence it is observable, that the Church of Rome does not strictly require
kneeling at the participation, which it would do, if it looked on the kneeling
at receiving as a proper Act of Adoration. The Rubricks of the Mass, do not,
that I can find, require the Priest to kneel in the Act of receiving; and the
Pope when he celebrates, receives sitting. Espencaeus says, in the Church of
Lions, many of the People did not receive kneeling; and upon complaint made
about it, they were by the advice of two Cardinals left to their old custom.
And I wonder your Brethren have not taken notice of the difference of kneeling
at the elevation of the Host, and in the Act of receiving it; the one was
required by the Constitution of Honorius, and was intended for an act of
adoration to the Host: the other was derived from the ancient Church, which
although it did not always use the same posture of adoration that we do; yet
it is sufficient for our purpose, if they received the Sacrament in the same
posture in which they worshipped God. And this I could easily prove, if this
were a place or season for it.


F. C. Well Sir, I do not love disputing; I pray go on with your former
Adversary.


R. P. Sir, I thank you for the diversion you have given us, if you please I
will now return to the place where we left; I was about to tell you the Answer
T. G. gives to Dr. St.'s third Argument from the Rubric at the end of the
Communion. The words are, It is here declared that by kneeling no adoration is
intended or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental bread or wine, there
bodily received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ's natural Flesh and
Blood. For the Sacramental bread and wine remain still in their very natural
substances, and therefore may not be adored, for that were Idolatry to be
abhorred of all faithful Christians; and the natural Body and Blood of Christ
are in Heaven; and not here, it being against the truth of Christ's Natural Body
to be at one time in more places than one. About which Dr. St. charges T. G.
first with Ignorance in saying, it was not yet above a douzen years since it
was inserted into the Communion Book; whereas he might have found it above a
hundred years before in the Liturgy of Edw. 6. To which T. G. answers, Dial.
p. 19.
That the various fate of this Rubric, first in not being annexed till the
second Liturgy of Edw. 6. and being cast out again in the year 1562. and then
admitted again almost a hundred years after, is no eviction to him, that the
charge of Idolatry is the dogmatical doctrine of the Church of England.


P. D. If this were all the declaration our Church had made of her sense, and
the intention of this Rubric were only to declare this point of Idolatry,
there were some probability in what T. G. suggests. But I have showed already,
how fully our Church has declared her sense about Romish Idolatry by other
ways; and the design of this Rubric was not to express her sense of Idolatry,
so much as to give satisfaction to those who scrupled the lawfulness of
kneeling. For which cause it was first put in, and afterward not thought
necessary to be continued, when persons were better satisfied about the
intention of our Church. But when after long disuse and violent prejudices the
dissenters were grown unacquainted with the design and intention of our Church,
there was the same reason for inserting it again, which held at first for
putting it in. And what now has T. G. gained by this observation? If it had
been, as he imagined, what he had gotten in one point, he had lost in another:
for then it would appear, that there was no such heat in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's days, if they were willing to leave out such a declaration of the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, at that time when Q. Elizabeth's Title was the
most disputed at Rome; so that from hence appears the vanity of T. G.'s former
observation, and how far they were from taking things into our Liturgy out of
spite to the Pope; nay, so far were they from this, that in the first year of
Q. Elizabeth, that petition in the Letany was left out, which had been inserted
by Henry 8. and continued in both Liturgies of Edw. 6. Cypr. Angl. p. 418.
From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities,
Good Lord -- And this he might have found in the same Historian. And was not
the title of Head of the Church taken by her Father and Brother so qualified
and explained then, as might prevent any occasion of quarreling at it by the
most captious persons? Do these passages look like doing things on purpose to
provoke and exasperate, and out of pure spite to the Pope, or like putting in
things on purpose to heighten the differences, when T. G. himself confesses,
they left out this Rubric, and it is evident they did leave out some of the
most provoking expressions?


R. P. I see you cannot bear the charge of intemperate heat on the beginning of
the Reformation.


P. D. I cannot bear such an unreasonable and unjust imputation as this is; and
I have a particular esteem for the Wisdom, Learning and Piety which was showed
in the Ecclesiastical part of our Reformation. But how does T. G. take off the
charge of Idolatry in this Rubric?


R. P. Dial. p. 21.
He says, he takes the meaning of it not to be, the denying adoration to be due
in regard of Christ's Body being present spiritually, but truly in the
Sacrament; but only that no adoration ought to be done to any corporal presence
of Christ's natural flesh and blood, as the word Corporal is taken to signify
the natural manner of a bodies being present. For which he gives these reasons,
(1.) Because those words in the second Liturgy of Edw. 6. No adoration ought
to be done to any real or essential being of Christ's natural flesh and blood,
are now changed [into any corporal presence of Christ natural flesh and blood.]
(2.) Because the Protestant Divines do yield the real presence of Christ's Body,
for which he quotes Bishop Tailor and Bishop Cosins; and he desires Dr. St. so
to explain these words, as not to undermine the constant doctrine of the Church
of England concerning the real presence, and leave us nothing but pure
Zuinglianism in the place of it.


P. D. I am so much his Friend, that at this time I will undertake this task
for him. First, We must consider the words of the Rubric. (2.) How this sense
of it can be reconciled with the real presence as owned by the Church of
England. (1.) For the meaning of the Rubric. We are to consider that the
Rubric denies adoration to be intended, either unto the Sacramental bread and
wine, or unto any corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood. And
after, it gives two distinct reasons for denying adoration to either of these.
1. To the Sacramental bread and wine, for this reason, because they remain
still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, for
that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. 2. To the
corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood; because the natural body
and blood of our Savior Christ are in heaven, and not here, it being against
the truth of Christ's natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one.
You see, here are two plainly distinct reasons given for denying adoration to
the elements, and to the Natural Body of Christ. The former is said to be
Idolatry; the latter to be absurd and unreasonable, it being repugnant to the
truth of Christ's body to be in more places than one at one time. So that the
sense of the Rubric lies in these two propositions.

1. That it is Idolatry to give adoration to the elements remaining in their
natural substances.

2. That it is absurd to believe Christ's natural body to be present, because
then it must be in more places than one, which is repugnant to the truth of a
body. These things to my apprehension are the plain and natural sense of this
Rubric.


R. P. But we do not give adoration to the Sacramental elements, but to the
Body of Christ.


P. D. I do believe I can prove that you give adoration to the Sacramental
Elements, as they make up one entire object of adoration with the body of
Christ; but that is not my present business; which is to show the sense of our
Church, which lies in these particulars. 1. That the Sacramental Elements do
remain in their natural substances after consecration. 2. That, to adore them
so remaining is Idolatry, and to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. No one
questions the former to be the sense of our Church; the only question lies in
the later, whether that be Idolatry or no? It is no question, that to give
divine adoration to any creature is Idolatry; and it is so acknowledged on all
sides; the only question then can be, whether the substance of bread and wine
be a creature or not? and this is no question with any man in his wits:
therefore to give adoration to the substance of bread and wine is Idolatry. No
demonstration in Euclid is plainer than this.


R. P. But I tell you, we do not worship the creature, but the body of Christ.


P. D. I tell you again, if there be a creature you do worship it, for you give
adoration to what is before you, be it what it will; if it be a creature you
adore it.


R. P. But we say, it is not a creature we worship.


P. D. Do not you give adoration to that which is consecrated, whether it
remains a creature or not after consecration? At the elevation of the Host, at
the carrying it about, at the exposing of it on the Altar, you worship that
which was consecrated do you not?


R. P. We worship that which was bread before consecration, but after, is no
longer so but the body of Christ.


P. D. But if it should remain bread after consecration, what do ye adore then?
is it not the substance of the bread?


R. P. Yes, but we believe it is not the bread.


P. D. That is not the question, what you believe; for they that believed God
to be the soul of the world, worshipped the parts of it upon a supposition,
which if it had been true would have justified their worship, every jot as well
as yours can do you, and yet they were gross Idolaters for all that. Nay, I
will say more to you, there never were Idolaters in the world, that did not
proceed upon a false supposition, and it may be not so unreasonable as yours.
This cannot therefore excuse you, if your supposition proves false; as no doubt
it is; that the substance of the bread does not remain after consecration. But
I now ask you what your adoration is, in the opinion of those persons who do
firmly believe the Sacramental Elements to remain in their natural substances.
Is it not the giving divine worship to a creature? And is not the giving divine
worship to a creature Idolatry? so that according to the sense of our Church
the Worship of the Host must be Idolatry.


R. P. But what have you got by all this? for we confess our selves, that if
the substance of bread and wine do remain after consecration we are as great
Idolaters as they that worship a red cloth.


P. D. Upon my word, you had need then to be well assured, that the substance
of Bread and Wine do not remain; and yet I must tell you, we can be certain of
nothing in the world, if we are not certain that the substance of bread and
wine do remain after consecration. For if we are certain of nothing by our
senses, but of the outward accidents (which is all your best men do say in this
case) we cannot be certain of any visible substance in the world, for no bodily
substance can be discerned, but by our senses; and so all foundation of
certainty by sense is destroyed. Nay, farther, it takes away all certainty by
reason, for it confounds the clearest maxims of it, by overthrowing all
Mathematical proportions of great and small, whole and parts; by destroying all
notions of distance and place; by jumbling the notions of body and Spirit. And
lastly, it takes away all certainty by Revelation, which can never come to us,
but upon the supposition of the certainty of Sense and Reason.


R. P. O Sir, I see what you would be at; you would fain draw me into a dispute
about transubstantiation, upon principles of Reason; I beg your pardon Sir.
This is a matter of faith, and must be stoutly believed, or else we are gone.
No more of this Sir, to your business of Idolatry I pray.


P. D. I was only giving you some caution by the by, how much you are concerned
to look about you; but since you are resolved to shut your eyes, I return to
the sense of our Church about the Idolatry of the Mass; and it follows
necessarily from our former discourse, that since our Church believes the
substance of the Elements do remain, and that your worship does really fix upon
that substance, whatever your intentions be, it is really Idolatry.


R. P. However this only proves it to be material Idolatry, and not formal.


P. D. I have often heard of this distinction, but I could never be satisfied
with it: For what is material and formal Idolatry?


R. P. Material Idolatry I take to be mistaken worship; i. e. I do give divine
worship to a false object, but I do not intend to give it to a false object of
Worship, but to a true one.


P. D. Then Formal Idolatry must be giving divine worship to a false object of
Worship, knowing it to be a false object. And where are there any such
Idolaters to be found in the world? Did not the Heathens believe that to be God
which they worshipped? And is not God a true object of worship? only they
mistook that to be God which was not* and so were only material Idolaters; Even
those that worshipped their Images for Gods, were only mistaken; for they had a
good intention only to worship God, but they unhappily took their Images for
Gods. And I must needs say, they who took the Sun, Moon and Stars for Gods, and
worshipped them as such, were very excusable in comparison of those who take a
piece of bread for God, or that which appears like it.


R. P. You are very severe methinks; but do you think there is no difference
among Idolaters?


P. D. Yes, I tell you there is, but not much to your comfort. The grosser men's
erour is, the more means to convince men of it, the more wilful their blindness
and continuance in it, the more culpable they are in their Idolatry, and
consequently the less excusable.


R. P. But may not a man innocently mistake? as if in the dark, a Child should
ask blessing of one that is not his Father, would his Father have reason to be
angry with him?


P. D. Not for once, or if it were in the dark; but if he should see him every
day go very formally to a joined Stool in the Hall, or to a Brown Loaf in the
Buttery, and there very solemnly down upon his knees to them, and beg their
blessing; tell me what you think the Father would say, to such a mistake? Would
he excuse him, saying, Alas poor Child, he intended all this to me, only he
mistook the Brown Loaf or a joined stool for me!


R. P. Forbear such comparisons; for we have divine Revelation, This is my
Body; and we believe his word against all you can say in this matter.


P. D. But what will you say, if by the confession of many of the best and most
learned of your own Divines, You have not Divine Revelation for it; and that
those words cannot prove that the substance of Bread does not remain after
consecration, which is the thing we now enquire after: and if it were not to go
off from our present business, I would undertake to prove this evidently to you.


R. P. However we have the Authority of our Church for it.


P. D. You had as good say, you are resolved to believe it; for the Authority
of your Church can never persuade any man that is not.


R. P. When you are gotten to this point of transubstantiation, it is hard to
get you off. It is the sore place of our Church, and you are like Flies in
Summer, always busy about it. I pray return to your Rubric, for you seem to
have forgotten it.


P. D. No, I have been pursuing it hitherto.


R. P. But what say you to T. G.'s reasons, why this must be understood of a
corporeal presence of Christ's natural Body, because you else overthrow the
doctrine of a real presence which has been accounted the doctrine of the
Church of England.


P. D. To this I answer, (1.) The Rubric says expressly, that it is against
the truth of Christ's natural Body to be at one time in more places than one. It
does not say against the corporeal presence of his natural Body, but the truth
of it; from whence it follows, that our Church believes the true natural body
of Christ, which was born of the Virgin, suffered on the Cross, and ascended
into Heaven, can be but in one place; which is declared in the foregoing words,
And the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven and not
here: i. e. in Heaven exclusively from being in the Sacrament. Which are not
true, if the same natural Body of Christ could be at the same time in Heaven
and in the Host.


R. P. How then can your Divines hold a real presence of Christ's Body, as T. G.
says they do?


P. D. You had heard if you had staid till I came to my second Answer, which
is, that notwithstanding this, our Church does hold, that after Consecration,
the Elements do become the Body and Blood of Christ, and so there is a real
presence of Christ's Body; but not of his natural, but of a mystical Body. I
will endeavor to make this out to you, because you look strangely upon me, as
if I were big of some mighty paradox. When Paschasius Radbertus did first
broach the modern doctrine of the Roman Church about the same body of Christ
being in the Sacrament, which was born of the B. Virgin, in the Western Church,
he met with great opposition therein from the most learned Divines of that Age;
among the rest, there lived then in the Court of Carolus Calvus a man very
eminent for his Learning, called Joh. Scotus, or Erigena. This man at the
request of Carolus Calvus delivered his opinion directly contrary to
Paschasius; for whereas he asserted, that the very same Body of Christ which
was born of the B. Virgin, was invisibly present under the accidents of Bread
and Wine, Scotus denied, that the Elements were in any real sense after
consecration the Body and Blood of Christ, the Sacrament being only a bare
commemoration, or figurative representation of the Body and Blood of Christ.
Hincmar. de praedest. c. 31. Lanfranc. de Corp. and Sang. Christ. c. 4.
So Hincmarus who lived in that Age delivers his opinion; which was afterward
taken up by Berengarius, as appears by Lanfrank's answer to him. And Ascelinus
in his Epistle to Berengarius shows that Joh. Scotus out of opposition to
Paschasius, set himself to prove from the Fathers, that what was consecrated on
the Altar was not truly and really the Body and Blood of Christ. These two
opposite doctrines being thus dispersed, and a Schism being likely to break out
upon it, as appears both by Ratramnus, and the Anonymous Author, published by
Cellotius, (and extant in MS in the Cotton Library) Carolus Calvus sends to
Ratramnus (an eminent Divine of that Age, being employed by the Gallican Church
to defend the Latins against the Greeks) to know his judgment in this matter.
He, (who is better known by the name of Bertram) gives, in his Preface, an
Account to his Prince of both these opinions, and rejects them both, as against
the sense of the Fathers and Doctrine of the Church. In the first part of his
Book, he disputes against Scotus who would allow no Mystery, and in the second
against Paschasius who contended that the same Body of Christ was in the
Sacrament, which was born of the B. Virgin: this, he says, was the state of
the second Question, whether that very Body of Christ which sits at the right
hand of God, be re^eived by believers in the Sacramental Mystery? And he
proves the Negative at large from the Testimonies of the Fathers; showing, that
they did put a difference between that Body of Christ which was born of the
Virgin, and suffered on the Cross, and that true but mystical body of Christ on
the Altar; and so, from the Testimonies of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierom,
Fulgentius; from the Scriptures; and from the Offices of the Church, he
concludes point blank against Paschasius, that it was not the same Body of
Christ in the Sacrament which was born of the B. Virgin. But then against the
opinion of Scotus, he delivers his mind fully in answer to the first Question,
saying, If there were nothing in the Sacrament but what appeared to the senses,
it was unfitly called a Mystery; and there would be no exercise for faith; no
change at all wrought in the Elements; the Sacrament would fall short of
Baptism and the Manna in the Wilderness: and lastly, to what purpose did Christ
promise his Flesh to be the Food of his People, which being not to be
understood carnally and literally must have a spiritual signification; so that,
though as to their outward appearance the Sacramental Elements are Figures, yet
according to the invisible Power and Efficacy they are the Body and Blood of
Christ. And this he shows, to have been the sense of the Fathers and Christian
Church. This opinion of Ratramnus, Paschasius in his Epistle to Frudegardus,
calls the doctrine of those who deny the presence of Christ's Flesh in the
Sacrament; but do hold an invisible power and efficacy in and with the
Elements; because, say they, there is no body but what is visible and palpable.
And whoever will read that Epistle of Paschasius will find the expressions, he
answers, the very same that yet occur in the Book of Bertram. Of the same
opinion with Ratramnus in this matter, was Rabanus Maurus, the greatest Divine
accounted of his Age, who wrote his Epistle to Egilo against them, who had
lately broached that doctrine (mark that) that the Body of Christ in the
Sacrament, was the very same which was born of the B. Virgin, and suffered on
the Cross and rose from the dead. And this appears from his Epistle to
Heribaldus still extant; wherein he says, he declared in what sense the
Sacrament was the Body of Christ. Besides, the Anonymus Author published by
Cellotius, (the only person about that time who appeared in behalf of the
doctrine of Paschasius, and very inconsiderable in comparison of his
Adversaries) confesses the opposition made to Paschasius by Rabanus and
Ratramnus, and endeavors to excuse his simplicity in asserting that the same
flesh of Christ was upon the Altar, which was born of the Virgin, by a new and
extravagant supposition of the Sacrament being the medium of uniting two real
bodies of Christ; viz. of his flesh and of his Church, and therefore that must
be a real body of Christ too; which is so remote from justifying Paschasius his
doctrine, that Cellotius himself is ashamed of him. This same doctrine of
Rabanus and Ratramnus is expressly owned by the Saxon Homilies, which deny the
Sacrament to be a mere commemoration according to the opinion of Joh. Erigena,
but say that after consecration the bread becomes the Body of Christ after a
spiritual and mystical manner; and in the Saxon Code of Canons it is expressly
determined, not to be that Body of Christ which suffered on the Cross. And this
I assert to be the very same doctrine which the Church of England embraced upon
the Reformation; as most consonant to Scripture and the Fathers; which although
it does declare against the natural Body of Christ, being in more places than
one, even that Body of Christ which is in heaven, yet in the Articles it
declares, that the body of Christ is given, taken and eaten, so that to the
faithful receivers the Bread consecrated and broken becomes the Communion of
the Body of Christ, and the cup of blessing the communion of the Blood of
Christ. And so in the Catechism, it is said, that the Body and Blood of Christ
are verily and indeed taken of the faithful in the Lords Supper; i. e. that
after consecration such a divine power and efficacy does accompany the Holy
Sacrament as makes the elements to become the Spiritual and mystical Body of
Christ; as the Church is really but mystically the Body of Christ, because of
his Spirit dwelling in them. So the Apology of our Church says, that in the
Lords Supper there is truly exhibited the Body and Blood of Christ, because
that is the proper food of our souls, as Bread and Wine tends to the
nourishment of our Bodiess And if the time would permit, I could not only more
largely prove this to be the sense of our Church, but that it is the true and
genuine sense of the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Church. And thus I
hope, I have done that which T. G. thought so impossible a thing, viz. to
explain this Rubric, so as not to undermine the doctrine of the real presence
asserted by the Church of England, nor to leave nothing but pure Zuinglianism
in the place of it.


R. P. I was afraid of a Paradox, and it appears, not without Reason, for I
never met with any one yet who explained the doctrine of Bertram and the Church
of England after this manner; and all that attempted it talked so in the
clouds, that transubstantiation it self did not seem more hard to understand:
but I remember Pet. de Marca has proved, that the Book of Bertram was the same
which was written by Joh. Scotus, and therefore your hypothesis is utterly
overthrown.


P. D. I have read and considered that faint attempt of that Great Man, which
seemed to be designed for no other end but to make us believe that Bertrams
Book was burned for heretical at the Synod of Vercelles; but if any one will
impartially consider the Book of Bertram and compare it with the account given
of the opinion of Joh. Scotus by the Writers against Berengarius, they will
find De Marca's opinion without the least color of probability.


R. P. But Card. Perron, Mauguin, Cellotius and Arnaud all say, that Bertram in
the First part disputes against the Stercoranists, who were a sort of
Heretics, who held that the Body of Christ in the Eucharist was passible,
corruptible and digestible, and in all things just as the bread appeared to our
senses; and asserted, that all the accidents of the Bread were founded
hypostatically in the Body of Christ, and not to have any proper subsistence of
their own.


P. D. These were a notable sort of Heretics, if they could be found; but it
appears by the enemies of Berengarius that this opprobrious name was fixed by
them on all those who asserted the substance of the Bread to remain after
consecration; and it would be very strange if Bertram should confute that which
himself asserts; for he says, the Sacramental Elements do pass into the
nourishment of our Bodies. But if any were liable to this accusation, it must
be Paschasius; if Pet. de Marca's observation of him be true, that he held both
substance and quantity of the Bread and Wine to be turned into the Body of
Christ; from whence it follows, that must be the subject of all those accidents
which were in the Bread before; which is the very sink of Stercoranism. Nay, I
am very much deceived, if Pope Nicholas 2. in the recantation prescribed to
Berengarius did not fall into the filth of it far more than Rabanus or
Heribaldus; for he asserts therein, that the Body of Christ is truly and
sensibly handled and broken by the hands of Priests and ground by the teeth of
Believers. But what place could be fitter for this Heresy, than the Seeds
Stercoraria? Guitm. de sacr. l. 1.
And Guitmundus striving to help Pope Nicholas and his Council out, falls into
the same Heresy himself: for he shows that Christ's Body may be handled and
chewed in the Sacrament; if so, it must be the subject of the Accidents of the
Bread and Wine. Which according to Perron and his followers is plain
Stercor^nism.


R. P. But do not you fall into another Heresy, viz. of Impanation?


P. D. A man had need look to his words, when Heresies are so common, and buz
so about a man's ears. And some think they confute a man with a vengeance, if
they can find out some Heresy with a hard name to fasten upon him. But if you
did know wherein the heresy of Impanation lay, you would never charge this
doctrine of our Church with it. For I find two distinct ways of Impanation,
and this doctrine is liable to neither of them. 1. By union of the Bread to the
Body of Christ, and by that to the Divinity, which was the way of Joh.
Parisiensis. 2. By an immediate conjunction of the Divine Nature to the Bread;
not merely by divine efficacy and power, but by an Hypostatical Union: which is
the opinion not without ground, attributed to Rupertus Tuitiensis; and is
liable to this great absurdity, that all that befalls the Bread may be
attributed to the person of Christ, which Bellarmine says, it is blasphemy to
imagine. And then it might be said, that the bread is God, that the Word is
made Bread, and that God is both bread and wine. But all which the doctrine of
our Church implies is only a real presence of Christ's invisible power and Grace
so in and with the Elements, as by the faithful receiving of them to convey
spiritual and real effects to the souls of men: As the Bodies assumed by Angels
might be called their Bodies, while they assumed them; or rather as the Church
is the Body of Christ, because of his spirit quickening and enlivening the Souls
of Believers: so the bread and wine after consecration are the real but the
spiritual and Mystical body of Christ. If any one yet thinks, that some at
least of our Divines have gone farther than this, let them know, it is the
Doctrine of our Church I am to defend, and not of every particular Divine in
it; and if any do seem to speak of the presence of the very same Body which is
in Heaven, I desire them in the first place to reconcile that doctrine with
this dogmatical assertion at the end of this Rubric; that it is against the
Truth of Christ's natural Body, (not against the corporal presence of it) to be
at one time in more places than one. Let men imagine what kind of presence they
please of the same body, I only desire to know, whether to be in Heaven, and to
be in the Sacrament, be to be in the same or distinct places? If the places be
distinct, as no doubt Heaven and Earth are, then our Church declares that it is
contrary to the Truth of Christ's Natural Body to be in more places than one at
one time.


R. P. But cannot God annihilate that Cylinder of air between the Body of
Christ in Heaven, and the Sacrament on the Altar, and so make them both to be
in one place?


P. D. This is a very idle and extravagant question; because, if it be granted,
it only proves that there is nothing between Christ's Body in Heaven, and the
Host, but it does not prove the Host to be that Body of Christ; and withal,
since so many thousand Hosts are consecrated in a Day, you must suppose so much
air annihilated as lies between Christ's Body and all those Hosts; but can any
man imagine God should annihilate so much air every time a Priest Consecrates?
and I remember a good saying of Cajetan, Cajet. in Aquin. 3. p. q. 75. art. 1.
and 2. and ^.
Non est disputandum de divina potentia ubi de Sacramentis tractatur; we must
not dispute of Gods absolute power about the matter of Sacraments; because
these are so often celebrated, that we are to suppose no more than an ordinary
power to be employed about them. And suppose we should grant a thing possible
by Gods absolute power, he says, it is folly to assert all that to be in the
Sacrament which God can do. However, this does not reach this Rubric, which
supposes distinct places, and says, it is contrary to the truth of Christ's
natural Body to be in more places than one at one time.


R. P. But may not all this be understood, as T. G. suggests, of the natural
manner of a bodies being present in more places than one; viz. that it is
repugnant to the Truth of Christ's natural Body to be naturally present or in a
corporeal manner in more places than one; but it may be naturally present but
in one place; i. e. by way of extension or quantity; but it may be present in
more places after another manner?


P. D. I think you have strained for this, and it is your last effort: to which
I answer. (1.) It yields no advantage to T. G. for supposing that some of our
Divines did hold it possible, that the same body might be present in several
places after a different manner, yet how does it hence follow, that the Rubric
does not charge them who worship the substance of Bread and Wine with Idolatry?
(2.) Supposing the Church did fix this charge upon those who worship the Body
of Christ as present, I desire to know whether another kind of presence would
excuse from Idolatry? i. e. supposing that to worship Christ's Body as
corporeally present be Idolatry, it would not be Idolatry to worship the very
same Body as present after another manner? Which is all one, as to ask, whether
if it be Idolatry to worship a man with his clothes on, it be likewise Idolatry
to worship him with his clothes off? If it be, the very same body, let the
manner of its being present be the same or different, it does not alter the
nature or reason of worship. Only of the two, it seems more unreasonable to
worship an invisible Body than a visible one; for in a visible body, he that
worships is sure of something that he sees, but when he fancies an invisible
Body present, he fancies something which if it were, must be seen, and yet
though he cannot see it, he resolves to worship it. (3.) It is altogether as
unreasonable to believe that a Body may be present in several places after a
different manner, as after the same manner. For wherever a Body is really
present, let it be with extension or without, it is so in that place as not to
be in another; i. e. the Body of Christ being in the Host on the Altar, is so
there, as not to be on the floor, or any other place about it; for otherwise,
it could not be said to be only under the accidents: I then ask, on what
account the same body cannot be present in two places at once after the same
manner, and yet may be after a different manner? Aquinas says, Aq. 4. did.
44. q. 2. ar. 2.
it does imply a contradiction for the same Body to be in several places at
once after the same manner, i. e. by way of extension or quantity; because, it
is necessary for the same thing to be undivided from it self, but that which is
in several places must be divided from it self. But as Conink well observes,
this argument proves it as impossible for the same body to be in several places
after a different manner, Conink de sacr. qu. 75. art. 3.
for it is never the less divided from it self by being in one place after
another manner than in the other: yea it will be more divided, because it will
be after two several ways repugnant to each other. And it is much more easy
to conceive that a Body should be in two several places after a natural manner,
than to be so in one place; and in another, after such a spiritual manner as is
very hard to be understood. Maerat. de sacr. disp. 24. sect. 1.
It is much more repugnant, says Maeratius, for the same Body to be extended
and not extended, than to have a double extension. If it be repugnant to the
finite nature of a body, to be in more places than one, because then it might
be present in all places; this, says Lugo, Lugo de Sacram. disp. 5.. 1.
will hold against a Sacramental Presence; for that comes nearer to a Divine
immensity for a Body to be in more places without quantity, than with it.
Suarez and Gamachaeus say, Suarez in 3. p. disp. 48. art. 1*. 4. Gamach. i^ 3.
p. qu. 76. c. 4.
this comes nearer to ubiquity, because a Sacramental presence supposes the
Body to be whole in every part, which a natural does not. And they grant, that
all the contradictions which follow upon being present in several places after
a natural manner, will hold if the one be natural and the other not: i. e. that
the same Body may be above it self and below it self, within it self and
without it self; and may move with two contrary motions upwards and downwards,
forwards and backwards; it may be hot in one place and cold in another; it may
be alive in one place and dead in another; and which is the highest
contradiction, one would think, by force of this principle, a man may be damned
in one place and saved in another. And no less a man than Ysambertus has
defended the possibility of this, upon this principle; for, Ysambert. qu. 75.
disp. 3. art. 8.
says he, a man as in one place may be killed in a mortal sin, and so be
damned; whereas in another place he may have contrition (and absolution) and so
be saved. But Vasquez asks an untoward Question, Vasq. in 3. p. disp. 109. c.
4. art. 6. p. 28.
suppose such a man be reduced to one place, whether shall he be saved or
damned? for he cannot then be both; and there is no more reason he should be
put out of the state of Grace by the state of sin, than out of the state of sin
by the state of Grace. Such horrible contradictions do men run into rather than
let go an absurd hypothesis; and Suarez confesses, that a Sacramental
Presence, is liable to the same contradictions, because that supposes a
capacity for Acts of the Mind under it. (4.) I say, that asserting a Body to be
present naturally in one place, and spiritually and indivisibly in more, does
involve more contradictions in it, than to be present in several places after a
natural manner. For the very manner of a bodies being present indivisibly
carries contradictions along with it peculiar to it self. For wherever there
is a body, there must be quantity, and wherever there is quantity there must
be divisibility; how then can a divisible body be indivisibly present? If they
say, it is after the manner of a Spirit, that does by no means salve the
contradiction; for how can a body be after the manner of a Spirit? and if it
can, how can the notion of Body and Spirit be differenced from each other? If
actual extension may be separated from a Body, why not quantity it self? why
may not divisibility be separated from a line? and two and two not make
actually four, supposing that they retain their intrinsic aptitude to do it?
What becomes of the differences of greater and less, since that which is
greater may be contained under the less; and so the very same thing will be
greater or less, greater and not greater than it self? What notion can we have
of distance, since here a Body is supposed to have all its organical parts,
head, breast, legs and feet; and yet no local distance between Head and Feet?


R. P. I see it is a dangerous thing to give you but a hint about
transubstantiation; if you but once take the scent, you run on so fast that it
is a very hard matter to take you off. I did not think this Rubric could have
held us thus long; but I see you were resolved to have two or three throws at
transubstantiation in passing, though I warned you before about it.


P. D. No Sir, It was T. G.'s fixing such an absurd sense upon our Church, as
though she made it Idolatry to Worship Christ's Body as present after a
corporeal manner, and not after another; which made me insist so long upon this.


R. P. What says my Fanatic Acquaintance to all this? What! sleeping?


F. C. Only a Nod or two; I hearkened a while, but I found you were about hard
and unsavory notions; truly it was to me no awakening discourse.


R. P. Come, come we will keep you waking; we are now come to the Puritan Cause.


F. C. Ay, Ay, there is some life in that.


R. P. What think you, was Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury a Puritan or not?


F. C. What! a Bishop a Puritan! a good one I warrant you: a Puritan in Lawn
sleeves! a Puritan with Cross and Surplice! You know well what belongs to a
Puritan, do you not? I tell you, there never was a true Puritan but abhorred
these things with all his heart. What do you tell me of a Bishop of Salisbury
for a Puritan? I say again, if he had been so, he would have taken his Lawn
sleeves and thrown them into the Fire.


P. D. But I pray Sir, how comes in this discourse about Bishop Abbot?


R. P. I will tell you; Among other Divines produced by Dr. St. to prove the
charge of Idolatry maintained against the Church of Rome in K. James his time,
one was Bishop Abbot in his answer to Bishop. T. G. takes this to be Archbishop
Abbot, and excepts against him as an abettor of the Puritan party, and tells
from Dr. Heylin, that on that account it was thought necessary to suspend him
from his Metropolitical Visitation; Dr. St. makes sport with his Suspending a
Bishop of Salisbury from Metropolitical jurisdiction, and tells what strange
things those of the Church of Rome can do with five words; and upbraids T. G.
with Ignorance of our Church; and in truth, is too Tragical upon such a slight
occasion. Now T. G. proves, that it was only a mistake of the person, and not
of his quality, although Dr. St. says, that he was never till now suspected
for a Puritan.


P. D. Are you sure of that?


R. P. Yes, T. G. says so, Dial. p. 25, 27.
more than once.


P. D. However it is good to be sure. These are Dr. St.'s words. The two first
he excepts against, are the two Archbishops, Whitgift and Abbot as
Puritanically inclined; but as it unhappily falls out, one of them was never
mentioned by me, and the other never till now suspected for a Puritan. I pray
advise T. G. to read a little more carefully, before he confutes: Is it not
plain, that he means, Archbishop Abbot was never mentioned by him, and
Archbishop Whitgift was never till now suspected for a Puritan? It could be no
want of understanding in T. G. to make him thus misconstrue his words.


R. P. But he proves, he was Puritanically inclined, and takes off his
Testimony.


P. D. How does he prove that?


R. P. From Dr. Heylin, whose Histories serve us to many a good purpose; for he
says, he was a Calvinian though a moderate one; that he was an enemy to Bishop
Laud in the University, that he commends Mr. Perkins, and wrote his last Book
of Grace and Perseverance of the Saints.


P. D. Very wonderful proofs! As though many of the stiffest Defenders of our
Church against the Puritan party, had not been inclining to Calvinism (as it is
called) in the point of Predestination; especially in that moderate way,
wherein R. Abbot asserted it! As though it were not possible, for men to be
zealous for our Liturgy and Ceremonies, if they held the doctrine of Election
and Perseverance! But we do not want those of the Highest Order of our Church
at this day, who are eminent for Learning, and Piety, and Zeal for the Church;
who would take it very ill from T. G. upon the account of those opinions, to be
thought enemies to the Church of England; as no doubt the Puritans were. But T.
G. runs on with this perpetual mistake; when his own Author Dr. Heylin has
told him whom he means by Puritans, Cypr. Angl. p. 48.1 ed.
viz. the Nonconformists; for speaking of Dr. Buckeridge Bishop Lauds Tutor, he
says, that he opposed the Papists on one hand, and on the other the Puritans
or Non-conformists. These are very pitiful shifts to overthrow Bishop Abbots
Testimony, when Dr. Heylin himself says of him, P. 66.
he was so moderate a Calvinian that he incurred the high displeasure of the
Supralapsarians, who had till then carried all before them. But what says T.
G. to those whom he yields not to have been Puritanically inclined, and yet
charged the Church of Rome with Idolatry?


R. P. He says, they do not impugn the doctrine it self of the Church of Rome,
or the practice conformable to that doctrine, but such things as they conceived
to be great Abuses in the practice of it.


P. D. That will be best tried by particulars; the First of these is no less a
Person than K. James, who calls the Worship of Images, damnable Idolatry; and
Dr. St. shows that K. James takes off their distinctions and evasions; and
says, Let them therefore that maintain this Doctrine answer it to Christ at
the latter day when he shall accuse them of Idolatry. And then I doubt if he
will be paid with such Sophistical Distinctions. Is all this, says D. St.
nothing but to charge them with such practices which they detest? Does he not
mention their doctrine, and their distinctions? Did not K. James understand
what he said, and what they did? What says T. G. to this?


R. P. Not a word that I can find.


P. D. Let us then see what he does take notice of.


R. P. A very notable thing I assure you. He says, they only found fault with
some abuses committed in our Church, Dial. p. 30. to 33.
and did not think men by virtue of the terms of her communion forced either to
hypocrisy or Idolatry: as Dr. St. does: so that it is not the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, if truly stated out of the decrees of her Councils, or practice
agreeable to that doctrine, which these Divines impeach as Idolatrous, but the
opinions of some School-Divines, or Abuses they conceived to be committed in
the practice of it. And for this he instanceth in the decree of the Council of
Nice about the Worship of Images.


P. D. Who does not know T. G. to be a man of art? and to understand the way of
fencing in the Schools as well as another? Was it not skilfully done in this
place to run to the point of Images, when we had been so lately upon the
Idolatry in adoration of the Host, as it is declared in our Rubric? For the
Constitution of the Church of Rome is plain to all persons about adoration of
the Host, at the elevation of it, and carrying it about; but in the matter of
Images they endeavor to palliate and disguise their allowed practices as much
as may be. I answer therefore on behalf of Dr. St. (1.) That when he speaks of
what men are obliged to do by virtue of Communion with the Church of Rome, he
speaks of the things strictly required by the Rules of that Church; and since
our Church declares the Mass Idolatrous, he does not in the least recede from
the sense of our Church in the disjunction he uses, either of hypocrisy, or
Idolatry; and I have some reason to believe that was the thing he aimed at
chiefly, when he spoke of the terms of Communion; because he had often heard of
some persons who live in the communion of that Church, who being not obliged to
make the same professions which Ecclesiastical persons are, do content
themselves with doing the same external Acts which others do; but with a very
different intention; who look upon transubstantiation, and many other doctrines
as foolish and ridiculous, and yet think they may join with those who do
believe them in all external acts of worship rather than break the peace of the
Church they live in; such persons would say they never worshipped the Host, and
therefore excuse themselves from Idolatry, but Dr. St. says, they cannot then
excuse themselves from hypocrisy, because they seem to give the same Worship
which the other does. (2.) As to the Idolatry committed in the Worship of
Images, we shall consider that in its proper place; but yet by virtue of
communion with the Church of Rome, all persons are (1.) bound to declare the
worship of Images lawful as it is practiced in that Church. (2.) To worship
Images upon occasion o^fered, as in processions, etc. (3.) To Worship the Cross
as it represents Christ with that worship which is proper to his person. That
which concerns us now, is to give an account of the judgment of these Persons,
how far they suppose the Church of Rome to be guilty of the Idolatry committed
in it. As to K. James we have seen already how far T. G. is from answering his
testimony; the next is Is. Casaubon, and he says, the Church of England did
affirm the practices of the Church of Rome to be joined with great impiety. So
that he speaks the sense of our Church and not barely his own; and surely when
he wrote by K. James his direction and order, and had so great intimacy with
Bishop Andrews and other learned men of our Church, he would declare nothing to
be her sense which was contrary to it. And as to his own private opinion, I
could tell T. G. somewhat more, viz. that when he was violently set upon by all
the Wit and Industry of Card. Perron, and disobliged by some persons of his own
Communion at Paris, he set himself seriously to consider the terms of Communion
in that Church, and whether he might with a safe conscience embrace it; and I
have seen in his own handwriting the reasons which hindered him from it; and
the first of them, was the Fear of Idolatry, which he saw practiced in the
worship of Images and Saints. Which is as full a proof as may be, that he did
not think any person could embrace the communion of that Church without
Hypocrisy or Idolatry as to the Worship of Images and Saints. The third is
Bishop Andrews, who not only charges the Church of Rome with Idolatry; but he
says, that in their Breviaries, Hours, and Rosaries, they pray directly,
absolutely and finally to Saints; and not merely to the Saints to pray to God
for them, but give what they pray for themselves: To this T. G. says, they
profess they do no such thing; as though we were enquiring what they professed,
and not what Bishop Andrews charged them with. If Idolatry according to Bishop
Andrews be required in the Authorized Offices of Devotion in their Church, how
can the members of it be excused either from hyocrisie or Idolatry? The fourth
is Dr. Field, who charge the Invocation of Saints with such superstition and
Idolatry as cannot be excused: The fifth Dr. Jackson who says, the Papists
give divine honor to Images. The sixth Archbishop Laud, who not only affirms
the modern Church of Rome to be too like to Paganism in the adoration of
Images, but condemns the praying to Angels as the Idolatry condemned by the
Council of Laodicea; as Dr. St. showed from his M S. notes upon Bellarmine. To
these Dr. St. added in his General Preface, the Testimonies of Archbishop
Bancroft, Bishop Montague, Pet. Heylin, and Mr. Thorndike; which three last
were the very persons T. G. did appeal to; and the last of them did declare
that the practice of Idolatry was such in the Roman Church, that no good
Christian dare trust his soul in the communion of it; which is all one as to
say, they must be guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry.


R. P. But T. G. says, they only reprove some practices as Idolatrous, or at
least in danger to be such, but Dr. St. acknowledges that they excuse the
Church of Rome from Idolatry although not all who live in the communion of it.


P. D. Does he indeed say so? or is this another piece of T. G.'s fineness? His
words are these: And although it may be only an excess of charity in some few
learned persons to excuse that Church from Idolatry, although not all who live
in the Communion of it: and then produces the seventeen Testimonies to show he
did not differ from the sense of the Church of England, or the eminent
defenders of it ever since the Reformation; and do you think that among his
Testimonies, he would produce any, whom he thought to free the Church of Rome
from Idolatry? no certainly; but I suppose that clause referred to Mr.
Thorndike and some few others; and as to Mr. Thorndike he afterward produced
the passage before mentioned out of some papers written by him a little before
his death. What says T. G. to that?


R. P. Not a word more, but I find he makes use of Mr. Thorndikes name on all
occasions, as if he favored our side against the Church of England and Dr. St.
And the man who manageth the Dialogue against him is brought in as one of Mr.
Thorndikes principles. I pray tell me was not he a man in his heart of our
Church, and only lived in the external communion of yours?


P. D. D. St. has given a just character of him, when he calls him a man of
excellent Learning and great Piety; and since so ill use is made of his name in
these disputes and such dishonor done to his memory, I shall but do him right,
to let you understand what his judgment was of the Church of Rome: which he
delivered in a paper to a Lady a little before his death, from whom it came
immediately to my Hands, and is the same paper Dr. St. does refer to.

1. The truth of the Christian Religion, and of the Scripture is presupposed to
the Being of a Church, And therefore cannot depend upon the Authority of it.

2. The Church of Rome maintains the Decrees of the present Church to be
Infallible, which is false, and yet concerns the salvation of all that believe
it, Therefore no man can submit to the Authority of it.

3. The Church of Rome in S. Jeroms time, did not make void the baptism of
those Sects which did not baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, But that Baptism is void and true baptism necessary to salvation.

Therefore the Church of Rome may err in matters of salvation.



4. The Church of Rome may err in Schism, following the wrong cause. If you
except only things necessary to salvation to be believed. This shows that
infallibility only in things necessary to salvation is not enough. It is
destructive to salvation to follow the wrong cause in Schism. Instance. The
Schism with the Greek Church for appeals to Rome. For there is evident
Tradition to the contrary.

5. The Church of Rome enjoins Apocryphal Scriptures to be esteemed Canonical
Scriptures. But this injunction is contrary to Tradition and Truth, and
concerns the salvation of all that receive it.

6. The Church of Rome in S. Jeroms time did not receive the Epistle to the
Hebrews for Canonical Scripture, as now it does, and as in truth it is,
Therefore the Church of Rome may err in declaring the Authority of Scripture.

7. The Church of Rome does err in teaching that attrition is turned into
contrition by submitting to the power of the Keys; But this error is
destructive to the salvation of all that believe it.

Therefore it may err in matters necessary to salvation.

That it is an error. Because of the condition of remission of sins, which is
before the being of a Church; and therefore cannot depend on the Authority of
the Church.



8. The Church of Rome injoyneth to believe Transubstantiation, and to profess
that which is false. For there is Scripture and Tradition for the presence of
the Body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist; but neither Scripture, nor
Tradition for transubstantiation, viz. for abolishing the Elements, But the
Church of Rome injoyns to believe it.

Therefore it enjoins to believe that for which there is neither Tradition nor
Scripture. Witness the Fathers that own the Elements after Consecration.



9. The Council of Trent enjoyneth to believe that Christ instituted a new
Passover to be sacrificed as well as represented, commemorated, and offered in
the Eucharist, de Sacrific. Missae, cap. 1. which is false, For the Sacrifice
of Christ's Cross is commemorated, represented and offered as ready to be slain
in and by the Eucharist; but not slain, and therefore not sacrificed in it and
by celebrating it.

And therefore when it is said there, c. 11. quod in Missa Christus incruente
immolatur, if it be meant properly, it is a contradiction; for that which has
blood is not sacrificed but by shedding the blood of it; if figuratively, it
signifies no more than that which I have said, that it is represented,
commemorated and offered as slain.

And therefore all parts agreeing to this, the Church of Rome requiring more is
guilty of the Schism, that comes by refusing it. For the propitiation of the
sacrifice of the Eucharist is the propitiation of Christ's Cross purchased for
them that are qualified.



10. The Council of Trent commends the Mass without the Communion, cap. 6.
wherein it erreth, For the Communion being the restoring of the Covenant of
Baptism after sin* the want of it without the desire of it is to be lamented
not commended, as destructive of the means of salvation.

11. There is neither Scripture nor Tradition for praying to Saints departed,
or any evidence that they hear our prayers.

Therefore it evidences a carnal hope that God will abate of the Covenant of
our Baptism, which is the condition of our salvation, for their sakes. 12. To
pray to them for those things which only God can give (as all Papists do) is by
the proper sense of their words downright Idolatry. If they say their meaning
is by a figure only to desire them to procure their requests of God; How dare
any Christian trust his soul with that Church, which teaches that which must
needs be Idolatry in all that understand not the Figure?

13. There is neither Scripture nor Tradition for worshipping the Cross, the
Images, and Relics of Saints, Therefore it evidences the same carnal hope,
that God will abate of his Gospel for such bribes. Which is the Will Worship of
Masses, Pilgrimages, and Indulgences to that purpose.

14. Neither Scripture nor Tradition is there for the removing any soul out of
Purgatory unto the Beatifical Vision before the day of Judgment, Therefore the
same carnal hope is seen in the Will Worship of Masses, Indulgences,
Pilgrimages and the like for that purpose: and that destructive to the
salvation of all that believe that the guilt of their sins is taken away by
submitting to the Keys before they be contrite; and the temporal penalty
remaining in Purgatory paid by these Will-worships.

15. Both Scripture and Tradition condemn the deposing of Princes, and
acquitting their subjects of their Allegiance, and enjoining them to take Arms
for them whom the Pope substitutes. And this doctrine is not only false, but in
my opinion properly Heresy, yet practiced by so many Popes.

The Church may be divided, that salvation may be had on both sides.

Instances. The Schisms of the Popes. The Schism of Acacius. The Schism between
the Greeks and the Latins.

I hold the Schism for the Reformation to be of this kind.

But I do not allow Salvation to any that shall change having these reasons
before him; though I allow the Reformation not to be perfect in some points of
less moment, as prayer for the dead, and others.

Remember always that the Popish Church of England can never be Canonically
governed being immediately under the Pope.



16. There is both Scripture and Tradition for the Scriptures and Service in a
known Tongue; and for the Eucharist in both Kinds. How then can any Christian
trust his soul with that Church, which has the Conscience to bar him of such
helps provided by God?

These are all his own words without addition or alteration. And what think you
now of Mr. Thorndike? was this man a secret Friend to the Church of Rome do you
think? who says so plainly, that a man cannot embrace the Communion of that
Church without hazard of his salvation.


R. P. I did little think by the Use T. G. on all occasions makes of him, that
he had been a man of such principles. But I think T. G. had as good have let
him alone, as have given occasion for producing such Testimonies of the
thoughts which a man of his Learning and Fame had, concerning the Church of
Rome. However, you see, he holds the presence of the Body and Blood of Christ
in the Eucharist, and can you reconcile this, to what you asserted to be the
Doctrine of the Church of England?


P. D. Yes very well. If you compare what he says here, with what he declares
more at large in his Book, wherein you may read these remarkable words to this
purpose. Laws of the Chapter Chapter 4. p. 30.
If it can any way be showed that the Church did ever pray that the Flesh and
Blood might be substituted instead of the Elements under the accidents of them,
then I am content that this be accounted henceforth the Sacramental presence of
them in the Eucharist. But if the Church only pray, that the Spirit of God,
coming down upon the Elements, may make them the Body and Blood of Christ, so
that they which receive them may be filled with the Grace of his Spirit; then
is it not the sense of the Catholic Church that can oblige any man to believe
the abolishing of the Elements in their bodily substance; because supposing
that they remain, they may nevertheless come to be the instrument of Gods
Spirit to convey the operation thereof to them that are disposed to receive it,
no otherwise than his flesh and blood conveyed the efficacy thereof upon earth:
and that I suppose is reason enough to call it the Body and Blood of Christ
Sacramentally, that is to say as in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And in two
or three places more he speaks to the same purpose.


R. P. Hold Sir I beseech you; you have said enough; you will fall back again
to transubstantiation in spite of my heart.


P. D. What? when I only answer a Question you asked me?


R. P. Enough of Mr. Thorndike; unless he were more our Friend, than I find he
was. I pray what say you to Archbishop Whitgift?


P. D. Has T. G. persuaded you that he is turned Puritan, above seventy years
after his death, who never was suspected for it while he was living, nor since
till the transforming days of T. G.?


R. P. You may jeer as you please, but T. G. tells a notable story of the
Lambeth Articles, Dial. p. 42. etc.
and how Q. Elizabeth's black Husband was like to have been divorced from her
upon them, and how K. James would not receive them into the Articles of the
Church. And all this, as well as many other good things he has out of one Pet.
Heylin. Is the man alive I pray, that we may give him our due thanks for the
service he has done us upon many occasions? For we have written whole Books
against the Reformation, out of his History of it; and I find T. G. relyes as
much upon him as other good Catholics do on Cochlaeus, and Surius; or as he
does at other times on the Patronus bonae Fidei.


P. D. Dr. Heylin was a man of very good parts and Learning, and who did write
History pleasantly enough; but in some things he was too much a party to be an
Historian, and being deeply concerned in some quarrels himself, all his
Historical writings about our Church do plainly discover which side he
espoused: which to me does not seem to agree with the impartiality of an
Historian. And if he could but throw dirt on that which he accounted the
Puritan party, from the Beginning of the Reformation, he mattered not though
the whole Reformation suffered by it. But for all this he was far from being a
Friend either to the Church or Court of Rome; and next to Puritanism, I believe
he hated Popery most; so that if he had been alive, and you had gone to thank
him for the service he had done you, in all probability you had provoked him to
have written as sharply against you as ever he wrote against the Puritans But
what is all this to Archbishop Whitgifts being suspected for a Puritan? Dares
Pet. Heylin suggest any such thing? no, he knew him too well: and says, Cypr.
Angl. p. 62.
that by his contrivance the Puritan Faction was so muzled that they were not
able to bark in a long time after. Had he then any suspicion of his being
Puritanically inclined? And as to the Lambeth Articles, they only prove that he
held those opinions contained in them, and recommended them to the University
to suppress the disputes which had been there raised concerning them. And what
then? does this render him suspected for a Puritan at that time? when many of
the greatest Anti-Puritans were zealous defenders of those opinions. In all Q.
Elizabeth's time and after, the name of Puritans, signified the opposers of our
Government, and the Service and Orders of our Church; and some have undertaken
to name the Person who first applied this name to the asserters of these
doctrinal points, toward the latter end of K. James. This is certain, (which
is most material to our purpose) that when K. Charles I. published his
Declaration to prevent unnecessary Disputations about these points, he says,
that they did all agree in the true usual literal meaning of the said Articles
of our Church, Cypr. Angl. p. 189.
and that even in those curious points in which the present differences lie,
men of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to be for them,
which is an argument again, none of them intend any desertion of the Articles
established. And which is a certain argument that even at that time no man was
charged with disaffection to the Church of England merely on the account of
these doctrinal points.


R. P. But what was it which Archbishop Whitgift says, for T. G. says, even
that will involve him more in the suspicion of Puritanism.


P. D. His words are these, I do as much mislike the distinction of the Papists
and the intent of it, as any man does, neither do I go about to excuse them,
from wicked and (without repentance, and Gods singular mercy,) damnable
Idolatry. This is enough to Dr. St.'s purpose; and afterward he says, he
places the Papists among wicked and damnable Idolaters. Is not this home do
you think?


R. P. But does not he say, that one kind of Idolatry is, when the true God is
worshipped by other means and ways than he has prescribed or would be
Worshipped? and according to Dr. St. this is the Fundamental principle of those
who separate from the Church of England, Dial. p. 46, 47, etc.
that nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what he has expressly
commanded: therefore according to Dr. St. himself, Archbishop Whitgift was a
Puritan.


P. D. It is notably argued, I confess; and thence it follows, if Archbishop
Whitgift had understood the force of his own principle, he must have separated
from the Church of England. But is it not plain to the common sense of any man
that Archbishop Whitgift writing on behalf of our Ceremonies, and against this
very principle in T. G., his words could not bear that meaning, and therefore
Dr. St. had great reason to say, that his meaning in those words was, against
his express command; as appears by the application of them? So that either you
must make Archbishop Whitgift so weak a man as to overthrow the design of his
whole Book, or this must be his meaning which Dr. St. assigns.


R. P. But Dr. St. himself makes the charging Papists to be Idolaters, Dial. p.
^7*
a distinctive sign of Puritanism.


P. D. Are you in earnest? I pray, when and where? For then I am sure he
contradicts himself, for his design is to prove just the contrary. Name me the
page, I beseech you, that I may judge of it.


R. P. Why does he not say, that it is the Fundamental principle of Puritanism,
that nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what he has expressly
commanded?


P. D. And what then?


R. P. Then -- Hold a little -- then -- it will not do.


P. D. I think not truly. If this be the Fundamental principle of Puritans,
that nothing is lawful in the Worship of God but what is commanded, then to
charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry is a distinctive sign of Puritanism.
How many Cords are necessary to tie these two together? (1.) Can no one charge
the Papists with Idolatry, but by virtue of this principle? I do hold, whatever
God has not forbidden, to be lawful in his Worship; but may not I at the same
time, hold some kind of prohibited Worship to be Idolatry? I can hardly imagine
a man of T. G.'s subtilty could write thus. But that you have the Book by you,
and tell me so, I could not have believed it. (2.) Those who do hold this
principle, do not presently make every thing unlawful to be an Idol by virtue
of it. For they do not deduce this unlawfulness from the prohibition of
Idolatry, but from the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures as a rule
of Worship, and they say, we must not add thereto, and therefore no humane
invention must be used in the Worship of God. Now judge you whether according
to this principle there can be nothing unlawful, but it must be an Idol?


R. P. This was an oversight I suppose in him. Let it pass. But what makes D.
St. vary so much from his old principle in his Irenicum, wherein he asserted,
that nothing is lawful in the immediate Worship of God, Dial. p. 49.
but what is commanded, this must come either from a greater light of the
Spirit, or from the weighty considerations mentioned by the Patronus bonae
Fidei, when, he says, Prodr. p. 76.
quicquid Cl. Stilling-fleet delinitus and occaecatus opimitate and obesitate
suorum sacerdotiorum, etc.


P. D. For the malicious suggestions of so wretched a calumniator, as the
Patronus bonae Fidei appears to be throughout that Book, they are not worth
taking notice of by any one that does not search for dunghils. It is Dr. St.'s
honor to be reproached by a man who has made it his business to reproach the
best Church in Christendom, and to undermine all Churches, above thirty years;
and yet the ungrateful creature has in some measure lived upon the Revenues of
that Church himself, which he has so shamefully reviled; being in great part
supported by the Bounty of a very worthy and learned Churchman who is nearly
related to him. But as to the contradiction charged on Dr. St. I begin to
suspect T. G. more than ever I did. For does not Dr. St. in that place
distinguish between immediate Acts and parts of Worship, and circumstances
belonging to those Acts, even in the very words alleged by T. G.? And does not
he say expressly, that he does not speak of these, B. Andrews Resp. ad Apolog.
Bell. p. 37. compared with Bur^^il. De^ens. Respons. ad Apolog. c. 6. q. 21. B.
Sanders. Preface to his Sermon.. 15. De obligat. cons. prael. 4.. 33.
but of the former? And is not the very same distinction used by Bishop
Andrews, Bishop Sanderson, and the most zealous defenders of the Rites of our
Church? Why then must he be supposed to have changed his mind as to this
principle, when he said no more at that time, than what the most genuine Sons
of our Church have asserted, among whom I do not question Bishop Andrews and
Bishop Sanderson will be allowed to pass. And they distinguish after the same
manner, between the necessary parts of Worship, for which they suppose a
command necessary, as well as Dr. St.: and the accidental and mutable
circumstances attending the same for order, comeliness, and edifications sake,
which are lawful if not contrary to Gods command. And does not Dr. St. say the
very same thing? viz. that in matters of mere decency and order in the Church
of God, it is enough to make things lawful if they are not forbidden. Let us
now compare this saying with what he calls the Fundamental principle of
Separation; that nothing is lawful in the Worship of God, but what he has
expressly commanded: and can any thing be more contradictory to this, than what
Dr. St. lays down as a principle in that very page of his Irenicum? that an
express positive command is not necessary to make a thing lawful, but a
non-prohibition by a Law is sufficient for that. Where then lay T. G.'s
understanding or ingenuity, when he mentions such a great change in the Dr. as
to this principle, when he owned the very same principle, even in that Book,
and that very page, he quotes to the contrary? T. G. does presume good
Catholic Readers will take his word without looking farther: and I scarce ever
knew a Writer who stands more in need of the good opinion of his Reader in this
kind, than T. G. does. As I shall make it fully appear, if you hold on this
discourse with me; for I have taken some pains to consider T. G.'s manner of
dealing with his Adversary. But this is too gross a way of imposing upon the
credulity of Readers: yet this is their common method of dealing with Dr. St.
When they intend to write against him; then, have you Dr. St. 's Irenicum?
hoping to find matter there to expose him to the hatred of the Bishops, and to
represent him as unfit to defend the Church of England. If this takes not, then
they pick sentences and half-sentences from the series of the discourse, and
laying these together, cry, Look ye here, is this a man fit to defend your
Church, that so contradicts himself thus, and thus? when any common
understanding by comparing the places, will find them either falsely
represented, or easily reconciled. In truth Sir, I think you have showed as
little learning, or skill, or ingenuity in answering him, as any one Adversary
that ever appeared against your Church: and especially, when T. G. goes about
to prove that he contradicts himself, or the sense of the Church of England.


R. P. But I pray tell me, if this charge of Idolatry were agreeable to the
sense of the Church of England, why the Articles of the Church do only reject
the Romish Doctrine concerning worshipping and adoration of Images, not as
Idolatry, but as a fond thing vainly invented and grounded upon no warranty of
Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God? For, Dial. p. 51, etc.
I perceive this sticks much with T. G. and from hence he concludes Dr. St. to
contradict the sense of it, P. 63.
who is the Champion of the Church of England.


P. D. I perceive T. G. kept this for a parting blow, after which he thought
fit to breath a while, having spent so many spirits in this encounter; but
methinks, his arm grows feeble, and although his fury be as great as ever, yet
his strength is decayed. And in my mind it does not become a man of his
Chivalry, so often to leave his Lance, and to run with open mouth upon his
Adversary, and to bite till his Teeth meet. For what mean the unhandsome
reflections he makes on all occasions, Dial. p. 52.
upon his being the Champion of the Church of England; and the Church of
Englands having cause to be ashamed of such a Champion; P. 160. P. 162.
and of his putting him in mind of his duty as the Champion of the Church, not
to betray the Church he pretends to defend? Where does he ever assume any such
title to himself? or ever entered the lists, but on the account of obedience, or
upon great provocation? The name of Champion savours too much of vanity and
ostentation, whereas he only showed how easily the Cause could be defended,
when his superiors first commanded such a stripling, as he then was, to
undertake the defense of it. But I shall set aside these reflections, and come
to the point of our Articles; and therein consider, 1. What T. G. objects. 2.
What Dr. St. answered. 3. Which way the sense of the Articles is to be
interpreted. T. G. looks upon it as a notable observation, that the Compilers
of the 39 Articles (in which is contained the doctrine of the Church of
England) sufficiently insinuate that they could find no such command forbidding
the Worship of Images, when they rejected the adoration of Images, not as
Idolatry, but only as a fond thing vainly invented, nor as repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, but as rather repugnant to the word of God; which
qualification of theirs gives us plainly to understand, that they had done
their endeavors to find such a command, but could meet with none. To which Dr.
St. gives this answer, that the force of all he says lies upon the words of
the English translation, whereas if he had looked on the Latin, wherein they
give account of their doctrine to foreign Churches, this Criticism had been
lost, the words being immo verbo Dei contradicit; whereby it appears that
rather is not used as a term of diminution, but of a more vehement affirmation.
And what says T. G. I pray to this?


R. P. T. G. repeats his own words at large, Dial. p. 59, 60, 61.
and then blames the compilers of the Articles for want of Grammar, if they
intend the word rather to affect the words that follow.


P. D. But what is all this to the Latin Articles which Dr. St. appealed to,
for explication of the English? And for the Love of Grammar, let T. G. tell us
whether there be not a more vehement affirmation in those words, immo verbo Dei
contradicit. Either T. G. should never have mentioned this more, or have said
something more to the purpose. For does he think our Bishops and Clergy were
not careful that their true sense were set forth in the Latin Articles? And
their sense being so peremptory herein and contrary to T.G. is there not all
the reason in the world to explain the English Articles by the Latin, since we
are sure they had not two meanings? This is so plain, I am ashamed to say a
word more to it.


R. P. But T. G. is very pleasant in describing the arguments Dr. St. brings to
prove the Articles to make the worship of Images Idolatry, because it is called
Adoration of Images, and said to be the Romish Doctrine about adoration. But
after the Cat has played with the Mouse as long as he thinks fit, leaping and
frisking with him in his claws, at last he falls on him with his Teeth, and
hardly leaves a bone behind him. Dial. p. 53, 54.
After he has mustered his arguments, and drawn them out in rank and file, and
made one charge upon another, for the pleasure of the Reader, he then gives him
a plain and solid answer; P. 56.
viz. by the words Romish doctrine concerning adoration of Images may be
understood either the Doctrine taught in her Schools, which being but the
opinions of particular persons, no man is bound to follow, or the doctrine
taught in her Councils which all those of her communion are bound to submit to.
If the Doctrine which the Church of England charge be that which is taught by
some of her School Divines (which he takes to be her true meaning) this is also
denied (at least by those very Divines who teach it) to be Idolatry. If by the
Romish Doctrine be meant the Doctrine of Councils owned by the Church of Rome
concerning worshipping and adoration of Images, then herein she is vindicated
from Idolatry by Eminent Divines that have been esteemed true and genuine Sons
of the Church of England.


P. D. And does this mighty effort come to this at last? What pity it is T. G.
had no better a Cause, he sets this off so prettily? and dazels the eyes of his
beholders with the dust he raises, so that those who do not narrowly look into
his feats of activity, would imagine him still standing, when he is only
endeavoring to recover a fall. For 1. By Adoration of Images, our Church does
not mean that which their School Divines call adoration of Images, as they
distinguish it from Veneration of them, but it means all that Religious Worship
which by the allowed Doctrine and practice of the Roman Church is given to
Images. And this is just the case of the Council of Francford (concerning which
I hear T. G. says not one word in his last Book, and I commend him for it) the
Western Bishops condemn adoration of Images: very true, says T. G. and his
Brethren, but all this was a bare mistake of the Nicene Council, which never
approved adoration of Images, but only an inferior Worship; but Dr. St. has
showed that the Francford Council knew of this distinction well enough, and
notwithstanding their denying it, the Western Church did not judge that the
worship which they gave to Images was really adoration whether they called it
so or not. Just so it is with the Church of England, in reference to the Church
of Rome; this distinguishes adoration from inferior Worship, but our Church
owns no such distinction, and calls that Religious worship which they give to
Images, adoration; and supposing it were really so, Dr. St. says, their own
Divines yield it to be Idolatry; i. e. the Church of England calls their
worship of Images adoration, or giving Divine Worship to a Creature, but their
Divines do yield this is Idolatry, and therefore the Church of England does
charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry. But how subtly had T. G. altered the
whole force of the argument? by taking adoration not in the sense of our
Church, but of their School-Divines, and then telling us, that even those
School-Divines who teach adoration of Images deny it to be Idolatry. And
whoever expected they should confess themselves guilty? But what is this, to
the sense of the Church of England? where does it allow such a distinction of
Divine worship into that which is superior and inferior, or that which is
proper to God and that which is not? 2. By Romish Doctrine the Church of
England does not mean the doctrine of the School-divines; but the Doctrine
received and allowed in that Church from whence the Worship of Images is
required and practiced. Such kind of Worship I mean, as is justified and
defended in common among them, without their School-distinctions; such worship
as was required here in the Recantation of the Lollards as Dr. St. observes,
Defense p. 581.
I do swear to God and all his Seynts upon this Holy Gospel, that fro this day
forward I shall worship Images with praying and offering unto them in the
Worship of the Seynts that they be made after; such Worship as was required
here by the Constitutions of Arundel, A. D. 1408. with processions,
genuflections, thurifications, deosculations, oblations, burnings of Lights,
and Pilgrimages which are called Acts of Adoration; and this Constitution was a
part of the Canon Law of England, which all persons were then bound to observe,
or else might be proceeded against as Lollards. And this is that which Dr. St.
insists upon, was the thing condemned by the Articles of our Church, viz. the
Worship of Images which was required and practiced here in England. And what
reason have we to run to School-Divines for the sense of matters of daily
practice, as the worship of Images was before the Reformation? And so I
conclude, if this be all T. G. in so long time has had to say about this
matter, ( viz. above four years since Dr. St.'s General Preface was Published)
he has very unreasonably charged him with dissenting from the Church of
England in this Charge of Idolatry.


F. C. I hope you have done for this time; and if you catch me again losing so
much time in hearing Fending and proving about the Church of England; I will
give you leave to call me Fanatic. If you have any thing more of this kind,
talk it out your selves if you please. I expected to have had some comfortable
talk with my old Friend about Liberty of Conscience; and how many precious
hours have you lost about the Church of England? This will never do our
business. If you please, my good Friend, you and I will meet in private at such
a place to morrow.


P. D. Nay Sir, let me not be excluded your company, since I am so accidentally
fallen into it; and have but patience to hear us talk out these matters, since we
have begun them. For I hear your Friends Friend T. G. has said some things
wherein your Cause is concerned.


F. C. I do intend for the Auction again to morrow, and if I can easily get the
Books I look for, I will bear you company; otherwise go on with your Discourse,
and I will come to you when I have made my Adventures. It is possible I may
meet with some of them to night; for I hear them at Rutherford, and Gillespee,
and our Divinity follows just after the Scotch. Which was well observed by the
Catalogue-maker, For the Covenant bound us to reform according to the pattern
of the Church of Scotland.


R. P. You intend then to meet here again to morrow at three of Clock, to
pursue our Conferences about these matters. I will not fail you; and so adieu.


The end of the first Conference.
THE Second Conference, About the consequences of the charge of Idolatry.
P. D. HOw long have you been at the Auction?


R. P. Above an hour; for I had a great desire to see how the Books were sold
at them.


P. D. And I pray what do you observe concerning the buying of Books here?


R. P. I find it a pretty humoursome thing: and sometimes men give greater
rates for Books, than they may buy them for in the Shops; and yet generally,
Books are sold dearer here, than in any part of Europe.


P. D. What reason can you give for that?


R. P. One is, that the Scholars of England allow themselves greater Liberty in
Learning than they do in foreign parts, where commonly only one kind of
Learning is in esteem in a place; but here a man that intends a Library, buys
all sorts of Books; and that makes your Traders in Books bring over from all
parts, and of all kinds, and when they have them in their hands, they make the
buyers pay for their curiosity. In Italy it is a rare thing to meet with a
Greek Book in the Shops; In Spain you see nothing almost besides Prayer-Books,
Novels, and School Divinity. At Antwerp and Lions, School Divinity and Lives of
the Saints are most sold. At Paris indeed there is greater variety. But we
observe it abroad, that in the best Catholic Countries, Learning is in least
esteem; as in Spain and Italy. And where Learning is more in vogue, as in
France, you see how ready they are to quarrel with the Pope; and to fall into
Heats and Controversies about Religion. And therefore to deal freely with you,
I am not at all pleased to see this eagerness of buying of Books among you. For
as long as Learning holds up, we see little hopes of prevailing, though we and
the Fanatics had Liberty of Conscience: since upon long experience we find
Ignorance and our Devotion, to agree as well as Mother and Daughter.


P. D. I am glad of any symptom that we are like to hold in our Wits; and I
think your observation is true enough. I have only one thing to add to it:
which is, that it was not Luther, or Zuinglius that contributed so much to the
Reformation, as Erasmus; especially among us in England. For, Erasmus was the
Man who awakened men's understandings; and brought them from the Friars Divinity
to a relish of general Learning; he by his Wit laughed down the imperious
Ignorance of the Monks, and made them the scorn of Christendom; and by his
Learning he brought most of the Latin Fathers to light, and published them
with excellent Editions, and useful Notes; by which means men of parts set
themselves to consider the ancient Church from the Writings of the Fathers
themselves, and not from the Canonists and Schoolmen. So that most learned and
impartial men were prepared for the Doctrines of the Reformation before it
brake forth. For it is a foolish thing to imagine that a quarrel between two
Monks at Wittemberg should make such an alteration in the state of Christendom.
But things had been tending that way a good while before; by the gradual
restoration of Learning in these Western parts. The Greeks coming into Italy
after the taking of Constantinople, and bringing their Books with them, laid
the first foundation of it; then some of the Princes of Italy advanced their
own reputation by the encouragement they gave to it: from thence it spread into
Germany, and there Reuchlin and his Companions joined Hebrew with Greek; from
thence it came into France and England. When men had by this means attained to
some skill in Languages, they thought it necessary to search the Old and New
Testament in their Original Tongues, which they had heard of, but few had seen,
not above one Greek Testament being to be found in all Germany; then Erasmus
prints it with his Notes, which infinitely took among all pious and learned
men, and as much enraged the Monks and Friars, and all the fast Friends to
their Dullness and Superstition. When men had from reading the Scripture and
Fathers formed in their minds a true notion of the Christian Religion and of
the Government and practices of the ancient Church, and compared that with what
they saw in their own Age, they wondered at the difference; and were astonished
to think how such an alteration should happen; but then, they reflected on the
Barbarism of the foregoing Ages, the gradual encroachments of the Bishop of
Rome, the suiting of Doctrines and practices to carry on a temporal Interest,
the compliance with the superstitious humors of people, the vast numbers of
Monks and Friars, whose interest lay in the upholding these things; and when
they laid these things together, they did not wonder at the degeneracy they saw
in the Christian Church. All the difficulty was, how to recover the Church out
of this state; and this puzzled the wisest men among them; some thought the ill
humors were grown so natural to the Body, that it would hazard the state of it
to attempt a sudden purging them quite away; and that a violent Reformation
would do more mischief than good, by popular tumults, by Schism and Sacrilege;
and although such persons saw the corruptions and wished them reformed, yet
considering the hazard of a sudden change, they thought it best for particular
persons to inform the world better, and so by degrees bring it about, than to
make any violent disturbance in the Church. While these things were considered
of by wiser men, the Pope goes on to abuse the People with the trade of
Indulgences, and his Officers in Germany were so impudent in this Trade, that a
bold Monk at Wittenberg defies them, and of a sudden lays open the Cheat, and
this discovery immediately spread like Wildfire; and so they went on from one
thing to another, till the People were enraged at being so long and so grossly
abused and Tyrannized over. But when Reformation begins below, it is not to be
expected that no disorders and heats should happen in the management of it;
which gave distastes to such persons as Erasmus was, which made him like so ill
the Wittenberg Reformation, and whatever was carried on by popular Tumults.
Joh. Rosin. vit. ^^ed. sapient.
Yet Rosinus says, that the Duke of Saxony before he would declare himself in
favor of Luther, asked Erasmus his opinion concerning him, who gave him this
answer, that Luther touched upon two dangerous points, the Monks bellies, and
the Popes Crown; that his doctrine was true and certain, but he did not approve
the manner of his Writing. But here in England, the Reformation was begun by
the consent of the King and the Bishops, who yielded to the retrenchment of the
Popes exorbitant power, and the taking away some grosser abuses in Henry 8's.
time; but in Edw. 6.'s time, and Q. Elizabeth's, when it was settled on the
principles it now stands, there was no such regard had to Luther, or Calvin, as
to Erasmus and Melancthon, whose learning and moderation were in greater esteem
here, than the fiery spirits of the other. From hence, things were carried with
greater temper, the Church settled with a succession of Bishops; the Liturgy
reformed according to the ancient Models; some decent ceremonies retained,
without the sollies and superstitions which were before practiced: and to
prevent the extravagancies of the people in the interpreting of Scripture, the
most excellent Paraphrase of Erasmus was translated into English and set up in
Churches; and to this day, Erasmus is in far greater esteem among the Divines
of our Church, than either Luther, or Calvin.


R. P. If this be true which you say, methinks your Divines should have a care
of broaching such things, which do subvert the Foundation of all Ecclesiastical
Authority among you, as T. G. told Dr. St. the charge of Idolatry does. For by
virtue of this charge, he says, the Church of England remains deprived of the
lawful Authority to use and exercise the Power of Orders; and consequently the
Authority of Governing, Preaching, and Adminstring the Sacraments, which those
of the Church of England challenge to themselves, as derived from the Church of
Rome, can be no true and lawful jurisdiction, but usurped and Antichristian.
Dial. p. 141, etc.
This I assure you T. G. lays great weight upon in his late Dialogues, and
charges him with Ignorance, and Tergiversation, and other hard words about it.
So that I have a mind to hear what you can say in his defense about this,
before I touch upon the other consequences which he urges upon this charge of
Idolatry.


P. D. With all my heart. There are two things wherein the force of T. G.'s
argument lies. (1.) That which he calls his undeniable Maxim of Reason, viz.
That no man can give to another that which he has not himself. (2.) That
Idolatry lays men under the Apostles excommunication, and therefore are
deprived of all lawful Authority to use or exercise the Power of Orders.

In answer to these, two things are already proved by Dr. St. (1.) That the sin
of the Givers does not hinder the validity of Ordination. (2.) That the
Christian Church has allowed the lawful Authority of giving and exercising the
Power of Orders, in those who have been condemned for Idolatry. Which he proves
more briefly in his Preface, and at large in his last Book from the case of the
Arian Bishops. And now let any one judge whether T. G. had any cause to Hector
about this matter for so many pages together, as though he had either not
understood, or not taken notice of the force of his Argument. Concerning his
undeniable Maxim of Reason he observed, that it was the very argument used by
the Donatists to prove the nullity of Baptism among Heretics: and that the
answer given by the Church was, that the Instrument was not the Giver, but the
First Institutor, and if the Minister keep to the Institution, the Grace of the
Sacrament may be conveyed though he has it not himself. This Dr. St. thought
very pertinent to show, that where Power and Authority are conveyed by men only
as Instruments, the particular default of such persons, as heresy or Idolatry,
do not hinder the derivation of that Power or Authority to them. And this he
proved to be the sense of the Christian Church in the Ordinations of Heretics.
It is true, he did not then speak to Authority so much as to Power; nor to
jurisdiction, as it is called by the School Divines, so much as to the validity
of Ordination. But he proceeded upon a parity of Reason in both cases; and
could not imagine that any persons would suppose the Christian Church would
allow a validity of Orders without lawful Authority to use and exercise those
Orders. For in all the Instances produced by him from the second Council of
Nice, wherein undeniable examples were brought of Ordinations of Heretics
allowed by the ancient Fathers and Councils (even those of Nice, Ephesus and
Chalcedon) it was apparent that their Authority to use and exercise their power
of Orders, was allowed as well as their Ordinations: For he there shows that
Anatolius the President of the fourth Council was ordained by Dioscorus in the
presence of Eutyches; that many of the Bishops who sat in the sixth Council
were ordained by Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus and Petrus, who in that Council were
declared Heretics. And does T. G. in earnest think this does not prove they
had lawful Authority? What becomes then of the Authority of these Councils?
nay, of the Authority of the Church it self, when Tarasius there says, as Dr.
St. produces him, they had no other Ordinations for fifty years together. Does
this prove either Dr. St.'s ignorance, or tergiversation? Is not this rather
plain and convincing evidence that the Christian Church did allow, not barely
the validity of Ordination by Heretics, but the lawful Authority to use and
exercise the Power of Orders? Which he likewise proves by the Greek Ordinations
allowed by the Church of Rome; by which he does not mean the validity of the
bare Orders, but all that Power and Authority which is consequent upon them.
For can any man be so senseless to think, that the Church of Rome only allowed
the Sacrament of Orders among the Greeks, without any Authority to
excommunicate or absolve? What mean then these horrible clamours by TG. of Dr.
St.'s Ignorance, intolerable mistake, shameful errors, tergiversation, and what
not? because he speaks only to the validity of Ordination, and not to the
lawful Authority of exercising the Power of Orders. Whereas the contrary
appears by that very Preface about which these outcries are made by E. W. and
T. G. What ingenuity is to be expected from these men, who deny that which they
cannot but see?


R. P. But T. G. gives this for a Taste, Dial. p. 132.
not only what candor and sincerity, but what skill in Church Affairs you are
to expect in the rest from Dr. St. which surely he would never have done, if he
had spoken to the point.


P. D. You may think as you please of him; I only tell you the matter of fact,
and then do you judge where the candor and sincerity, where the skill in
Church affairs lies.


R. P. But is it not an undeniable Maxim, that no man can give to another,
that which he has not himself? and therefore it lies open to the conscience of
every man, that if the Church of Rome be guilty of Heresy, much more, if guilty
of Idolatry; Dial. p. 133, 134.
it falls under the Apostles excommunication, Gal. 1.8. and so remains deprived
of the lawful Authority to use and exercise the power of Orders, and
consequently the Authority of Governing, Preaching, etc. This you see bids fair
toward the subversion of all lawful Authority in the Church of England, if the
Church of Rome were guilty of Idolatry when the Schism began; because
excommunicated persons being deprived of all lawful Authority themselves can
give none to others; and if those others take any upon them, it must be usurped
and unlawful.


P. D. This is the terrible argument which T. G. produces again in Triumph, as
though nothing were able to stand before it: and yet in my mind T. G. himself
has mightily weakened it by yielding the Validity of Ordinations made by
Heretics or Idolaters. For, if no man can give that which he has not; how can
those give power and Authority who have none? But the Power of Orders does
necessarily carry Authority along with it; For it is part of the Form of Orders
in the Roman Church, Accipe spiritum sanctum, Pontificale Romans de ordinat.
Presbyt. Council. Trident. Sess. 23. c. 4.
Quorum remiseritis, etc. So that a power to excommunicate and absolve is given
by virtue of the very Form of Orders; and your Divines say, the Form is not
complete without it. But then, I pray, resolve me these Questions. Is not a
power to excommunicate and absolve a part of that jurisdiction which T. G. does
distinguish from the bare power of Orders?


R. P. Yes, without doubt.


P. D. Is not this power given by the very Form of Orders in your Church?


R. P. Yes, but what then?


P. D. Does not the Council of Trent say the character is imprinted upon saying
those words, Accipe spiritum sanctum, etc.


R. P. What would you be at?


P. D. Is the character of Orders given by words that signify nothing, and
carry no effect along with them?


R. P. No certainly.


P. D. Then these words have their effect upon every man that has the power of
Orders.


R. P. And what then?


P. D. Then every one who has the power of Orders, has the power to
excommunicate and absolve.


R. P. Be it so.


P. D. But the power to excommunicate and absolve is a part of jurisdiction,
therefore a power of Orders carries a power of jurisdiction along with it; and
consequently valid Ordination must suppose lawful Authority to use and exercise
the power of excommunication and absolution.


R. P. In the name of T. G. I deny that.


P. D. Hold a little; you are denying the conclusion. Consider again what you
deny. Do you deny this power to be given in your Orders?


R. P. No.


P. D. Do you deny this power to be part of jurisdiction?


R. P. No.


P. D. Then this power of jurisdiction is given wherever the Orders are valid.


R. P. This cannot be; for T. G. complains over and over of Dr. St.'s
ignorance, wilful and intolerable mistake, unbecoming a Writer of
Controversies, for not distinguishing between the validity of Ordination, and
the power of Jurisdiction, which he would never have done, if one had carried
the other along with it.


P. D. Do not tell me, what T.G. would, or would not have done. I tell you what
he has done; and judge you now with what advantage to himself.


R. P. But T. G. is again up with his undeniable Maxim, that none can give to
another what he has not himself: Dial. p. 143.
and this he thinks will carry him through all.


P. D. I tell you that very Maxim overthrows the validity of Ordinations as he
applies it. For if the Validity of Orders does suppose Authority to be
conveyed; and there can be no such Authority given in the case of Idolatry:
then the Power of Orders is taken away as well as Jurisdiction. Besides, Is not
the Power of giving Orders a part of that lawful Authority which belongs to
Bishops?


R. P. I do not understand you.


P. D. Can any man give Orders without a Power to do it?


R. P. No.


P. D. Is not that Power a part of Episcopal Authority?


R. P. Yes.


P. D. How then can there be a power of giving Orders without Authority?


R. P. Now you show your Ignorance. Do not you know that there is an indelible
character imprinted in the Soul by the Power of Orders, which no act of the
Church can hinder a Bishop from giving in the Sacrament of Orders, or a Priest
from receiving; but jurisdiction is quite another thing, that is derived from
the Church, or rather from the Pope who is the fountain of jurisdiction; and
this may be suspended or taken away.


P. D. I cry you mercy Sir. I was not bred up in your Schools; this may be
current doctrine with you; but I assure you I find no footsteps of it either in
Scripture or Fathers, and if I be not much misinformed, some of your greatest
Divines are of my mind. I see all this outcry of T. G.'s concerning Dr. St. 's
Ignorance comes at last to this Mystery of the Indelible Character imprinted
in the soul by the Sacrament of Orders, which makes Ordination to be valid, but
gives no Authority or Jurisdiction. I pray make me a little better acquainted
with this character; for at present, I can neither read, nor understand it.


R. P. Yes, yes, This you would be always at, to make us explain our
School-notions, for you to fleer and to mock at them.


P.D. But this I perceive is very material to prevent intolerable error and
mistake; and for all that you know I may come to be a Writer of Controversies,
and then I would not be hooted at for my Ignorance; nor have the boys point at
me in the Streets and say, There goes a man that does not understand the
character: which in my mind would sound as ill, as saying there goes one that
cannot read his A. B. C. I beseech you Sir, tell me what this indelible
Character is; for to tell you truth, I have heard of it before, but never met
with one who could tell what it was.


R. P. Yes, that is it; you will not believe a thing, unless one can tell you
what it is. Why, it is a mark or a seal imprinted in the soul by the Sacrament
of Orders that can never be blotted out; and therefore Ordination is valid,
because if reordination were allowed, one character would be put upon another,
and so the first would be blotted out. Do not you understand it now?


P. D. I suppose altogether as well as you. Is it a Physical kind of thing,
just like the strokes of a pen upon paper; or rather as the graving of a Carver
upon Stone, so artificially done that it can never be taken out while it
continues whole; or is it only a moral relative thing depending upon divine
institution, and only on the account of distinction called a Character?


R. P. Without doubt it is an absolute thing, but whether to call it a habit,
or a power; whether it be a quality, of the first, or the second, or the third,
or fourth kind, that our Divines are not agreed upon: and some think it is a
new kind of quality: nor whether it be imprinted on the essence or powers of
the soul; and if in the Faculties, whether in the Understanding or Will; but it
is enough for us to believe, that there is really such an absolute indelible
Character imprinted on the soul; from whence that Sacrament can never be
reiterated which does imprint a Character as that of Orders does.


P. D. I am just as wise by all this account as I was before. For the only
reason of the point is, it must needs be so.


R. P. Yes, the Church has declared it in the Council of Trent, and that is
instead of all reasons to us.


P. D. But what is this to Dr. St.? Must he be upbraided with ignorance, error
and tergiversation, because he does not believe the indelible character on the
Authority of the Council of Trent?


R. P. No; that is not the thing, but because he did not understand the
difference between the Power of Order, and jurisdiction.


P. D. Are you sure of that? If I do not forget, he has this very distinction
in that pestilent Book called Irenicum, which T. G. hits him in the teeth with*
on all occasions.


R. P. But he did not, or would not understand it here.


P. D. Yes, he knew it well enough; but he thought if he proved the Validity of
Ordination, he proved the lawfulness of Authority and Jurisdiction; because the
giving Orders is part of Church Authority, and Authority is received in taking
Orders; and the Church never allowed one, but it allowed the other also. If you
have any thing more to say about this matter, I am willing to hear you, but as
yet I see no reason for T. G.'s clamours about such a mistake in Dr. St., for I
think the mistake lay nearer home.


R. P. But E. W. publicly reproved Dr. St. for this mistake, and yet after
that he goes on to confirm his former answer with new proofs and Testimonies,
Dial. p. 151, etc.
that Bishops ordained by Idolaters were esteemed validly ordained, and does
not speak one word in answer to what was objected by T. G. viz. that the
English Bishops must want lawful authority to exercise the power of Orders, if
their first Ordainers were Idolaters. And E. W. calls it an intolerable
mistake, and T. G. says, he has heard he was a main man esteemed for his
Learning. After repeating the words of E. W. at length T. G. very mildly adds,
P. 155.
as if he were wholly insensible of the gross and intolerable error E. W.
taxed him with, he runs again into the same shameful mistake; But says T. G.
Are the Power of giving Orders and lawful Authority to give them, P. 157.
so essentially linked to each other, that they cannot be separated? May not a
Bishop or Priest remaining so, be deprived of all lawful Authority to exercise
their Functions, for having fallen into Heresy or Idolatry? And if they have
none themselves, can they give it to others?


P. D. On whose side the intolerable mistake lies, will be best seen, by
examining the force of what T. G. says (as to E. W. the matter is not great)
which lies I suppose in this, that those who do fall into Idolatry or Heresy
may ordain validly; for, says he, from Esti^s, no crime, or censure soever can
hinder the Validity of Ordination by a Bishop; but he may be deprived of any
lawful Authority to do it, and therefore cannot convey this lawful Authority to
others ordained by him. From hence T. G. says, no crime can hinder the
Validity of Ordination; but Idolatry, he says, does ipso facto deprive Bishops
of the Authority of exercising Orders, or conveying jurisdiction; and therefore
though the Ordination of the Bishops of England may be valid, yet their
jurisdiction cannot be lawful, and so the Foundation of their Authority is
subverted by the charge of Idolatry. I hope you will allow this to be the force
of all that T. G. says.


R. P. Yes; now you have hit upon his right meaning.


P. D. Let us then consider more closely, on which side the mistake lay; which
will be discerned by this, whether we are to follow the Modern Schools, or the
Judgment of Antiquity in this matter. For Dr. St. spoke according to the sense
and practice of Antiquity, and T. G. according to the modern notions and
distinctions of their Schools. It is true, their Schoolmen have so
distinguished the power of Order and Jurisdiction, that they make the one to
depend upon an indelible unintelligible character, which no crime can hinder
having its valid effect: but that jurisdiction, or the right of excommunication
and absolution may be suspended or taken away. Since the Councils of Florence
and Trent this Doctrine of the indelible Character given in Orders, is not to
be disputed among them; and therefore they hold the character to remain
wherever Orders are received in the due form; but then they say this character
is capable of such restraints by the Power of the Church, that it remains like
Aristotle's first matter, a dull and unactive thing till the Church give a new
Form to it, and this they call the Power of jurisdiction. But that all this, is
new doctrine in the Church and a late Monkish invention, will appear by these
considerations.

(1.) How long it was before this doctrine was received in the Church by the
confession of their own Schoolmen. Scotus, and Biel, and Cajetan, Scot. in
s^nt. l. 4. did. 4. q. 9. Biel. in S^nt. q. 2. Cajet. in 3. p. q. 63. art. 1.
(no inconsiderable men in the Roman Church) do confess, that the doctrine of
the Character imprinted in the soul can neither be proved from Scripture, nor
Fathers, but only from the Authority of the Church, and that not very ancient
neither. Morin. de Ordin. part. 3. Exercit. 3. c. 1. ^. 4.
And Morinus takes notice that it was not so much as mentioned by P. Lombard,
or Hugo de Sancto Victore: although they debate those very Questions which
would have required their expressing it, if they had known any thing of it.

(2.) How many of their Schoolmen who do acknowledge the character of
Priesthood, yet make the power of Orders to belong to jurisdiction, so Albertus
Magnus and others cited by Morinus; but Alex. Alensis carries this point so
far, that he says, that because of the indelible character of Priesthood, the
power can never be taken from a Priest, but only the execution of it; Alex. Al.
4. p. q. 8. memb. 5. art. 1.. 6. ad 2.
But in a Bishop there is no new character imprinted, and therefore in the
degrading him, not only the execution, but the Power of Giving Orders is taken
away. And Scotus says, if a Bishop be excommunicated, Scot. in 4. did. 25. q.
1. resp. ad 3.
he loses the power of giving Orders; if Episcopacy be not a distinct Order;
as you know many of the Schoolmen hold. And Morinus grants, Morin. ib. exerc.
5. c. 9. n. 12, 13.
that if Episcopacy be not a distinct Order, but a larger commission, the power
of Bishops may be so limited by the Church, as not only to hinder them from a
lawful Authority, but from a power of Acting; so that what they do, carries no
validity along with it.

(3.) How many before the days of the Schoolmen were of opinion that the
censures of the Church did take away the power of Orders? Gratian holds it most
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Fathers, that a Bishop degraded has no power
to give Orders, Great. 1. q. 1. post can. 97.
although he has to Baptize; only for S. Augustines sake, he thinks, they may
distinguish between the Power and the execution of it. Gul. Parisiensis says,
that Bishops deposed can confer no Order, Gul. Pa^is. de Sacr. Ord. c. 7.
because the Church has the same power in taking away, which it has in
giving, and the intention of the Church is to take away their Power. If what T.
G. asserts, had been always the sense of the Church, I desire him to resolve
me these Questions. 1. Why Pope Lucius 3. did re-ordain those who had been
ordained by Octavianus the Antipope? 2. Why Urban 2. declared Nezelon or
Wecilo an excommunicate Bishop of Ments to have no power of giving Orders? and
that upon T. G.'s own Maxim, That which a man has not, he cannot give to
another; because he was ordained by Heretics. 3. Why the Synod of
Quintilinberg under Greg. 7. declared all Ordinations to be Null which were
made by Excommunicated Bishops? 4. Why Leo 9. in a Synod voided all Simoniacal
Ordinations? 5. Why Stephanus 6. re-ordained those which were ordained by
Formosus? 6. Why Hincmarus re-ordained those who had been ordained by Ebbo,
because he had been deposed? 7. Why Stephanus 4. re-ordained those who had
received Orders from Pope Constantine? 8. Why the Ordinations made by Photius
were declared null? To name no more. If this had been always the sense of the
Christian Church, that the Power of Orders is indelible, but not that of
jurisdiction, I desire T. G. to give an answer to those Questions; which, I
fear, will involve several Heads of his Church under that which he calls in Dr.
St. an intolerable mistake. Did so many Popes know no better this distinction
between the Validity of Ordination, and the Power of Jurisdiction? I am sorry
to see T. G. so magisterial and confident, so insulting over Dr. St. as
betraying so much ignorance as does not become a Writer of Controversies, when
all the while, he does only expose his own. But alas! This is the current
Divinity of the Modern Schools; and what obliges them to look into the opinions
of former Ages? Yet methinks a man had need to look about him, before he
upbraids another with gross and intolerable errors, lest at the same time he
prove the guilty person; and then the charge falls back far more heavily on
himself.

(4.) Those who did hold the Validity of Ordinations did it chiefly on the
account of the due Form that was observed, whoever the Persons were; whether
Heretics, or Excommunicated-persons. For after all the heats and disputes
which happened in the Church about this matter, the best way they found to
resolve it was to observe the same course which the Church had done in the
Baptism of Heretics: viz. to allow that Baptism which was administered in due
form, although those who administered it were Heretics. Thence Praepositivus,
as he is quoted by Morinus, says, Morin. de Ord. Sacr. p. 3. ex. 5. c. 1. n. 3.
That a Heretic has power to administer all the Sacraments as long as he
observes the Form of the Church. And not only such a one as received Episcopal
Orders in the Church himself, but those who do derive a succession from such:
as appears from Tarasius in the second Council of Nice, where he says, That
five Bishops of Constantinople successively were Heretics, and yet their
Ordinations were allowed by the Church: to the same purpose speak others, who
are there produced by the same learned Author. Let these considerations be laid
together and the result will be, 1. Either Dr. St. was not guilty of an
intolerable error and mistake in this matter, or so many infallible Heads of
the Church were guilty of the same. 2. It was believed for some ages in the
Roman Church, that the censures of the Church did take away the Power of
Orders. 3. T. G.'s distinction as to the foundation of it in the indelible
Character of Orders is a novel thing, and acknowledged by their own Divines to
have no Foundation either in Scripture or Fathers. 4. The ground assigned by
those who held the validity of Ordination by Heretics, will hold for the
Authority of exercising the Power of Orders, if not actually taken away by the
Censures of the Church. For every man has the power which is given him, till
it be taken from him; every one that receives Orders according to the Form of
the Church has a power given him to excommunicate and absolve, therefore every
such person does enjoy that power, till it be taken from him. For as I have
already showed, this is part of the Form of Orders in the Roman Church, Accipe
Spiritum Sanctum, Quorum remiseritis, etc. and the Council of Trent determines
the character to be imprinted upon the use of these words: Conc. Trid. sess.
23. can. 4.
therefore this power of jurisdiction is conveyed by the due Form of Orders,
from whence it unavoidably follows that every one who has had the due Form of
Orders, has had this Power conveyed to him, and what power he has, he must
enjoy till it be taken away.


R. P. But T. G. says, That Excommunication by the Apostles sentence does it,
Gal. 1.8.


P. D. This is indeed a piece of new doctrine, and a fruit of T. G.'s
Mother-wit, and which I dare say, he received neither from Schoolmen nor
Fathers. For it involves such mischievous consequences in it as really
overthrow all Authority in the Church. For by this supposition, in case any
Bishop falls into Heresy or Idolatry, he is ipso facto excommunicated by St.
Paul 's sentence, and consequently has no Authority to exercise the power of
Orders, and so all who derive their power from him have no lawful Authority, or
Jurisdiction. I do wonder in all this time T. G. did no better reflect upon
this assertion and the consequences of it, and rather to thank Dr. St. that he
took no more notice of it, than upbraid him with intolerable error and mistake.
I will put a plain case to you to show you the ill consequence of this
assertion to the Church of Rome it self. Dr. St. has proved by undeniable
evidence, that the Arians were looked on and condemned as Idolaters by the
Primitive Church: and T. G. does not deny it; and what now if we find an Arian
among the Bishops of Rome, and from whom the succession is derived? He must
stand excommunicated by virtue of the Apostles sentence, and therefore has no
Authority to give Orders, and so all the Authority in the Church of Rome is
lost. The case I mean is that of Liberius; who showed himself as much an Arian,
as any of the Arian Bishops did, for he subscribed their confession of Faith,
and joined in communion with them. S. Hier. de Script. Eccles. in Fortunat. in
Chronico. Libel. precum, p. 4.
St. Hierom says more than once, That he subscribed to Heresy; the Pontifical
Book says, he communicated with Heretics; Marcellinus and Faustinus say, That
he renounced the faith by his Subscription; yea more than this, Hilary
denounced an Anathema against him and all that joined with him: Baron. A D.
357. n. 46.
and Baronius confesses he did communicate with the Arians, which is suffient
to our purpose. Then comes T. G. upon him, with St. Paul 's sentence of
excommunication; and so he loses all Authority of exercising the power of
Orders, and consequently that Authority which is challenged in the Church of
Rome being derived from him is all lost. And now judge who subverts the
foundation of Ecclesiastical Authority most; T. G. or Dr. St.: yet it falls out
unhappily, that Pet. Damiani mentions these very Ordinations of Liberius the
Heretic (so he calls him) to show how the Church did allow Ordinations made by
Heretics. Pet. Dam. Gom. opuse, 7. c. 16.
But this is not all; for by all that I can find, if this principle of T. G. be
allowed, no man can be sure there is any lawful Ecclesiastical Authority left
in the world. For who can tell what secret Idolaters or Heretics there might
be among those Bishops from whom that Authority is derived? This we are sure
of, that the Arian Bishops possessed most of the Eastern Churches and made
Ordinations there: Libel. prec. p. 26. Subscribentes in illa fide Arianorum,
quam integro and libero judicio damnaverant. Advertit Sapientia vestra,
Ariminensem Synodum, piissime coeptam, sed impiissime terminatam.
and the Western Bishops in the Council of Ariminum did certainly comply with
them: as is now plain from Marcellinus and Faustinus, whose Book was published
by Sirmondus at Paris; where Sulpitius Severus says, more than four hundred
Western Bishops were present; who were all excommunicated by T. G.'s principle;
and what now becomes of all Ecclesiastical Authority? But Dr. St. has showed
that the Christian Church was wiser, than to proceed upon T. G.'s principle,
proving from Authentic Testimonies of Antiquity, that the Arian Ordinations
were allowed by the Church, although the Arians were condemned for Idolaters.


R. P. Dial. p. 156, 157.
Yes, T. G. says, That Dr. St. was resolved to go on in the same track still,
and to prove that the Act it self of Ordination is not invalid in case of the
Idolatry of the Givers, which was never denied by his Adversary.


P. D. How is it possible to satisfy men who are resolved to cavil? Does not
Dr. St. by that instance of the Arian Bishops evidently prove, that the
Authority of giving Orders was allowed by the Christian Church at that time,
and that which he calls their jurisdiction as well as the power of Orders?
because nothing more was required from the Arian Bishops but renouncing
Arianism and subscribing the Nicene Creed; and thus for all that I can see by
T. G.'s principle, they still remained under St. Paul's excommunication, and so
Ecclesiastical Authority is all gone with them.


R. P. But do not you think that Dr. St. had some secret design in all this
really to subvert the Authority of the Church of England? For T.G. lays
together several notable things to that purpose to make it appear that he
purposely declined Dial. p. 161.
defending the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Church of England: I assure you
it is a very politic Discourse, and has several deep fetches in it. First, he
begins with his Irenicum, and there he lays the Foundation, that the Government
may be changed. 2. The Book was reprinted since the Bishops were reestablished
by Law. 3. He persuades the Bishops in that Book to reduce the form of Church
Government to its primitive State and Order, by restoring Presbyteries under
them, etc. 4. When this would not do, he charges the Church of Rome with
Idolatry, and makes this the sense of the Church of England, to make her
contribute to the subversion of her own Authority. 5. When T. G. told him of
the consequence of this, he passed it by, as if he saw it not, and trifled with
his Adversary about the validity of Ordination. 6. When E. W. endeavored to
bring him to this point, he still declined it, and leaves Episcopacy to shift
for it self. And after all these T. G. thinks, he has found out the Mole that
works under ground.


P. D. A very great Discovery I assure you! and T. G. deserves a greater reward
than any common Mole-catchers do. But I never liked such Politic Informers;
for if people are more dull and quiet than they would have them, they make
plots for them to keep up their reputation and interest. They must have always
something to whisper in Great Men's Ears, and to fill their Heads with designs
which were never thought of; by which means they torment them with unreasonable
suspicions, and tyrannize over them under a pretense of kindness. Just thus
does T. G. do by the Governors of our Church: he would fain persuade them,
that there is one Dr. St. who has undertaken to defend the Church, but does
carry on a very secret and subtle design to ruin and destroy it. If they say,
they do not believe it; he seems to pity them for their incredulity and
weakness, and endeavors to convince them, by a long train of his own
inventions; and if they be so easy to hearken to it, and to regard his
insinuations, then he flatters and applauds them as the only Friends to the
Church, when in the meantime he really laughs at them as a sort of weak men,
who can be imposed upon by any man who pretends to be a Friend, although even
in that he does them and the Church the greater mischief. I cannot believe such
kind of insinuations as these can prevail upon any one man of understanding in
our Church, against a person who has at least endeavored his utmost to defend
it. But since T. G. talks so politickly about these matters, I will convince you
by one argument of common prudence, that if Dr. St. be a man of common sense,
(much more if he be so politic and designing as T. G. represents him) all
these suggestions must be both false and foolish. For that which all designing
men aim at, is their own interest and advantage: Now can any man that has
common sense left in him, imagine that Dr. St. can aim at any greater advantage
by ruining the Church than by preserving it? Are not his circumstances more
considerable in the Church of England than ever he can hope they should be, if
it were destroyed? They who would persuade others that he carries on such a
secret design, must suppose him to be next to an Idiot, and such are not very
dangerous Politicians. But what is it then should make him act so much against
his interest? It can be nothing but folly or malice. But I do not find they
have taxed him of any malice to the Church of England, or of any occasion for
it which the Church has given him, if he were disposed to it. Why then should
any be so senseless themselves, or suppose others to be so, as to go about to
possess men with an opinion of an underground plot Dr. St. is carrying on, not
only to blow up the Thames, but the rising Fabric of St. Paul's too: i. e. to
ruin and destroy himself? If he be a Fool, he is not to be feared; if he be
not, he is not to be mistrusted.


R.P. But what say you to T. G.'s proofs? Do you observe the several Molehills
which he has cast up; and is not that a sign he works un-derground? What say
you to his Irenicum in the first place?


P. D. I will tell you freely; I believe there are many things in it, which if
Dr. St. were to write now, he would not have said; For there are some things
which show his youth, and want of due consideration: others which he yielded
too far in hopes of gaining the dissenting Parties to the Church of England;
but upon the whole matter I am fully satisfied the Book was written with a
design to serve the Church of England: and the design of it, I take to be this;
that among us there was no necessity of entering upon nice and subtle disputes
about a strict jus divinum of Episcopacy, such as makes all other Forms of
Government unlawful; but it was sufficient for us, if it were proved to be the
most ancient and agreeable to Apostolical practice, and most accommodate to our
Laws and Civil Government; and there could be no pretense against submitting to
it, but the demonstrating its unlawfulness, which he knew was impossible to be
done. And for what proposals he makes about tempering Episcopacy, they were no
other than what King Charles 1. and Mr. Thorndike had made before him; and does
T. G. think they designed to ruin the Church of England? And as long as he
declared this to be the design of his Book both at the beginning and conclusion
of it, suppose he were mistaken in the means he took, must such a man be
presently condemned as one that aimed at the ruin and destruction of the
Church?


R. P. But T. G. says, he tendered it to consideration after Episcopacy was
resetled by Law.


P. D. That is as true as others of his suggestions. The Book was Printed while
things were unsettled, and was intended to remove the violent prejudices of the
dissenting party against Episcopal Government; and I have heard, did
considerable service that way, at least in a Neighbor Kingdom, and it happened
to be reprinted afterward, with the same Title it had before. But what then?
Do not Booksellers look on Books as their own, and do what they please with
them, without the Authors consent or approbation? Has he ever Preached or
Written any Doctrine since, contrary to the sense of the Church of England?
Has he made any party or faction to the disturbance of the Peace of the
Church? Has he not conformed to its Rules, observed its Offices, obeyed his
Superiors, and been ready to defend its Cause against Adversaries of all
sorts? And can malice it self after all this fasten such a calumny upon him,
that he is a secret enemy to the Church of England, and designs to ruin and
destroy it? I remember a poor Englishman in Amboyna being cruelly tormented by
the Dutch; and finding nothing he could say would persuade his Tormentors to
release him (and he said any thing that he thought would prevail with them) at
last he prayed God, that he might tell them Probable Lies. I would advise T. G.
the next time he goes a Mole-catching, to find out Probable Plots, otherwise he
will lose all the reputation of an Informer and Discoverer. But I can hardly
tell, whether his Plot or his Proofs were the worse; for as there appears no
likelihood in the Plot, so there is no evidence in the Proofs. There being
nothing pretended since the Irenicum, but this charge of Idolatry, and that
has been sufficiently cleared already, by showing that it does not subvert the
Authority of the Church of England.


R. P. Let us now, if you please, proceed to the other dangerous consequences
of this charge, as they are mustered up by T. G.: One is, That it overthrows
the Article of the Holy Catholic Church.


P. D. That is something indeed; what! does it take away an Article of the
Creed? Nay then, it is time to look about us. But how I pray?


R. P. I will tell you how. If the Church has been guilty of Idolatry, (1.)
Then she has required and enjoined Idolatry, Dial. p. 66, 67.
for many hundreds of years parallel to the Heathens. (2.) Then Mahomet had
more wisdom and power to carry on his design than the Son of God, for his
followers have been preserved from it by the grounds he laid above a thousand
years. (3.) Then our Forefathers had better been converted to Judaism or
Turcism than to Christianity as they were.


P. D. I deny every one of these consequences. For our present dispute is only
about the Church of Romes being guilty of Idolatry; and from thence (1.) it
does not follow, that the whole Christian Church must require Idolatry, if that
does; unless T. G. had proved, that all other Churches are equally involved in
the same guilt, which he never attempted. (2.) It does not follow that Mahomet
was wiser than Christ; for if you compare the grounds laid for Divine Worship
by Christ and Mahomet; I say that Christ did show infinitely more Wisdom in
them, than so vile an Impostor; and it is a shame for any Christian to suggest
the contrary: but if T. G. speaks of Power to carry on his design; then it must
suppose that Mahomets Power has preserved the Mahumetan Religion so long free
from Idolatry, although Christ has not; which must imply the greatness of
Mahomets Power in Heaven; and so it borders upon blasphemy. (3.) It does not
follow that our Forefathers had better been converted to Judaism or Turcism
than to Christianity. For they had incomparably greater advantages toward
their salvation than either Turks or Pagans; and such circumstances might
accompany their practice of Idolatry, as might make it not to hinder their
salvation. But I shall give you a full answer to this in the words of Bishop
Sanderson, (who is another competent witness, if any more were needful, that
Dr. St. does not in the charge of Idolatry contradict the sense of the Church
of England.) We have much reason to conceive good hope of the salvation of many
of our Forefathers: who, B. Sanderson Genesis 20.6. n. 17.
led away with the common superstitions of those blind times, might yet by
those general truths, which by the mercy of God were preserved among the
foulest over-spreadings of Popery, agreeable to the Word of God (though clogged
with an addition of many superstitions and Antichristian Inventions withal) be
brought to true faith in the Son of God; unfeigned Repentance from dead Works;
and a sincere desire and endeavor of new and holy Obedience. This was the
Religion that brought them to Heaven, even Faith and Repentance, and Obedience.
This is the true, and the Old and the Catholic Religion: and this is our
Religion, in which we hope to find salvation; and if ever any of you that
miscall your selves Catholics come to Heaven, it is this Religion must carry
you thither. If together with this true Religion of Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience, they embraced also your additions, as their blind Guides then led
them; prayed to our Lady, kneeled to an Image, crept to a Cross, flocked to a
Mass as you now do: these were their spots and their blemishes; these were
their hay and stubble; these were their errors, and their Ignorances. And I
doubt not, but as S. Paul for his blasphemies and persecutions, so they
obtained mercy for these sins, because they did them ignorantly in misbelief.
And upon the same ground we have cause also to hope charitably of many thousand
poor souls in Italy, Spain and other parts of the Christian world at this day,
that by the same blessed means they may attain mercy and salvation in the end,
although in the mean time through ignorance they defile themselves with much
foul Idolatry, and many gross superstitions.

Obj. But the Ignorance which excuses from sin, is Ignorantia facti, according
to that has been already declared; but theirs was Ignorantia juris, which
excuses not. And besides, as they lived in the practice of that Worship which
we call Idolatry, so they dyed in the same without repentance; and so their
case is not the same with S. Paul's, who saw those sins and sorrowed for them,
and forsook them; but how can Idolaters, living and dying so without
repentance, be saved?

Ans. It is answered, that Ignorance in point of Fact so conditioned as has
been showed does so excuse a toto; that an Action proceeding thence, though it
have a material inconformity with the Law of God, is yet not formally a sin.
But I do not so excuse the Idolatry of our Forefathers, as if it were not in
it self a sin, and that (without repentance) damnable. But yet their Ignorance
being such as it was; nourished by Education, Custom, Tradition, the Tyranny of
their Leaders, the fashion of the Times, not without show also of Piety and
Devotion; and themselves, withal, having such slender means of better
knowledge; though it cannot wholly excuse them from sin without repentance
damnable, yet it much lesseneth and qualifieth the sinfulness of their
Idolatry; arguing that their continuance therein was more from other
prejudices, than from a wilful contempt of Gods Holy Word and Will. And as for
their Repentance, it is as certain, that as many of them as are saved did
repent of their Idolatries, as it is certain no Idolater nor other sinner can
be saved without repentance. But then there is a double difference to be
observed between repentance for Ignorances, and known sins; the one must be
particular, the other general; the one cannot be sincere without forsaking, the
other may; which he inlarges upon, and then concludes, Some of our Forefathers
then, might not only live in Popish Idolatry, but even dye in an Idolatrous
Act, breathing out their last with their lips at a Crucifix and an Ave Mary in
their thoughts: and yet have truly repented, (though but in the General, and
the crowd of their unknown sins) even of those very sins; and have at the same
instant true Faith in Jesus Christ, and other Graces accompanying salvation.


R. P. But has not Christ promised that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against his Church?


P. D. This Dr. St. has already answered thus. Against what Church? The whole
Christian Church? whoever said they could, or how does that follow? The Church
of Constantinople, or the Church of Jerusalem? Have not the Gates of the Turk
been too strong for them? The Church of Rome? The Gates of Hell do certainly
prevail against that, if it does unchurch all other Churches that are not of
its communion. And why may not Idolatry prevail where Luciferian Pride, and
Hellish Cruelty, and desperate Wickedness have long since prevailed? Has
Christ made promises to secure that Church from Error, which has been
overrun with all sorts of Wickedness by the confession of her own members and
friends?


R. P. But T. G. says, Dial. p. 68, 69.
that Dr. St. ought to have assigned us some Church distinct in all Ages, from
all Heretical and Idolatrous Congregations, which Christ has preserved always
from Heresy and Idolatry?


P. D. Why so? Unless he had first yielded, that Christ had promised to
preserve such a distinct Congregation of Christians, which he never did. But he
showed the feebleness of that kind of arguing, from particulars to generals; as
though all the promises made to the Church must fail, if the Church of Rome be
guilty of Idolatry.


R. P. But I will prove that Dr. St. ought to assign such a distinct Church,
because, he says, that a Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound to join
in some Church or Congregation of Christians, therefore there must be such a
Church at all times to join with.


P. D. I answer, (1.) Dr. St.'s answer does imply no more than this, that a
Christian is bound to join with other Christians in the Acts of Gods public
Worship; but withal he adds immediately, that he is bound to choose the
communion of the purest Church; which does suppose a competition between two
Churches, where a person may embrace the Communion of either, as the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome. So that where there are distinct Communions,
the best is to be chosen. (2.) Supposing no Church to be so pure that a man's
Conscience can be fully satisfied in all the practices of it, yet he may
lawfully hold Communion with that Church he is baptized in, till the unlawful
practices become the condition of his Communion. As here in England, the
conditions of Communion are different as to Clergymen and Laymen; if the
latter be satisfied in what concerns them, they have no reason to reject
Communion themselves, for what concerns others. (3.) Where any Church does
require Idolatrous Acts as conditions of Communion, that Church is the Cause of
a separation made for a distinct Communion. So that there is no necessity of
assigning a distinct Church in all Ages free from heresy and Idolatry; since
men may Communicate with a corrupt Church, so they do not Communicate in their
corruptions; and when they come to that height to require this, they make
themselves the Causes of the Separation which is made on the account of
Heresy, or Idolatry.


R. P. Still that promise sticks with me, that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church: and are not Heresy and Idolatry the two Posts of
those Gates?


P. D. If you turn over that promise never so much, you will prove no more from
it, than the continuance of a Christian Church in the World, with a capacity of
salvation to the members of it. And this we do not deny: but it does not prove
that any particular Church shall be preserved in all Ages free from Heresy and
Idolatry. For whatever may be consistent with the salvation of the members of a
Church, may be consistent with the Gates of Hell not prevailing against it; but
Heresy and Idolatry may be consistent with the salvation of the members of a
Church. Because there are so many cases assigned by Divines, wherein sins of
Ignorance and Error, are consistent with salvation. I say then, that Christ's
Promises do prove a possibility of salvation in all Ages of the Christian
Church; but they do not prove the indefectibility of any distinct Church.


R. P. But why does Dr. St. say, the Gates of Hell have prevailed against the
Church of Rome, Dial. p. 70.
when himself acknowledges it to be a true Church, as holding all the essential
points of faith?


P. D. As though a man could be damned for nothing, but for denying the
Articles of his Creed! It is in respect of Pride, Cruelty, and all sorts of
Wickedness, as well as Idolatry, that he says, the Gates of Hell have
prevailed against it.


R. P. Well! But T. G. for all that proves, that all Christians are bound by
virtue of their Christianity to join in communion with the Church of Rome.
Dial. p. 73.



P. D. Does he so? It is a great undertaking, and becoming T. G. But how?


R. P. First, There was in the world before Luther a distinct Church, whose
communion was necessary to salvation, but this was not the Protestant, for that
came in after Luther, therefore it was the Roman.


P. D. This is very subtle reasoning, yet it is possible we may find out
something like it. There was in the World before Julius Caesar some Civil
Society, in which it was necessary for a man to live for his own preservation;
but this was not the Roman Empire, for that rose up after him; therefore it was
the Roman Commonwealth. But does not this imply, that there was no other Civil
Society in the world, wherein a man could preserve himself, but the Roman
Commonwealth? But I will put the case a little farther home; after Britain was
made a Province, it became a Member of the Roman Empire, and depended so much
upon the strength and Arms of Rome, that it was not able to defend it self; it
being sore distressed by enemies, and in danger of Ruin, sends to Rome for
help; there it is denied, and the Britains forced to look out for help
elsewhere. Now after T. G.'s way of reasoning the Britains must return to the
Romans, because once they had been members of the Roman Empire. The case is
alike in the Church; the time was when the Western Church was united under one
Head, but by degrees this Head grew too heavy, and laid too great a load on the
members, requiring very hard and unreasonable conditions from them; upon this,
some of the members seek for relief, this is denied them, they take care of
their own safety, and do what is necessary to preserve themselves. The Head and
some corrupt members conspiring, denounce excommunication, if they do not
presently yield and submit. These parts stand upon their own rights and ancient
privileges; that it was not an Union of submission but association originally
between several National Churches: and therefore the Church of Rome assuming so
much more to it self, than did belong to it, and dealing so tyrannically; upon
just complaints our Church had Reason to assert her own Freedom, and to reform
the abuses which had crept either into her doctrine or practice. And that this
was lawful proceeding, it offered to justify by Scripture and Reason and the
Rules of the Primitive Church. Now the question of Communion, as it was stated
between T. G. and Dr. St. comes to this, whether any person being baptized in
this Church, ought in order to his salvation to forsake the communion of it,
for that of the Church of Rome? And this being the true state of it, I pray,
where lies the force of the argument? Dr. St. yields communion with some Church
to be necessary: and what follows, the communion of the Church of England is so
to one baptized in it; why must any such leave it for that of the Church of
Rome? Yes, says T. G., there was a distinct Church before Luther, whose
communion was necessary to salvation; and what then? what have we to do with
Luther? we are speaking of the present Church of England, which was reformed by
it self, and not by Luther. Why is it necessary to leave this Church, in which
persons are baptized, and not in that before Luther? Here lies the main hinge
of the Controversy; to which T. G. ought to speak, and not to run to a Church
before Luther. The Church of England was the Church of England before the
Reformation as well as since; but it has now reformed it self, being an entire
body within it self, having Bishops to govern it, Priests and Deacons to
administer Sacraments, to preach the Word of God, to officiate in the public
Liturgy, in which all the Ancient Creeds are read and owned; the question now
is, whether salvation cannot be had in the communion of this Church? or all
persons are bound to return to the Church of Rome? This is the point, if T. G.
has any more to say to it.


R. P. T. G. urges farther, Nothing can render the communion of the Roman
Church not necessary to salvation, Dial. p. 74.
but either Heresy or Schism; not Heresy, because she holds all the essential
articles of Christian Faith; not Schism, because then Dr. St. must assign some
other distinct Church (then at least in being) from whose Unity she departed.


P. D. A right Doway argument! one would take T. G. for a young Missioner by
it; it is so exactly cut in their Form. But it proceeds upon such false
suppositions as these. (1.) That Communion with the Roman Church as such, i. e.
as a Body united under such a Head, was necessary to salvation, which we
utterly deny; and it can never be proved, but by showing, that Christ appointed
the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the Church; which is an argument, I do not
find that now adays, You are willing to enter upon; being so threadbare and
baffled a Topic. (2.) That no Doctrines but such as are contrary to the
Articles of the Creed, can be any reason to hold off from the Communion of a
Church; but we think, the requiring doubtful things for certain, false for
true, new for old, absurd for reasonable are ground enough for us not to
embrace the Communion of a Church, unless it may be had on better terms than
these. (3.) That no Church can be guilty of Schism, unless we can name some
distinct Church from whose Unity it separated; whereas we have often proved,
that imposing unreasonable conditions of Communion, makes the Church so
imposing guilty of the Schism. Surely T. G.'s stock is almost spent, when he
plays the same game so often over. These are not such terrible arguments to be
produced afresh, as if they had never been heard of; when there is not a
Missioner that comes, but has them at his fingers end.


R. P. But the Roman Church was once the true Church, Dial. p. 78.
Romans 1. and the Christian world of all Ages, believed it to be the only true
Church of Christ; but it cannot be proved not to be the true one, by an
evidence equal to that which once proved it true; therefore we are bound to be
of the communion of that Church.


P. D. O the virtue of sodden Coleworts! How often are they produced without
shame! To be short Sir, (1.) We deny that the Church of which the Pope is Head,
was ever commended by St. Paul; or in any one Age of the Christian World, was
owned by it to be the only true Church: which is very much short of the whole
Christian World of all Ages. (2.) Since the evidence is so notoriously faulty
about proving the Roman Church to be the only true Church; a small degree of
evidence as to its corruptions may exceed it, and consequently be sufficient to
keep us from returning to its communion. But what does T. G. mean by repeating
such stuff as this? Which I dare say Dr. St. only passed by, on account of the
slightness and commonness of it; they being arguments every day brought, and
every day answered. And if he had a mind to see Dr. St.'s mind about them, he
might have seen it at large in his Defense of Archhishop Laud; And do you think
it fair for him, every Book he writes, to produce afresh every argument there,
which has received no Answer?


R. P. I perceive you begin to be out of patience.


P. D. Not, I assure you, when I meet with any thing that deserves it.


R. P. Here comes our Fanatic Friend to refresh you a little. What is the
matter man? why so sad? have you met with an ill bargain at the Auction?


F. C. No, no. I got a Book last night, has taken me up till this time; and
truly, I have read something in it which fits much upon my Spirit.


R. P. What is it? if we may ask you.


F. C. It is no comfort either to you, or me.


R. P. If I be concerned, I pray let me know.


F. C. You know last night we heard them at Rutherford and Gillespee; I came in
time enough for Gillespee's Miscellany Questions; a rare Book, I promise you.
And by a particular favor I carried it home with me, and looking upon the
Contents, I found the Seasonable Case, viz. About Associations and
Confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, or Heretics: and he proves them to be
so absolutely unlawful from Scripture, and many sound Orthodox Divines, that
for my part he has fully convinced and settled me, and I thought it my duty to
come and to tell you so.


R. P. Well, we will let alone that discourse at present, we are at our old
trade again: and I was just coming to a seasonable question for you, viz.
Whether you have not as much reason to separate from the Church of England, as
the Church of England had from the Church of Rome?


F. C. Who doubts of that?


P. D. I do Sir; nay more, I absolutely deny it.


F. C. What matter is it, what you say or deny? You will do either for a good
preferment. Have not you assented and consented to all that is in the Book of
Common Prayer, and what will you stick at after?


P. D. Consider Sir, what it is to judge rash judgment; I wonder men that
pretend to Conscience, and seem so nice and scrupulous in some things, can
allow thmselves in the practice of so dangerous a sin. If you have a mind to
debate this point before us, without clamor and impertinency, I am for you.


F. C. You would fain draw me in to dispute again, would you? No such matter,
there is your man, he will manage our Cause for us against you of the Church of
England, I warrant you.


R. P. I am provided for it: For T. G. desires of Dr. St. for the sake of the
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Dial. p. 78.
and other separated Congregations, to know why the believing all the ancient
Creeds, and leading a good life may not be sufficient to Salvation, unless one
be of the Communion of the Church of England?


P. D. A very doughty question! As though we were like you, and immediately
damned all persons, who are not of the Communion of our Church. We say, their
separation from us is very unjust and unreasonable; and that there is no color
for making their case equal with ours, as to the separation from the Church of
Rome.


R. P. I will tell you of a man who makes the case parallel, it is one Dr. St.
in his Irenicum: and T. G. produces many pages out of him to that purpose.
Dial. p. 79.



P. D. To save you the trouble of repeating them, I have read them over, and do
think these Answers may serve for his vindication. (1.) That in that very place
he makes separation from a Church retaining purity of Doctrine, on the account
of some corrupt practices to be unlawful; and afterward in case men be
unsatisfied as to some conditions of communion, Ire^. p. 117. P. 123.
he denies it to be lawful to erect New Churches; because a mere requiring
conformity in some suspected rites, does not make a Church otherwise sound to
be no true Church: or such a Church from which it is lawful to make a total
separation, which is then done, when men enter into a new and distinct Society
for worship, under distinct and peculiar Officers, governing by Laws and Church
Rules different from those of the Church they separate from. And now, let your
Fanatic Friend judge whether this man, even in the days of writing his
Irenicum, did justify the practices of the separated Congregations; which he
speaks expressly against?


F. C. No truly. We are all now for separated Congregations, and know better
what we have to do, than our Forefathers did. Alas! what comfort is there in
bare Nonconformity? For our people would not endure us, if we did not proceed
to separation. He that speaks against separation ruins us and our Cause.


P. D. So far then we have cleared Dr. St. from patronizing the Cause of the
separated Congregations. (2.) He says, that as to things left undetermined by
the Law of God in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches, Iren.
p. 124.
and in matters of Order, Decency and Government, every one notwithstanding
what his private judgment may be of them, is bound to submit to the
determination of the lawful Governors of the Church. Can any thing be said
plainer for Conformity, than this is by the Author of the Irenicum?


R. P. But how then come in those words produced by T. G.?


P. D. I will tell you; he supposes that some scrupulous and conscientious men
after all endeavors used to satisfy themselves, may remain unsatisfied as to
the Lawfulness of some imposed Rites, but dare not proceed to positive
separation from the Church, but are willing to comply in all other things save
in those Rites which they still scruple; and concerning these he puts the
Question, whether such bare-nonconformity do involve such men in the guilt of
Schism? And this I confess he resolves negatively, and so brings in that long
passage T. G. produces out of him. I now appeal to your self, whether T. G.
has dealt fairly with Dr. St. in two things, (1.) In not distinguishing the
case of separation, from that of bare nonconformity, only in some suspected
Rites; and in producing these words to justify the separated Congregations?
(2.) In taking his judgment in this matter rather from his Irenicum written so
long since, than from his late Writings, wherein he has purposely considered
the Difference of the Case of those who separate from the Church of England and
of our separation from the Church of Rome.


R. P. But has he done this indeed? and did T. G. know it?


P. D. Yes very well. Answer to several Treat. part 1. from p. 1^0, to 1^6.
For it is in that very Book, the Preface whereof T. G. pretends to answer in
these Dialogues: and he does not speak of it by the by, but discourses largely
about it. Is this fair dealing? But the Irenicum served better for his purpose
as he thought, and yet he has foully misrepresented that too.


R. P. But yet Dr. St. must not think to escape so: for he has searched
another Book of his, called his Rational Account, and there he finds a passage
he thinks in favor to Dissenters from the Church of England; Dial. p. 87.
and which undermines the Church of England.


P. D. Therefore the Church of Rome is not guilty of Idolatry.


R. P. Have a little patience; we shall come to that in time. At present I pray
clear this matter, if you can.


P. D. To what purpose is all this raking, and scraping, and searching, and
quoting of passages not at all to the point of Idolatry?


R. P. What! would you have a man do nothing to fill up a Book, and make it
carry something of the Port of an Answer; especially to a thick Book of between
800 and 900 pages?


P. D. If this be your design, go on: but I will make my answers as short as I
can; for methinks T. G. seems to have lost that spirit and briskness he had
before; for then he talked like a man that had a mind to keep close to the
point; but now he flags and draws heavily on: For he repeats what he had said
before for some pages, and then quotes out of Dr. St.'s other Books for several
pages more, and at last it comes to no more than this, Dr. St. does in some
places of his Writings seem to favor the Dissenters. I am quite tired with
this impertinency: yet I would fain see an end of these things, that we might
come close to the business of Idolatry which I long to be at.


R. P. Your stomach is too sharp set; we must blunt it a little before you fall
to.


P. D. You take the course to do it, with all this impertinency; but what is it
you have to say?


R. P. To please you I will bring this charge as near to the point of Idolatry
as I can; the substance of it is this, Dr. St. says, the Church of England
does not look on her Articles as Articles of Faith, Dial. p. 84, etc.
but as inferior Truths; from thence T. G. infers, (1.) The Church of Rome
does not err against any Articles of Faith. (2.) Dr. St. does not believe the
thirty nine Articles to be Articles of Faith. (3.) Then this charge of Idolatry
is vain and groundless, because Idolatry is an error against a Fundamental
point of Faith.


P. D. Here is not one word new in all this long charge, but a tedious
repetition of what T. G. had said before. It consists of two points. 1. The
charge upon Dr. St. for undermining the Church of England. 2. The
unreasonableness of the charge of Idolatry upon his own supposition. Because T.
G. seems to think there is something in this business which touched Dr. St. to
the quick, and therefore he declined giving any answer to the First Part of it,
I will undertake to do it for him. Dr. St. does indeed say that the Church of
England does not make her Articles Articles of Faith, as the Church of Rome
does the Articles of Pope Pius the fourth his Creed. And did ever any Divine of
the Church of England say otherwise? It is true the Church of Rome from her
insolent pretense of Infallibility, does make all things proposed by the Church
of equal necessity to Salvation; because the ground of Faith is the Churches
Authority in proposing things to be believed. But does the Church of England
challenge any such Infallibility to her self? No. She utterly disowns it, in
her very Articles; therefore she must leave matters of Faith, as she found
them; i. e. she receives all the Creeds into her Articles and Offices, but
makes no additions to them of her own; and therefore Dr. St. did with great
reason say, that the Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, but such as
have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian world and of all
Ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self: from whence he does
justly magnify the moderation of this Church in comparison with the Church of
Rome.


R. P. But T. G. says, That he has degraded the Articles of the Church of
England from being Articles of Faith, into a lower Class of inferior Truths.


P. D. I perceive plainly T. G. does not know what an Article of Faith means
according to the sense of the Church of England. He looks on all propositions
made by the Church as necessary Articles of Faith, which is the Roman sense,
and founded on the doctrine of Infallibility; but where the Churches
Infallibility is rejected, Articles of Faith are such as have been thought
necessary to Salvation by the consent of the Christian world, which consent is
seen in the Ancient Creeds. And whatever doctrine is not contained therein
though it be received as Truth, and agreeable to the Word of God, yet is not
accounted an Article of Faith: i. e. not immediately necessary to Salvation as
a point of Faith, But because of the dissentions of the Christian world in
matters of Religion, a particular Church may for the preservation of her own
peace declare her sense as to the Truth and Falsehood of some controverted
points of Religion, and require from all persons who are entrusted in the
Offices of that Church a subscription to those Articles, which does imply that
they agree with the sense of that Church about them.


R. P. But Dr. St. says from Archbishop Bramhall, that the Church does not
oblige any man to believe them, but only not to contradict them, and upon this
T. G. triumphs over Dr. St. as undermining the Doctrine and Government of the
Church of England.


P. D. Why not over Archbishop Bramhall, whose words Dr. St. cites? And was he
a favourer of Dissenters, and an underminer of the Church of England? Yet Dr.
St. himself in that place owns a subscription to them as necessary; and what
does subscription imply less than agreeing with the sense of the Church? So
that he says more than Archbishop Bramhall does. And I do not see how his
words can pass, but with this construction, that when he says, we do not
oblige any man to believe them, he means as Articles of Faith, of which he
speaks just before. But I do freely yield that the Church of England does
require assent to the truth of those propositions which are contained in the
thirty nine Articles: and so does Dr. St. when he says, the Church requires
subscription to them as inferior Truths, i. e. owning them to be true
propositions, though not as Articles of Faith, but Articles of Religion, as our
Church calls them.


R. P. If they are but inferior Truths, says T. G. was it worth the while to
rend asunder the Peace of Christendom for them? Is not this a very reasonable
account, as I. S. calls it, of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, and a
rare way of justifying her from the guilt of Schism?


P. D. T. G. mistakes the matter. It was not our imposing negative points on
others; but the Church of Romes imposing false and absurd doctrines for
necessary Articles of Faith, which did break the Peace of Christendom. We could
have no communion with the Church of Rome unless we owned her Supremacy, her
Canon of Scripture, her Rule of Faith, or the equality of Tradition and
Scripture, her doctrines of Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images,
Transubstantiation, etc. and we were required not only to own them as true,
which we know to be false; but as necessary to Salvation, which we look on as
great hindrances to it. What was to be done in this case? Communion could not
be held on other terms, than declaring false opinions to be true, and dangerous
Doctrines to be necessary to Salvation. On such terms as these we must renounce
our Christianity, to declare that we believed falsehoods for truths, and not
barely as truths, but as necessary Articles of Faith. Therefore what Schism
there was, the Church of Rome must thank her self for. And when this breach
happened, our Church thought it necessary to express her sense of these
Doctrines, that they were so far from being Articles of Faith, that they were
false and erroneous, having no foundation either in Scripture or Antiquity: and
required a subscription to this declaration, from such as are admitted to teach
and instruct others. How could our Church do less than she did in this matter,
if she would declare her sense to the World, or take care of her own security?
And is this making Negative Articles of Faith; about which T. G. and E. W. and
others, have made such senseless clamours? when we only declare those things
they would impose upon us to be so far from being Articles of Faith, that they
are erroneous Doctrines, and therefore are rejected by us. And this I take to
be a Reasonable Account of the Potestant Religion; which is more than I. S.
has given to those of his own Church of his Demonstrations.


R. P. But since Dr. St. grants the Church of Rome to hold all the essential
points of Faith, how can he charge her with Idolatry, since Idolatry is an
Error against the most Fundamental point of Faith? I pray answer to this, for
this comes home to the business.


P. D. I am glad to see you but coming that way. To this Dr. St. has already
given a full and clear answer, in his late Defense. Defense, p. 187, etc.


(1.) He says, by the Church of Romes holding all essential points of Faith no
more is meant than that she owns and receives all the Ancient Creeds.

(2.) T. G. grants, that Idolatry is giving the Worship due to God to a
Creature; If therefore a Church holding the essential points of faith may give
the Worship due to God to a Creature, then there is no contradiction between
saying the Church of Rome holds all the essential points of faith, and yet
charging it with Idolatry. Because Idolatry is a practical Error, and
therefore may be consistent with holding all the doctrinal points of Faith; no
more being necessary to it, as Dr. St. proves, than entertaining a false notion
of Divine Worship, by which means it may really give Gods worship to a
Creature, and yet be very Orthodox in holding that Gods Worship ought not to be
given to a Creature.


R. P. T. G. was aware of this Answer, and thus he takes it off. To err, he
says, Dial. p. 92.
strictly speaking, is to teach that which is opposite to Truth; but if the
Church of Rome teaches that the Worship she gives to Saints and Images is not a
part of the Honor due to God, and yet it is; then she errs against the second
Commandment, though she judges she does not.


P. D. What is this to the purpose? the question is not whether Idolatry does
not imply a practical error against the second Commandment; but whether it be
consistent with the doctrinal points of Faith, such as are essential to the
Being of a Church? For of this sort of Errors, all the dispute was, as is
plain from Dr St.'s words, which gave occasion to this objection.


R. P. But is it not a Fundamental Error to destroy the doctrine of the second
Commandment?


P. D. If it be, The more care had they need to have who put it out of their
Books, that it may not fly in their Faces. But who ever reckoned the
Commandments among the Articles of Faith? I do not deny it to be a very
dangerous practical Error to destroy the doctrine of the second Commandment;
or rather to take away the whole force of the precept; but I say, this is none
of those essential points of Faith, which Dr. St. spoke of, and therefore this
is no answer to him.


R. P. Therefore T. G. adds, that this does not proceed upon a general Thesis,
Dial. p. 94.
whether some Idolatrous practice may not consist with owning the general
principles of Faith; but upon a particular Hypothesis, whether the Worship of
God by an Image, be not an error against the doctrine of the second
Commandment, if that be to forbid men to worship him by an Image? And therefore
if it be a Fundamental point to believe that to be Idolatry which God has
expressly forbidden in the Law under the notion of Idolatry, and that be the
worshipping of him by an Image, as Dr. St. asserts; it is clear that the Church
of Rome in telling men it is not Idolatry, errs against a Fundamental point,
and he cannot according to his principles maintain his charge of Idolatry
without a contradiction.


P. D. This is then the thing to be tried; and therefore we must judge of it by
what Dr. St. said, to which this is supposed to be a Contradiction. Did he ever
say that the Church of Rome did not err against the doctrine of the second
commandment? Nay, he has invincibly proved it has. I say invincibly, since T.
G. gives it up in these Dialogues; spending so many pages upon the repetition
of his old arguments, and passing over all that elaborate discourse of Dr. St.
about the sense of the second Commandment, on which the hinge of the
Controversy depends. If then Dr. St. does charge them with a very dangerous
and pernicious error in respect of this Commandment, that could not be the
Fundamental error he cleared the Church of Rome from, when he said, she held
all essential points of Faith, (mark that) and he explained himself purposely
to prevent such a mistake, to mean such doctrinal points of Faith as are
essential to the constitution of a Church and the true Form of Baptism; now the
question is, whether it be a contradiction for a man to say, that the Church of
Rome does hold all these essential points of faith, and yet is guilty of
Idolatry? And how after all, has T. G. proved it? It is a fundamental point,
says he, to believe that to be Idolatry which God has forbidden as Idolatry;
and so it is to believe that to be Perjury, and Theft and Adultery, which God
has forbidden under their notion. But will any man say the true notion of
Adultery is a doctrinal point of Faith? Although therefore it be granted that
the Church of Rome do err fundamentally against the second Commandment; yet
that does not prove Dr. St. guilty of a contradiction, because he spoke not of
practical errors, but of the Doctrinal and essential points of Faith. And now
I hope we have done with all these preliminaries, and may come to the point of
Idolatry it self.


R. P. Hold a little, you are still too quick; I have something more yet to say
to you before we come to it.


P. D. What is that?


R. P. I have a great deal to tell you out of Mr. Thorndikes Just Weights and
Measures, Dial. from p. 99. to p. 113.
about the Charge of Idolatry and the mischievous consequences of it.


P. D. To what end should you repeat all that? I begin to think you were not in
jest, when you said T. G. put in some things to fill up his Book. Dr. St. had
before declared the great esteem he had for Mr. Thorndikes Learning and Piety;
but in this particular, he declared, that he saw no reason to recede from the
common doctrine of the Church of England, on the account of Mr. Thorndikes
Authority, or Arguments. And I have already given you such an account of his
opinion with respect to the Church of Rome, as I hope will take off Mr.
Thorndikes Testimonies being so often alleged against us by T. G. and his
Brethren. If T. G. had not purposely declined the main matters in debate
between Dr. St. and him, he would never have stuffed out so much of his Book
with things so little material to that which ought to have been the main design
of it.


R. P. But I have somewhat more to say to you, which is, Dial. p. 116.
that you charge T. G. with declining the dispute about the sense of the second
Commandment, whereas he does speak particularly to it.


P. D. I am glad to hear it; I hope then he takes off the force of what Dr. St.
had said in his late Defense about it. For I assure you it was much expected
from him.


R. P. What would you have a man do? Dial. from p. 116. to 120. p. 121, 122. p.
127.
he produces at least four leaves of what he had said before: and then a little
after, near two leaves more: and within a few pages, above two leaves again out
of his old Book; and then tells how Dr. St. spends above an hundred pages about
the sense of the second Commandment, whereas he neither removes the
contradictions, nor answers the arguments of T. G. but criticizeth upon the
exceptions of T. G. to the several methods for finding out the sense of the
Law; but, says he, what need so much pains and labor be taken, if the Law be
express; and do not you think this enough about the second Commandment?


P. D. No truly. Nor you neither, upon any consideration. For the Dr. in his
Discourse upon the second Commandment, Defense, from p. 673. to p. 692.
(1.) has manifestly overthrown T. G.'s notion of an Idol, viz. of a figment
set up for Worship, by such clear and convincing arguments, that if T. G^ had
any thing to have said in defense of it, he would never have let it escaped
thus. (2.) From p. 692. to p. 698.
He has proved the sense he gives of the Commandment to be the same which the
Fathers gave of it. (3.) From p. 702. to p. 717.
He takes off T. G.'s instances of worshipping before the Ark and the
Cherubims; and From p. 717. to p. 720.
the Testimony of S. Austin. (4.) From p. 720. to p. 784.
He answers T. G.'s objections and clears the sense of the Law by all the means
a Law can be well understood. And is all this, do you think, answered by T.
G.'s repeating what he had said before; or blown down by a puff or two of Wit?
I do not know what T. G. thinks of it, but I do not find any understanding man
takes this for an answer, but a mere put-off. So that I may well say, Dr. St.'s
proofs are invincible, when T. G. so shamefully retreats out of the Field, and
sculks under some hedges and thorns which he had planted before, for a shelter
in time of need.


R. P. But why did not Dr. St. answer punctually to all that T. G. said?


P. D. Because he did not think it material, if the main things were proved.


R. P. Bu^ T. G. will think them unanswerable, till he receive satisfaction
concerning them.


P. D. That it may be is impossible to give a man, that has no mind to receive
it; but if you please, let me hear the strength of what T. G. lays such weight
upon, that he may have no such pretense for the future; and lest the third time
we meet with the same Coleworts.


R. P. Dial. p. 116, 117.
Does not Dr. St. make express Scripture his most certain rule of Faith? Does
not he on the other side deny any thing to be an Article of Faith, which is not
acknowledged to be such by Rome it self. Then if God has expressly forbidden
the worship of himself by an Image, it is an Article of Faith that he ought not
to be worshipped by an Image; and since Rome does not acknowledge it, it is not
an Article of Faith. Therefore T. G. calls upon the Dr. to speak out. Is it, or
is it not an Article of Faith? But T. G. says, he has found out the Mystery
of the business (for he can find out Mysteries, I assure you, as well as
discover plots, and catch Moles) to gratify the Non-conformists, the Articles
of the Church of England must pass only for inferior truths; but when the
Church of Rome is to be charged with Idolatry, then they are Articles of Faith:
so that, as T. G. pleasantly says, the same proposition taken Irenically is an
inferior Truth, but taken Polemically it must be an Article of Faith, because
expressly revealed in Scripture.


P. D. Is this it which T. G. thought worth repeating at large? surely it was
for the sake of the Clinch of Irenically and Polemically, and not for any show
of difficulty in the thing. For all the Mist is easily scattered by observing a
very plain distinction of an Article of faith; which is either taken, 1. For an
essential point of faith, such as is antecedently necessary to the Being of a
Christian Church; and so the Creed is said to contain the Articles of our
Faith, and in this sense Dr. St. said the Church of Rome did hold all the
essential points of faith which we did. 2. For any doctrine plainly revealed in
Scripture which is our Rule of faith. And did Dr. St. ever deny that the Church
of Rome opposed some things clearly revealed in Scripture? nay, it is the
design of his Books to prove it does. And if every doctrine which can be
deduced from a plain command of Scripture, is to be looked on as an Article of
Faith, then that the Cup is to be given to those who partake of the Bread, that
Prayers are to be in a known Tongue, will become Articles of Faith, and do you
think Dr. St. either Irenically or Polemically, did ever yield that the Church
of Rome did not oppose these? If T. G. lays so much weight on such slight
things as these, I must tell you he is not the man I took him for: and I
believe it was only civility in Dr. St. to pass such things by.


R.P. But T.G. would know, what he means by expressly forbidden, Dial. p. 121.
only that it is clear to himself, expecting that others should submit to his
saying it, as the travelers did to Polus in Erasmus; or that it is clear or
manifest of it self? and that it is not so, he says, appears by the pains and
ways he takes to find it out.


P. D. This is yet a degree lower. By clearly and expressly, Dr. St. means that
which is so to an unprejudiced mind. For there is nothing so plain, but men may
cavil at it. Not the Being of God; not the certainty of our senses; not the
differences of Good and Evil; not the coming of the Messiah; not the Truth of
the Scriptures. But will T. G. say, that none of these are clear, because men
are put to pains and several ways to prove them? If therefore Dr. St. has
showed that all the evasions of the force of the second Commandment are mere
cavils, and would take off as well the force of any other Commandment, if men
thought themselves as much concerned to do it; I think he has proved the sense
of the Commandment to be clear and express against the Worship of God by an
Image. And for his Friend Polus, you know it does not look well in conversation
for a man to repeat his own Jests. But you named a third passage T. G. repeats
out of his former Book. What is that, I pray?


R. P. That concerns Dr. St.'s first way of finding out the sense of the Law;
For, he says, Dial. p. 125.
the Law does only expressly forbid bowing down to the Images themselves, as the
Heathens did, but speaks not one word of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of
worshipping God himself by them; and upon this he upbraids Dr. St. that
spending above a hundred pages about the sense of the second Commandment, he
neither endeavors to remove the contradictions, nor to answer the arguments of
T. G.


P. D. Then truly he deserved pity, and to have his Friends come in to help
him, they are such wonderful contradictions and mighty arguments. But Dr. St.
has at large proved, (1.) That the Heathens did not take the Images themselves
for Gods; Defense p. 465, etc.
in a large discourse to that purpose, and consequently this command was not
express against the Heathen Idolatry in T. G.'s sense of it. (2.) That the
Fathers did understand this Commandment to be expressly against the Worship of
God by an Image; From p. 419. to p. 431.
in another large discourse: which he concludes with those words of S. Ambrose,
Non vult se Deus in lapidibus coli, God will not be worshipped in Stones. And
is this nothing to the answering T. G.'s arguments? (3.) That the Worship of
God before the Ark and the Cherubims (the only argument of T. G.) does not
reach to the Worship of God by Images; From p. 702. to p. 717.
and this in another set discourse. (4.) That God did afterward explain his
own Law, by condemning the Worship of himself by Images; in the case of the
Golden Calf, and the Calves of Dan and Bethel, and he punctually answers T.
G.'s objections. From p. 748. to p. 783.
And after all this, Is it not great tenderness and modesty in T. G. to say,
that Dr. St. only Criticizeth upon T. G. 's exceptions, and does neither remove
the contradictions, nor answer the Arguments of T. G.? I never yet saw plainer
evidence of a forlorn Cause, than these things give. By this taste, I begin to
fear, when we come to the charge of Idolatry, we shall find very little new, or
material. However, being thus far engaged, I am resolved, God willing, to
attend you quite through his late Dialogues; and if you please at our next
meeting, we will enter upon the charge of Idolatry: and I will undertake to
make good the charge, and I shall expect from you T. G.'s answers.


R. P. I will not fail; and I pray Brother Fanatic, let us have your company,
for I have a terrible charge against the Church of England for bowing to the
Altar.


F. C. I shall be glad to hear that with all my heart.


THE Third Conference, About the Nature of Idolatry.
P. D. WE are now entering upon a weighty business, and therefore without any
preface to it, I begin. Dr. St. in his late Defense has undertaken to clear
the Nature of Idolatry, by considering two things. 1. Whether it were
consistent with the acknowledgement of one supreme God? 2. Wherein the Nature
of that Divine Worship lies, which being given to a Creature makes it Idolatry?

1. To clear the former, he considered, who those are, which by common consent
are charged with Idolatry, and from thence he supposed the best resolution of
the question might be gathered; and those were, (1.) the Ancient Heathens, (2.)
Modern Heathens, (3.) the Arrians. And concerning these he proved, that they
did all acknowledge one supreme God, and consequently the Notion of Idolatry
could not consist in the Worship of many independent Deities.

(1.) As to the Ancient Heathens. (1.) From the Testimony of Scripture. (2.)
From their own Writers in the Roman Church, of whom he names twelve
considerable ones. (3.) From the Fathers; and there he shows from a multitude
of plain Testimonies, that the state of the Controversy about Idolatry between
the Fathers and Heathens, was not about a supreme God which was acknowledged on
both sides, but whether Divine Worship were to be given to any Creatures on the
account of any supposed excellency in themselves, or relation to God? And so he
draws the History of this controversy through the several Ages of Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Clemens of Alexandria, Origin, Cyril, S. Augustine, etc. In
short, through all those who did with greatest reputation to Christianity
manage this Cause against the Heathen Idolaters.

(2.) As to modern Heathens; two ways. (1.) From the Testimony of your own
Writers concerning the Brachmans, Chinese, Tartars, Americans, Africans, Goths
and Laplanders. (2.) From the Testimony of the Congregation of Cardinals in a
remarkable case about Idolatry in China, wherein their resolution was desired.

(3.) As to the Arrians, he proves from Athanasius, Gr. Nazianzen, Nyssen,
Basil, Epiphanius, Cyril, Theodoret, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine;
that the Arrians were unanimously charged with Idolatry; although they did
acknowledge but one God, and supposed the greatest created excellencies to be
in Christ, and believed the Worship of Christ tended to the honor of the
Father.

2. As to the Nature of Divine Worship. He proceeds in this method.

1. To show what Worship is; which he distinguishes from honor, the one
relating to bare excellency, the other to Superiority and Power; which
distinction he proves from the most eminent School Divines.

2. What Divine Worship is; viz. such a subjection of our selves to God as
shows his peculiar Sovereignty over us: from whence he proceeds to manifest,
That there are some peculiar external Acts of Divine Worship, which he proves,
(1.) From the Nature and design of Religious Worship; and here he enquires into
the distinction of Civil and Religious Worship; which, he says, as other moral
actions, is to be taken from the circumstances of them: and from hence came the
institution of solemn rites for Religious Worship. And the best Divines of the
Roman Church do allow, that there ought to be some peculiar external Acts of
Divine Worship; which he likewise proves from the infinite distance between God
and his Creatures; and from the remarkable Testimonies of the Heathens to that
purpose.

(2.) From Gods appropriating some external Acts of Worship to himself; wherein
he speaks to two things:

1. What those Acts are which God has appropriated to himself; of which he
reckons up six.

1. Sacrifice. 2. Religious adoration. 3. Erection of Temples and Altars. 4.
Burning of Incense. 5. Solemn Invocation. 6. Vows.

2. How far Gods appropriating these Acts does concern us? Which he thus
resolves. 1. It is granted there must be some peculiar Acts. 2. God is the best
Judge of them. 3. What he has once appropriated cannot be made common till his
Will be declared. 4. Christ has made no alteration herein by his Law. 5. The
Apostles suppose the same notion of Idolatry to continue still. 6. The Jews did
esteem it Idolatry to use those acts of Worship toward any Creature. Where he
shows that Idolatry may be committed as many ways as Worship may become due to
God.

(3.) From the sense of the Christian Church; which has condemned those for
Idolatry who have applied these appropriate Acts of Worship to any thing
besides God.

3. How the applying the Acts of Religious Worship to a Creature makes that
Worship Idolatry? Where he explains,

1. What real honor we do allow to the Saints on the account of their
excellencies.

2. What Worship we deny to them. (1.) Inward submission of our souls in
prayer, dependence, and thanksgiving. (2.) External and solemn Acts of
Religious Worship, which are given to Saints in the Church of Rome: and he
proves from unquestionable Testimonies of Antiquity, that the Fathers did deny
to be given to them. And so he concludes that Discourse with a full and clear
explication of a Testimony of S. Augustine against Invocation of Saints.

This is a brief Abstract of the design of Dr. St.'s discourse concerning the
Nature of Idolatry; whose parts are too well considered and put together to be
blown down with a puff or two of Wit. Let me now hear how T. G. has acquitted
himself in this matter, which we shall the better judge of, by having this
Scheme before us.


R. P. I perceive you expect T. G. should have followed Dr. St.'s method, and
have answered him part by part; but he was wiser than so; for he charges him
with three things. (1.) That he makes vain, and endless, and unnecessary
discourses. (2.) That he ought to have laid down the true notion of Idolatry
from the nature of the thing, which he has not done. (3.) That he has
unfaithfully reported the words and sense of Authors. After which, he disproves
the parallel between the Heathen and Romish Idolatry.


P. D. This last, if you please, we will reserve to another Conference; for I
believe the other three, will hold us long enough. I pray begin where T. G.
does.


R. P. First, He complains much of the Bulk of the Book; and brings in a kind
of a Tailors bill of the number of pages: Dial. p. 167, 171, 172.
Imp. of T. G.'s notion of Idolatry, p. 183. It. Of the Nature of Divine
Worship, p. 164. It. Of the Controversy about Images between Christians and
Heathens, p. 140. It. Of Images in the Christian Church, p. 180. odd. It. Of
the sense of the second Commandment, p. 113. It. Of Instances, and facings and
linings, p. 96. Sum. tot. p. 877. Was not this enough to put any man out of
humor?


P. D. No doubt; when he considered he was to pay it all. And I do believe what
he says, that he was very uneasy when he read it; and like the Laconian in
Boccalini, who was condemned to read over Guicciardines War of Pisa: and
desired rather to be condemned to the Galleys. For there is nothing more
troublesome to a man than to see that he owes more than he is ever able to pay.


R. P. But T. G. shows how much of the Bill might have been cut off.


P. D. The shortest way had been to have thrown all into the Fire, as no doubt
he would have done, if it had been in his Power, and that had been the most
effectual Discharge to Dr. St. 's charge of Idolatry. But do you think, it is a
good answer to an Indictment, to say it consisted of too many lines?


R. P. T. G. says he ought to have proceeded more Mathematically.


P. D. How so?


R. P. By laying down only these four Postulata. Dial. p. 173.
1. That Idolatry may consist with the acknowledgement of one Supreme Being. 2.
That God ought to be worshipped according to his own appointment. 3. That the
Wiser Heathens pretended they did not look on their Images as Gods, but as
Symbols of that Being to which they gave divine Worship. 4. That for the four
first Centuries, there was little or no use of Images in the Temples and
Oratories of Christians. Which as far as I understand T. G. he was willing to
have granted him.


P. D. Are you sure of that? If these things be fairly granted, they will go a
great way toward the resolution of the present Question. But I pray let me
understand how far and in what sense?


R. P. For the first, that Idolatry may consist with the acknowledgement of one
supreme Being: I perceive T. G. puts this limitation to it, Dial. p. 174.
at least as Idolatry is taken by Dr. St. for the giving external Acts of
Worship, due only to God, to a Creature.


P. D. Let us then lay up this at present, that real Idolatrous Worship is
consistent with the acknowledgement of one supreme God; which may be of use to
us in this debate.


R. P. For the second, T. G. says, that it is no where denied, but is supposed
by him, Dial. p. 175.
when he says, that if God have forbidden himself to be worshipped after such
a manner, the giving him such worship will be dishonouring of him, though the
Giver intend it never so much for his honor, much more then, the giving acts
of worship appropriated to him to another.


P. D. This is very kind. For then if it appear, that God has forbidden the
Worship of himself by an Image, it follows that no intention of the person can
excuse such worship from Idolatry.


R. P. For the third, concerning the practice of the wiser Heathens, T. G.
allows the Dr. to make his best of it.


P. D. Then there may be Idolatrous worship of Images, where the Images
themselves are not made the objects of Worship; and consequently if such
worship be forbidden in the second Commandment, that cannot be understood only
of bowing down to the Images themselves.


R. P. For the fourth, he says, since the Church has a power in decreeing
Rites and Ceremonies, Dial. p. 176, etc.
it had been no prejudice to his Cause, if it had been longer, before the Use
of Images was brought into Churches.


P. D. If the Church had looked on the worship of Images as an indifferent
Rite, there had been some reason for what T. G. says; But the force of what
Dr. St. said, lay not merely in their having no Images in Churches in the
Primitive times; but in the Reasons given by the Primitive Christians against
the Worship of them. From whence he has at large proved that the Primitive
Christians did look on the Worship of Images as utterly unlawful by the Law of
God, although the Object represented did deserve Worship. And this I take to be
one of the most material Discourses in Dr. St.'s Book, to the present
Controversy, and which he lays the greatest weight upon. For he insists upon
these several particulars. (1.) P. 419. to p. 428.
That they judged such a representation of God by Images to be unsuitable to
his Nature; for which he produces the Testimonies of Clemens Alexandr., Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Origin, S. Hierom, S. Augustine and others. (2.) Defense,
p. 428, etc. p. 490, etc.
That they looked on the Worship of Images as repugnant to the Will of God; as
being contrary to the second Commandment, which did oblige Christians. (3.) P.
494, etc.
That to suppose that they looked on the worship of Images as a thing
indifferent, is to charge the Primitive Christians with great hypocrisy. (4.)
P. 497. to p. 505.
That the Christian Church continued to have the same opinion about the worship
of Images after the Pagan Idolatry was suppressed. (5.) P. 506. to p. 521.
That it was no just excuse in the sense of the Primitive Church, that they
worshipped a true object, or gave only an inferior worship to the Images, for
the sake of those represented by them. (6.) P. 503, etc.
That Ignorance and Superstition first brought in the worship of Images, which
was still condemned by the best Divines of the Church. (7.) P. 538. to p. 555.
That the Worship of Images came to be established in the Church by very
indirect means; such as Treason, calumnies, lies, and burning and suppressing
all Books against it. (8.) P. 812. to p. 840.
That when it was established by the second Council of Nice, it was vehemently
opposed by the Western Church at the Council of Francford: and that this
Council of Nice was never owned in the Western Church for a General Council
till the Reformation began.

And now I pray was it possible for T. G. to overlook all these things? or was
it fair to pretend to answer Dr. St.'s Book, wherein all these things are, and
yet to pass them over, as if they had never been written? If this be the way of
making Just Discharges, I am afraid T.G.'s credit cannot hold out long; for
this is not after the rate of five shillings in the pound: and for all that I
see, Dr. St. may take out the Statute against him. However, I shall consider
what he pretends to Discharge, and if his payment be not good in that neither,
his Word will hardly be taken for any Just Discharge more. I pray go on.


R. P. For the fifth Chapter, Of the sense of the second Commandment, T. G.
says, Dial. p. 177.
if God has there expressly prohibited the giving any Worship to himself by an
Image, as Dr. St. affirms, there needed no more than to expose the Law as in a
Table in Legislative Gothic (as it is done by him, p. 671.) with the addition
only of a Finger in the Margent to point to the Words for every one that runs
to read them.


P. D. And must this pass for an Answer to Dr. St.'s Discourse about the sense
of the second Commandment? I am really ashamed of such trifling in a matter of
so great importance. I know not whether it were the Legislative Gothic or no,
or a Finger on the Wall, but something or other about that Commandment has so
affrighted you in the Church of Rome, that you dare not let it be seen in your
Ordinary Books of Devotion. As for the cavil about expressly, I have answered it
already.


R. P. For his last Chapter, T. G. says, there needed no more than to say,
Dial. p. 179.
that the Church of England does not allow any Worship to be given to the Altar.


P. D. Is it possible for T. G. to think to fob us off with such answers as
these? barely to tell his Adversary, he might have spared this and the other
Discourse.


R. P. But T. G. says, this is the most material thing in that Chapter.


P. D. Say you so? Was the wise Council of Nice, so immaterial a thing? that it
must now be quite abandoned, and no kind of Discharge be so much as offered to
be made for it? Was there nothing material in what concerns the charge of
Contradictions, Paradoxes, School-disputes, etc.? And all the other Instances
waved to come to this of Bowing to the Altar? there must be some Mystery in
this; and I think I have found it, the Patronus bonae Fidei inveighs bitterly
against this, as worse than Egyptian Idolatry, and reproaches Dr. St. upon
account of his defending it: and T. G. finds it much easier to reproach than to
answer.


R. P. The truth is, this Patronus bonae Fidei does T. G. Knights service; For
when he has no mind to appear himself, he serves him for a Knight of the Post,
who runs blindfold upon any thing that may discredit the Church of England; two
or three such rare men would ease us of a great deal of trouble. Dial. p. 182.
to 187.
For T. G. takes between five and six pages together out of him in this place,
besides what he has taken up at interest upon other occasions.


P. D. Is this the Just Discharge, to borrow so much out of the Fanatic stock?
Setting then aside what is brought over of the old Account, which had been
reckoned for before; and how very many material things are never entered, which
he was accountable for; and how much he has borrowed upon the Bona Fides of
the Fanatic Historian, all the rest will amount to a very pitiful Discharge.
But since no better payment can be had, let us at least examine this: For this
Bona Fides is a kind of Republican Public Faith, which no body will trust
twice, not so much as for Bodkins and Thimbles.


F. C. Hold Sir. You love always to be rubbing upon old Sores; have you forgot
the Act of Oblivion? You know we dare not speak what we think of those times
now; and is that fair to accuse when we dare not answer? Mind your own
business, defend the Church of England if you can, in that Idolatrous practice
of bowing to the Altar. I always thought what it would come to, when Dr. St.
went about the charge of Idolatry upon the principles of the Church of England;
I knew he could never defend himself but upon good Orthodox Fanatic
principles, as you call them. Now Sir, you have him at an advantage, join your
force and T. G.'s with that of the Patronus bonae Fidei, and if the Geese
follow the Fox close, you will keep him from ever stirring more.


P. D. I thank you for your good Will to the Cause, and that is all I fear from
you; you only add to the number, and help to preserve the Roman Capitol by your
noise.


R. P. You shall not escape thus; what say you to bowing to the Altar, is not
that as great Idolatry, as worship of Images?


P. D. Do you not remember the answer Dr. St. has already given to this
objection?


R. P. I tell you I read none of his Books, and know not what he has written,
but as I find it in T. G.


P. D. What is that?


R. P. Have I not told you already, that the Church of England does not allow
any worship to be given to the Altar?


P. D. And is not that to the purpose? For dare any of you say so of the Church
of Rome in respect of Images?


R. P. But T. G. says, this is not the meaning of the Canon which Dr. St.
produces: Dial. p. 180.
for, he says, the Canon only implies that they give no Religious worship to
it, but they do not deny any kind of worship to be given to it; and Dr. St.
himself grants that there is a Reverence due to Sacred Places.


P. D. Now your bolt is shot I hope I may have leave to say something both in
behalf of the Canon and Dr. St. (1.) For the Canon, I say as Dr. St. did, that
it denies any worship to be given to the Altar, for it makes the adoration to
be immediately made to the Divine Majesty, without respect to the Altar, either
as the Object or Means of Worship, which I prove, (1.) From the Introduction.
For can any words be more express than those, in the Introduction? For as much
as the Church is the House of God, dedicated to his holy Worship (not to that
of the Altar) and therefore ought to mind us both of the Greatness and Goodness
of his Divine Majesty (not of the sacredness of the Altar) certain it is that
the acknowledgement thereof, not only inwardly in our hearts, but also
outwardly with our Bodies, must needs be pious in it self, profitable unto us
and edifying unto others. If the intention of the Canon had been to have given
any worship to the Altar, the Introduction must have related to that, and not
to the Divine Majesty.

(2.) From the Recommendation; we therefore think it meet and behooveful, and
heartily commend it to all good and well-affected People, members of this
Church, that they be ready to tender unto the Lord, (not to the Altar) the said
due acknowledgement by doing Reverence and Obeisance both at their coming in
and going out of the said Churches, etc. according to the most ancient Custom
of the Primitive Church in Purest times, and of this Church also for many years
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

(3.) From the express disowning the giving any Religious worship to the
Communion Table. Which is not meant of an individuum vagum, but of this Act of
Adoration, which is the Religious worship here spoken of; and thereby no kind
of worship is intended to the Altar, but only to God. And which is more plain
yet by what follows, that it is not done out of an opinion of the Corporal
Presence of Christ's Body on the Table, or in the Mystical Elements; but only
(mark that) for the advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him Alone, (not
the Altar together with him) that honor and glory which is due unto him and no
otherwise. Can any words be plainer than these? They want only Legislative
Gothic, and a Finger in the Margent, for T. G. to understand them.

(4.) Archbishop Laud who certainly understood the meaning of this Canon,
pleads only for the worship to be given immediately to God himself. God forbid,
says he, Speech in Star Chamber, p. 43, 46.
that we should worship any thing but God himself: and he adds, if there were
no Table standing, he would worship God when he came into his House. And he
calls it still, Doing Reverence to Almighty God, but only toward his Altar:
and he says, the People did understand this fully, and apply the worship to
God, and to none but God.

(5.) When the introducing this, was made one of the Articles of his Charge by
the Commons; his Answer was, Canterbury's Trial, p. 473.
That his bowing was only to worship God, not the Altar, and I hope it is no
offense or treason to worship God in the Kings own Chapel, or to induce others
to do the like.

(6.) I do not find any of our Divines who pleaded most for it, do contend for
any more than worshipping God toward the Altar, and not giving any worship to
the Altar; the arguments they used were for determining the local circumstance
of worship, and not for making the Altar the object of it. Defense, p. 705, etc.
And the difference between these two Dr. St. has at large cleared.


R. P. But cannot we say, that we only worship God before an Image, and do not
give any Religious worship to the Image, and then the case is parallel?


P. D. You may say so, and you sometimes do, to deceive ignorant people; but
you cannot say it truly. For (1.) Your Councils have determined that Religious
worship is to be given to Images; our Canon says, it is not to be given to the
Altar, therefore the case is far from being parallel. And Dr. St. has fully
proved, that the Nicene Council did require Religious worship to be given to
Images; Defense, p. 577, etc.
and Anathematizes all who do it not. And utterly rejects those that say they
are to be had only for memory, and out of some kind of Honor or Reverence; for
nothing but Religious worship would satisfy them. And the Acts of that worship
are expressed to be not only bowing but prostration, kissing, oblation of
Incense and Lights; and Dr. St. has elsewhere showed, that all the Acts of
worship which the Heathens did perform to their Images in old Rome, are given
to Images in modern Rome. From p. 648. to p. 699.
(2.) Those in the Church of Rome who have only contended for the worship of
God before the Image, have been condemned by others as savouring of Heresy,
who say it is a matter of Faith in the Roman Church, that Images are to be
worshipped truly and properly; and that the contrary opinion is dangerous,
rash, and sovouring of Heresy, From p. 583. to p. 599.
which is likewise proved at large by Dr. St.


R. P. But does not Dr. St. himself allow a Reverence due to Sacred places?


P. D. He does so. But do you observe the difference he puts between that and
Worship? I will endeavor to make his distinct notion of these things plain to
you.

First, He distinguishes between Honor and Worship:

(1.) Honor he makes to be the Esteem of Excellency; Either Inward, only in
the mind. Either Outward, in acts suitable to that estimation.
And this Excellency may be twofold, 1. Personal. 2. Relative.

1. Personal; and that threefold; 1. Civil; in regard of humane Society, as
that of Abraham to the Children of Heth. 2. Moral; on account of moral
Excellencies; either Natural, or Acquired.
3. Spiritual; in regard of supernatural Graces:


And that may be given two ways, (1.) To the Persons as present; which is
Religious Respect: as that of Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel, Dan. 2.46. Of Abraham
to the Angels, Genesis 18.2. (2.) To them as absent; and this is Religious Honor:
and it lies chiefly in Thanksgiving to God for them, and celebrating their
memories; because the Honor of Divine Graces ought to redound chiefly to the
giver of them.


2. Relative: from the relation which things have to what we esteem on the
account of its own excellency. 1. Civil Relation to our Friends, or strangers
whom we esteem; and so we set a value on their Pictures, on their Letters or
Handwriting, or any thing belonging to them. 2. Spiritual Relation to God and
his Worship; and the regard to these he calls Reverence.


And that lies in these things: (1.) Discrimination from common use. (2.)
Consecration to a sacred use. (3.) Suitable Usage of them in regard of that
relation.


But if you ask wherein the difference of this lies from Worship, He says,
from the greatest Divines of your Church, that

(2.) Worship has a respect to Power and Superiority; and that is 1. Civil; in
regard of the Power and Authority of Magistrates. 2. Religious; in regard of
Gods peculiar Sovereignty over us,


And that is twofold, 1. Internal in Submission, Dependence.
2. External; which must be, 1. Such as express our submission and dependence;
as 1. Sacrifice. 2. Solemn invocation. 3. Adoration. 4. Vows. 5. Swearing by
him, etc.
2. They must be peculiar to himself. 1. From the dictate of Nature, as to the
peculiarity of Gods Soverainty. 2. From the Will of God, which appropriates
such Acts to himself. 3. From the consent of Nations and the Christian Church.




Therefore the giving that Worship which is due to God, and does express our
subjection to him, to any thing besides him, is violation of the Rights of Gods
Sovereignty; and if it be given to any creature, it receives its denomination
from the Nature of that Creature to which it is given. (1.) To Animate
Creatures. Angels. Good. Bad.
Dead men. Saints. Wicked.
Brutes of all sorts.
(2.) To Inanimate. Natural. Elements. Minerals. Plants.
Artificial; made to represent the objects of Worship, and therefore called
Images.



Which is properly Idolatry, being the worship of a representation; but because
that word Idol is extended to any creature to which the Worship proper to God
is given, therefore every such kind of Worship is in Scripture, and by the
Christian Church called Idolatry. And by this Scheme of Dr. St.'s notion of
these things, you may easily understand the difference he puts between
Reverence and Worship.


R. P. But T. G. says, The Church of Rome requires by the terms of Communion
with her, Dial. p. 181.
no more than Reverence, or Honorary respect to Images.


P. D. Why does T. G. go about thus to impose on his Readers without answering
what Dr. St. had produced to the contrary? From three things. 1. From the
Decrees of the second Council of Nice. 2. From the constant opinion of their
most eminent Divines, both before, and after the Council of Trent. 3. From the
public and allowed Practices of their Church. 1. In Consecration of Images for
Worship; with Forms prescribed in the Roman Pontifical. 2. In Supplication
before them, with prostrations and all other Acts of Worship which the Heathens
used toward them. 3. In Solemn Processions with Images, with the same kind of
Pomp and Ceremony which was used in Heathen Rome.



And after all this can T. G. have the confidence to say, this is only Honorary
Respect without answering to any one of these particulars, which were purposely
alleged to prove the contrary?


R. P. But now Sir look to your self, for the Patronus bonae Fidei knocks all
down before him, and proves bowing to the Altar practiced in the Church of
England to be worse than Popish or Egyptian Idolatry.


P. D. I hope not worse than the Power of Excommunication, which the same
excellent Advocate for Fanatics has bestowed as ill names upon and with as
little Reason: but such as it is I am prepared to receive it.


R. P. The Patronus bonae Fidei says, that, However Dr. St. wheadled and
blinded with preferments (for that is the meaning of T. G.'s etc.) endeavors
to palliate this kind of Adoration, Prodr^m. p. 76.
and to vindicate it from the crime of Idolatry, yet I doubt not to affirm,
that this bowing outvies the Idolatry both of Egyptians and Romanists, not only
in horrible iniquity and enormitie, but in madness and folly.


F. C. Who is this Patronus bonae Fidei, you speak so much of? He is a good man
I warrant him. He speaks home to the business.


P. D. Yes if ignorance and confidence does it: for never did man betray more
than your Advocate in this saying.


F. C. He will prove it I warrant you.


P. D. Just as you did Kneeling at the Communion to be Idolatry; if so well.
But first for the Roman Idolatry.


R. P. It is not, says he, so much madness in them to adore the Lord Jesus
under the species of bread, as it is an error in them to believe
transubstantiation. Dial. p. 183.
But it is an Hypochondriacal madness, and giddybrained stupidity for men to
perform adoration toward that place, where Christ is no more present than any
where else, and where neither the Table, nor Altar, nor any thing that is set
upon the Table (unless perchance a clean Towel, two Books richly bound, or a
pair of Candlesticks with two Candles in them, not to be lighted, till their
minds be quite drunk with Popery) represent either Christ or his Image. A
Fanatical Adoration he calls it, without any Object.


P. D. Call you this proving? It is rather raving and foaming at the mouth.
This is such biting as may endanger an Hydrophobia. There is no arguing with
such a man, but in a dark Room and under good Keepers. But that you may take no
advantage by his sayings; how can it be Idolatry without an Object? i.e.
Idolatry without an Idol. But can there be no Object of worship but what is
visible? What does he worship himself? Or rather whom do his Clients the
Fanatics worship? Nothing? Because not a visible object. Is not adoration a
part of Worship? If not, it is no Idolatry to give it to an Image. If it be,
then bowing to an Invisible Object in a place dedicated to Divine Worship is
giving to God that Worship, which being given to an Image makes it Idolatry. I
pray Sir do you answer for him.


F. C. I understand you not.


P. D. I thought so. But I will endeavor to make you understand me. Is the
bowing down to an Image Idolatry?


F. C. Yes, without all doubt.


P. D. Is not Idolatry giving to a Creature the Worship that is due to God?


F. C. Yes.


P. D. How can that be giving to a Creature the Worship due to God; if it be
not lawful to give this Worship to God which you give to the Creature?


F. C. I know not what you mean.


P. D. Not yet? Is not adoration of an Image, Idolatry?


F. C. Yes, I told you so once already.


P. D. Then adoration is to be given to God. How else can the giving it to a
Creature make it Idolatry?


F. C. I do not well understand you; but as far as I can guess, you speak of
bodily worship; but alas! we know that God must be worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth.


P. D. Who denies that? But observe what follows, then no man is guilty of
Idolatry, that does not worship an Image in Spirit and in Truth: but the Law
forbids bowing down to them and worshipping of them; do you think that bowing
down is meant of the Mind or of the Body?


F. C. What is it you would have by all these Questions?


P. D. No more but this, that it is lawful to give external adoration to the
Divine Majesty.


F. C. And what then?


P. D. Is it lawful to give God that worship, (which it is lawful to give
absolutely) in a place set apart for his Worship?


F. C. That is a strange question indeed.


P. D. See now, what you have brought your self to; to acknowledge that to be
lawful which you so rashly called Idolatry.


F. C. What is that?


P. D. Bowing in the Church, in testimony of our adoration of the Divine
Majesty.


F. C. That is not it; but it is bowing to the Altar.


P. D. Who knows best? Those that made the Canon or you? They declare they
meant nothing else than what I have said; and deny any Religious Worship to be
given to the Altar. And would not you think it hard for us to accuse you for
worshipping your Hats in prayer, because you put them before your faces when
you pray; as you do us for worshipping the Altar, because we bow toward it?


F. C. But you look toward the Altar when you bow.


P. D. And are not your eyes upon your Hats when you pray? And is not prayer a
part of Gods immediate Worship?


F. C. But we call it bowing to the Altar.


P. D. We may as well call yours, praying to the Hat.


F. C. Some do assign the reason of their worship from the Communion Table, and
we never do from our Hats.


P. D. They do not assign the reason of their worship; but the reason of that
circumstance of it, why that way rather than another; which they parallel with
the Jews worshipping of God toward the Ark and the Cherubims, which yet were
no objects of Divine Worship, either by Gods appointment, or the Jewish
practice, or in the opinion of some of the most learned Divines, even of the
Roman Church; who make the most advantage they can of it; Defense from p. 702,
to p. 717.
as Dr. St. has at large proved in his Answer to T. G.; and I do not hear of
any Reply T. G. has made to it.


R. P. But the Patronus bonae Fidei says, the Papists have more reason to
worship Christ on the supposition of Transubstantiation, than you have to
worship --


P. D. What? Speak out. The Altar? we deny it to be any Object of Worship to
us: If he means, than to worship God with external adoration toward the Altar,
let him do that, which he never yet did, prove what he says; viz. that there
is more reason to worship Christ under the bread on supposition of
transubstantiation, than for our giving external adoration to the Divine
Majesty. For to give this adoration to God needs no other supposition but of
his infinite Majesty and Omnipresence; but to worship Christ on the Altar under
the species of Bread, does not only suppose the truth of one of the most absurd
suppositions in the world, that the substance of the Bread is changed into the
Body of Christ, and the Body of Christ is there invisibly present under the
species of Bread: but it supposes likewise these things. 1. That the Body of
Christ as united with the species of Bread is a proper object of Divine
Adoration: i. e. that these two do make up one entire object of Divine Worship;
and then it follows that the sacramental species are a partial object of Divine
Adoration, for whatever goes to make up an object entire must have share with
it; which is quite another thing from an accidental connection, as of a Princes
Robes together with his Person; for no man ever said the Princes Garments made
up with his Person an Object fit to be kneeled to in token of Subjection. But
here is an union supposed between Christ's Body and the Accidents, and such an
union by virtue whereof Divine Worship is directed to the species of Bread, and
consequentially to the Body of Christ as united thereto. 2. It supposes, that
the Body of Christ being thus united with the species of bread may receive all
that worship which is due to God alone. Which is not very easy to prove.
Because it does not follow, that wherever a Body is, there those things must
be which do not result by necessary concomitancy from the being of a Body. For
since it does not follow by virtue of the Hypostatical union that wherever the
Divinity is, the humane nature of Christ must be there also; how does it
necessarily follow, that wherever the Body of Christ is, the Divinity is so
present as to make that Body become an Object of Divine Adoration? We say the
Foot is united to the Soul as well as the Head, but do we therefore say that
whatever is in the Soul is equally present in the Foot as in the Head? as that
the Foot reasons, considers, directs as the Head does. It is not therefore bare
union but the manner of Presence, which does make an Object fit for adoration.
That Presence ought to be (if not glorious and becoming the Divine Majesty in
that respect) yet so well attested, as the Divinity of Christ was in his humane
nature, by the voice of Angels, by Testimony of God himself from Heaven, by
miracles, by Prophecies, etc. But here is nothing like this; no evidence being
given of the Divine Presence under the Elements, neither from sense, nor
reason, nor Scripture. For the Scripture is only pretended to speak of the Body
of Christ, and not of his Divinity.


R. P. But by virtue of the hypostatical union wherever the Body of Christ
is, his Divine Nature must be present too.


P. D. That I know very well is commonly said by you; but I pray consider these
two things. (1.) If the Body of Christ may be present by reproduction of the
same Body; as some of your greatest and latest Divines have asserted; then
there is no such necessity of concomitancy of the Divinity of Christ; because
they say, God may reproduce the same body without all the accidents of it, and
consequently without the Hypostatical Union. (2.) By the same way of
Concomitancy they may hold the Persons of the Father and Holy Ghost to be under
the species, and to be there worshipped. For where the Body of Christ is, there
the soul is; where Soul and Body is, there the Divinity is; where the Divinity
is, there the Person of the Son is; and where the Person of the Son is, there
the Persons of the Father and Holy Ghost are too.


R. P. You may account this an absurdity, but we account it none at all: yea
some of our Divines have said, If the Holy Trinity were not every where, yet it
would be in the Eucharist, by virtue of this Concomitancy.


P. D. I do not now meddle with your opinions; I only consider the Patronus
bonae Fidei and his Brethren, who do look on these as absurdities, and yet are
so foolish to say, that our worshipping God toward the Altar is more absurd
than your worshipping Christ on the Altar, on supposition of
Transubstantiation. But why worse than Egyptian Idolatry, I beseech you?


R. P. The Egyptians, says he, pretended some color for their Idolatry, as
than an Ape, or a Cat, or a Wolf, Dial. p. 184.
etc. had some participation of the Divinity; but those that bow down to a
Wooden Table are themselves stocks: with much more to that purpose.


P. D. Is such a man to be endured in a Christian Commonwealth (not to say a
Church, for excommunication he regards not) who parallels the adoration given
only to the Divine Majesty (as our Church professes) with the Worship of an
Ape, or a Cat, or a Wolf, etc? Nay he makes the Egyptian Idolatry more
reasonable than our Worship of God. The only thing that can excuse him is Rage
and Madness; and therefore I leave him to his Keeper. But I pray tell me, was
it mere kindness to the Church of England which made T. G. to produce all these
passages at full length out of the Patronus bonae Fidei? Or out of pure spite
to Dr. St. by so often repeating the passage of his being delinitus and
occaecatus? And why in such a place, where he pretends only to give an account
of Dr. St.'s vain and endless Discourses, does he bring in this at large? Is it
only for his comfort to let him see, there is one body at least in the world,
more foolish and impertinent than he? We have seen enough of what T. G. ought
not to have done, let us now see what he says Dr. St. ought to have done.


R. P. The first thing to be done in a Dispute, Dial. p. 193.
is to settle the state of the Controversy upon its true Grounds, by laying
down the true notion of the matter in debate; therefore Dr. St. ought in the
first place to have given us the true Notion of Idolatry in the nature of the
Thing; and then to have shown that notion to have agreed to the honor and
veneration which the Church of Rome in her Councils declares may be given to
the Images of Christ and the Saints: but he chose rather to dazzle the eyes of
the Reader with the false lights of mere external Acts, the obscure practice
even of wiser Heathens, and the clashing of School-Divines.


P. D. Now I hope we are come to something worthy of consideration. I like the
method of proceeding very well. And I like Dr. St.'s Book the better, because I
think he pursued the right method, beginning first with the Nature of Idolatry
and Divine Worship; and then coming to the first Particular of Image Worship,
which he has handled with great care and exactness in respect of your Councils
as well as your Practices and School-Divines.


R. P. It is true, he proposed well at first, Dial. p. 195, etc.
but like a Preacher that has patched up a Sermon out of his note-book, he
names his Text, and then takes his leave of it. For, what he was to speak to,
was Idolatry in the nature of the thing, independently of any positive Law,
whereas he speaks only of an Idolatry forbidden by a positive Law; but if there
be no Idolatry antecedent to a positive prohibition, the Heathens could not be
justly charged with Idolatry.


P. D. In my mind, he did not recede from his Text at all, but pursued it
closely; but you are uneasy at his Application, and therefore find fault with
his handling his Text. What could a man speak to more pertinently as to
Idolatry in the Nature of the thing, than to consider, what that is, which is
acknowledged to be Idolatry both in the Heathens and Arrians; What that was
which the Primitive Church accounted Idolatry in them; What opinons those have
of God, whom the Roman Church do charge with Idolatry; Wherein the Nature of
Divine Worship consists, not only with respect to positive commands, but the
general consent of mankind; Did Defense, p. 191. p. 210.
he not expressly argue from the Reason and design of solemn Religious worship
abstractly from positive Laws? Did he not show From p. 210. to p. 215.
from many Testimonies, that the Heathens did look on some peculiar Rites of
Divine worship as Sacred and Inviolable, that they chose rather to dye, than to
give them any but a Divine Object? It is true, after this, he enquires into the
Law of God, and what acts of worship he had appropriated to himself; and was
there not great Reason to do so? Are we unconcerned in the Laws God made for
his worship? In my apprehension, this was the great thing T. G. had to do, to
prove that Gods Law about worship was barely ceremonial, and only respected the
Jews; but that we are left to the Liberties of the Law of Nature, about
Religious worship: but he neither does this, nor if he had done it, had he
overthrown Dr St.'s Book. For he proves in several places, that the Heathens
had the same distinctions of sovereign and inferior worship; absolute and
relative, which are used in the Roman Church; and if these do excuse now, they
would have excused them, who by Scripture and the consent of the Christian
Church are condemned for Idolatry. And judge you now, whether Dr. St. took
leave of his Text, whether he did not speak to Idolatry in the Nature of the
thing?


R. P. But he says, P. 199, etc.
the Heathens could not understand the nature and sinfulness of Idolatry if not
from some Law of God; which is in effect to clear the Heathens from Idolatry,
till that Law was delivered to them; whereas S. Paul says, they had a Law
written in their hearts, whereby they might understand it; and Dr. St. ought to
have shown wherein the deordination and sinfulness of Idolatry did consist
antecedently to any positive prohibition; and till this be done, he can make no
parallel between the Heathen Idolatry and that of the Roman Church.


P. D. I am glad to find any thing that looks like a difficulty, which may give
an occasion of farther thoughts about this weighty matter, and of clearing the
Doctors mind concerning it. Herein I shall endeavor to explain these two
things. 1. How far Dr. St. does make the nature and sinfulness of Idolatry to
depend on the Law of God. 2. Wherein the sinfulness of Idolatry does consist
abstractly from a positive Law.

1. How far he makes the sinfulness of it to depend on a positive Law.

1. He supposes Natural Religion to dictate these things. Defense, p. 194, 195,
196, 197.
1. That God ought to be solemnly worshipped. 2. That this worship ought to be
peculiar to the Divine Nature in regard of his Sovereignty over us, and the
infinite distance between him and his Creatures. 3. That the giving this solemn
worship which is due to God to any Creature, is the invading the Rights of his
Sovereignty. Thence he shows from Aquinas, that worship is not given to God
because he needs it, but that the belief of one God may hereby be confirmed in
us by external and sensible Acts, which cannot be done unless there be some
peculiar Acts of his Worship. And external worship is a profession of internal;
acts being expressive of our minds as well as words. Thence he determines, that
Idolatry is a sin of the highest nature, because it invades Gods peculiar
Rights; and implies blasphemy in it, because it takes away from God the
peculiarity of his dominion. Are not these arguments drawn from the nature of
the thing, and not merely from a positive Law?

2. Notwithstanding these dictates of natural Reason concerning the worship of
God, yet he supposes mankind to have been so corrupted as to have lost the
sense of the sinfulness of giving divine worship to creatures. Which, he says,
they did chiefly on a threefold supposition. (1.) That God committed the
Government of the world under him to some inferior Deities. Or, P. 113.
(2.) That God was the soul of the world, and therefore the worship given to
the parts of it did redound to him. Or (3.) That external adoration was below
him, and that the service due to God was that of our minds, and the other might
be given to Creatures.

3. That God saw it necessary to revive the peculiarity of his worship by his
Law given in the Decalogue; which although given to the Jews, was of an eternal
and immutable nature, being not built on any reason peculiar to them, but
common to all mankind; and on this account the Christian Church did look on the
same Law as obliging all Christians; as the Doctor has proved in several
places before cited.

4. That when the Apostles went abroad to reclaim the world from Idolatry, they
made use of no other notion of it, than what was received among the Jews; and
by the Reasons on which the Law of God was founded, they convinced the world of
that sin of Idolatry, which by the corruption of mankind, and the custom of the
world they had lost the sense of. And this was plainly the meaning of Dr. St.'s
words to any unprejudiced mind, as appears by laying these things together;
which are all contained in the same discourse. If we say the Gentiles had lost
the sense of other sins, as it is evident they had, and the Apostles made use
of the Law of God to convince them; does it hence follow that the sinfulness of
those things did barely depend upon a positive Law? And therefore the notion of
Idolatry may be said to be new, not as though it were not against the
principles of Natural Religion, but because they had lost the sense of them: so
the Law of Moses was a new Law though it revived the Law of Nature in its moral
precepts; the doctrine of Christ was a new doctrine to the world although most
agreeable to the principles of natural reason.

(2.) The sinfulness of Idolatry according to natural Religion consists in
these things. (1.) In taking away the due sense of the Distance between God and
his Creatures: which is a violation of the Rights of his Sovereignty, and
consequently it is crimen laesae Majestatis Divinae, or Treason against the
Divine Majesty. (2.) In neglecting to give God the worship which was proper to
him. And this was the consequent of Idolatry; and not as though the Nature of
Idolatry did lie barely in not giving to God the worship due to him, as T. G.
seems to suggest: Dial. p. 205.
but when men did accustom themselves to the worship of Idols, they grew so
fond of their own inventions, that they had five Ave Mary's for one Pater
Noster, and so the worship of God came to be almost lost in the crowd of
Deities which they joined with him. (3.) In worshipping bad Spirits, instead of
good ones; which craftily insinuated themselves among the Idolaters under the
pretense of Inferior Deities. For so the people still believed them to be good
Spirits, and their learned men defied all those who said they worshipped any
other, as Dr. St. has showed; Defense, p. 518.
yet the Christians proved they were evil, because they received that worship
from them, which the good ones would not do. (4.) In disparaging the Divine
Nature by making Images to represent him, (which suggested mean thoughts of God
to their minds, lessening the apprehensions of the Greatness of his Majesty)
and hoping to please God by worshipping such representations of him. Which he
thought so dishonorable to himself, that he forbids it by a severe Law, and
punished the transgressors of it; and from hence the Christian Church has
accounted the same thing unlawful to them, because so dishonorable to God.
(5.) In taking away that dependence upon God, which he expects from his
Creatures. For when they suppose that God has committed the care of these
things to any inferior beings, they are apt to make their addresses to them
more frequently because of a vicinity of Nature to them; and to depend upon
them for help in time of need; which takes off that entire trust in God which
is most agreeable to his Wisdom, Goodness and Providence. (6.) In giving divine
worship to vile and wicked men instead of God. This was an aggravation of
Idolatry, and increased the sinfulness of it; although the nature of Idolatry
does not lie in giving divine worship to bad men, but to any Creatures. And in
this particular lay the abominable sinfulness of the Poetical Idolatry among
the Greeks and Romans, which was in this respect worse than of the most
barbarous Nations we ever read of. (7.) The more vile the practices, the more
mean the submissions, the more gross the errors of Idolaters were, the greater
was the sinfulness of Idolatry. Hence the filthy and obscene Actions of the
Eastern, Greek and Roman Idolatries; the mean submissions and the gross errors
of the Egyptian Idolatries heightened the sinfulness of them. These are the main
things wherein the sinfulness of Idolatry did consist, abstractly from any
positive Law. You see how freely I give them to you upon such an invitation,
and much good may they do you. If Dr. St. had thought T. G. had desired any
such thing from him, I do believe he would have added not only a seventh, Dial.
p. 201.
but an eighth Chapter for his sake on such a subject as this, which it is so
easy to enlarge upon. But I stop for fear T. G. should think I am only
patching up a Sermon out of Note-books, yet I think I have not taken leave of
my Text.


R. P. Did you ever hear of the speaking Trumpet?


P. D. What has the speaking Trumpet to do with Idolatry? I am afraid I waked
you out of some pleasant dream, you talk so far off from the business. Now I
think of it, I have found it by the train of thoughts, in Mr. Hobs his way.
Text led you to preaching, and preaching to the speaking Trumpet, because of
the rare invention of the Virtuoso to have one Parson to preach to a whole
County.


R. P. No, that is not it. T. G. brings it in on the occasion of this dispute.


P. D. Does he truly? But how comes it in? As the man brought in Hercules into
his Sermon by Head and Shoulders?


R. P. T. G. is a man of a great reach; and therefore he may be allowed to
bring in a thing, which another man would never have thought of.


P. D. But I pray how?


R. P. You know the Virtuoso argued thus, If the speaking Trumpet might be made
to carry the voice a League, then eight mile about, if eight mile, then round a
whole County, and then why not from one Nation to another, there being no stop
in Art?


P. D. This is very ridiculous; but how does T. G. apply it?


R. P. To Dr. St.'s argument against relative Worship; Dial. p. 202.
who says that by virtue of that, men may worship the Sun, the Stars, the
Earth, or any other Creature.


P. D. And does not the argument hold?


R. P. No; T. G. says, it is like the Virtuoso's arguing about the speaking
Trumpet.


P. D. I pray tell how. In my mind T. G. rather imitates the Virtuoso's swiming
on the Table; for he puffs and blows, and moves all the joints of his Body, but
he is on the Table still. The difficulty remains just where it was; and the
speaking Trumpet takes away none of the force of it. For the parity of Reason
holds in one case, which it is ridiculous to imagine in the other.


R. P. T. G. says, there is a conformity between it, and the extension of
worship to any Creature. For, he says, there is a stop in nature.


P. D. How and where? For why may not I worship God in any creature as well as
by an Image? Where are the measures and bounds fixed, that thus far we may go
and no farther? Why may we not worship Trees, and Fountains, Earth, and Water,
and the whole Host of Heaven as well as an Image? if we have due apprehensions
of God in our minds as the Creator of them, and do not suffer our worship to
rest absolutely on the Creatures, but intend to carry it at last to God, and to
fall only after an inferior manner upon them. I cannot for my heart find out
this stop in nature. For the reason of relative worship as to an Image is bare
imagination, supposing that person to be present who deserves worship: but in
the Worship of the Creatures, there is a real presence of the Divinity, and a
certain relation which the Creatures have to God; why therefore may I not
worship God in any of his Creatures, as well as by an Image? and so the ancient
Idolatry of the World, which the Christian Religion rooted out, may by the help
of this trick of Relative Worship be revived again.


R. P. You run too fast. For T. G. says, the Creatures ever since sense
prevailed against reason, Dial. p. 204.
are become like stumbling blocks to the souls of men, and a snare to the feet
of the unwise, to allure and draw them to the worship of them.


P. D. And do you think Images (but that they are set so high) have not more of
the Nature of Stumbling Blocks in them? Are they such immaterial and insensible
things, when S. Augustine says, their very fashion and shape is apt to move
men more, and the likeness to a living being prevails more on the affections of
miserable men to worship them, Defense, p. 529.
than their knowledge that they are not living does to the contempt of them; as
Dr. St. observed.


R. P. But T. G. adds, that those very Divines of the Church of Rome who do
admit the consequence in speculation, and do not condemn the practice of it in
Philosophical and contemplative men, who consider the creatures purely as the
works of God, and as it were behold him present in them; do notwithstanding
utterly condemn the common and promiscuous use of it in the vulgar, as exposing
them to manifest danger of being seduced by the tempting beauty and astonishing
power of the Creatures, to forget the Creator and worship them.


P. D. What is become of the speaking Trumpet now? and of the stop in nature?
All the danger, it seems, is in the dullness and stupidity of the People. And
yet, if I mistake not, T. G. has provided against this, when he says, the
difference is so great between vulgar Heathens and Christians, Dial. p. 419.
as to the Believing in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth,
and of all things visible and invisible. If the common people have so firm and
settled a Notion of this in their minds, they may as easily pass from the Scale
of Creatures to the Creator, as from an Image to what is represented by it. Is
there so much danger they should stop in the Creatures; and none at all they
should stop in Images; when himself confesses, it is Idolatry to worship the
Images themselves? And since Dr. St* has shown from their own Divines,
Defense, p. 698.
how many ways Idolatry may be committed in the worship of Images. (1.) If
proper Latria or Divine Worship be given to an Image, it becomes an Idol. Nay
Bellarmine says, that those who worshipped an Image of Christ with Divine
Honors, although it were for the sake of Christ, and not of the Image, did
commit Idolatry. Therefore, he says, those were condemned for heretics, who
gave Divine Worship to the Image of Christ. If then the people happen to give
Divine Worship to an Image, although they no not believe it to be so, yet this
does not excuse them from Idolatry; for, says he, although a man pretend in
words, the Worship to be Relative, or for the sake of God, or Christ; yet it
being divine worship, he does really do it absolutely and for themselves. (2.)
When Images are worshipped as true representations of the Divine Nature. (3.)
When Images are worshipped for the sake of any sanctity, virtue or Divinity
abiding in them. But tell me now, whether common people are not in danger of
any of these things, as much at least as of resting in the Creatures? Is it not
as easy for them to forget the distinction of absolute and relative worship,
or to fancy God to be like the Images of him; or to imagine some sanctity,
virtue or Divinity to be inherent in the Images; as to stop at the Creatures
and to go no higher? Yea, more than this, have not the common people been
charged with doing these things by your own Divines? When they tell us of their
madness in the Worship of Images; Defense, p. 309.
and that there was little or no difference between their worship and that of
the Heathens? in some places cited by Dr. St. Is it possible for any man that
observes what the common people do, to imagine that they place no Sanctity,
Virtue or Divinity in their Images? When they walk so many miles barefoot to a
certain Image of our Lady; when they creep upon their bare knees toward it;
when they make formal supplications to the Images, with as much Ceremony as if
the persons they represent were present; when they look with so much submission
and devotion toward them; when they come with such mighty expectations of
relief and help from them; when they tell stories of so many miracles which
have been wrought by them; nay, when their learned men, who should have more
wit or honesty, write Books on purpose to heighten these follies and madnesses
of the People. Can you, with any face say, there is not so much danger in the
worship of Images, as in the worship of the Creatures? I did not expect, after
what Dr. St. had represented in this matter, T. G. should have given so
wretched an answer as this. For if this were all to keep men from the Relative
worship of Creatures, I dare affirm that most of the Fathers arguments against
this sort of Idolatry were very weak and feeble, and that they did not reach
the Philosophical and contemplative men; but only the dull and stupid vulgar;
that there was nothing of real Idolatry in their worship of the Creatures, but
only danger to the common people, and scandal to the weak. Name me that
Christian, who through all the Primitive Church ever let fall an expression to
this purpose. It was Idolatry, downright Idolatry they charged them with in the
worship of the Creatures, and not any mere scandalous compliance with the
ignorant vulgar. If this had been all they meant, for all that I can see the
Work of the Apostles and Primitive Christians had been to have informed them
only of the True God whom they were to worship in the Creatures, and if all the
People were once thoroughly informed of this, all the ancient Rites of worship
might have continued. They might have still baked Cakes to the Queen of Heaven,
and worshipped the whole Host of Heaven; they might have continued their
Devotion to the Earth, and Fire, and Trees and Fountains, if they did but
direct their worship through them to God. What mean all those sayings of
Fathers, all those Canons of Councils, wherein this very manner of Worship was
condemned for Idolatry? Defense, p. 400, etc.
as Dr. St. has in part showed. Speak out Gentlemen, and let us know what you
think of the Primitive Church, which so freely condemned this Relative Worship;
but never imagine that we will be guided by your modern Schools, or the
Doctrine of your Church in these things, against the consent of the whole
Primitive Christian Church; whose Fathers you must condemn as Children, and
whose Martyrs you must look on as Fools, if your doctrine of Relative worship
be allowed. For most of those who suffered Martyrdom might have escaped if they
had allowed these principles of Relative worship; no more being required of
them, but to do as the rest did, to burn a little incense in obedience to the
Laws, to make some customary libations before the Emperors Images, to make the
common supplications at the Temples of Vesta or Ceres, or any other of the
Gods, which the Philosophers understood of the several parts of the world: and
might they not have done all these things, and referred the worship ultimately
to the True God? I do not think this so trifling a matter as T. G. makes it,
but I think the honor of Christianity and of the Primitive Martyrs deeply
concerned in it; and I wish you not to maintain your Fooleries upon such
principles as reflect dishonor upon Christianity it self.


R. P. Methinks the speaking Trumpet has roused you, and put you into a fit of
furious zeal.


P. D. No Sir, I do assure you. It is the honor I have for Christianity which
has made me speak thus warmly; for I am very unwilling to have the primitive
Christians to suffer as Fools and as weak Brethren.


R. P. But T. G. says from Vossius, That the Gentiles concluded Nature it self
to be God, Dial. p. 204.
and the parts of it also to be Deities, and that they forsook God and staid in
the worship of Nature.


P. D. Some persons not inferior to Vossius for learning or judgment in these
matters, do suppose it to be a great mistake in him to make the Gentiles
worship inanimate nature for a true God, which say they, is in plain terms to
make them Atheists: For then they must own nothing but mere matter in the
world. And to what purpose men should worship an inanimate senseless being, it
is very hard to understand; it is therefore much more probable that they did
own some inferior Deities over the several parts of the world, and one Supreme
which passed through all; whom they did worship in and by his Creatures. But I
am not now to give an account of the Pagan Idolatry, of which we shall have
occasion to discourse afterward. That which I insist upon is, that those who
had a right notion of God might upon the principles of relative worship have
justified themselves in doing the same things which the Heathens did, provided
their intentions were directed aright; and consequently that there was no
necessity of taking away the Heathen Rites as Idolatrous in reference to the
parts of the world, but only of acquainting them more fully with the Notion of
God, and the nature of Relative Worship.


R. P. But T. G. still stands to it, that there is more danger in worshipping
the Creatures, Dial. p. 206.
than in the worship of Images; because the Creatures are not so apparently
representative of God, as an Image is of the Person represented by it, which
carries the thoughts presently and effectually to him. But the other needs a
great deal of discourse to discover the analogy they bear to the Creator, and
the dependence they have of him for their very being: yet so, that from the
greatness and beauty of the Creatures the Maker of them may proportionably be
seen.


P. D. To this Dr. St. gave a full answer, Defense p. 806.
when he said, that in an object of worship, we are not so much to consider the
quickness of representation, as the perfections represented. Although therefore
an Image may carry ones mind sooner to the thing represented, than the
Creatures; yet the one is so infinite a disparagement to the Divine Nature in
comparison of the other, that there is far greater danger upon T. G.'s
principles in one than in the other. I will make this plain to you by this
instance. Suppose the Image of a venerable old man with Pontifical Habits set
up to represent God Almighty, as has been usual in the Church of Rome; and one
man worships God by this; another he looks upon the Sun as a wonderful Work of
God, and he worships God as manifesting himself in the Sun; the Question now
is, whether there be more danger in worshipping God by an Image, or by the Sun?
I say by an Image. For (1.) T. G. confesses that Images are unlawful objects of
Worship, which are conceived to be proper likenesses of the Divinity; now I
appeal to your self, whether men are not more apt to take the Image of a man
for a likeness of the Divinity, than any of Gods Creatures? Besides (2.) Images
do not represent any thing that deserves our worship; but only lineaments and
figures, the work of Painters and Carvers; but the Creatures represent to our
minds infinite power, wisdom and goodness, which are the greatest Motives of
Divine Worship. For as Dr. St. has said, the least work of Nature infinitely
exceeds the greatest of Art in curiosity, Defense p. 805.
beauty, strength, proportion* and every thing that can discover Wisdom and
Power. (3.) The presence of God in an Image is only by a fiction of the mind, a
man fancying the true Object of Worship to be really present; but in the
Creatures there is a real Divine Presence. And where there is greater reason
for worship, there is surely the less danger. (4.) If the greater excellency of
the Creature make the danger greater, then as Dr. St. argued, where there is
less excellency there is less danger; and consequently there must be less
danger in worshipping the Inanimate Creatures than Animate, and Bruits than
Men, and mere Moral Men than Saints; because the danger must increase as the
excellency does: and consequently the Egyptians were more excuseable in their
worship than you. And by this reason there was less danger in worshipping the
Tail of the Ass our Savior rode upon, than St. Peter, or his pretended
Successor. (5.) There is less danger of Worship where the representation is
more divine and spiritual, than where it is more gross and corporeal; but the
representation of God is much more divine and spiritual by his Creatures than
by Images. And therefore Cardinal Lugo said, if a Wooden Image may be
worshipped for the sake of the exemplar, much more such a lively Image of God
as man is. And thus upon this principle of Relative Worship all the several
sorts of Idolatry which were used among the Heathens may be revived, and set up
with as fair pretenses at least as Image Worship.


R. P. T. G. says, If Dr. St. can discern God so easily in his Creatures,
Dial. p. 207.
as a man's mind is carried from the Image to the Prototype, he believes he is
one of the most admirable Persons in the Meletetiques in the whole World.


P. D. What is this but trifling in weighty matters? I would allow T. G. as
much scope for his wit, as he would desire; provided it become the gravity of
the subject. What is there in these Meletetiques, but what is the duty of every
good man, to see God in his works? which all persons do who are not Atheists;
And is this a thing to be exposed to scorn and derision?


R. P. But T. G. takes it for that part of Mystical Theology which inessences
the soul with God.


P. D. Alas for his ignorance! that he cannot distinguish between natural and
mystical Theology. I always took the seeing the great evidences of Gods Power,
Wisdom and Goodness in his Creatures to be Natural Theology: and is it not
possible to discover God in his works without inessencing the Soul with God?
This is too mean and low for T. G.; surely you father this upon him. For I can
hardly believe this and many other passages you mention, to be written by him;
or else T. G. has helped me to another piece of Meletetiques; for I discover
him much better in his Works than I did before; but with no great advantage
either as to his Wisdom or Goodness.


R. P. You may satisfy your self if you please that I* do not wrong him; for
here is the Book; and in the next page he compares Dr. St. with one who said
Christ might be better represented by a Cow than a Crucifix, Dial. p. 208.
and another who said he detested the Image of Christ Crucified.


P. D. For what good end was Dr. St. joined with these? (supposing the stories
true, which I hardly believe) has he ever said any such thing? or that tended
that way? It is the worship he writes against, and not the bare representation
of Christ Crucified. T. G. was not to seek for Dr. St.'s mind in this matter,
for these are his words. I do not say there is as great incongruity in
representing the humane nature of Christ, Defense p. 746.
as there was in representing the infinite nature of God, but I say there is as
great incongruity still in supposing an Image of whatsoever it be, can be the
proper object of Divine Worship. For the humanity of Christ is only capable of
receiving adoration from us, as it is hypostatically united to the Divine
Nature; and if the humane nature of Christ be not, what then is the Image of
it? What union is there between the Divine Nature and a Crucifix? All that can
be said is, that imagination supplies the Union, and Christ is supposed to be
present by representation. But (1.) this overthrows all measures and bounds of
Worship, and makes it lawful to worship any creature with respect to God. (2.)
It contradicts the argument of S. Paul, for then God may be worshipped with the
work of men's hands. (3.) It Is contrary to the sense and practice of the
Primitive Church which interpreted the second Commandment to hold against all
Images set up for wo^ship, as well those proper to Christians, as others among
Jews or Gentiles. Why did not T. G. rather answer these arguments, than make
odious comparisons of him, with Viret and Beza? But there is a reason for all
things if a man can hit on it.


R. P. But T. G. wonders Dr. St. should discover God so easily in his
Creatures, while he says elsewhere, the Creatures can give no greater than
Moral Certainty of the Being of God himself.


P. D. It was well thought upon, and deserves an answer; because T. G. is not
the only person who has cavilled at this. If Dr. St. by Moral Certainty does
mean only a bare probability, there were some color for the objection, but in
the very place to which T. G. referrs, he asserts the highest degree of actual
certainty: Rat. Acc. p. 178, 179.
and that which he calls Moral Certainty, he says is, a firm, rational, and
undoubted certainty. Why then may not Dr. St. discover God in his Creatures,
since he asserts so great an assurance of Gods being their Creator?


R. P. But why then does he call it Moral Certainty?


P. D. It is mere cavilling, when a man's mind is understood, to be quarrelling
at his terms; especially if they be such, as others have used before him, and
seem most agreeable to the nature of the Evidence. For we may conceive these
several sorts of Certainty.

1. A Certainty of Principles: which is that, I suppose, they call Metaphysical
Certainty. For that was the proper Office of Metaphysics, to establish certain
general principles which might be of Use to all other Sciences: such as those,
that both parts of a contradiction cannot be true of the same thing: and that,
of every thing, Arist. Anal. Post. l. 1. c. 11. n. 5, 6, 7. Metaph. l. 1. c.
12. l. 13. c. 1. Philop. in Analyt. l. 1. p. 27.
either the one, or the other part of a contradiction is true. These are such
principles, Metaph. l. 4. c. 6. Themist. in Analyt. Post. l. 1.
of which Aristotle says, it is folly in any man to go about to demonstrate
them, any otherwise than by showing the absurdity of him that denies them:
They are such, Themistius says, which every man has by nature, and without
which he cannot be supposed to learn any thing; and these are called
self-evident and indemonstrable principles; and Axioms; which need no more than
the bare representation of them to the mind, as that the whole is greater than
a part. If you take away equal things from equal, the remainder is equal. For
whatever depends upon Induction, or needs any medium to prove it, more than the
bare perception of terms, was never by any Philosopher accounted an
indemonstrable and self-evident principle. Much less were Identical
propositions taken for first principles, by any man that ever understood what
principles were; as it were very easy to prove, if there were occasion for it.
I have but two things to add concerning this kind of Certainty.

1. That the Certainty of our own Beings, is equal to this Certainty of
Principles. It being a thing of natural and immediate evidence. For the very
doubting as well as thinking proves the certainty of the being of that which
doubts. And where there is such evident perception as of first principles, and
our own beings, the assent is as necessary as for the balance to incline where
the greatest weight lies.

2. That self-evident principles have very little influence upon our knowledge
of other things; and therefore a late Philosopher observes that even that
fundamental principle, (...). l. 2. c. 7. n. 4.
that it is impossible the same thing should be, and not be at the same time,
is of little or no Use for finding out of Truth. And supposing the first
principle of the certainty of our own Beings to be granted the Cartesians
(which no man who thinks can deny them) yet I do not see how the truth of other
things conveyed by our senses can be drawn from thence; the one being an
absolute certainty, the other only depending on a supposition which carries not
equal evidence along with it: which is the next kind.

2. A certainty by sense; or upon supposition, that we are not so framed as not
to be deceived in the most plain and clear perceptions of sense. This is that I
suppose they mean by Physical Certainty. It implies no contradiction we should
be so deceived, and consequently it is short of the first kind of Certainty.
But withal the supposition is so just and reasonable, that such a man's
understanding may be justly questioned, who questions the plain evidence of
sense as to light, and day, and bodies, etc. And all mankind in spite of their
most subtle arguments do trust their senses: and Epictetus well said, Arrian.
l. 2. c. 20.
that if he and two or three more were servants to a Sceptick, they would make
him hang or starve himself if he did not change his opinion. And Galen says,
Galen. de Hippocr. and Plat. decret. l. 2.
the evidence of sense needs no demonstration; for all those things which are
evident to sense are to be believed for themselves.

3. A Certainty by Reason, or of deducing something not known from that which
is known. Which is so evident in Mathematical demonstrations that no man who
understands the terms, and attends to the proof can forbear his assent.
Aristotle did attempt to bring the way of reasoning in other things to
Mathematical certainty; which was the great design of his Logic. To this end
he begins with the explication of simple terms, and so he proceeds to
propositions, and then to the joining of two of these so together that from
thence a third thing may follow by virtue of some middle term wherein they
agree. But because the conclusion may not necessarily follow, where the manner
of reasoning was true, therefore in order to demonstration, he supposes two
sorts of principles. 1. Axioms, or common principles received by all that
understand them. 2. Positions; which are twofold: 1. Suppositions, or
Postulata. 2. Definitions. But after all, he grants that only such things are
capable of Demonstration which have a certain and immutable cause. And he puts
a difference between a necessary conclusion, and a demonstration. The one
depending on the Form of Syllogism, the other upon the necessity of the Cause.
But in demonstrative Syllogisms Aristotle does not require some degree of
necessity but the highest, when the connection between the Subject and Predicate
is so great, that one cannot be defined without the other; so that Logical
Demonstration must be of an inseparable property, and by the most immediate and
necessary cause. But very few things in the world are capable of such
demonstrations, by reason of our ignorance of the essential properties and
immediate causes of things; and those Instances which are brought either by
Aristotle or his Commentators are about such things where demonstration was
least needful, and tend very little to the improvement of our knowledge.

4. A Certainty which supposes some Moral principles, and proceeds upon them.
Such as these, That every Intelligent being acts for some end: That it is not
the interest of mankind to deceive one another: That there are some things fit
to be chosen, and others to be avoided: That circumstances vary the nature of
Actions: That where comparisons are made, the greatest good and the least evil
are to be chosen. Such as these, I call Moral Principles: which have
self-evidence in them to any man that understands the terms. And whatever does
necessarily follow from these principles may be justly called a Moral
Demonstration.

5. A Certainty which supposes an immediate Divine Assistance to preserve the
mind from error, and this is Infallible Certainty. For the mind of man being
of it self liable to mistake in its apprehension and judgment of things,
nothing can preserve it from a possibility of error, but immediate assistance
from God, who cannot be deceived and will not deceive.

These things being premised, we are now to enquire what kind of Certainty that
is, which we have concerning the principles of Religion.

1. For the principles of Natural Religion. You are to consider what kind of
Adversary Dr. St. had to deal with, viz. one who pleaded for an infallible
Certainty, Rat. Acc. p. 178, 206.
as that infallibility does imply Divine Assistance, as necessary in order to
an obligation to Assent. Against this Dr. St. objects, that the main
foundations of all Religion, which are the Being of God and immortality of the
soul, were not capable of this kind of Proof. Because this very notion of
Infallibility does suppose that which he would prove, viz. that there is a God
who must give this assistance. But at the same time he yields, that we have as
great evidence and certainty, as humane nature is capable of, of such a Being
as God is, from the consideration of his Works: which being neither from
Mathematical Demonstrations, nor supernatural infallibility he called Moral
Certainty. Which he might do from these grounds.

1. Because the force of the Argument from the Creatures depends upon some
Moral Principles. Viz. From the suitableness and fitness of things to the
Wisdom of an Intelligent and Infinite Agent, who might from thence be inferred
to be the Maker of them. It being unconceivable that mere matter should ever
produce things in so much beauty, order and usefulness as we see in every
Creature; in an Ant or a Fly as much as in the vast bodies of the Heavens.

2. Because they do suppose some Moral Dispositions in the persons who do most
readily and firmly assent to these Truths. For although men make use of the
highest titles for their arguments, and call them Infallible Proofs,
Mathematical Demonstrations, or what they please; yet we still see men of bad
minds will find something to cavil at, whereby to suspend their assent; which
they do not in mere Metaphysical notions, or in Mathematical Demonstrations.
But virtuous and unprejudiced minds do more impartially judge, and therefore
more readily give their assent: having no byas to incline them another way.
Although therefore the principles be of another nature, and the arguments be
drawn from Idea's, or series of Causes, or whatever medium it be, yet since the
perverseness of men's will may hinder the force of the argument, as to
themselves, the Certainty might be called Moral Certainty.

2. As to the Christian Faith. So he grants,

1. That there are some principles relating to it which have Metaphysical
Certainty in them; as, that Whatever God reveals is impossible to be false, or
as it is commonly expressed, though improperly, is infallibly True.

2. That there is a rational Certainty, that a Doctrine confirmed by such
Miracles as were wrought by Christ and his Apostle must come from God: that
being the most certain Criterion of Divine Revelation.

3. That there was a Physical Certainty of the truth of Christ's Miracles and
Resurrection from the dead, in the Apostles who were eyewitnesses of them.

4. That there was an Infallible Certainty in the Apostles delivering this
doctrine to the world, and writing it for the benefit of the Church in all Ages.

5. That we have a moral Certainty of the matters of Fact, which do concern the
Doctrine, the Miracles, and the Books of Scripture: which is of the same kind
with the certainty those had of Christ's Doctrine and Miracles, who lived in
Mesopotamia, at that time; which must depend upon the credibility of the
Witnesses who convey these things, which is a Moral Consideration, and
therefore the Certainty which is taken from it may be properly called Moral
Certainty. Of which there being many degrees, the highest is here understood,
which any matter of fact is capable of.

And now I pray tell me, what reason has there been for all this noise about
Moral Certainty?


R. P. T. G. owns that the Dr. in other places does acknowledge a true
certainty of the principles of Religion; but, he says, he can say and unsay,
without retracting, Dial. ^. 209.
with as much art and ease as any man he ever read.


P. D. I had thought unsaying had been retracting. But Dr. St. says as much in
those very places T. G. objects against, as in those he allows. Only T. G.
delights in cavilling above most Authors I have ever read.


R. P. But does not Dr. St. allow a possibility of falsehood notwithstanding all
this pretense of Certainty? P. 210.



P. D. Whatever is true, is impossible to be false; and the same degree of
evidence any one has of the truth of a thing, he has of the impossibility of
the falsehood of it: therefore he that has an undoubted certainty of the truth
of Christianity, has the same certainty that it is impossible it should be
false. And because possibility and impossibility are capable of the same
distinctions that Certainty is, therefore according to the nature and degrees
of Certainty is the possibility or impossibility of falsehood. That which is
Metaphysically certain is so impossible to be false, that it implies a
contradiction to be otherwise: but it is not so in Physical Certainty, nor in
all rational Certainty, nor in Moral: and yet, wherever any man is certain of
the truth of a thing, he is proportionably certain that it is impossible to be
false.


R. P. This only relates to the person, and not to the Evidence; Is there any
such evidence of the Existence of a Deity, as can infallibly convince it to be
absolutely true, and so impossible to be false?


P. D. I do not doubt, but that there are such evidences of the Being of God,
as do prove it to any unprejudiced mind impossible to be otherwise. And T. G.
had no reason to doubt of this, from any thing Dr. St. had said, who had
endeavored so early to prove the Being of God, and the Principles of Christian
Faith; Origines Sacrae l. 2. and 3.
before he set himself to consider the Controversies which have happened in the
Christian Church. T. G. therefore might well have spared these reflections, in
a debate of so different a nature; but that he was glad of an opportunity to go
off from the business, as men are, that know they are not like to bring it to a
good issue.


R. P. T. G. confesses this is a digression; but he promises to return to the
matter; and so he does I assure you, for he comes to the second thing, which,
he says, the Dr. ought to have done, Dial. p. 213.
viz. to have showed how the Notion of Idolatry does agree to the Doctrine of
the Church of Rome in her Councils.


P. D. It is a wonder to me, you should think him defective in this, when he
shows that there are two things from whence the sense of the Roman Church is to
be taken; 1. From the Definitions of Councils. 2. From the practice of the
Church.

1. From the Definitions of Councils. And here Defense from p. 5^5. to 605.
he entered upon the consideration of what that worship was, which was required
to be given to Images: and showed from the words of the Council, and from the
Testimony of the most eminent Divines of the Roman Church, that it was not
enough to worship before Images, and to have an intention to perform those
external Acts; but there must be an inward intention to worship the Images
themselves; and that the contrary doctrine was esteemed little better than
downright Heresy.

2. From the Practice of the Church. For he shows many of your best Divines
went upon this principle, that God would not suffer his Church to err; and
therefore they thought the allowed practice of the Church sufficient for them
to defend those things to be lawful which they saw generally practiced. And
from hence he makes it appear that the Church of Rome has gone beyond the
Council of Nice in two things.

1. In making and worshipping Images of God and the B. Trinity, which was
Defense, from p. 556. to p. 575.
esteemed madness and Pagan Idolatry in the time of the second Council of Nice;
and is justified by the modern Divines of the Church of Rome from the general
practice of their Church.

2. In giving the Worship of Latria to Images; Defense, from p. 606. to p. 639.
which was condemned by the Council of Nice; and notwithstanding is defended by
multitudes of Divines in the Roman Church, from the allowed practice in the
Worship of the Cross; both before and after the Council of Trent.

After which he enquires at large into the public Offices, and commended
Devotions of that Church in respect to Images, and from thence he Defense, from
p. 639. to p. 699.
proves that 1. As to Consecration of Images for worship, 2. As to the Rites of
Supplication to them; 3. As to pompous procession with them, the modern Church
of Rome does not fall short of the practice of Pagan Rome.

And do you think all this is not applying the notion of Idolatry home to the
Roman Church? When, 1. He shows by the principles of the second Council of
Nice, the modern practices of the Church of Rome are chargeable with Idolatry.
2. That the practices agreeable with that Council were charged with Idolatry by
the Western Church in the Council of Francford, not from any mistake of their
meaning, but because they looked on the Worship then decreed to be proper
adoration.


R. P. Dial. p. 214.
But T. G. says, If the Worship defined by the Council of Nice were inferior
Worship, and not Latria, as Dr. St. confesses, then nothing can be clearer
than that it was not the Worship due to God, and consequently the Church of
Rome cannot be chargeable with Idolatry from any thing contained in that decree.


P. D. Will T. G. never understand the difference between the intention of the
person and the Nature of the Act? They might declare it to be only inferior
Worship, but the Council of Francford took it to be proper adoration which was
due only to God. And if that Councils Judgment must stand; all those in the
Church of Rome who give Latria to the Cross, must be guilty of Idolatry.


R. P. Does not the Church of England allow bowing to the Altar, which if the
Altar had any sense would think were done to it; as T. G. says, Dial. p. 215,
etc.
he was certainly informed of a Country fellow who being got near the Altar in
his Majesty's Chapel, thought all the Congies had been made to him, and so
returned Congy for Congy. And if bowing may be used out of Religious respect to
the Altar, why not kneeling, or prostration, or fixing our eyes in time of
Prayer, or burning Incense or Lights before the Images of Christ and his
Saints: but how can Dr. St. purge the Church of England from Idolatry in that
practice, when he says, that any Image being made so far the object of Divine
Worship, that men do bow down before it, (and he supposes the same will hold
for any other creature) it does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is
forbidden in the second Commandment?


P. D. What would T. G. have done, had it not been for this practice of bowing
toward the Altar? when yet he cannot but know that the practice of it is not
enjoined by our Church, for the Canon leaves it at liberty; If the Church of
Rome did the same about the Worship of Images, the parallel would hold somewhat
better. But the Church of Rome declares Religious Worship is to be given to
Images, and our Church declares that none is to be given to the Altar, and does
not this make an apparent difference? If the Country fellow standing without
the rails fancied the Congies made to himself; what would he have done, if he
had stood within an Image of our Lady, and seen all the Courtship that had been
used toward her by some of her devoted servants and slaves; when he beheld the
bare knees bleeding, the tears trickling, the breast knocking, the eyes scarce
lifted up to show the greater reverence and humility toward the Image, what
could he have thought, but that he was shut up within the bowels of the Goddess
they worshipped? Whereas if the Country fellow had gone up into the Court, and
seen the ancient servants make their Reverences after dinner in the Presence
chamber, he would soon have been better informed; if some of the old Courtiers
had told him, it was the ancient Custom of the Court to make their Reverences
in all Chambers of Presence, and from thence when they went into his Majesty's
Chapel they used the same custom out of Reverence to God Almighty whose
Presence Chamber they accounted the Chapel to be. What is all this to giving
Religious Worship to the Altar? wherein the force of all T. G. says must lie.


R. P. But you do bow before the Altar, as we do before Images.


P. D. I utterly deny that. For your Church declares bowing before Images
without an intention to worship the Images is next to Heresy, (if we are to
take the sense of your Councils from their own words and the explication of
Divines;) You explode their Doctrine who say, that we are only to worship God
before them. And is there no difference between the Acts of these two men as to
Images themselves? The one declares that he looks on no Religious worship as
due to an Image, but it serves him only to put him in mind of him who is the
proper object of Worship, and he never intends by any Act of his to worship the
Image it self: another says, the Church requires Images to be worshipped, and
for my part I think my self bound to do what the Church requires, and therefore
it is my intention to give Worship not barely to the object represented, but to
the very Image it self, although it be on the account of its representation.
And the latter Dr. St. has showed to be the only allowed sense in the Church
of Rome, and the other rejected either as heretical or next to it. Which T. G.
never so much as once takes notice of. But however this does not reach our
case; for we believe the second Commandment to be still in force, which is
express and positive against all worship of Images, and bowing down to them,
but that which was lawful among the Jews, notwithstanding that precept, viz. to
Worship God toward the Mercy Seat, is still lawful among Christians, viz. to
Worship God alone, but toward the Altar. And thus I hope T. G. will at last be
brought a little better to understand the sense of our Church in this practice,
and how far it is from being a parallel with your Worship of Images.


R. P. T. G. finds great fault with Dr. St. 's citation out of Card. Lugo,
about submission to Images, Dial. from p. 218. to p. 227.
because he left out aliquis, and potest dici, and I tell you, he makes a huge
outcry about it, and fills up several pages with it.


P. D. Does he truly? It was a great sign he wanted matter to fill up his book.
But I pray on what occasion was this passage brought in? It may be that will
give us some light into this matter.


R. P. T. G. referrs to the page, but he never mentions the occasion. It is
such a page. Defense, p. 599.



P. D. Let us see, what Dr. St. was proving in that place. It was, that by the
Council of Nice as it is explained by the Divines of the Roman Church, true and
real Worship is to be given to Images; P. 575.
and for this he produces the several Testimonies of Suarez, Medina, Victoria,
Catharinus, Naclantus, Bellarmine, Soto, Velosillus, Pujol, Tannerus,
Ysambertus, Bassaeus, Sylvius, Arriaga, and at last Card. Lugo. If the thing be
not proved, which he designed, why is Card. Lugo alone produced? If it be
proved, why is Card. Lugo produced at all?


R.P. Because he left out aliquis and dici potest.


P. D. But suppose the other be sufficient to express his concurrence with the
rest, what unfairness is there in that, to shorten his words when he lays no
weight upon the manner, but upon the thing? Had Dr. St. charged Lugo with
holding greater submission than the rest, and then left out the qualifying
expressions, he had done him injury. But he knew Lugo meant no more than the
rest, and produced him for no other purpose. If there be but any inward
affection carried to the Image, which may be called a certain kind of
submission to the Image, it is all one to Dr. St.'s purpose; which was only to
prove, as he says, in the same page, from the Acts of the Council, and the
Judgment of their learned and eminent Divines, that by the Decree of the
Nicene Council such true and real Worship is to be given to Images as is
terminated upon the Images themselves. Did these Testimonies prove this, or did
they not? If they did not; why did not T. G. discover them all? if they did;
why does he so vainly cavil, about some thing impertinent to the main business,
in the very last of all? So that, after all this cry, there is very little
Wool, unless it be that which is made of Goats hair.


R. P. But this tends to breed an impression in the Reader, that the inward
affection Card. Lugo required was of giving submission to an Image as
superior; because in another place he quotes the same Author for making cultus
to signify Reverence toward Superiors.


P. D. But does not the Cardinal say so?


R. P. T. G. says nothing to the contrary, which I am sure he would have done,
if he had not.


P. D. Well then; Lugo makes worship to be a Reverence toward Superiors; but
he says, that true worship is due to Images. And is not this making the Image
Superior?


R. P. I thought where I should have you; but T. G. has explained Lugo's
meaning from himself.


P. D. Let me hear it as T. G. that candid and ingenuous dealer has it.


R. P. 1. He says, When we worship an Image, the inward affection is not
carried to the Image, after the same manner it is to the Prototype; for we
worship the Prototype absolutely, i. e. for its own proper excellency; but the
Image only with a relative worship, i. e. for the excellency not of the Image
it self, but of the Prototype, which kind of Worship he affirms to be far
inferior to the other, which is absolute.

2. We have not the same inward submission toward the Image, which we have
toward the Prototype; for we submit our selves to the Prototype, acknowledging
it to be more excellent than our selves, and superior to us, which kind of
submission we cannot prudently conceive to belong to an Image; nor indeed any
at all, by which we submit our selves to it, preferring it before us.

3. The sole external act of kissing or bowing is not so carried to the Image
but that some inward affection also goes along with it, which he says, may be
called also some kind of affection of submission; by which he means an
affection of submitting our selves to the Image; for as much as the Act of the
Will from which it proceeds is an affection of performing those acts about
their Images, which we are wont to exercise toward our Superiors.


P. D. Now I hope, we have the Cardinals true meaning. From whence I desire you
to observe.

1. That the difference he puts between the Worship of the Image and the
Prototype lies in the inward estimation of the Excellency of the one above the
other; which is as much as to say, that he does really think there is more
excellency in Christ himself than in a Crucifix. Which deserves a special
remark; especially being made by a Cardinal. When one might venture to say,
that there is scarce an Idolater so sottish in the world, but will acknowledge
his Deity to be much better than the Image of him; and that he worships one for
his own excellency, and the other only out of respect to him.

2. He acknowledges, that all those Acts whereby we express reverence toward
Superiors may be used toward Images, as bowing, kneeling, prostration, etc.

3. That there is some kind of inward affection which may be called a certain
kind of affection of submission going along with these external Acts. And does
not all this amount to true and real worship? which was the thing Dr. St.
designed to prove. For here, without exception, all those Acts whereby our
reverence toward Superiors is expressed, may be used to Images; i. e. all
tokens of submission to them, and an inward affection of some kind, which may
be called affection of submission. By which we find it yielded to us that all
external Acts of Adoration may be given to Images, provided, that the inward
affection be carried after a different manner to the Prototype and to the
Image; which no Idolater in the world, if Maimonides may be believed, would
ever deny: if they believed any other Gods besides their Idols, as he says,
there were none but did. So that Card. Lugo upon fair ground gives up all
peculiarity of any external Acts of Divine Worship; and for all that I can see,
may sacrifice to an Image, or offer up the Host to it, on the same reasons that
they make their prostrations before it. And he understood the consequence of
his own Doctrine so well, that he does not seem to boggle at it on the account
of adoration. But as long as T. G. yields that Cardinal Lugo does allow all
external Acts of submission to Images, and such an inward affection as to make
that submission sincere and real, Dr. St. has all which his heart could desire
from this testimony of Lugo.


R. P. But all this amounts to no more, T. G. says from him, but that the
Prototype deserves to be treated honorably, not only in it self, but in all
things which have connection with it, as an Image or the like.


P. D. That is, God may be worshipped in any Creature; and any act of adoration
may be performed toward it, if it have a respect to him: whether by a real or
imaginary presence. Which takes away the distinction of divine worship as it is
applied to outward acts, and all necessary discrimination between the Worship
we give to God and to his Creatures; And if this be for the honor of his
Sovereignty and Dominion over us, let the world judge.


R. P. After all this, T. G. says, Dial. p. 228.
that Dr. St. agrees with Cardinal Lugo in the thing, although he quarrels with
him about the words.


P. D. That is news indeed. How does T. G. make that out?


R. P. Because he says from Aquinas, that although no irrational or inanimate
being be capable of that real excellency to deserve any honor from us for its
own sake; Defense, p. 600, 601.
yet on the account of a relation to divine things they may deserve a different
regard and usage from other things.


P. D. This is true; but he immediately distinguishes from St. Augustine between
the peculiarity of use belonging to the sacred utensils, and the worship given
to Images.


R. P. That is no matter how he distinguishes, as long as the consequence holds
from one to the other. For if a Religious respect be due to sacred places and
things on the account of their Relation to God, Dial. p. 229, 230, 231.
and an inward intention of the mind to express it toward them by an outward
token of submission, as bowing to the Altar, it comes to the same thing which
Cardinal Lugo pleads for to an Image, so that if one be Idolatry, the other
must be so too. So that T. G. concludes very triumphantly that by these
edge-tools, viz. School-distinctions Dr. St. has cut the throat of his own
Cause. And then he brings in the Patronus bonae Fidei again.


P. D. Methinks another writing of the same worthy Author had been much more
proper, called Jugulum Causae. But is it possible for T. G. not to apprehend
the difference of these things? I will once more endeavor to make it plain to
you. The reverence to sacred places and things differs from the relative
worship of Images in these things.

1. In the Acts belonging to them. For this I need only to repeat Dr. St.'s
words. Is there no difference between a Religious respect (if I may so call it)
to sacred places and things, Defense, p. 603.
and all the most solemn Acts of Adoration which were ever given to Images by
the most sottish Idolaters? Such as kneelings before them, prostrations,
praying with their eyes fixed upon them, as though they were speaking to them,
burning incense and lights before them, which are as great testimonies of
worship as ever were used by the greatest and most sottish Idolaters. And here
Cardinal Lugo allows all external acts of submission to Images; whereas in the
other case, discrimination is all that is contended for, out of Reverence to
them. As for bowing toward the Altar, it has been so often answered before,
that I shall not repeat.

2. In the Reason of Worship. For if the Reason assigned for the Worship of
Images be peculiar to them, then it cannot hold for all sacred things and
places. Now the Reason of the Worship of Images is representation of the
Prototype as present to the fancy of him that worships; but this cannot hold
for the sacred Vtensils and places which have their honor for the sake of the
use they are dedicated to. Thus if Images in Churches were appointed only for
use without any worship to be given to them, it would come much nearer to a
parallel, than they can do now, when they are consecrated and set up on purpose
for adoration; as they are continually in the Roman Church.

3. In the distinction the Law of God makes between them. For when it most
severely prohibits the worship of Images, it not only allows but commands the
reverencing Gods Sanctuary; and the consecrating Sacred Vessels for the use of
the Temple. So that where the Law distinguishes we have reason to do it too:
and so the Christian Church did, when it looked on the worship of Images as
unlawful, yet they did show respect and honor to sacred things and places: and
honor is all they are capable of as St. Augustine says, but no worship does
belong to them. So that these Edge-Tools do no execution at all but upon T.
G.'s Images; which could never have been framed without them, and yet are
destroyed by them.


R. P. You think to escape about the Doctor's unfaithful reporting the sense of
Authors with this one Testimony of Cardinal Lugo; but you are deceived, I have
another ready for you of Gregory Nyssen.


P. D. Another! I expected hundreds upon T. G.'s outcries. Dial. p. p. 226.
When he says, the Citations are many and long, and out of Authors of all
Nations, and all Ages, and all Religions. What! but another?


R. P. You would have T. G. write an Answer as big as Foxes Acts and Monuments,
but you are deceived, he is wiser than so. For he has a particular aversion to
a great Book upon one subject. If he can discover four or five citations
faulty, that will take away the reputation of all the rest.


P. D. A very short way I confess. Methinks one or two may serve; and save
Candle and Firing, and Waste-paper. Nay one single Testimony may do it, with an
end of an old Latin verse tacked to it, Crimine ab uno -- especially such a
one as this of Cardinal Lugo. But, however let us hear that of Gregory Nyssen.


R. P. It is about the Arians being charged with Idolatry: Dial. p. 234.
which is brought in with a great deal of Pomp among other Testimonies, to show
that the Arians were charged with Idolatry for the worship they gave to Christ,
whom they acknowledged to be a Creature, from thence to parallel their worship
with that of the Church of Rome to the Saints.


P. D. I am glad to hear but one of those Testimonies challenged; for if that
be given up, there are enough remaining to prove his design: which you mightily
mistake, if you think it was only to parallel your worship of Saints with the
Arians Idolatry. For this is never so much as mentioned by Dr. St.; but he
names several considerable advantages which are gained by it in this subject of
Idolatry.

1. That there may be Idolatry where the true God is owned, and worshipped, as
he was no doubt among the Arians; from whence it follows, that the Nature of
Idolatry does not consist in giving Sovereign Worship to a Creature, without
respect to the Creator. Which will be of use to us in the debate about the
Pagan Idolatry.

2. That Relative Latria being given to a Creature is Idolatry, for
notwithstanding they looked on Christ as the express Image of God; yet because
they gave divine worship to him, supposing him to be a Creature, they were
charged with Idolatry.

3. That making God the Fountain and Original of those excellencies for which
any Creature is worshipped does not excuse from Idolatry. For the Arians were
guilty who supposed all the excellencies of Christ to be derived from God.

4. That no distinction of Doulia and Latria does excuse from Idolatry; For the
Fathers make the giving Doulia to Christ to be Idolatry.

5. That the notion of an Idol is so far from being a mere imaginary figment or
Chimera, that it was attributed by the Fathers to the most excellent Being,
even to Christ himself, when Divine Worship was given to him as a Creature.

These are matters of great moment, if they hold good; does he pass all these
by, only to fall upon one single Testimony? If he does, it is a shrewd sign,
though he cried out of Gregory Nyssen, yet he was pinched somewhere else. Well;
but what is this horrible crime about Gregory Nyssen? Has he brought him under
an Index Expurgatorius? Has he falsified his words and corrupted the Text? Or
has he wilfully altered his sense and meaning? Has he done it in all the
quotations out of him, or only in one? Whatever it is, let us have it.


R. P. It is in the citation out of his Oration de laudibus Basilii.


P. D. But the Dr. has three or four more out of the same Author. It seems
they stand well enough. Has not the Dr. truly cited his words?


R. P. Yes, T. G. says, as to the general truly enough.


P. D. What is the fault then?


R. P. That he does not add the words that follow, wherein he shows what kind
of worship that was which the Arians gave to Christ; Dial. p. 234, etc.
viz. not only to worship and serve him, but also to six hopes of salvation in
a Creature and to expect judgment from it. And was it not neatly done of the
Doctor to wrap up all this in those short words, The Devil persuaded men to
return to the worship of the Creature? Which is a Laconism not observed by him
on other occasions: but it was here done on purpose to conceal from the Reader
the apparent difference between the worship of Saints in the Church of Rome,
and the Arians worship of Christ.


P. D. I am glad, it is out at last, after so much straining. See how much
choler there is in it! Indeed, it might have done him much harm, if he had kept
it in any longer. But I wonder the Laconick Gentleman does complain of
shortness. Do you think the Laconian in Boccalini would have made such a noise
for missing a page or two in Guicciardins War of Pisa? Do you in earnest think
Dr. St. should take such pains to conceal that which every one knows, that the
Arians fixed their hopes of Salvation on Christ, and expected him to come to
Judgment? What wonderful discovery is this, which T. G. has made? Nay Dr. St.
himself takes notice of this Objection, Defense, p. 519.
that they did give a higher degree of worship to Christ than any do to Saints;
and returns this Answer to it; that they did only give a degree of worship
proportionable to the degrees of excellency supposed to be in him far above any
other creatures whatsoever. But still that worship was inferior to that which
they gave to God the Father: and at the highest such as the Platonists gave to
their celestial Deities. And although the Arians did invocate Christ and put
their trust in him, yet they still supposed him to be a creature, and therefore
believed that all the Power and Authority he had was given to him: so that the
worship they gave to Christ must be inferior to that honor they gave to the
Supreme God whom they believed to be Supreme, Absolute and Independent.


R. P. T. G. takes notice of this Answer, and objects two things against it.
First, Dial. p. 247.
That it stands too far off from the words of Nyssen at the distance of 350
pages; and so proves a very late salve for so old a wound.


P. D. Especially, considering how poor Nyssen lay a bleeding all that while.
Is it not enough for us to unswer Objections; unless we put them just in the
page you would have them, after the way of Objections and Solutions? I pity the
hard fate of the Laconian that has 350 leaves to turn over, longer than the
War of Pisa. O for the Galleys! But I hope he will consider better of it.


R. P. You may jest as you please at this Answer; but the second is a very
solid one: for T. G. shows the parallel to be inconsistent, both with the
practice of the Arians, and Doctrine of the Fathers.


P. D. What parallel does he mean? Dr. St. proves from hence inferior relative
worship given to a creature to be Idolatry, in the sense of the Fathers. Is
this true, or is it not?


R. P. You have not patience to hear T. G.'s answer out. For,

1. He says, The Fathers do acknowledge a worship due to the Saints, Dial. p.
248, etc.
and particularly Gregory Nyssen in an Oration produced by him: and therefore
if they had condemned the Arians of Idolatry for giving only a like worship to
Christ though in a higher degree, they had condemned themselves for the like
crime.

2. The Arians made no such Apology for themselves, as the Doctor makes for
them, viz. that they gave Sovereign and absolute worship to God, and only
inferior and relative worship to Christ.

3. Why might not the generality at least believe Christ to be of a superior
Order, so as to have true Divinity in him, as the Heathens did of their lesser
Gods, and that being assumed as a Consort in the Empire, absolute Divine Honor
was due to him?

4. They were chargeable with Idolatry, because they did avowedly give those
Acts of Worship to Christ believing him to be a Creature, which by the common
consent and public practice of Christians, from whence exterior signs in the
duties of Religion receive their determination, were understood to be due only
to God incarnate. Which makes their case very much different from that of the
Church of Rome, which gave to Saints and Images only such Acts of Worship as by
the common use and practice of the Christian World before Luther, were
determined and understood, when applied to Saints and Images, to express an
inferior degree of Reverence or Worship, than what is due to God himself. This
is the substance of T. G.'s answer.


P. D. I confess T. G. now offers something worthy a serious debate. Which may
be reduced to these two things.

1. What those Acts of Worship were, which the Arians were charged with
Idolatry for giving to Christ supposing him a Creature.

2. How far the Church of Rome is liable to the same charge, for the worship
she gives to Saints and Images.

1. For the Acts of Worship which the Arians were charged with Idolatry in
giving to Christ as a Creature. The strength of T. G.'s answer lies in two
things. 1. That they were given absolutely to Christ, as a lesser God. 2. That
they were such Acts which by the consent of the Church did signify proper
Divine worship.


1. Let us consider whether the worship given to Christ could be absolute upon
their supposition that Christ was a Creature. T. G. speaks somewhat faintly in
this matter, at first saying only, Why might it not be absolute? at least as to
the generality? But afterward, he takes heart, and says roundly that the
Fathers evermore charge the Arians for giving absolute Divine Worship to
Christ, Dial. p. 250.
although they believed him to be of a different nature from the Supreme God:
which he hopes is far enough from the Doctors relative or inferior Worship. But
I am very far from being satisfied with this Answer. For I pray tell me wherein
lies the difference between Sovereign Worship, and Inferior: In Acts of the
Mind, or in External Acts?


R. P. In Internal doubtless; on T. G.'s principles, who makes External Acts to
signify according to the determination of the Church.


P. D. What are those Internal Acts wherein the Worship of the Supreme God
consists?


R. P. A due esteem of his excellency, and suitable affection to it.


P. D. Must not this due esteem distinguish him from all Creatures?


R. P. Yes surely; for otherwise it can be no due esteem: the distance being
infinite between God and his Creatures.


P. D. Can a man then have an equal esteem of God and a Creature? which he
acknowledges to be made by him?


R. P. Certainly not.


P. D. Then it must be unequal, according to the difference of uncreated and
created excellencies.


R. P. Yes.


P. D. Then the Worship must be unequal; and that which is given to a Creature
must be inferior worship.


R. P. But T. G. says, they might believe true Divinity to be in him, as the
Heathens did of their lesser Gods.


P. D. True Divinity! What is that, when they believed him to be a Creature?
did they take him for an uncreated creature? For that can be no true Divinity
which is not uncreated; and yet you confess they owned Christ to be a Creature.
What nonsense and contradiction would T. G. cry out upon, if Dr. St. had ever
said any such thing?


R. P. Might not they believe Christ to be assumed as Consort in the Empire,
and so absolute Divine Honor to be due to him?


P. D. What do you mean by this absolute Divine Honor? For I have already
proved it must be inferior Worship.


R. P. I do suppose absolute Divine Honor is that which is given to a Being on
the account of its own excellency, and relative from the respect it has to
another.


P. D. But whether absolute or relative, it is proper Divine Honor you mean.
And does not that imply an esteem of proper divine excellency, and is not that
proper to God alone and uncreated? How then can this absolute Divine Honor be
given to a Created Being?


R. P. How did the Gentiles to their false Gods?


P. D. Just as the Arians, for they made distinctions in their worship; as will
appear when we come to that subject.


R. P. What do you make then this worship of the Arians to be?


P. D. An Inferior and Relative Worship; for they supposed they worshipped God,
when they gave those Acts of Worship to Christ which were agreeable to the
excellencies that were in him.


R. P. But (2.) Those Acts were such as by the consent of the Church were
understood to be due only to God incarnate.


P. D. Here we are to know, both what these Acts were; and what power the
Church has to impose a signification upon them.


R. P. T. G. names these. 1. Worshipping and serving him with Latria. Dial. p.
249, 251.
2. Putting their trust in him as Mediator of Redemption. 3. Invoking him as
the Judge of the quick and the dead, etc.


P. D. What means this etc. I am afraid here is something beyond the trick
about Gregory Nyssen, which lies under this Dragons Tail. Are these all which
Dr. St. mentioned?


R. P. I know not that; if you know more I am sure to hear of it.


P. D. You are not mistaken; for Dr. St. had showed at large, (1.) That
external adoration was one of those things which the Fathers charged the Arians
with Idolatry for giving to Christ supposing him to be a Creature: from Peter's
forbidding Cornelius, Defense, p. 165, 175, 178.
and the Angel St. John; because this is only proper to God: from the plain
testimonies of Athanasius, Epiphanius and St. Cyril. (2.) That invocation of
Christ as a Mediator of Intercession, was condemned as Idolatry in the Arians.
Athanasius supposes it inconsistent with Christianity to join Christ, P. 166.
if he were a creature, in our prayers, together with God. (3.) That they made
no such distinction of worshipping and serving with Latria, as T. G.
insinuates. For he shows from the Testimonies of Athanasius, P. 163. P. 171. P.
178. P. 180.
and even Gregory Nyssen, St. Cyril and Theodoret, that the very worship which
they condemn for Idolatry is called Doulia by them. And therefore these are
mere shifts and evasions which do not remove the difficulty at all. I deny not,
but they did put their trust in Christ for Salvation, and expect his coming to
judge the quick and the dead; but I say these were but expressions suitable to
the apprehensions they had of his excellencies above any other Creatures, but
still inferior to Gods: and the Fathers did not charge them with Idolatry
merely for these Acts, but for the other likewise mentioned before.


R. P. But T. G. has a reserve still behind, viz. that it is in the Churches
Power to determine the signification of external Acts of Worship, what belongs
to Sovereign or proper Divine Worship, and what to inferior worship; that at
that time the Church might take those for Acts of Divine Worship which
afterward by consent of the Church came only to signify inferior Acts of
Worship when applied to Creatures; and therefore the argument cannot hold from
that time to after Ages.


P.D. I think you have hit upon T.G.'s meaning: and in truth it is the only
thing to be said in the case. For if Idolatry be a thing in the Churches Power
to determine, it is the only way in the world for the Church of Rome to free
her self (supposing that power to be lodged in her); but if it should happen
that the Law of God, the consent of Nations, the Reason of Divine Worship and
the Practice of the Primitive Church have determined Idolatry antecedently to
the power of the present Church: what a case are you then in? The guilt of
Idolatry must lie heavily upon you, and if it be so great a sin as your own
Schoolmen determine, you have a great deal to answer for; notwithstanding all
the tricks and evasions of T. G. But why does not T. G. make the external Acts
of Theft, Adultery, Murder and Perjury, as much under the Churches power as
those of Idolatry? But I forbear now, supposing that we shall meet with this
useful notion again before we end this debate.


R. P. You are mistaken, if you think T. G. had no other answer to give: For he
says, they could not be understood of that worship which our Church gives to
Saints, because they acknowledge an inferior worship due to the Saints; for
which he quotes St. Austin, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Hierom and Gregory Nyssen.


P. D. Had T. G. the confidence to quote St. Augustine again for this, when Dr.
St. purposely answered this very Testimony in his Book which T. G. pretends
here to answer, and proves evidently from him that no worship was then given to
the Saints? Defense, p. 336.
and to all this T. G. returns nothing, but however he brings the same
Testimony again; as whole and as sound, and as much to the purpose as ever.
Gregory Nazianzen is quoted at peradventure, for I remember nothing in the
Orat. de Not. Christ. to that purpose, although I lately read it over. St.
Hierom speaks only of reverencing the Sepulchers of the Martyrs: but all the
weight lies upon Gregory Nyssen, and what, I pray, says this single Witness to
the business?


R.P. More than you will be willing to hear, or able to answer. For in his
Oration upon St. Theodore that great and holy Martyr, (which even Rivetus
himself that capricious Fanatic in Criticism does not question to be his
genuine work) he commends the peoples devotion to the Martyrs, Dial. p. 238.
he describes the magnificent structure of the Temple, the pieces of Sculpture
in it, and especially the picture of the Martyr; then coming to the Shrine he
shows the esteem they had for his Relics; and if they were admitted to touch
his body, they embrace it as if they beheld it yet alive; and weeping over it
as if he were whole before them, they solicit his supplication and
intercession, beseeching him as a Champion of God, and invocating him as one
that could obtain blessings, when he would, for them. And then he dilates
himself upon the Acts of the Martyr and the great benefits they received by
him: and at the end of his Oration addresses himself to him in these words, We
stand in need of many benefits, do thou intercede and deprecate with our common
King and Lord for thy Country. Do thou as a Soldier fight in our defense. And
in case there be need of greater intercession call an Assembly of thy Brother
Martyrs; let the prayers of many just persons expiate the sins of multitudes of
Offenders. Admonish Peter, excite Paul, and John also the beloved Disciple to
be solicitors for the Churches they have founded; that Idolatry may not lift up
its head, that Heresies may not overgrow the Vineyard, etc. But by the Power of
thine and thy fellows intercession, O admirable man, and eminent among Martyrs,
the Christian Church may be a plentiful Field of Harvest, etc. If Dr. St. had
been present at this Oration, says T. G. how may we think would his zeal have
urged him to have cried out Idolatry, Dial. p. 242.
flat Idolatry, very real Idolatry, mere Heathenish Idolatry.


P. D. I am not of your mind in this; for I suppose he would have considered
the allowances to be made for an eloquent person in a Panegyrical Oration; when
things are amplified, heightened, improved, with all the most moving figures and
strains of Rhetoric to excite the Auditors admiration and affection to the
party commended. And he must be a great stranger to the Schools of Eloquence
that will form doctrines and devotions from Apostrophe's and Prosopopeia's. I
do not think Dr. St. would have charged Cicero a jot the more for Idolatry for
his praying to the Hills and Woods of Alba, Vos Albani tumuli atque luci, oro
atque obtestor: What! flat Idolatry! Heathenish Idolatry! praying to Hills and
Woods. No such matter. For so Rhetoricians will tell T. G. what great scope
Orators may take in the representation of persons and the things done by them;
and how mightily those figures both adorn the Oration and move the Auditors;
But withal, that these are figures it is very easy to exceed in, and it
requires great judgment to manage them with a due decorum. If it were needful
for T. G. I could produce the Testimonies of both Greek and Latin Rhetoricians
to this purpose. All the question is, whether Gregory Nyssen spoke like an
Orator in these expressions, for which we must consider the character of the
Person, and the Occasion of speaking. As to Gregory Nyssen, Gregory Nazianzen
severely rebukes him in a whole Epistle for affecting more the Glory of an
Orator than of a Christian; Greg. Naz. Ep. 43.
and this after he was a Priest, and devoted to the service of Christ; in so
much that many Christians were very much offended at him. And what wonder is it
to find such a person, on such an occasion as making a Panegyrical Oration on a
Martyr, laying on all his colors, opening his perfuming pots, and using more
the figures of an Orator, than the exactness of a Divine? Nay, it was become so
general a Custom among their Eloquent men to exceed in their Panegyrical
Orations, that I find Theodoret quoted for saying, No rule of Doctrine is to be
taken from them. Theod. Dial. 3.
And it is agreed by your Divines as well as our own, that the Fathers in their
popular Orations do make use of such bold figures, as are not to be made a
foundation for doctrines to be taken from them. Therefore this Apostrophe to
Theodorus by Gregory Nyssen is no argument to prove invocation of Saints; there
being a great difference between flowers of Rhetoric and Forms of Devotion.


R. P. But he commends the devotion of the people to the Martyrs, and calls it
a pure worship.


P. D. That he might well do, as the solemnities of the Martyrs were observed
out of honor to God and the Christian Religion. For then the Christians met at
the Tombs of the Martyrs to perform the public worship of God there; and
afterward erected Churches upon their memories, so that the place, the time,
the occasion of meeting was for the honor of the Martyrs, but the worship was
given to God alone.


R. P. Does not Gregory Nyssen take notice of the peoples soliciting his
supplication and intercession with God for them, as their Champion, etc.


P. D. I grant he does so; but observe his words; he says the people when they
touch any part of his body, (which was very rarely granted) they embraced it,
as if it had been living; and wept over it; and then he adds (...). As if he
had been whole and appeared before them, (which last word (...) T. G. very
conveniently left out, which I leave to the reader to judge of, as a Testimony
of T. G.'s sincerity, at the very same time he charges Dr. St. for the same
fault) they solicit his intercession, beseeching him as the Champion of God,
and calling upon him as one that received gifts when he pleased. I do not think
this Superstition of the People was to be excused, which began most early to
appear in the parts of Cappadocia and Pontus, and the reason of it is not hard
to give, from the turning the Heathen Festivals into Christian Solemnities to
the Martyrs, of which Gregory Nyssen speaks in the Life of Gregory
Thaumaturgus; Greg. Nyss. in vit. Greg. p. 574.
but however, this was not any solemn invocation of him, as a part of Religious
Worship, but an occasional and rare thing, and done upon supposition, as if he
had been alive and then present among them. And that the practice of these men
who seemed most to make addresses to Saints in the fourth Century did differ
from the invocation of Saints in your Church, I shall make appear by these
particulars.

1. Invocation of Saints is made a solemn part of Religious Worship in the
Church of Rome. For which, we do not run to some extravagant expressions of
your Preachers; nor barely to the Ave Mary's they use in their Pulpits, of
which no single instance can be produced out of Antiquity; but to the public,
solemn Authorized Offices of your Church. And although you may say, the Church
is not answerable for the indiscretion of Preachers, or the Figures of Poets,
yet certainly she is for all standing and allowed Offices of Divine Worship.
And this is that we charge you with, that by this you make Religious Worship of
the Creatures, a part of your constant and solemn worship. Even in the Mass it
self, you begin with confession to God and to his Creatures (which Athanasius
accounted so great an impiety, to join God and his Creature together in an Act
of Worship) and afterward pray to them. And although in the plain Canon of the
Mass you pretend there is scarce any, or but twice or thrice, a direct
invocation of the Saints; yet upon occasional and anniversary Masses, such
Invocation is very frequent, as in the Masses of the Festivals of the Blessed
Virgin, which are many in the year; the Mass for Women with Child; the Masses
of the Apostles, the Angel Michael and many Saints: which it were tedious to
repeat. It would be endless to give an account how much of your Breviaries,
Hours, Litanies, and private Offices of Devotion is stuffed out with formal
addresses to Saints. If you but cast your eye on any of the Offices of the B.
Virgin, you cannot question the truth of this. Now I pray tell me, where you
meet with any like this in Antiquity; you may pick up some flourishes of
Orators or Poets in the fourth Century; but what are these to the standing
Offices of the Church; which are the standard of Divine Worship? Name me any
one Liturgy of the Church, which is Authentic, that had the name of a^y Saint
or Creature in it by way of Invocation before the time of Petrus Fallo, who is
no Author to be gloried in. And of him indeed Nicephorus says, that he first
brought the Invocation of the Blessed Virgin into the Prayers of the Church.
Niceph. Callist. l. 15. c. 28.
Before his time, the Fathers utterly deny there was any Invocation of Saints
in the Prayers of the faithful, Defense p. 340, to 347.
as Dr. St. has evidently proved from St. Augustine: and methinks T. G. should
have said something or other to it, and not think this poor single Testimony of
Gregory Nyssen would overthrow all.

2. The Invocation of Saints in your Church is direct and formal, not merely by
way of desire to pray for them, but to bestow blessings upon them. Of which Dr.
St. has produced several late Instances in Books of Devotion now in use here
in England; Defense, p. 293. to 305.
to which many more might be added, if it were needful. And it is a wonder to
me, that any man who has looked into the Offices of the B. Virgin can make the
least doubt of this. And considering the Titles given her in the Roman Church,
it were a disparagement to her, not to pray directly to her for blessings. For
if she be the Fountain of Grace and Mercy, the Mother of Consolation, the
Safety of all that trust in her, the Dispenser of Graces to whom she pleases,
the Queen of Heaven to whom all Power is committed, the Mediatrix between her
Son and us; as she is styled in the Roman Church; why may not men pray as
directly to her as to Christ himself? As long as these and many other Titles
are owned in their Prayers, in their Sacred Hymns, in their Commentators on
Scripture, and not merely in their Poets and Orators. Why does T. G. go about
to deceive the world in making it believe that all their Invocation is only
praying to pray for them? Which is all that is pretended to be used in the
Ancient Church: And Cassander thinks they were rather wishes and desires than
prayers; Cassand. Ep. 19. Op. p. 1109.
for which he gives a very good reason, viz. that there was a condition
expressed by them; such as that of Greg. Nazianzen in his Oration on his Sister
Gorgonia. If thou have any regard to our affairs, and if this be part of the
reward of holy Souls to be sensible of things done below, receive this Office
of Kindness from me. Which shows they had no confidence or assurance that the
Saints in Heaven did understand our affairs, and therefore all expressions of
this kind in them were rather Wishes than Prayers. And even Greg. Nyssen in
this Oration upon Theodore supposes, Greg. Nyssen Orat. in Theod. p. 585.
that unless he came down from above wherever he was, whether in the
Ethereal Region, or Celestial, or Angelical, and were actually present among
them, he could not understand the honors that were done him, nor the addresses
they made to him. And when they did express such an uncertainty as this at the
same time they made these Addresses toward the Conclusion of their Orations,
after the manner of Orators, it is plain they are to be understood rather for
Rhetorical Wishes, than formal Invocations. Now let any man compare this
doubtfulness of the Ancients, with the confidence expressed in the Church of
Rome, when they declare it to be de Fide that the Saints do hear them,
(although the manner be not) and then judge whether their practices can be of
the same kind.

3. The Invocation of Saints in your Church does imply inward submission to a
Creature; and therefore goes very much beyond the addresses of the Ancients.
There are three things which prove this Inward submission to a Creature in the
Invocation of Saints. 1. Inward Devotion to them: 2. An acknowledged
superiority over them: 3. An intention to give them Divine Worship.

1. Inward Devotion. For even mental Prayers to Saints are allowed by the
Council of Trent, as Dr. St. told T. G., Defense, p. 293.
of which he takes no notice; and yet quarrels with him for two other passages
in the same place. Must we impute this to a casual Vndulation of the visual
rays, Dial. p. 256.
as T. G. very finely expresses it? I am afraid, there was some other cause
for it. For since that Council allows internal prayers to Saints, it must not
only certainly suppose their knowledge of the heart, but a due submission of
our souls to them; which inward Prayer does import. And therefore suppliciter
invocare tam voce quam mente, which are the words of the Council of Trent; does
not only imply formal Invocation, but internal submission; both which do belong
to suppliants.

2. An acknowledged Superiority over them: which appears by that Authority and
Government which they attribute to them, with respect to particular places and
things. Whereby they make the Saints not bare Intercessours, but Tutelar
Deities, and they invocate them as such. T. G. says, Dial. p. 238.
they do not make them Authors of those Blessings; not Originally, and
Independently; but subordinately and Ministerially they do. And if this be not
Idolatry, no worship of the inferior Deities among the Heathens was so.
Lipsius was no Fool when he made the B. Virgin a Tutelar Deity; and the Popes
surely understand their own Religion, when they Canonize particular Saints to
be Patrons of such places: which may be seen in some of the latest
Canonizations. As of S. Rosa, that admirable Saint of Peru, and others.

3. An intention to give Divine Worship to them. For what else can be meant by
that eminent kind of adoration which Bellarmine says, does belong to them;
that Divine worship, D. Forbes Consid. modest. and pacif. p. 293.
which Azorius says, you give to the Saints; and Serrarius says, many of the
wisest persons among you say, that Latria and Doulia proceed both from the same
virtue of Religion; that is, they are of the same kind. So that this is not
merely the Superstition of the Vulgar, but the Judgment of the wisest among
you, if Serrarius his Judgment may be taken. I will not dissemble what B.
Forbs observes, P. 297.
that some of the Schoolmen do make the Invocation of Saints not to slow from
the virtue of Religion, but another of their own making, called singularis
observantia. But this is only a trick found out to avoid the imputation of
Idolatry, which they thought would fall justly upon them, if they made the
Worship to be of the same kind, although of a different degree: since nothing
can be plainer in Antiquity, than that all truly Religious Worship belongs only
to God and cannot be given to a Creature, without the guilt of Idolatry. For
even in the same Age wherein Greg. Nyssen lived, the Council of Laodicea
declared the Invocation of Angels to be Idolatry; Council. Laodic. c. 35. Theod.
in Col. 2.18.
so Theodoret expresses the sense of that Council, who certainly understood
the meaning of it, (...), are his words, which he makes to be all one with
(...). So that praying to them is that part of divine worship which was
condemned for Idolatry, being given to Angels.


R. P. T. G. Cathol. no Idol. p. 384.
T. G. says, This was a practice of nominating Angels, which he says, cannot
with any show of probability be understood of that worship, which the Holy
Catholic Church gives to Holy Angels.


P. D. Good Sir, his Reason; for to my apprehension it comes as home to the
practice of the Church of Rome as may be.


R. P. (1.) Because the Council speaks of such as excluded our Lord Jesus
Christ, making private Assemblies: which words Dr. St. conveniently omitted.


P. D. Did he so? let us hear them at length. That Christians ought not to
forsake the Church of God, and go aside, to invocate Angels; or make unlawful
Conventicles; If any one be found practicing this secret Idolatry, let him be
accursed; because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and
betaken himself to Idolatry. The Council speaks this of a sort of Christians,
who yet were guilty of Idolatry in praying to Angels; therefore praying to
Angels is Idolatry.


R. P. Yes, such praying to Angels as Theodoret speaks of, upon account that
the Law was delivered by them, or that God being invisible and incomprehensible
cannot be approached but by the Angels.


P. D. Will T. G. stand to it, that this is Idolatry? then it must be Idolatry
in the nature of the thing, or by some positive Law; if the latter, we see the
Council of Laodicea accounts it equal Idolatry among Christians as before: if
the former, then praying to a Creature is Idolatry in the Nature of the Thing:
which is a very fair concession, and I suppose the Church of Rome will con him
no thanks for.


R. P. But it is Idolatry on those accounts I mentioned.


P. D. On what I pray? Because the Law was delivered by them? How is that
possible on T. G.'s principles, when they were only Gods Ministers therein? and
so praying to Gods Ministers in Heaven is Idolatry; how then will praying to
Saints escape?


R. P. But Theodoret adds, they brought us salvation thereby.


P. D. Only Ministerially; and this alters not the case.


R. P. But suppose they thought access to God was only by them?


P. D. What then? that might prove them no Christians, but does it prove them
Idolaters? Suppose they were Jews; must they therefore needs be Idolaters?


R. P. But T. G. says, good Angels are not to be worshipped but in
subordination to Christ the Head, nor their prayers to be desired as
efficacious for us but through his merits.


P. D. And what follows? therefore leaving out Christ is Idolatry? Does T. G.
talk at this rate; and hope to excuse the Church of Rome from Idolatry? For I
still ask, what it was, which made their Worship of Angels Idolatry? Leaving
out of Christ might make it Judaism or Heathenism, but how comes it to be
Idolatry?


R. P. I think you will never be satisfied.


P. D. Not with such answers, I assure you.


R. P. Baronius says, Theodoret was mistaken; and that this Canon is to be
understood of Heathen Idolatry; and that the Oratories of Michael which
Theodoret says, were built by those Idolaters, were in truth built by very
good Catholics.


P. D. This is plain dealing: and Baronius saw well enough, there was no way to
justify the Church of Rome, but by condemning Theodoret: but I leave it to any
man's consideration, whether Theodoret, whose distance was not great, either in
Age or Place, did not better understand the meaning of this Council; and the
practices of those times and places, than Baronius; and whether his judgment
be not rather to be taken, than that of a man, who turns every stone to avoid a
difficulty, which he saw could no otherwise be answered.


R. P. (2.) How can this be the meaning of the Council of Laodicea, when it
declares for the honoring, and celebrating the Feast-days of the Martyrs?


P. D. Does T. G. call this a second Reason? Where lies the consequence? The
Council of Laodicea, was for honoring the Feast-dayes of the Martyrs,
therefore the praying to Angels is not condemned by it for Idolatry. As though
there were no way of celebrating their Festivals, but by praying to Saints and
Angels. When T. G. proves that meeting at their Memories on their Anniversary
days, and praising God for them, and rehearsing their Acts, was no keeping
their Festivals without praying to them; he will do something toward making
this look like a Reason. In the mean time, let the Reader consider whether
praying to Saints was practiced by Greg. Nyssen, when praying to Angels about
the same time by the Council of Laodicea is condemned for Idolatry. But this is
not all which I have to say; for if Gregory Nyssen's practice does excuse the
modern Invocation of Saints from Idolatry, I desire to know whether it was
singular in him, or the sense of the Church of that Age?


R. P. No doubt T. G. brings it for an instance of the sense of the Church: for
it were to no great purpose to produce a singular opinion or practice of one
man condemned by the rest of the Church.


P. D. Then I ask, whether offering up ones self, or offering up a cake to a
Saint, be the greater Idolatry?


R. P. A man's self certainly.


P. D. Do not they who devote themselves to a particular Saint, choosing her
for their perpetual Patroness, vowing themselves to be her slaves, offer up
themselves to her?


R. P. What would you have?


P. D. I will tell you, Epiphanius who lived in the same Age with Greg. Nyssen,
condemns those for rank Idolatry, who offered up Cakes to the B. Virgin; and do
you think he would have excused those who offered up themselves and their
devotions to her? And at the same time he condemns the worship both of Saints
and Angels; Defense, p. 175. to p. 180.
in the places produced by Dr. St. What answer has T. G. made to this?


R. P. I do not remember he takes notice of it.


P. D. T. G. would make an excellent Commentator; for he knows how to pass over
a hard place, as well as any I have met with. But still I have one question
more. Whether Greg. Nyssen did argue well against the Arians or not?


R. P. Why should you question that?


P. D. Do you think he spoke consistently to himself? Or, if not, is his
opinion to be taken from a Panegyrical Oration, or a strict Dispute?


R. P. A strict dispute; for then men consider every word, and the consequence
of it.


P. D. Greg. Nyssen goes upon this principle, To give Divine Worship to a
Creature is Idolatry: but the Arians in worshipping Christ as a Creature do
give Divine Worship to a Creature: therefore, etc. To make good the particulars
of this charge, we must consider what Greg. Nyssen makes to be the parts of
Divine Worship; and if I can prove, that Greg. Nyssen does make prayer to be
such a part of Divine Worship, then by necessary consequence he makes praying
to a Creature to be Idolatry. Now it is very well known that Greg. Nyssen in
several places makes prayer with supplication to be peculiar to God; Bell. de
bonis oper. in particul. l. 1. c. 1. Greg. Nyssen orat. 1. de orat. orat. 2. de
orat. Dom. Tract. 2. de inscript. Psalm c. 3. Ambros. de obit. Theod.
therefore he calls it a conversing with God; a request of good things with
supplication unto God. In which he agrees with the rest of the Fathers, who
made Religious Invocation peculiar to God. Sed tamen tu solus Domine invocandus
es, says S. Ambrose. I do not pray to any besides thy self; says Ephreem
Syrus in the Officium Diurnum of the Maronites. We call not on the name of this
man or that man, says S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 1. in Coloss.
3. Hom. 9.
but on the name of the Lord. This is an honor, he says, God has reserved to
himself, to call upon him, and will not give it to Angels or Archangels; as he
elsewhere speaks. Unto God alone do we pray, says the Greek Catena on the
fifth Psalm. To whom shall I call but unto thee, says S. Augustine. Aug.
Confess^. l. 1. c. ^. Clem. ^^rom. l. 7. Tirtul. Apol. c. 30.
This is the best sacrifice we can offer unto God, say Clemens of Alexandria
and Tertullian. It were easy to produce many more Testimonies to this purpose,
if these be not sufficient to prove, that in Greg. Nyssens* Age, as well as
before, Prayer was looked on as a peculiar part of Divine Worship.


R. P. To what purpose? since no body denies, that prayer as it is a means to
obtain blessings from God as the Author of them is peculiar to God.


P. D. This Answer does not take off the force of the argument. For prayer may
be considered two ways. 1. As a Means to obtain blessings. 2. As a solemn part
of Divine Worship. Now if they reserved prayer to God, on the latter account,
then it follows, that whatever Invocation does take off from the peculiarity of
this part of external worship, is against the design of the Fathers. So Origin
argues that Invocation and Adoration do imply each other. Orig. l. 8. in Epist.
ad Romans c. 10.
Invocare nomen Domini and adorare Deum unum atque idem est. To invocate God
and to adore him is all one; from whence he proves that those who invocate
Christ do adore him. And where the Church of Smyrna declares in her Epistle
about the Martyrdom of Polycarp, that they did not worship any other but
Christ, the old Latin Translation renders it, neque alteri cuiquam precem
orationis impendere. And Theodoret makes praying to Angels, and the worshipping
of them the same thing. So that prayer was looked on as a part of adoration;
therefore whosoever gives the external worship of prayer to another besides
God, does give to a Creature that which belongs to God.


R. P. I know not what you mean, I pray explain your self more.


P. D. Is not God worshipped solemnly by us, when we join together in prayer to
him?


R. P. Yes.


P. D. Is not this external worship, that which the Fathers mean, by the
adoration that is employed in prayer?


R. P. Suppose it be.


P. D. Wherein lies this external worship? Is it not that we meet together and
join in acts of Devotion to testify our acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty
and dependence upon him?


R. P. What then?


P. D. Then whosoever do use the same external Acts of Worship to a Creature,
do apply that to a Creature which the Fathers did suppose to belong only to
God; as if men kneel and pray to Saints in the same place, at the same time,
with the same Ceremonies of Devotion they use to God himself, they take off the
peculiarity of this worship to God, and make it common to his Creatures.


R. R. This only reaches to the external Acts, but the intention and design of
the worshippers with us make the difference.


P. D. I do not now meddle with your intention and design; but I am pursuing
the force of the argument used by the Fathers. To make this yet more plain to
you. The Fathers use the argument of external adoration against the Arians; for
say they, Defense, p. 165.
Peter forbad Cornelius to worship him, and the Angel S. John; from whence they
infer that God only ought to be worshipped, and therefore giving external
adoration to Christ, supposing him to be a Creature, is Idolatry. Is this
argument good, or not?


R. P. Let me consider a little: It was good then, but it is not now; for T. G.
says, it is in the Churches power to determine the signification of exterior
signs.


P. D. An admirable answer! which makes the arguments of the Fathers in truth
to have no force at all. For the Arians might say, the external acts of
adoration did not signify the same with them, which they did with Catholics,
for they only signified an inferior and relative worship, when applied to the
Son; and Sovereign and absolute worship, when given to the Father. So that if
there be any force in what the Fathers did argue against the Arians, it will
make the inferior and relative worship of a Creature to be Idolatry;
notwithstanding Greg. Nyssens Oration upon Theodore.


R. P. I am like T. G. who hates a great Book upon one subject; so do I a long
discourse upon one argument: methinks Greg. Nyssen has taken up a great deal
of our time, and I have something more yet to say to you, before we part.


P. D. I pray let me hear it, and I suppose it will admit of a quicker dispatch.


R. P. It is upon the same head of the Doctors fidelity in quoting Authors, and
it concerns the passage in Arnobius, in which T. G. charged him with cogging in
the word Divinity in the singular number instead of adorable Deities in the
Plural; Dial. p. 252.
and Dr. St. answers with a protestation, that he translated these words nihil
numinis inesse simulachris, which he says are but two lines above the words T.
G. charges him with.


P. D. And how I pray does T. G. clear himself? for in my mind he is most
concerned to vindicate himself.


R. P. He does it very well; for he denies not those words to be there which
Dr. St. translated, but he says, he ought not to have translated the words of
Arnobius to the Heathens, but the words of the Heathens to Arnobius, since his
design was to prove the Heathens did not worship the Images themselves for Gods.


P. D. A pitiful shift! T. G. charged Dr. St. with cogging in the word Divinity
in the singular number; Dr. St. shows, it was so used but two lines before
those words which T. G. cites, and those were the words he translated. Now
says T. G. those were the words of Arnobius to the Heathen; what then? does he
not confute them in something which they held; if he proves, nihil numinis
inesse simulachris, must not they hold aliquid numinis, etc. so that it comes
all to one. But to put this out of all doubt, if T. G. had looked a little
farther, he might have found these very words of the Heathens, Illud etiam
dicere simulachrorum assertores solent; (...) l. 6. p. 208.
surely these are the Heathens; non ignorasse antiquos nihil habere numinis
signa. What does T. G. think now? Had he not better look more about him, before
he makes such rude and impertinent clamours about Dr. St.'s insincerity in
quoting Authors? Of which you may judge by this one Instance, where himself is
so notoriously faulty, and yet from hence he concludes what a sad account of
Citations we are like to have from him. Dial. p. 257.



R. P. What say you to Dr. St.'s obs^rvations of the Council of Trent about the
Worship of Images?


P. D. Have you ever been a hunting of Squirrels?


R. P. Why do you ask me such an impertinent question?


P. D. Not so impertinent as you think: for the Squirrels leaping from bough to
bough, forwards and backwards, is just like T. G.'s answer to Dr. St.'s Book.
For he makes nothing of leaping a hundred or two hundred pages forwards and
backwards as the humor takes him. However, let us hear what he has to say to
those observations. For I remember very well, what the design of them was;
Defense, p. 614.
viz. that though the worship of Latria was owned before it by many Divines to
be given to Images, and that were against the decree of the Council of Nice;
yet the Council of Trent allows all external acts of adoration of Images, gives
no intimation against this kind of Worship; and since it, many of the most
eminent Divines of your Church have justified the giving Latria to Images, and
that from the words of this Council.


R. P. But T. G. says, Dial. p. 214.
those very Divines do not mean by Latria proper Divine Worship, which is due
to God and terminated upon him; but that the Act being in their opinion one in
substance to the Prototype and the Images, it is terminated absolutely upon the
Person of Christ for himself, and falls upon the Image after an inferior
manner, as a thing only relating to him, and purely for his sake: for which
reason, some call it relative Latria; others, secundary; others, improper;
others, Analogical; others, per accidens; and the dispute in effect is rather
de modo loquendi, than of the thing it self.


P. D. To clear this matter, we must consider, (1.) That the Council of Nice
does deny Latria to be given to an Image. (2.) That the Divines of the Roman
Church do say that the practice of the Church cannot be defended in the Worship
of the Cross, without giving Latria to it. (3.) That the Council of Trent, when
just occasion was given, declares nothing against this; for although it referrs
to the Council of Nice, yet when it gives the reason of worship, it does it in
such terms, that many of your Divines say, must infer the worship of Latria to
be given to them.


R. P. What if it does, says T. G. since, it is only a dispute about words,
and all agree that the worship proper to God, signified primarily by the word
Latria, is not to be given to Images?


P. D. That must be a little better considered. For do you think it is possible
to give the worship proper to God to an Image, or not? If it be not, why did
the Council of Nice declare against it; if it be, tell me in what Acts that
Worship of Latria does consist?


R. P. It is when men give proper divine honor to an Image.


P. D. What is this proper divine honor? for you are not one step forwarder by
this answer. I see I must come to particulars. Were the Gnostics and ancient
Heretics to blame in their Worship of Images, or not?


R. P. No doubt they were; for they stand condemned by the Church for that
worship they gave to Images.


P. D. Wherein did their fault lie?


R. P. In giving Divine Honor and Worship to the Image.


P. D. Did not they worship the Image of Christ?


R. P. And what then?


P. D. Then their fault lay in giving divine Worship to the Image of Christ?


R. P. Yes, proper divine Worship.


P. D. What was that proper divine worship? was it absolute, or relative?


R. P. Absolute.


P. D. Then it was giving divine worship to an Image of Christ, without respect
to Christ; which is either nonsense, or a contradiction. Is it possible to
give divine worship to an Image of a person, without respect to the person? Men
may worship a piece of Wood, or a Stone, without respect to a person; but to
worship that which represents, and on that account, because it represents,
without any respect to what it represents, is a contradiction; therefore the
worship of an Image as such is a relative worship; and proper Latria as given
to an Image is relative Latria.


R. P. But men may give absolute divine worship to an Image; for may not a man
join in his mind the Image and person represented as one object of Worship, and
so give proper divine worship to both considered as one?


P. D. I thank you for that: For so I find some of your Divines have determined
that in this sense absolute and proper divine worship may be given to the
Cross. Defense, p. 616. to p. 620. p. 637.
And Dr. St. produced several of them, who contended for an absolute Latria to
be due to Images: such as Ludovicus a Paramo, Paulus Maria Quarti, Gamachaeus a
late Professor of Divinity in the Sorbon; and others.


R. P. But T. G. says, they only differ in modo loquendi.


P. D. I think rather in modo colendi. For are not absolute and relative
worship two distinct kinds? how else comes the giving absolute worship to be
Idolatry, and not the giving relative? And if giving absolute worship be
Idolatry, all in your Church are guilty of it, who worship the Image and thing
represented as one object. If it be not, then there can be none to an Image as
such.


R. P. Yes; if they offer sacrifice to Images, as the Gnostics did.


P. D. S. Augustine and Theodoret say; they adored Images, and offered Incense
to them. And is not the very same practiced in your Church? If this were
Idolatry in them, why not in you? Unless your Church has power to change the
Nature of Idolatry: which is all one with changing the nature of Virtues and
Vices.


R. P. But they sacrificed to Images as the Heathens did.


P. D. True; for the burning Incense before Images was thought to be
sacrificing to them, being joined with adoration. And the Christians chose
rather to dye, than to join in that act of worship toward the Images of the
Emperors: whence Dr. St. observed, Defense, p. 323.
that burning of Incense toward Images was the same trial of Christians, that
eating of Swines flesh was of the Jews. I pray tell me, was there any harm in
this or not? supposing the Christians looked on the Emperors as Gods
Vicegerents, and the Images only as representing them?


R. P. I see what you aim at; you would have me condemn the primitive
Christians or our selves: according to the sense of the Church at that time, it
was unlawful, but according to the sense of our Church now, it is lawful to do
the same things out of honor to the Images of Christ, or his Saints.


P. D. That is, your Church is innocent, if your Church may be judge. But I now
dispute upon your own principles of relative worship, whether those Acts might
not have been done to the Emperors Images, which had saved the lives of so
many Martyrs?


R. P. No; for the Emperors then exacted to be worshipped as Gods, i. e. with
divine worship.


P. D. Was that Divine Worship supreme or not? i. e. did they take the
Emperors for supreme Deities?


R. P. No; but they gave them the Worship of the supreme Deity.


P. D. Then the giving this Worship was thought Idolatry, though men's
conceptions were right as to their being Creatures.


R. P. But what is this to the worship of Images?


P. D. Was it not lawful to give the same worship to the Images of the
Emperors as to the Emperors themselves? Might not they look on the Emperors
as Gods Vicegerents, and so give them relative Latria on that account; and then
look on their Images as representing them, and so give a secundary, improper,
Analogical relative Latria to their Images? and by this means the Heathens and
the Christians had only differed in modo loquendi; but the Christians had saved
their lives by the bargain.


R. P. But our dispute is of the Images of Christ, and not of Heathen Emperors.


P. D. I only show the absurd consequences of this doctrine, and how
inconsistent it is with the principles of primitive Christianity. But I return
to the distinctions of your Divines about Latria being given to Images. You all
agree T. G. says, that the worship proper to God is not to be given to Images.
Is not Latria the Worship proper to God?


R. P. Yes: proper Latria is; but not improper and relative.


P. D. Is there any worship so proper to God, that it cannot be improperly and
relatively given to an Image?


R. P. What do you mean? for I do not understand you.


P. D. Rather, you will not. I ask you, whether there be any such act of
worship so proper to God, that you may not in respect to God, do that to his
Image; or in respect to Christ, do that to the Cross?


R. P. Although there may be none such, yet the Church does not use all acts of
worship to the Image, which it does to God.


P. D. I not ask what you do; but what upon your principles you may do. And
suppose a man does that Act which your Church allows not, is he guilty of
Idolatry or bare disobedience in doing it to an Image?


R. P. Of Idolatry.


P. D. Then there are such external acts of worship so proper to God himself,
that the doing them to an Image for his sake is Idolatry. As to sacrifice to an
Image for the sake of Christ is Idolatry. Is it not?


R. P. Yes.


P. D. Is the improper and relative sacrificing to an Image Idolatry?


R. P. You ask an untoward question. For I see what you drive at.


P. D. Answer me directly. Is it, or is it not?


R. P. I think it is.


P. D. Then it follows, that this distinction of proper and improper, absolute
and relative Latria signifies nothing. For if the Acts of Worship are proper to
God, no relative or improper use of them can excuse from Idolatry; if they are
not proper, then it is no Latria.


R. P. I must think again of this matter. For as you represent it, this can
never excuse us.


P. D. I wonder so many subtle men should ever think it would. But I will not
thus give it over. When the Council of Nice did forbid Latria being given to an
Image, did they mean to an Image, as a piece of Wood, or Stone; or to an Image,
as an Image?


R. P. As an Image. For they did forbid giving Latria to that which they
worshipped, but they worshipped it as an Image, for the sake of the Prototype.


P. D. Your reason is unanswerable. Therefore I say, they did forbid all
relative Latria of an Image, call it by what name soever you please. For the
Worship of an Image as such must be relative worship. Therefore all those who
contend for relative Latria are condemned by the Council of Nice. Besides, I
would fain know of these Gentlemen, whether their improper and relative Latria,
be Latria or Inferior worship? one or other it must be; and it is a
contradiction to say Latria is inferior worship; for that is to say, It is
Latria, and it is not. If it be then true Latria, I ask whether the Image as an
Image be God or a Creature; if it be a Creature, as no doubt it is, then true
Latria is given to a Creature; which according to T. G. must be Idolatry.
Again; Either it is the same Act of Latria which is terminated on the Person of
Christ absolutely, and on the Cross relatively; or it is a different Act. If
the same act; then there is a double worship, and but one Act; for there is an
absolute worship of the person of Christ, and a relative worship of the Image;
and let it be relative, or what it will, it is a real Act of worship; and so
there must be two Acts, and yet it is but one Act. For is the Image or Cross
worshipped, or not? If it be worshipped, there must be an act of worship
terminated on it; and how can there be an act of worship terminated upon it, if
the same act passes from the Image to the Prototype? These are unintelligible
subtleties, and only invented to confound men's understandings, as to the true
and distinct notion of Divine Worship; and to blind their minds in the practice
of Idolatry. Farther, if this be a difference only de modo loquendi, as T. G.
says, then the very same act may be proper and improper, absolute and
relative, per se and per accidens. For so T. G. says, that it is one Act in
substance; but it is absolute as terminated on the person of Christ, relative
as on the Cross; proper in one sense, improper in the other; per se in the
former sense, per accidens in the later. Which Catharinus thought to be no less
than ridiculous. Lastly, there is nothing in the world, but may be worshipped
with Latria by the help of these distinctions. For a Divine presence in the
creatures is really a far better ground of worship, than a bare fiction of the
mind, that the Image and the thing represented are all one. But of this we have
discoursed already.


R. P. To tell you plainly my mind, I never liked this giving Latria to Images
my self; but it being a common doctrine in our Church, we ought to say as much
for it as we can; but I am only for an inferior worship to be given to them,
and so is T. G. if I do not much mistake his meaning.


P. D. Let us then consider this inferior worship, as distinct from Latria;
and concerning this I shall prove, that it neither answers the reasons given by
Councils; nor the practice of the Roman Church.

(1.) Not the reasons given by the Councils of Nice and Trent. For which I
desire but these two postulata. 1. That Images are to have true and proper
worship given to them; which is expressly determined by those Councils. 2.
That the Reason of this Worship is nothing inherent in the Image, but something
represented by it. Which is affirmed by those Councils. From hence I argue thus.

To worship Christ only before an Image is not to give proper worship to the
Image, which the Councils require to be given. Therefore either the Image is to
be worshipped for it self, which were Idolatry by your own confession; or
Christ is to be worshipped in and by the Image.


R. P. Christ is to be worshipped in and by the Image.


P. D. Then you give Christ the worship due to him, or not?


R. P. The worship due to him.


P. D. But the Worship due to Christ is proper Latria; therefore you must give
proper Latria to Christ as worshipped in and by the Image.


R. P. True; but we give it to the Image of Christ otherwise than to his
Person; for we worship him absolutely, and the Image respectively and for his
sake.


P. D. That is it which I would have; that there is no worshipping an Image on
the account of representation, but you must fall into the doctrine of relative
Latria.


R. P. But may not I show respect to the Cross for Christ's sake, without giving
the same worship to the Cross, that I do to Christ?


P. D. That is not the question; but whether you may worship Christ in and by
the Cross representing his Person, without giving that worship which belongs to
the person of Christ? For either you worship the Cross for it self, which you
confess to be Idolatry; or you worship Christ as represented by it: if you
worship Christ, you must give him the worship which belongs to him, and that
can be no other than Latria. Which not only appears by the doctrine but by the
practice of your Church in the worship of the Cross. Which I prove by the
second particular, viz.

(2.) Inferior worship does not come up to the practice of your Church,
because your Church in praying to the Cross speaks to it, as if it were Christ
himself. O Crux ave, spes unica, etc. as Aquinas observes and many other of
your Divines, who never own any Prosopopoeia; but do say, that the Cross is
truly worshipped with that worship which belongs to the person of Christ, on
the account of representation. And can you imagine so many of your most eminent
Divines would have put themselves to so much difficulty in defending a Relative
Latria, if they could have defended the practice of your Church without it? But
they saw plainly the Church did own such a worship to the Cross; and when
occasion was offered, did declare it, as in the place cited out of the
Pontifical by Dr. St., which it would never have done, Def. p. 640.
if it had not been agreeable to its sense.


R. P. But this is but one single passage, and will you condemn a whole Church
for that?


P. D. Not, if the sense of the Church were otherwise fully expressed against
it; but here we have showed that passage to be very agreeable to the reason of
worship given by your Councils; and to the solemn practice of your Church in
adoration of the Cross; and therefore that passage ought to be looked on as a
more explicit declaration of the sense of the Church. For, let me ask you, if
the Church of Rome had been against Latria being given to the Cross; whether in
a book of such public and constant use as the Pontifical is, it should be left
standing, when the Book-menders are so busy in your Church, that scarce an
Index of a Father can escape them; nor such sentences as seem to thwart their
present doctrine. Of which take this Instance. You remember what stir T. G.
made about Gregory Nyssen's oration upon Theodore; now the same person
disputing against the Arians, says, that no created thing is to be worshipped
by men; this sentence Antonius in his Melissa had put down thus, that we are
only to worship that being which is uncreated. This Book happened to come under
the Spanish Index of Cardinal Quiroga; do you think he would suffer it to stand
as it did? No, I assure you, Deleatur dictio solummodo, says he; satis pro
imperio. Away with this Only. Why so? was it not in the Author? No matter for
that. It is against the practice of the Church; out with it. More such
instances might be produced: but I appeal to your self, whether after such care
has been taken to review the Pontifical by Clement 8. and the publishing of it
with so much Authority, such a passage would have been suffered to remain, if
it had been any ways repugnant to the sense of the Church?


R. P. But T. G. says, the Terms of Communion with the Church are not the
Opinions of her School-Divines, Dial. p. 263.
but the Decrees of her Councils.


P. D. And what then? Did Dr. St. meddle with the School-Divines any otherwise
than as they explained the sense of Councils, or the practice of the Church?
And what helps more proper to understand these, than the Doctrine of your most
learned Divines? T. G. will have one Mr. Thorndike to speak the sense of the
Church of England, against the current Doctrine of the rest, as Dr. St. has
proved; yet he will not allow so many Divines of greatest Note and Authority to
explain the sense of the Church of Rome? Is this equal dealing?


R. P. T. G. says, Dial. p. 264.
That for his life he cannot understand any more the Idolatry of worshipping an
Image, than the Treason of bowing to a Chair of State, or the Adultery of a
Wives kissing her Husbands Picture; and that the same subtilties may be used
against these, as against the other; and therefore notwithstanding the disputes
of School-Divines, honest nature informed with Christian Principles will be
security enough against the practice of Idolatry in honoring the Image of
Christ for his sake.


P. D. What is the matter with T. G. that for his life he can understand these
things no better, after all the pains which has been taken about him? Has not
the difference of these cases been laid open before him? Do not your own
Writers confess, that in some cases an Image may become an Idol, by having
Divine Worship given to it? Is this then the same case with a Wives kissing her
Husbands Picture? Does not this excuse the Gnostics worship of the Image of
Christ, as well as yours? If there may be Idolatry in the worship of an Image,
we are then to consider, whether your worship be not Idolatry? Especially,
since both parties charge each other with Idolatry; those who will have it to
be Latria, and those who will not. And I do not see what honest nature can do
in this case, however assisted, unless it can make the worship of Images to be
neither one nor the other. I see T. G. would fain make it to be no more than
bare honor of an Image for the sake of Christ; but this does not come up to
the Decrees of Councils, the general sense of Divines, and the constant
practice of your Church; If ever worship was given to Images you give it, by
using all Acts of Adoration toward them.


R. P. But suppose the King had made an Order, that due honor and respect
should be given to the Chair of State, ought not that to be observed,
notwithstanding the disputes which might arise about the nature of the Act?


P. D. To answer this, we must suppose a Command from God that we must worship
an Image of Christ, as we do his Person; but here it is just contrary. The
Reason of the second Command being owned by the Christian Church to hold
against the worship of Images now as well as under the Law. But those in the
Church of Rome who do charge each other with Idolatry, without supposing any
such command, do proceed upon the nature of the Worship; which must either be
Divine Worship, which one party says is Idolatry, being the same which is
given to God; or an inferior Religious Worship, which the other party says
must be Idolatry, being an expression of our submission to an inanimate thing.
And for my life I cannot see what answer T. G. makes to this.


R. P. T. G. says, Dial. p. 265.
the Rules of the Church are to be observed in this case as the Rules of the
Court about the Chair of State.


P. D. What! are the Rules of the Church to be observed absolutely, whether
against the Law of God or not? Which is as much as to say at Court, that the
Orders of the Green-cloth are to be observed, against his Majesty's pleasure.
But not to insist on that; I say in this case the Rules of the Church help
nothing; for they who do follow the Rules of the Church must do one, or the
other of these; and whichsoever they do, they are charged with Idolatry. And
therefore Dr. St. had great reason to say; Where there is no necessity of doing
the thing, the best way to avoid Idolatry is to give no worship to Images at
all.


R. P. Dial. p. 266.
What will become of the Rules of the Church, says T. G. if men may be
permitted to break them for such Capriches as these are?


P. D. Are you in earnest? Does T. G. call these Capriches? Idolatry is
accounted both by Fathers and Schoolmen a crime of the highest nature; and when
I am told I must commit it one way or other, by your Divines, if I give worship
to Images, is this only a Capriche?


R. P. Dial. p. 267.
Will not the same reason hold against bowing to the Altar; bowing being an act
of worship appropriated to God?


P. D. Will the same reason hold against bowing out of Reverence to Almighty
God? which I have told you again and again, is all our Church allows in that
which you call, bowing to the Altar. I see you are very hard put to it, to
bring in this single Instance, upon every turn, against the plain sense and
declaration of our Church. If this be all T. G. upon so long consideration has
to say in this matter, it is not hard to judge, who has much the better Cause.


R. P. I pray hold from triumphing a while; for there is a fresh charge behind,
wherein you will repent, that ever you undertook to defend Dr. St., it is
concerning the unjust parallel he has made between the Heathen and Romish
Idolatry.


P. D. I see no cause to repent hitherto. And I hope I shall find as little
when I come to that.


THE Fourth Conference, About the Parallel between the Heathen and Romish
Idolatry.
R. P. HAVE you considered what T. G. says, concerning the parallel between
the Heathen and Romish Idolatry, and does not your heart fail you, as to the
defense of Dr. St. which you promised to undertake?


P. D. No truly. The more I have considered it, the less I fear it.


R. P. What think you of the notion of Idolatry he charge on T. G.? viz. that
it is the giving the Sovereign Worship of God to a Creature, and among the
Heathens to the Devil, as if the Idolatry of the Heathens consisted only in
worshipping the Devil; Dial. p. 276.
whereas it appears from the words Dr. St. cites out of him, that he charged
the Heathens with Idolatry in worshipping their Images for Gods, and the
Creatures for Gods; although withal they worshipped evil Spirits, and T. G.
contends, that their Supreme God was an Arch-Devil.


P. D. Is this such a difficulty to be set in the Front? I suppose it is only
to try whether I will stumble at the threshold. If the Supreme God whom the
Heathens worshipped was an Arch-devil, as T. G. says, then without all
question they gave their most Sovereign worship to the Devil. And when he
pleads so earnestly, that all the Gods of the Heathens were Devils, under
whatsoever name or title they worshipped them; what injury can T. G. think it
to his Hypothesis to say, that the Heathen Idolatry did consist in giving
Sovereign worship to the Devil? Besides Dr. St.'s words do not imply, that
according to T. G. the Heathens did not give Sovereign worship to other things,
but that they did it eminently to the Devil; which must needs follow, if the
Supreme God among them was no other than an Arch-Devil; as T. G. then asserted,
and now endeavors more at large to prove.


R. P. Therefore waving this, I come to the main point; whether the Heathen
Jupiter were the true God, or an Arch-Devil?


P. D. You are just like the Author of a late Scurrilous Pamphlet called
Jupiter, Dr. St. 's Supreme God, etc. who would fain reduce the whole Question
of Idolatry to this single point, without considering either the occasion of
this Question, or the main arguments used by Dr. St., or the very scope and
design of his Discourse: But he is so pitiful a trifler, that he deserves no
notice at all. That we may proceed more clearly in this Debate, we ought first
to attend to the principal Question; which was, whether Idolatry be consistent
with the acknowledgement of one Supreme Being? And the reason of this Question
was, because those who did plead the most plausibly in excusing your Church
from Idolatry, went upon this principle, that supposing men preserved in their
minds the notion of one Supreme Being, it is impossible they should give to a
creature that honor which was due to God alone. To overthrow this Dr. St.
undertook to show, that this principle would equally excuse the Heathen
Idolatry, since both the ancient and modern Heathens did own one Supreme God.
And if this be granted him, it matters not to the main design of his Discourse
whether it were Jupiter or not. And it is a wonder to me, since the man in T.
G.'s Dialogues who argues against Dr. St. professes himself a Disciple of Mr.
Thorndike, he should never take notice of this principle, nor once go about to
defend it. But since T. G. acknowledges that the Heathens had a notion of one
Supreme Being ingraffed in their minds by nature; Dial. p. 371.
the point then in debate is, on what account they were charged with Idolatry;
and whether that will not reach to the practices of the Roman Church, i. e.
whether their Idolatry lay in worshipping the Creature and not the Creator; or
in giving Divine Worship though of different degrees to the Creature and the
Creator? And here lies the main strength of this controvesie; and supposing Dr.
St. were mistaken as to the sense of the Fathers, about Jupiter; yet if the
true notion of Idolatry be proved to consist in giving the same Divine Worship
to God and his Creatures, his parallel will be sufficient to make good the
charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome. Yet, since T. G. seems to lay so
much weight upon the Fathers sense concerning Jupiter, I am content to examine
them together with you; but in the first place let us consider, what the
Scripture says to this point; for as I remember Dr. St. began with that, then
he proceeded to your own Writers, and at last brought in the Testimonies of
Fathers, and I see no reason we should go off from this method.


R. P. Since you will have it so, I will begin with the Scripture; and Dr. St.
pretends to prove Jupiter to be the Supreme God from those words Acts 17. Whom
ye ignorantly worship, him I declare unto you.


P. D. Consider, I pray, the question between Dr. St. and T. G., viz. whether
it were the true God, or an Arch-devil: and Dr. St. argues in these words. Did
St. Paul mean the Devil when he said, whom you ignorantly worship, him I
declare unto you? Did he in good earnest go abroad to preach the Devil to the
world? Yet he preached him whom they ignorantly worshipped. What says T. G. to
this?


R. P. From this very Inscription, To the unknown God, Dial. p. 301.
he notably proves, it could not be understood of Jupiter who was a known God;
and St. Paul could not be said to come to preach their Jupiter to the
Athenians, when he expressly tells them, he came to declare to them a God whom
they did not know.


P. D. To this I answer, that the Athenians had so confounded the notion of the
supreme God, with that of the Poetical Jupiter, and the Peoples fancies were so
stained and polluted with those vulgar representations of Jove which they
learnt from the Poets and Painters, that the Apostle rather chose to preach the
true God to them from the inscription to the unknown God, than from any Altars
that were inscribed Jovi Opt. Max. Because the People would have imagined, if
St. Paul had made choice of any usual inscription to a Deity worshipped in
common with the rest, that he must in consequence allow the nature and kind of
their Worship. For they joined Jupiter and the rest of their Gods together, the
Body of their Worship consisting of an acknowledgment of one as Supreme, viz.
Jupiter, and of the rest as worshipped together with him; and so their worship
being a complex thing, it was more agreeable to the Apostles design, which was
to destroy their Idolatry, not to make use of that notion of God which was
corrupted by their Idolatries, but to take advantage from the Inscription to
the unknown God, so to declare his Nature, as to confute their Idolatrous
Worship, as he does in the following verses. Jupiter therefore as he was the
Head of the Heathen Worship, and as he stood in conjunction with their other
Deities, was a known God amongst them, and solemnly worshipped by the
Athenians; but as by Jove was understood the Eternal Mind as the only proper
object of Divine Worship, and therefore ought not to be worshipped with men's
hands, nor to be joined with his Creatures, so he was an unknown God. For they
had no other knowledge of a Supreme God, than as of one who admitted others
into a participation of the same Worship with himself. And there were these two
things which made those Gentiles disown the God of the Jews, who agreed with
them in the acknowledgement of one Supreme God who made the world, (1.) That he
would be worshipped by no Images or representations of himself. (2.) That he
would admit no inferior beings to have any share in Divine Worship, but all
such were accounted Idolaters by the Jewish Laws, who according to the Eastern
Customs worshipped any other as Mediators, or inferior Deities. From hence the
Heathens accounted the God of the Jews an unknown and unsociable Deity; there
being no representations made of him; nor any others to be joined in worship
with him: therefore Dion Cassius calls him (...), a God who could neither be
described nor represented. If we believe Georgius Syncellus, this Altar and
Inscription To the Unknown God, Syn. Chron. p. 333.
was but lately set up at Athens; whence St. Paul might have the greater reason
to take notice of it, and from thence to declare how unsuitable their Worship
was to the true God. And therefore St. Paul when he supposes the True God to be
the unknown God among them, speaks not in respect of his Eternal Being, for
even T. G. confesses the Heathens had the notion of one Supreme God ingrafted
in their minds by nature; but in respect of his way of Worship, without Images
or Inferior Deities. For so he pursues his discourse, by arguing from his
perfections against that way of Worship which was in use among them. Whereas,
if he had supposed them wholly ignorant of one Supreme God, his first and most
necessary work had been to have proved there was such a one; but this he
supposes as a thing well enough known in General by them; but not worshipped by
them as he ought to be. God that made the world and all things therein, seeing
that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands;
nor is worshipped with men's hands, etc. If St. Paul had supposed them ignorant
of a Supreme God, ought he not first to have proved that there was a God who
made the world, etc. But since there was no dispute about that, he shows the
incongruity of their way of Worship to the Perfections of his Nature. St.
Augustine proves from this place, Whom ye ignorantly worship, Aug. c. Cre^^. l.
1. c. 28, 29.
him I declare unto you; that the True God was truly though ignorantly
worshipped by the Athenians. For, says he, what did St. Paul preach to them,
but that the same God whom they ignorantly and unprofitably worshipped out of
the Church, they should worship wisely and savingly in the Church? One God,
says he, is worshipped ignorantly without the Church, and yet he is the same
God: as it is the same faith which is without charity out of the Church; for it
is one God and one Faith, and one Catholic Church; Non in qua sola unus Deus
colitur, sed in qua sola Unus Deus pie colitur. Not in which alone One God is
worshipped; but in which alone One God is piously worshipped. The fault then of
the Athenians lay in their manner of the Worship of the True God, and not in
the total neglect of it, or in Worshipping an Arch-devil instead of him.


R. P. T. G. does not deny that they had some confused notion of a supreme God,
but he says, that he whom they worshipped under the notion of Jupiter was an
Arch-devil.


P. D. It appears by S. Augustine, that they worshipped the same God, while they
were Heathens and when they became Christians, but after a different manner.
And as to Jupiter, Dr. St. observes, that S. Paul quotes the saying of Aratus,
For we are his Offspring; which words are spoken of Jupiter by the Poet, and
applied to the True God by the Apostle; and surely he did not mean that we are
the Devils Offspring; but from thence he infers, that we are the Offspring of
God: so that if S. Paul may be credited rather than T. G. their Jupiter was so
far from being the Arch-devil, that he was the true God, blessed for evermore.


R. P. To this T. G. answers, that it is no wonder a Heathen Poet should apply
the attributes of the true God to Jupiter; and the name of Jupiter to the true
God, as being the name of that Deity which was supreme among them; but S. Paul
takes the Poets words by way of Abstraction from Jupiter, and applies them to
the true God; leaving out all mention of Jupiter, and changing his name; which
he would not have done if their Jupiter was the true God.


P. D. I pray tell me one thing; did S. Paul only intend to fill up his
discourse with the end of a Verse, as some Writers do, with Omne tulit punctum,
etc. or did he intend it by way of argument to convince the Athenians?


R. P. S. Paul surely did not affect Pedantry, and therefore it must be
argumentative.


P. D. If that be granted, consider the force of the argument in T. G.'s sense
of S. Paul's words. For in him we live and move and have our Being; as certain
also of your own Poets have said, For we are also his Offspring. For as much
then as we are the Offspring of God, etc. S. Paul proves that we have our
life, motion, and subsistence from God, from the words of Aratus; For we are
his Offspring: Either Aratus did speak of the same God whom S. Paul speaks of,
or not? if not, where lies the force of the argument? if he did, then S. Paul
allows Aratus his Jupiter to be the Supreme God. Whosoever reads the Verses in
Aratus cannot imagine he should mean any else; and the Greek Scholiast there
says, by Jupiter he meant the God that made the World. And Dr. St. produced
the Testimony of Aristobulus the Jewish Philosopher, to the same purpose, viz.
that under the name of Jove, his design was to express the true God.


R. P. T. G. does not deny that Aratus might apply the name of Jupiter to the
true God, and the attributes of the true God to Jupiter: Dial. p. ^03.
but, he says, it does not follow that S. Paul, because he cited him, thought
their Jupiter to be the true God.


P. D. Suppose then S. Paul was of T. G.'s mind, and that their Jupiter was an
Arch-devil; and see what admirable reasoning he attributes to S. Paul. We have
all our dependence upon God, as certain of your own Poets have said, speaking
of him who was really an Arch-devil; For we are his Offspring. If an Athenian
had asked S. Paul, whose Offspring does Aratus say we are? Gods or the Devils?
If Jove meant by Aratus was no other than an Arch-devil, how does this prove us
to have our dependence on God for life and motion? If he were the true God,
then I grant it follows; and the Jupiter meant by Aratus must be the supreme
God. If Aratus does give the name of Jupiter to the true God, then he that was
meant under that name was the true God; and S. Paul bringing this sentence to
prove a main point of Divinity must allow him that was called by the name of
Jupiter to have been the true God. And if T. G. does yield that the Poet did
apply the name of Jupiter to the true God, he gives up the cause, for that is
all which Dr. St. contends for: and surely it is not possible for T. G. to
imagine the true God and an Arch-devil to be the same. And supposing that Dr.
St. had such a faculty as he mentions, P. 302.
of changing the Devil himself into God; it seems much more desirable, than
that of T. G. of changing the true God into an Arch-devil.


R. P. But does not S. Paul say, that the Heathens offered to Devils and not to
God; P. 304.
and will you make S. Paul to contradict himself?


P. D. S. Paul does not there speak of their intention and design; for they
professed to worship the true God, and good spirits as inferior Deities; but
what their worship was in Gods account; which being so abominably corrupted
with Idolatry and Superstition, was so far from being pleasing to God, that it
could be acceptable to none but impure spirits. From whence you may do well to
observe, that Worship is not terminated according to the i^^ention of the
persons, but according to the nature and design of the Worship; For the
Heathens, when they were urged, did stiffly maintain, that the spirits they
worshipped, were good in themselves and kind to us, and utterly denied that
they worshipped any other, Defense, p. 518.
as Dr. St. has showed; but notwithstanding this S. Paul does charge them with
the worshipping of Devils and not of God. And the main argument the Fathers had
to prove them to be evil spirits was because they received such worship from
men, which good Spirits would never have done. This observation is of necessary
use for understanding both Scripture and Fathers, when they charge the Heathen
Idolaters with worshipping Devils and not God; as will appear by our following
discourse. This place does not therefore prove that the Gentiles did not intend
to worship the true God under the title of Jupiter O. M. but that Idolatrous
worship does not tend to the honor of God, but to the service of the Devil.


R. P. Do not you remember, when at Lystra the Priest of Jupiter would have
offered Sacrifice to S. Paul as Mercury, P. 304, 305.
and to Barnabas as Jove, in whose shapes they supposed those Gods to have
appeared, S. Paul not only forbad them to do it, but told them their design was
to convert them from those vain things to the living God: and can you now think
that S. Paul meant Jupiter by this living God, when he taught them to convert
themselves from those vain things (their false Gods) to the living God, i. e.
to Jupiter? Was this his way to persuade the men of Lystra to leave the worship
of their Gods, to tell them that he came to teach them to worship Jupiter?


P. D. Is there no difference between these two Questions; whether the true God
might not be worshipped among the Heathens under the title of Jupiter O. M.?
and whether Jupiter of Creet as worshipped by them was not a false God? This
later Dr. St. never denied; and the former was all he pleaded for, as pertinent
to his purpose. When they did make such a description of him as to his Power,
and Goodness, as could not agree to such a wretch as the Cretan Jupiter was
described by the Poets; when they rejected the Poetical Fables, and declared as
plainly as men could do, that they understood the supreme Governor of the
World; as Dr. St. has at large showed; Defense, 44, etc.
the question is, whether under the name of Jove they meant the true God or
not? But does he ever so much as intimate that Jupiter of Creet was not a false
God? or that S. Paul and the Apostles did not go about to convert mankind from
the vanities of Idol-worship in the sacrifices they made to this Jupiter and
Mercury, as well as any other of their inferior Deities? To make this matter
more clear, which concerns the worship of Jupiter among the Heathens; we are to
observe,

1. That the name was more ancient in Greece for an object of Divine Worship
than Jupiter of Creet. If this can be made out, then although this name might
be applied to a particular person, (as it was usual in the Eastern parts to
call their Princes by the name of their Gods) yet originally it belonged to the
Deity, and consequently might still be properly attributed to him; and under
that name they might well understand the Supreme God. For the proof of this, I
make use of an observation of Pausanias, and of others from him; Pausan. in
Arcad. Eusebius. Chron. p. 28. Isid. Orig. l. 8. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 18. c. 10.
viz. that Cecrops was the first who called the supreme God (...) or Jove;
Eusebius has it (...); hic primus omnium Jovem appellavit, says Isidore. It
is well known that Cecrops came out of Egypt, from whence Herodotus observes
the Greeks took the names of their Gods; Cecrops lived in the time of Moses,
and before the flood of Deucalion says Varro: it happened in his time, say
Eusebius and S. Hierome, in which great part of Thessaly and Greece were
overwhelmed. But Jupiter of Creet, by whom Europa the daughter of Agenor was
taken, was the fifth in descent from Deucalion, according to Diodorus, being
the son of Tectamus, the son of Dorus, the son of Hellen, the son of Deucalion.
His proper name, Diodorus says, was Asterius, whom Eusebius follows: S.
Augustine calls him Zanthus, and Strabo, Zathus; whose son Jon carried the
Colonies of Greeks into the twelve Cities of Asia, from him called Jonia. From
hence it appears that the name of Jupiter did not properly belong to him of
Creet, but was assumed by him, when he affected divine honors.

2. This Jupiter of Creet did obtain Divine honor under that name among the
rude and barbarous Greeks. And this was the great discovery made by Euhemerus,
from the inscription in the Temple of Jupiter Triphylius in Greece: from whence
it appeared, Lact. l. 1. c. 11.
that this King of Creet was a very busy and active Prince, having great
command both at Sea and Land, and was very successful in reducing the barbarous
people under Laws and Government, and in many useful inventions for the benefit
of humane Life: which made the people after his death in Creet, bestow the
greatest Divine honors upon him, and worship him under the most sacred name.
For it had been a custom long before among the Greeks to Deifie the most
useful men; as S. Augustine observes of Phegous the Brother of Phoroneus; Aug.
de Civ. Dei l. 18. c. 3, 5*
of Apis King of the Argives who dyed in Egypt; of Argus who had a Temple and
Sacrifices allotted to him; of Phorbas, Jasus, Sthenelus, who were all Princes
among the old Greeks. And therefore it was no wonder such people should give
Divine Worship to this Prince, who had brought them into so much order in
comparison of what they were in before. From hence we find him not only
worshipped in Creet, where he had several titles from the places where his
Temples stood, as Idaeus, Dictaeus, Arbius, Asius, Temillius and Scyllius, etc.
but in Greece, as Ithometes, Atabyrius, Triphylius, Olympius, Cithaeronius,
etc. and wherever the Colonies of Greeks in Asia were, as at Tarsus, S. Paul's
own Country; and he was called Sardessius, from a City of Lycia, Chrysosoreus
from a place in Caria, Tarantaeus from a City in Bithynia, Dolichaeus from a
City in Comagene, Abretanus from a place in Mysia, and Asbameus from a Fountain
in Cappadocia. Is this now any such mighty argument to prove that Jupiter could
not be taken for the supreme God, because in Lystra a City of Lycaonia S. Paul
and Barnabas refused the worship the people would have given to them, as to
Jupiter and Mercury? Among the Grecian Colonies, what wonder is it, if the
Grecian Jupiter was worshipped? and who ever said, that he was not a false God?
But, after all this, suppose they did mean the great and original Jupiter, the
maker of the world, had not S. Paul and Barnabas reason to turn them from the
vanities of their worship, when they found them so ready to give divine honors
to two men whom they fancied to appear in the likeness of their Gods, by doing
a sudden and unexpected miracle? And if it were lawful, by the light of nature
to give divine worship of an inferior degree to mankind, what made the
Apostles so concerned to run in among them, and to rent their clothes, and to
cry out, We are men of like passions with you. Therefore all that strain of T.
G.'s Rhetoric whereby he endeavors to return Dr. St.'s arguments upon himself
from this place, has no manner of strength or pungency in it.

But what says T. G. to Dr. St.'s other argument from Scripture, viz. that S.
Paul to the Romans does say, Romans 1.19.
that which is known of God was manifest among the Heathens; that his Eternal
Power and Godhead were so far discovered that they were left without excuse in
their gross Idolatry? How could this be, if their supreme God whom they
worshipped were only an Arch-devil? Or does T. G. suppose, that they did own
one true God, but gave all their worship to the Devil? And since the name of
Jupiter was used to express always the chief God whom they did own, and by
such characters as could only agree to the true God, is it any ways likely
they should never intend to worship him under that name? When Dr. St. has
showed from Dio Chrysostom, Defense* p. 11, 47.
that by Jupiter they meant the first and greatest God, the supreme Governor
of the World, and King over all rational beings.


R. P. I do not find T. G. takes any notice of the other argument from
Scripture, but he applies himself to the Fathers.


P. D. But what says he to the Testimonies Dr. St. produced of the Writers of
his own Church, a full Jury of them, Defense from p. 11. to p. 23.
who frankly acknowledge that the Heathens did own and Worship one supreme God?


R. P. I suppose he thought none of the rest worth answering: but he finds
great fault with the testimony out of Aquinas.


P. D. This is a rare way of answering. Dr. St. produced twelve several Authors
of good reputation, T. G. takes no notice of eleven of them, and because he
makes some cavils at the twelfth, he would have this pass for an answer to them
all.


R. P. But the Dr. loses his credit so much in that, that we need not to
examine the rest.


P. D. Why so? It is possible a man through haste or inadvertency, or as T. G.
expresses it, through a casual undulation of the visual rays, may for once
mistake; but does it follow, that he must do it for twelve times together? But
I have not yet found any cause for these clamours; and I suppose there may be
as little as to this Testimony: I pray tell me where lies it?


R. P. T. G. makes a great many words about it, but the short of the charge is
this, Dial. from p. 399. to p. 405.
that what Aquinas spoke of some of the Philosophers, viz. the Platonicks, who
acknowledged one supreme God, from whom they said, all those others whom they
called Gods, did receive their being: Dr. St. interprets as spoken of the
Generality of the Heathens, who are there said to acknowledge a multitude of
Gods properly so called.


P. D. I know not whether to express greater shame or indignation at this
disingenuous dealing. There needs no other answer, but to set down Aquinas his
words, and to leave the Reader to construe them. c. Gentes l. 1. c. 43.
Hac autem veritate repelluntur Gentiles Deorum multitudinem confitentes,
quamvis plures eorum unum Deum summum esse dicerent, a quo omnes alios quos
Deos nominabant, creatos esse asserebant, etc. Can any thing be plainer from
these words, than that those Gentiles are refuted who held a multitude of
independent Deities, although the greater number of them (of whom? is it not of
the Heathens he spoke of before? and where is there one word of Platonists or
Philosophers in the whole sentence?) do acknowledge one supreme God, of whom
all others whom they called Gods did receive their being. What can be more
evident from these words, than that although some among the Heathens might hold
a multitude of independent Deities, yet the greater number did not? The single
question here is, whether plures Gentilium, does signify the greater number of
Gentiles, or the small number of Platonists, who are not once mentioned? But
besides this, Dr. St. produces another Testimony out of the same Book of
Aquinas, where he makes three several schemes of the Heathen Worship, viz. (1.)
Of those who held one First principle, but thought Divine Worship might be
given to inferior Beings. (2.) Of those who supposed God to be the soul of the
world. (3.) Of those who worshipped animated Images. If the other had been the
general opinion of the Heathen, he would have ranked it in the first place;
viz. of those who gave Divine Worship to many independent Deities, but he does
not so much as mention it, where it had been very proper to do it. And it is
plain from this Testimony of Aquinas, that it is Idolatry to give Divine
Worship to any Creatures, although of never so great excellency.


R. P. Let us come to the Fathers I beseech you, for my fingers itch to be at
them; for I see T. G. has taken more than ordinary pains to prove, that the
Fathers make the Heathens supreme God to be an Arch-devil: but it is necessary
in the first place to state the question aright.


P. D. I think so too.


R. P. T. G. has taken some pains to do it, to prevent misunderstanding. For
he takes notice of four several questions which may relate to this matter.
Dial. p. 310.
(1.) Whether the Heathens did not acknowledge one Supreme God? which he
yields, and produces several Testimonies of the Fathers to that purpose. p.
312, etc.
(2.) Whether the Heathens did not pretend that they understood this Supreme
God by Jupiter, and accordingly gave him the titles due to the Supreme God?
This T. G. denies not, to be fully proved by Dr. St., but he says all these
Testimonies are impertinent. p. 316, etc.
(3.) Whether the Fathers do not acknowledge that this was pretended by the
Heathens? This T. G. accounts impertinent too: For, p. 318.
says he, they might cite some sayings of the Heathen to that purpose, and yet
be of a contrary judgment themselves. But the point in debate between the Dr.
and T. G. is this, (4.) Whether it were the Fathers own sense that Jupiter was
the Supreme God?


P. D. I pray tell me for what end were the Fathers appealed to in this dispute
about the nature of Idolatry? Was it not to prove Idolatry consistent with the
acknowledgement of one Supreme God? For does not Dr. St. propose several ways
for the proof of this concerning the Heathens, Def. p. 5.
either the Testimony of the Heathens themselves; or of the Writers of the
Roman Church, or of the Scriptures, or of those Fathers who disputed against
their Idolatry, or of the Roman Church it self? Therefore the Fathers were
appealed to as Witnesses concerning this main point; and if it appear from them
that it was Idolatry in the Heathens to own a Supreme Deity and to give Divine
Worship to any created Being, then the notion of Idolatry will reach to the
Roman Church. But T. G. endeavors to get off from the close debate of this,
which was the most pertinent of all, and would fain substitute another question
in the place of it, which was but a secondary and accidental dispute occasioned
by T. G.'s saying that the Heathens Supreme God was an Arch-devil. Although Dr.
St. has proved that was not agreeable to the general sense of the Fathers, yet
any one may see that quite through his discourse his chief aim was at stating
the Nature of Idolatry according to the sense of the Fathers. Defense p. 25.
From Justin Martyr he shows that the question between the Christians and
Heathens was not about one Supreme God, which he acknowledges to be owned by
them; but whether Divine Worship ought in general to be given to any creature,
and in particular to the Heathen Gods? And he lays the force of the Christian
Doctrine as to worship upon that peremptory declaration of the Will of God;
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The same he
shows as to Athenagoras, Clemens Alexandrinus, Defense p. 60, etc.
Origin, Cyril, and all the Fathers who managed the dispute against the Heathen
Idolatry. Is it impertinent to the right stating the nature of Idolatry, to
consider whether they who charged the Heathens with it, did at the same time
confess they owned one Supreme God? Does not T. G. himself grant that it is
very material toward the right understanding the nature of Idolatry to
consider what was the design of the Fathers to charge them with Idolatry in?
Dial. p. 3^8.
Whether in worshipping the Creature and not the Creator with Divine Worship;
or in worshipping more Gods than one properly so called; (which he seems to fix
the Heathen Idolatry upon) or in giving the same worship to God and his
Creatures (which Dr. St. asserts) which notion soever of these be true, it
cannot be said to be impertinent for Dr. St. to prove his notion to be the
sense of the Fathers. And if the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme God, as
T. G. grants, and the Fathers do allow this in their disputes of Idolatry;
which T. G. cannot deny; then the question comes to this, whether they charged
them with Idolatry only for neglecting to worship the Supreme God which they
owned; or in holding one Supreme and many Supremes at the same time? For if
they believed one Supreme God, as T.G. grants, and yet held many independent
Deities which they worshipped as such, they must hold one Supreme and yet many;
for every independent Deity must be Supreme. I wonder therefore if T. G.
designed to debate this matter fairly, why he should account the other
questions impertinent; and account that the only point in debate, whether
according to the sense of the Fathers Jupiter was the Supreme God?


R. P. Do not you remember how Dr. St. insulted over him as to the sense of the
Fathers in this matter; and had he not reason then to speak to this point?


P. D. I allow him all the liberty he can desire, provided he do not reject the
main evidence as to the Cause of Idolatry to be impertinent; which he would cut
off by this trick, that they do not refer to his question about Jupiter. But
since you have such a mind to tell me the sense of the Fathers in this matter,
let us hear and consider them in order.


R. P. T. G. begins as Dr. St. does with Justin Martyr: and he shows from him
that the Devils appearing in humane shapes were the first beginners of
Idolatry, Dial. p. 287.
the people taking them for Gods, and worshipped their Images.


P. D. This is no great discovery to Dr. St. for he takes notice of this very
opinion of Justin Martyr. Defense p. 29.



R. P. But he makes Jupiter to have been one of these Devils in his first
Apology, Where he says, the Poets and Mythologists not knowing that the Angels
and Demons begotten by them had been the Authors of the infamous practices he
there speaks of, attributed them to God himself and to the sons begotten by
him, and to those who are called his Brethren, Neptune and Pluto.


P. D. What follows from hence I beseech you?


R. P. That according to the sense of Justin Martyr, Jupiter the Supreme God
was a Devil.


P. D. That should be better proved; For how does it follow from Justins words?
That which Justin says is, that what he attributes to Devils, the Poets
attribute to God himself and his Sons: and what then? It thence follows that
Justin thought they attributed very unworthy things to God, but not that he
thought him to be a Devil. For does not the same Author prove that their Poets
as well as Philosophers did own one supreme God, and that Homer calls him
Emphatically, (...), which is the very expression Justin uses in this place,
(...); and by that he says, is meant the truly existent Deity, whom he calls
(...).


R. P. But Justin says, the Devils were the causes of Idolatry, and the Poets
say the true God was the cause, therefore according to Justin Martyr their true
God was a Devil.


P. D. Which is just like this kind of reasoning. The Poets and Mythologists of
the Roman Church attribute the miracles wrought by Images to the true God;
others say, they are wrought by the power of the Devil; therefore they make the
Papists God to be a Devil. Which is altogether as true reasoning as the former.
For Justin says, he believes Idolatry to have come from the Devils, the Poets
they say it came from God: and although he quotes this opinion of theirs, it
does not follow that he thought their God to be a Devil; but that they
attributed those things to God, which did come from the Devil. So much for the
first Testimony, let us come to the next; and if the rest prove like it,
notwithstanding T. G.'s fluttering, all his Fathers will be but a Covie of one
still.


R. P. The next is, Athenagoras, who first shows from what the Poets and
Historians relate concerning the Heathen Gods, Def. p. 288.
that there was nothing that might induce us to believe Saturn, Jupiter,
Proserpine and the rest of them to be Gods, but rather that they were men, and
by their actions Devils: and then that Jupiter according to the interpretation
of the Philosophers was no God.


P. D. Is not this, the same Athenagoras who said, that the generality of
mankind were agreed in this, whether they would or no, that there was but one
God? And who proves this from the Testimony of the Heathen Poets and
Philosophers, and that with the very name of Jupiter too? Athenag. leg. pro
Christian. p. 5, 6.
(...). Does Athenagoras yield this to be a good proof concerning one true God,
and yet deny the true God to be meant by Jupiter? No; but we must consider a
threefold sense of Jupiter among the Fathers.

(1.) The Original Jupiter, the Father of Gods and Men among the Poets, the
supreme mind and Governor of the world among the Philosophers; the one God
confessed by all mankind; whom Athenagoras mentions under that name, in the
verses of Euripides. And if Athenagoras took this Jupiter for a Devil, he does
not prove any thing to his purpose from those Testimonies of the Poets and
Philosophers. For his design was to vindicate the Christians in holding the
Unity of the Godhead, which I desire T. G. to observe; You accuse us, says
Athenagoras, because we reject your popular Gods, and assert one God; yet says
he, you condemn not your Poets and Philosophers who applied themselves most to
the consideration of things, and agree with us in the Unity of the Godhead.
What force were there in this argument; if the God they owned were not the true
God, but an Arch-devil? How could the Christians plead the consent of the Wiser
Heathens with them, if they owned a Devil instead of the true God? Suppose any
loyal subjects in the late times had been accused as enemies to the Government,
would it have passed for any vindication of them to have pleaded that they
owned O. C. who was a single person, as well as our lawful King? It is true,
they both agreed in a single person, but the rights of those two single persons
were so opposite to each other, that the same men could not be friends to both,
or both be said to own the same Monarchy. But when the Christians pleaded the
consent of the Heathens, it was not merely to purge themselves from Atheism;
but to show that the wisest Heathens were of their mind; As T. G. confesses,
the Fathers appealed to the Testimony of the Consciences of men to this
purpose, Dial. p. 312, 313, 314.
as giving evidence for Christians, (mark that) What evidence was this for
Christians, unless it were not only for one God, but for the true God? For they
who did own one God, who was so far from being the true, that in the Fathers
judgment, he was the greatest enemy to him in the world, viz. an Arch-devil;
these were far from giving testimony to the Christians; as who would say, that
the Indians who worship the Devil do give testimony to the true God? If
therefore it was the Arch-devil, as T. G. says, whom the Poets and
Philosophers according to the Fathers, did give testimony to, instead of
producing their evidence as they did on all occasions, they ought to have
rejected it with scorn and indignation. For what consent could there be between
God and the Devil? If the Fathers thought they owned one supreme Devil, and yet
produced their testimonies to justify their belief of one true God, it would
have been just, as if the Kings Subjects should have said to O. C.'s friends;
why are you angry with us for not submitting to his Government; since D. and H.
and P. and the rest, own a single person as well as we? True, would they have
said, but our difference is the more irreconcilable, for you are for one
single person and we for another; and their interests can never be united,
there being a competition between them for the same Power. Thus when
Athenagoras and the rest of the Fathers produce the Testimonies of Euripides,
Sophocles, Plato, Aristotle, etc. to show their consent with the Christians in
the acknowledgement of one supreme God; we will suppose the Emperor Antoninus
to whom Athenagoras addressed himself, to ask him this question, You produce
their testimonies to prove their consent with you as to one supreme God; do you
mean the same God; or an Usurper and an Arch-devil? If you think it was not the
same, but his utter enemy, What madness is it to produce those who owned him
whom you account the greatest usurper, to prove a consent with you, who pretend
to discover his usurpation, and do cry out upon him as the greatest enemy to
God and mankind? If you think they meant the same God with you, who is the Lord
and Governor of the world, we cannot deny the force of your allegations, and
judge it unreasonable to condemn you for that doctrine, which the wisest among
our selves did own. Since therefore T. G. confesses that the Heathens did own
one supreme God, and that under the name of Jupiter, and that the Fathers do
produce many testimonies of theirs to that purpose: and that, as it appears, to
show their consent with Christians as to the unity of the Godhead, as
Athenagoras says expressly; what can follow more naturally from hence, than
that the Fathers did look upon that Jupiter whom they owned to be the one
supreme God, to be the same true God, whom the Christians worshipped? And when
Athenagoras produced the Testimony of Plato concerning the Maker and Father of
the Universe, he immediately adds, (...)^ ^ understanding thereby one
unbegotten and eternal God. Was this meant by Athenagoras of the true God, or
of the Arch-devil? And from hence he argues thus; If Plato's opinion were not
impious or Atheistical, neither is ours who hold the same God who made the
world. What force is there in this arguing, if Athenagoras did not look on
Plato's God and the Christians to be the same? And in another place speaking of
Plato's saying concerning Jupiter, Legate. p. 26.
that he rides first in Heaven upon his winged chariot, ordering and disposing
all things; and an army of Gods and Demons follows him; he subjoyns this
caution, that this is not to be understood of Jupiter the son of Saturn; but
that this name belongs to the Maker of all things. Can there be a plainer
testimony than this, that there was a more ancient and greater Jupiter than the
son of Saturn, and he no less than the Maker of the World? When Athenagoras
himself makes this distinction, and owns that the name of Jupiter belongs to
the maker of all things, is it possible to think that by this Jupiter,
Athenagoras did not mean the supreme God but an Arch-devil? But he goes on and
says, that Plato added the word Great to Jupiter, on purpose to distinguish
the Celestial Jupiter from the Terrestrial, and him that was unbegotten, from
him that was begotten; and not only junior to the Heaven and Earth, but to the
Cretans who stole him away to prevent his being killed by his Father.

(2.) The Poetical Jupiter. Of him Athenagoras speaks, when he joins him with
Saturn and Proserpina. Where he mentions the Poetical Theology; and he says,
that Orpheus, Homer, and Hesrod were not much inferior in age to the Gods they
describe, as to their Genealogies, shapes, Athen. p. 16.
actions and passions; which he shows at large to be unworthy of any who are
called Gods. Toward the latter end of his Apology, he gives the true account
of these things, viz. that those whom they worshipped for Gods had formerly
been men of interest and power, P. 34.
and either through fear or flattery had divine worship given to them; and
particularly of Jupiter, he proves from Callimachus, that he was born in Creet,
although the Poet will by no means allow that he died and had a Sepulcher
there. From hence he shows, that under the names of Deified men the evil
spirits did assume the divine worship which was given to themselves; which he
proves from the cruel and impure actions which they did put men upon. He shows,
that the Image of Neryllinus who lived in their time did give answers to those
who consulted it; and so did that of Proteus, or Lucians Peregrinus, who cast
himself into the fire at Olympia; since therefore the Images themselves could
not do these things, nor those whose Images they were, he concludes they were
evil Spirits who were busy about those Images, and wrought upon the
imaginations of those who came to consult them. And who denies that these were
evil Spirits which drew men to Idolatry, and encouraged them in it, as
Athenagoras observes, who under the names of great men did assume divine
worship to themselves? And in this sense Dr. St. never denied that Jupiter of
Creet was a false God, and the Devil under his name drew men to the practice of
gross Idolatry.

(3.) The Allegorical Jupiter. For Athenagoras says, Athen. p. 22.
that the Poetical Fables were so filthy and base, that the Philosophers had no
other way, but to turn them into Allegories; and to interpret them Physically
of the nature and mixture of the Elements. And thus according to Empedocles,
Jupiter was Fire, Juno Earth, Pluto Air, Nestis water. However, says
Athenagoras, these are but Elements, and parts of matter, and therefore cannot
be Gods, nor deserve divine worship. The Stoics made Jupiter to be Fire, Juno
Air, Neptune Water. Others made one part of Air to be Jupiter, and another
Juno: however they cooked and dressed their Allegories, they were but Pork
still; it could arise no higher than a worship of the Elements instead of God.
And now let any one judge how sufficiently T. G. has proved from Athenagoras,
that the supreme God of the Heathens was an Arch-devil. I pray proceed to your
next.


R. P. Theophilus Antiochenus says, that neither the Mother of the Gods, nor
her Children are Gods, but Idols, the works of men's hands, and most impure
Devils: which T.G. says, was cited by him in the same page with Origin before,
although Dr. St. makes so much sport with him about crying out the Fathers,
when he named, he says, only Origin.


P. D. And was not this true? Does T. G. name any more than Origin to prove
that Jupiter according to the Fathers was an Arch-devil? Look the place and you
will find it punctually true. I grant he mentions Theophilus Antio^hemis in the
same page; Cath. no Idol. p. 349, 350.
but to what purpose? Not to prove the supreme God an Arch-devil; but the
inferior Deities to be Inferior Devils: which was a thing never denied by Dr.
St. and therefore this Testimony signifies as little now, as it did before.


R. P. But you will not so easily reconcile Tertullians Testimonies with Dr.
St. 's abominable pretense, Dial. p. 290.
as T. G. calls it, that the God of the Romans was the true God.


P. D. It is one thing to say, the God of the Romans was the true God, and
another to say, they did worship the true God under the title of Jupiter O. M.
For the former may imply that they had no other Gods besides him to whom they
gave Divine Worship; which I dare say never came into Dr. St.'s head. But all
that he asserted was, that the Romans did own and worship the supreme God under
the titles of Jupiter O. M. and gave such characters and descriptions of him as
could agree to none but the Lord and Governor of the World: which he proved
from many testimonies of Cicero, Seneca, and others the gravest of the Roman
Writers. And what does Tertullian say to take off these testimonies?


R. P. First, he says, we are not ignorant that those who act and are pleased
and counterfeit a Divinity under those names (of dead men) and consecrated
statues, Tertul. de spect. c. 10.
are wicked spirits, i. e. Devils.


P. D. And what then I beseech you? Was Jupiter O. M. one of these dead men? if
not, to what purpose is this Testimony brought; unless it be as Country people
say, for want of a better?


R. P. Not so, for he says elsewhere, We worship one God whom ye all know by
the light of Nature: As for the rest whom you think to be Gods, Ad S^ap. c. 2.
we know them to be Devils.


P. D. Admirable! who can stand before such demonstrations? Tertullian here
grants they all knew the true God, therefore the supreme God of the Romans was
a Devil. He might as well have brought another Testimony out of the Book de
spectaculis; No man can be ignorant of that which Nature suggests, De spect. c.
2.
that God is the Maker of the World. Were the Romans ignorant of that, which
Tertullian says, no man could be ignorant of? And when they made use of the
most proper Epithets of Good and Great to describe and worship him by; is it
probable they should not understand him? Or that Tertullian should think their
supreme God was an Arch-devil; when he says in the words cited by T. G. he was
the same God whom the Christians worshipped? Does T.G. consider what he writes?
when he puts down this for a Testimony against Dr. St. We worship one God whom
ye all know by the light of Nature. Does it not hence follow, that the God whom
the Gentiles knew, was the same whom the Christians worshipped? and he was not
certainly an Arch-devil. I pray judge, whose pretense is the more abominable
upon his own Testimonies.


R. P. For all this, Tertullian shows, that Jupiter worshipped in the Capitol
was not the true God. For speaking of the supplications the Heathens made
there, he says, Apol. c. 40.
they were averse both from God and Heaven.


P. D. And had he not great-reason to say so, when he says, The Romans with
full bellies, and wallowing in all kind of Luxury, did offer up their
sacrifices to obtain rain, and thought to have it drop down from the Capitol
upon them, if the people went barefoot thither? Does not God himself tell the
Jews they were far from him, when they seemed most to draw nigh unto him? i. e.
their sacrifices and oblations signified nothing, while they continued in their
sins. I should not stick to say that intemperate and wicked men are averse both
from God and Heaven, though they walk barefoot and make the richest presents to
the true God. But how does this prove they did not intend to worship the true
God there? Although withal their worship, even in the Capitol, was Idolatrous
worship; both as to the Image of Jupiter, and the conjunction of other Gods
with him; therefore whatever their intention was as to the worship of Jupiter
O. M. their supplications might well be displeasing to the true God; and on
that account they might be said to be averse from God and Heaven.


R. P. I have another testimony of Tertullian still good; which if I mistake
not will put you hard to it. It is in his Apologetick. Apolog. c. 24.
We are esteemed not to be Romans but injurious to them, because we do not
worship the God of the Romans. It Is well, he is the God of all, whether we will
or no. But among you it is lawful to worship any thing but the true God; as if
he were not the great God of all, whose no are all. Dial. p. 290.
What could be said more express to remove that abominable pretense of the
Doctors, that the God of the Romans was the true God?


P. D. I see no reason in the world for your accounting the Doctors pretense
abominable, unless he justified the way of worship then used, which he
confesses to be abominable both in the old Romans and others who too much
imitate their Idolatries. Observe, that Tertullian speaks of their worship,
which being Idolatrous, the Christians had just reason to refuse joining with
the Romans in it. From hence they were accused for worshipping another God from
him whom the Romans worshipped, and Tertullian before mentions the several
suspicions which they had concerning the God of the Christians; Apolog. c. 16.
some said it was the head of an Ass, some the Cross, some the Sun, and some
set forth a ridiculous picture with the ears of an Ass, a Book and a Gown, and
called this the God of the Christians. Tertullian upon this declares that the
Christians worshipped the God that made the world and none else; or as he said
to Scapula, the God whom all men know by Nature. And in that very Chapter from
whence those words are cited, he says, it was the common opinion among the
Romans, that there was one God higher and more powerful than all the rest, of
perfect Wisdom and Majesty: for the greatest part, says he, did make this
scheme of Divinity, that the chief Power lay in one God, to whom the rest were
only ministerial and subservient. I am afraid T. G. will allow my sense of
these words no more than he is wont to do Dr. St.'s. I will therefore give you
Tertullians own words. Nam and sic plerique disponunt Divinitatem, ut imperium
summae Dominationis esse penes unum, officia ejus penes multos velint. Which
words are of mighty weight and consequence in this matter, toward the right
understanding Tertullians meaning. Here we see from whence Aquinas had his
plures eorum, and in what sense it must be understood. From hence it appears,
that the Generality of the Heathens did not assert a multitude of independent
gods: nor were charged with Idolatry on that account. And to let us see whom
they meant by this supreme God, he produces in the next words the place of
Plato mentioned by Athenagoras of the great Jupiter in Heaven with his Army of
Gods and Demons.


R. P. But Tertullian says, the Christians did not worship the God of the
Romans; and the Romans would not suffer them to worship the true God: how could
this be, if they did own and worship the true God?


P. D. I will tell you, The God of the Romans was he who was worshipped after
an Idolatrous manner in the Capitol and elsewhere: the Christians chose rather
to to dye than to worship God after this manner: the Romans would permit no
other kind of Worship than their own: and when the Christians refused to join
in their worship, they could not believe, let them say what they would, that
they worshipped that God whom all men know by the light Nature. The God of the
Romans is the God worshipped after the Roman manner; as the God of the Jews, of
the Turks, and of the Christians is the God worshipped according to those
several Laws, although he be the same God in himself the Maker and Governor of
the World. This place then does imply no more, than that the Roman Religion as
it stood at that time and the Christian were inconsistent; but it does not
follow from hence that the Romans did not intend to worship the Supreme God
under the title of Jupiter O. M.


R. P. Before we leave Tertullian, I have something more to say to you
concerning him: it is about a passage of his Book ad Scapulam cited by Dr. St.
where he endeavors to prove that the Heathens Jupiter was the Supreme God,
Dial p. 371, etc.
by a miracle wrought upon the Heathens supplications to him under the name of
Jove.


P. D. Are you sure that Dr. St. ever meant any such thing?


R. P. T. G. quotes his words, God, says he, showed himself to be the powerful
God by what he did upon their supplications to him under the name of Jove.


P. D. But does not Dr. St. expressly say, Defense p. 47.
that it was upon the prayers of Christians, that miracle was wrought?


R. P. Yes, T. G. takes notice of that, and from thence proves that he wilfully
corrupted Tertullians text, and makes a very Tragical business of it. Methinks
I see the great Dionysius with his Birchen Scepter walking round him, Dial. p.
284.
telling him of his faults, and then one or two lashes; but lest his pain
should be too soon at an end, he takes off his hand, and walks the other turn,
with a stern and Magisterial Countenance bidding others beware, and telling
them what an example he will make of him, he lays on again, with such a spring
in his arm, and so many repeated strokes, that I even pity the poor Doctor, and
I could not think Dionysius himself could have expressed more severity on such
an occasion; but I consider, it is against an Heretic, and it is necessary
sometimes to let you see how sharp we can be.


P. D. You need not to tell us that; but we had need to keep out of your lash
as long as we can, for we expect no great kindness from you, if ever we fall
under it. But why should T. G. think that Dr. St. designed to corrupt
Tertullians sense in that place, when himself had before owned that the miracle
was wrought by the prayers of the Christians? He would never have done this, if
he intended the other. I do confess the words, as they lie, are capable of that
construction T. G. puts upon them; but in common ingenuity they ought to be
understood according to his own former sense of them; unless the force of the
argument lay in the other sense; which I do not perceive it does. For Dr. St.
designed to prove in that place from Tertullian, Defense p. 92.
that the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme God, from the testimony of their
Consciences, and lifting up their hands and eyes to Heaven upon any great
occasion: and then brings in those words before mentioned; which are there
produced for no other end, but to show that the same powerful God was owned by
the Gentiles and Christians in that famous miracle. He did not intend there to
prove, as T. G. suggests, that Jupiter whom they worshipped in the Capitol was
this one Supreme Being, from the testimony of Tertullian and the Miracle
wrought by God himself upon the Heathens supplications to him under the name of
Jove; And where he did purposely set himself to prove this, he there confesses
that the miracle was wrought at the prayers of the Christians, and that the
whole Army made the exclamation, Deo Deorum and qui solus potens, whereby they
did in Jovis nomine Deo nostro testimonium reddere, says Tertullian; and Dr.
St. adds that the Heathens did intend this honor to their own Jove. From
whence it appears that all the force of the argument from this Testimony lies
in this, that the Heathens did confess there was one supreme and powerful God
whom they called Jove. And this I say in Dr. St.'s name is the whole strength
and force of his argument, and that he never thought of what T. G. imposes upon
him, viz. that God wrought that miracle upon the supplications of the Heathens
to prove that Jove was the true God: which was not necessary to his design. But
I do insist upon it, as an invincible proof of that which he intended, the
acknowledgement of one supreme God, whom they called Jove. I do yield then,
that the miracle was wrought by the prayers of the Christians; that the
Christians did not pray to God under the name of Jove; that the Heathens did
attribute the honor of the miracle to their Jove; that in the titles they gave
to him on this occasion they did give testimony to the mighty power of that God
whom the Christians worshipped; I will not deny, that M. Aurelius did write a
Letter to the Senate, wherein he acknowledged this miracle to be wrought by the
Christians, (although it may be that was not the Letter, which is extant in
Baronius) But after all these concessions, I say, that Dr. St.'s argument holds
good, that the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme God under the name of Jove.
For what could the Army mean else, by that acclamation, Deo Deorum and qui
solus potens? From whence it unavoidably follows, that the Heathen Army did
acknowledge one Supreme and Omnipotent God, whom they called Jove: And in
Antoninus his Column at Rome, this God is described under the title of Jupiter
Pluvius: therefore according to the sense of the Heathen Army, this Jupiter was
Deus Deorum, and solus Potens. T. G. could not but see, that herein lay the
strength of Dr. St.'s argument; but he dissembles it, and makes him to aim at
what he never thought of, and catching hold of an ambiguous expression, he runs
away with that, and uses him with more severity than ever Dionysius turned
Pedant, or reforming Stepmother used, which are his own expressions upon a far
less occasion.


R. P. But Tertullian distinguishes the true God from him who was worshipped
under the name of Jove.


P. D. I deny not, that Tertullian does distinguish the worship of the true God
from the worship of Jove. And when the Heathens attributed such miracles to
their Jupiter, with a design thereby to justify the Heathen Worship, the
Christians had great reason to stand upon this distinction; and to complain
that what the Christians obtained by prayers and fasting, they attributed to
their Jupiter, i. e. what the Christians hoped would convince them of their
Idolatry, they used for an argument to prove that God was not displeased with
it. But it does not follow, from any thing Tertullian has said, that he did
not suppose the Heathens did not intend to worship the true God under their
Jupiter, when he confesses the greatest part of them did suppose one Supreme
God, and that the Christians worshipped the same God whom all men knew by the
light of Nature.


R. P. What say you to Clemens Alexandrinus, Dial. p. 290.
who affirms the Gods of the Heathens to be Devils; and among the rest he
reckons up Jupiter himself; so far was he from thinking Jupiter to be the true
God?


P. D. Dr. St. had prevented this objection, Defense p. 75.
by saying that in that place Clemens speaks of the Poetical Theology, and of
Jupiter of Creet; but withal he shows not only that Clemens does acknowledge
that all mankind had a natural knowledge of the true God, P. 77.
but that they meant him under the name of Jupiter: and commends the manner of
speaking concerning God as grave and decent, where the Divine perfections are
attributed to Jupiter: he quotes a saying of Xenocrates wherein he calls God
(...) the Supreme Jove, and some others of a like nature. Which seem to be as
plain evidences as Dr. St. could desire. And what answer does T. G. give to
them?


R. P. He says, Dial. p. 360.
it does not follow from hence that it was the sense of Clemens himself, that
Jupiter who was worshipped in the Temples was that true God. And his meaning
was not to assert Jupiter to be that supreme Being, but from the Epithets and
Titles of Omniscient, Omnipotent, etc. which the Poets and Philosophers
attributed unto God under the name of Jupiter, to convince them, that there was
but one supreme Being, Maker and Governor of the World.


P. D. His design then was to convince them of that, which he proves they all
knew already. If they had such a knowledge of God, as T. G. grants that Clemens
does prove from their Testimonies, Dial. p. 361.
either it was the true God they knew, or a false God or an Arch-devil. If the
later, they do not reach to what he brings them for, which was to prove the
inbred notion of one supreme Disposer of things; if the former, then all those
Titles and Epithets did express the true God; according to Clemens his own
sense of them. But does T. G. think that they gave the Titles and Epithets of
Omnipotent, Omniscient, etc. to the Devil? and that Clemens believed it at the
same time, when he proves from hence that all men have the natural knowledge of
God? If he can think so, he must make Clemens a man of much reading, but of no
judgment. But I pray reflect a little; Dial. p. 3^9, etc.
T. G. confesses that Clemens says, that those Epithets were attributed to
Jupiter with a great deal of decency and gravity concerning God; then according
to T. G. the Devil may very decently and gravely be said to be an omnipotent
and omniscient Devil. For I pray observe but this one passage and you will find
what pitiful shifts T. G. is put to. The things which the Poets attribute to
Jupiter in express terms Clemens says are spoken with great decorum of God:
and at the same time he grants, that they meant God by their Jupiter; what then
follows but that although they used the name Jupiter, yet under that name they
spoke those thinks of God which were very agreeable to him. No, says T. G.
this is not his meaning, but that they spoke those things concerning their
Jupiter, which being applied to the true God would be spoken with great gravity
and decency. Which in plain terms is, that they attributed the perfections of
God to the Arch-devil, which was very ill done of them one would think, and
horrible blasphemy; but however, says T. G. these things may be said to be
spoken with great gravity and decency concerning God, because if you take them
from the Devil and apply them to God, they are decent expressions. Let us
suppose James Naylor riding through the streets of Bristol assuming to himself
the title of the Son of God, and some of his followers crying Hosanna to the
Son of David: would T. G. say this were spoken with decency and gravity;
because it would be so, if it were rightly applied to his Son Christ Jesus? T.
G. does not seem here to consider wherein the decency of speech lies; for there
is the greatest indecency, nay blasphemy in the misapplication of the best
titles and most glorious attributes. And were there no other reason to convince
me of the sense of the Fathers in this matter, this alone were sufficient; that
if T. G.'s hypothesis were true, all those great things which the Heathens
spoke of their Jupiter were most abominable blasphemies; for the Divine
Perfections were attributed to the chief of Devils. And if to attribute the
miraculous works of God to the Devil be the sin against the Holy Ghost; what
then is it to give to the Devil all the perfections of God himself? And yet, if
T. G. say true, the Fathers must believe that the most learned and wise of the
Heathens did so, when they spoke of the Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness of
their supreme Jupiter: and if they did believe they were guilty of such
horrible blasphemy, would they so often quote, approve, extol these sayings as
they do? Would they not rather have reproved, censured, condemned them for
them, as the most intolerable reproaches of the Divine Nature? Would they have
born such things in Plato, Euripides or any other Philosopher or Poet? For to
call a Stone, a Stock, a dead Man, a God; to attribute life, sense,
understanding to mere matter; were tolerable blasphemies in comparison with
making the Devil to be the supreme Governor of the world; to be One and All;
to be infinite Wisdom as well as Power; and yet all these must be thus given to
the Devil by the wisest Poets and Philosophers which the Heathens ever had. Nay
farther, their best and most understanding men who are most commended by the
Fathers themselves, must be the greatest blasphemers of all others, and be
thought so by the Fathers at the same time when they magnify their sayings,
for the Wisdom, Gravity, and Decency contained in them. This is so gross, so
wild, so absurd an imagination as could hardly enter into any man's head who had
any manner of esteem for the Fathers. And I would advise T. G. rather to let
the Fathers quite alone, than to fix such absurdities upon them.


R. P. Methinks you are grown very warm of a sudden; but I have another Father
to cool you, and he is Minucius Felix.


P. D. He is but a Paterculus a very diminutive Father, as T. G. speaks;
however I hope he is able to speak for himself.


R. P. He says, the impure Spirits lurking in the consecrated statues gained
to themselves the Authority and Esteem of a Deity that was there present.


P. D. And what then? How often must you be told, that the question is not,
whether the Devils were not assisting in the practice of Idolatry? which Dr.
St. never questioned; either by presence in consecrated Images, or by assuming
divine honors under the names of Deified men; but this does not come up to the
question in hand; which is, whethers the Fathers did not believe they did
intend to worship the supreme God under the name and Titles of Jupiter O. M.? I
will make this plain to you, that if possible you may understand the difference
of these questions. You know what boasts are made in your Church of the
Miracles wrought by our Lady of such and such a place, as of Mointague, Hall,
Loretto, etc. what do you mean by this, but that such Images which are there of
her did effect them, not by the power of the Wood or Stone, but of some
spiritual power which was present in or about them; suppose now a person who
has heard of the coming of Satan with signs and lying wonders, should believe
that the evil spirits did endeavor to retrieve Idolatry in the Christian World
after the way by which they advanced it in the Heathen World; and so concludes
that they work these pretended miracles, might not such a one say, that impure
spirits lurk in your consecrated Images, and there receive Divine Worship under
the names of Saints and Angels; and yet at the same time believe that you
worship one supreme God?


R. P. But here the case is different; for Minucius says, that Saturn, Dial.
p. 291.
and Serapis, and Jupiter (mark that) confess themselves to be Devils.


P. D. Two ways Jupiter might be a Devil, and yet not prejudice Dr. St.'s
assertion. (1.) As he assumed the honors given to the Poetical Jupiter; who
was really a Prince of Creet; but the Poets by attributing to him the villainies
of many others (as to the ravishing of women, etc.) had made him one of the
greatest monsters of Wickedness that ever was; and therefore it was no wonder
the Devil should be worshipped under his name; not intentionally but
terminatively, in as much, as all this worship ended in the service of the
Devil, who was always very active to subdue the minds of men to the Folly and
Wickedness of Idolatry. (2.) As he was busy about consecrated Images, even to
the supreme Jupiter. Thus although the Greeks and Romans might set up Images
with Scepters, and Globes, and Thunderbolts in their hands, on purpose to
declare that they intended to worship the supreme God by them; yet this way of
worship being so disagreeable to the Divine Nature and Perfections, God might
justly suffer the impure Spirits to be active in those very Images, which were
consecrated to himself: and they might by this means run away with that honor
which they intended to give to the Divine Majesty. But the Question still
remains, whether notwithstanding all this, the Heathens did not design to
worship the supreme God under the name of Jove? and nothing of this nature does
show that the Fathers believed the contrary; and as to Minucius Felix, Dr. St.
had produced a material passage out of him to prove, that they who make Jove
the chief God, are only deceived in the name, but agree in the power.


R. P. I am glad you mention that place; for T. G. has at large proved that
Dr. St. has corrupted both the sense and words of Minucius to make him speak
as he would have him. Dial. p. 354.



P. D. I am now so used to these false and shameless charges of T. G. about Dr.
St.'s corrupting of Authors, that I dare stand the shock, let T. G. make use of
all his strength and skill.


R. P. T. G. says, that Minucius intended nothing less than to assert Jupiter
to be the one supreme God; but that he argued only ad hominem (as we say) from
what the wiser Heathens pretended they thought of Jupiter, that they ought to
acknowledge but one supreme God, Maker and Governor of the World: and the
design and sense of Minucius was this, That although they were deceived in
their pretense of assigning Jupiter to be the supreme God; yet by what they
affirmed of him, viz. that he was the Prince or the Chief, and the Poets
setting forth one Father of Gods and Men, they were sufficiently convinced,
that they ought to acknowledge but one supreme and undivided Power, by which
the world was made and governed; which was the point Minucius was proving in
that place. But the Dr. by putting in and leaving out what he thought might
make for his advantage, has corrupted the very Text of Minucius, to make it
speak his sense.


P. D. A very heavy charge! But what if there be no ground for all this? Is not
T. G. a man of admirable dexterity, and unparalled ingenuity? I will take T.
G.'s own translation of the words; and if from thence all that Dr. St. says,
does follow, there can be certainly no cause for all these clamours. Those
also, says he, who will have Jupiter to be the Prince or Chief, are deceived
in the name, but agree as to the Unity of Power. The matter lies within a
narrow compass: Either they who agreed as to the Unity of Power and called that
Power by the name of Jove did mean the same God with Minucius, or not. If they
meant the same God, Dr. St. gives the true sense of Minucius, for then they who
make Jove the chief God are only deceived in the name and agree in the Power:
(and it is ridiculous Pedantry to quarrel at his translating, Qui Jovem
Principem volunt, They who make Jove the chief God: and for putting in only, it
is no more than the sense implies, for if they agree in the thing, they must be
only deceived in the name.) This is therefore the single point to be debated,
whether according to Minucius they understood the same God or not? And to make
this out I desire no other method than what T. G. proposes, viz. to consider
the design of Minucius in that place. Providence being supposed, he says, the
question is whether the world be Governed by one, or more, and after other
arguments for Monarchical Government in general, he produces the consent of
mankind in lifting up their hands to Heaven, and calling upon God, and saying,
God is great, God is true, and if God give. Is this, says he, the voice of
Nature in the common people, or the confession of a Christian? Where nothing
can be more evident, than the consent between the voice of Nature, and the
confession of a Christian as to the same God. And then it immediately follows.
Et qui Jovem Principem volunt, falluntur in nomine, sed de una Potestate
consentiunt. These agree too as to the Unity of Power, who would have Jove to
be Chief. Is there not all the reason that may be, to understand this agreement
to be with those mentioned before; viz. the common people and Christians, who
all consent in the Unity of Power; but these call that Power by the name of
Jove; and although Minucius thinks they are deceived in attributing that name
to God, yet he yields that they agreed in the thing. This is the plain and
easy sense of Minucius; Let us now consider T. G.'s sense of these words, and
see how well that agrees with his design. His sense is this; They who would
have Jupiter to be the Prince or Chief, were agreed as to the Unity of Power,
but were so much deceived, not only in the name, but in the thing it self, that
they attributed this Power, not to God but to the Devil. For, says T. G.
Minucius his own thoughts were, that this Jupiter was a Devil. Let this be
supposed, and his meaning is this, The common People call upon God, and say,
God is true, God is great; and therein agree with the confession of Christians;
and they who will have Jove, i. e. the Devil to be the Chief of Gods, do agree
as to the Unity of Power. They who make God to be Chief, and the Devil to be
Chief, do both agree that one is Chief I grant: but will any man of common
sense say only that these are deceived in the name, who thinks at the same
time, they mean the Devil? Are they not deceived in much more than the name, in
the very thing it self? Do they not set up an Usurper instead of God, and his
most inveterate enemy, and attribute infinite and undivided power to him? And
is this dwindling expression fit for a Christian, to say only, falluntur in
nomine, they are deceived in the name? No: but he ought to have told them, they
were deceived much more in the thing than in the name. It was but a trifle in
comparison what name they used, if their sense and meaning were good. Call him
Jove or what they pleased, if they meant the same thing, it was only a
difference about a name: but if they did really attribute the Divine
perfections to the Devil, this was a crime of the highest nature, it was
notorious blasphemy; and no true Christian could pass it over so gently and
slightly, as Minucius does, if he were of T. G.'s opinion. But to convince us
that he was far from it; he afterward produces the consent of Philosophers
with the Christians, so he says, (in the same page of the Leyden Edition) that
they did consent with them: and surely it was no consent with Christians to
give the divine perfections to the Devil. Speaking of Thales, he says, Vides
Philosophi principalis nobiscum penitus opinionem consonare. (I forbear to
translate lest T. G. should want matter to fill up some empty pages as he did
by proving that volunt does not signify making, etc.) However, Minucius shows,
that this Prince of Philosophers did fully agree with the Christians. Wherein I
beseech you? in attributing that power to the Devil which they give to God?
this is an agreement which I dare say, no Christian would ever own. And
therefore it must be, in acknowledging the same Divine Being which the
Christians did. And after he has reckoned up the several opinions of the most
noted Philosophers, he has this remarkable expression; Exposui opiniones
omnium fere Philosophorum, quibus illustrior gloria est Deum unum multis licet
designasse nominibus: I have set down the opinions of almost all the famous
Philosophers, who all set forth one God though under many names: And lest any
should fall into T. G.'s extravagant imagination, that this was not a consent
in the same Being, but as to a mere Unity of Power, though lodged in the Devil
himself, he adds these words, Vt quivis arbitretur, aut nunc Christianos
philosophos esse, aut philosophos fuisse jam tunc Christianos. Let T. G.
construe this to his sense, if he can for his heart. Would any man in the
World, who believed the Heathens supreme God to be the Devil, have said, either
that the Christians now were Philosophers, or the Philosophers then were
Christians: i. e. that those who asserted that God, and those who said, the
Devil were supreme Governor of the world, were of the same opinion. Which is
so foolish, so ridiculous an assertion, that I wonder to find T. G. resolve to
maintain it. And I now desire you, or any man to judge whether the half dozen
Fathers T. G. has produced before Origin can amount to a Covie of One. I have
exercised great patience in examining these testimonies, and not after T. G.'s
way turned off all the rest, because one was defective; and if you have any
more that speak to the point, I am content to give you all the satisfaction you
can desire, provided they prove more than that in general, the Gentiles
sacrificed to Devils, which was never denied.


R. P. T. G. produces the Testimonies of Eusebius, Athanasius, S. Cyprian,
Dial. p. 293, etc.
S. Chrysostom, S. Hierom and others.


P. D. To what purpose?


R. P. To prove that they were wicked spirits who delighted in their worship
and Sacrifices.


P. D. Who ever denied this? Will T. G. quote the Fathers from one end to the
other to prove that all men are sinners? Name me those who seem to speak to the
poin^, and I will answer them.


R. P. You cannot deny that Arnobius, Lactantius, and S. Augustine do speak to
the point about Jove being worshipped as the supreme God, will you hear them?


P. D. Yes; what have you to say more about them?


R. P. Dial. p. 296.
Arnobius says, that Jupiter O. M. to whom the Capitol was Dedicated was not
the true omnipotent God: and Lactantius makes Jupiter the King of those
Celestial Gods, which the evil spirits feigned.


P. D. Are not these the two persons whom Dr. St. goes about to excuse for
applying the Poetical Fables to Jupiter O. M.?


R. P. Dial. p. 320.
That is a fine way of defending the Fathers, to take the parts of the Heathens
against them; as Dr. St. does.


P. D. He never does it as to the main of the cause, as to any of them (which
were to take the part of Idolatry against Christianity; which in my opinion,
others are far more liable to the guilt of than he) nor does he charge any of
them with wholly mistaking the state of the Question; but he instanceth in two
Rhetoricians (who must be excused in many other things, as it were easy to
show) and he says of them, that they could not forbear giving a cast of their
former employment in this matter. And when Dr. St. says, we ought not to
charge the Heathens with more than they were guilty of; does T. G. think we
ought? but I am of another opinion, though we should grant their supreme God to
be a Devil, for we ought to give the Devil his due.


R. P. But what say you to S. Augustine whom Dr. St. represents as the most
baffled by the Heathens in this point? Dial. p. 324, 325.
Is not this kind of procedure more suitable to the design of Julian, than of
the Reformation?


P. D. Cannot a man write against your Idolatry, but he must be another Julian?
i. e. a man cannot write like a Christian, but he must be an Apostate. Are you
the only Christians in the world? and your peculiar doctrines the only
Christianity? If it be, it is a Christianity, which the Christian Church never
knew in its best Ages; a Christianity never taught by Christ nor his Apostles.
but for S. Augustine, I do not find that Dr. St. thinks him in the least baffled
in this matter; but being a learned and ingenuous man, he says, Defense, p. 94.
that he quitted the argument from the Poetical Fables concerning Jupiter, and
reduced the controversy to its true point, about the Idolatry committed in the
worship of inferior Deities. But what an itch of calumniating had seized T. G.
when he could not hold from paralleling Dr. St. with Julian merely for giving
an account of the state of the Controversy about Idolatry, as it was managed
by S. Augustine?


R. P. This leads us into another weighty subject, viz. on what account the
Fathers charged the Heathens with Idolatry.


P. D. I grant it is so, and tends very much to the right understanding the
nature of it. And what account does T. G. give of it?


R. P. I assure you T. G. shows himself to be a man very well versed in the
Fathers, and seems to have them at his Fingers ends; nay, he has such great
plenty of them, that they serve him not only for freight but for ballast too;
filling his Margent as well as his Book with them: and had he not studied
brevity, he might have outdone the Dr. himself in being Voluminous. Dial. p.
347.



P. D. No doubt of it; if he had a mind to produce all that the Fathers say on
the subject of Heathen Idolatry; but let us pare off all impertinencies which
tend only to amuse and confound a Reader, and keep close to our subject. Tell
me on what account T. G. says, the Fathers did charge the Heathens with
Idolatry.


R. P. I suppose it may be reduced to these following. (1.) In worshipping
their Images for Gods. (2.) In worshipping a multitude of false Gods. (3.) In
worshipping the Creatures and not the Creator. And as to every one of these he
shows how false Dr. St.'s parallel is of the Heathen Idolatry and the worship
practiced and allowed in our Church.


P. D. I pray begin with the first of these; and let us hear what account T. G.
gives of the Heathen Idolatry in the Worship of Images.


R. P. The Images, he says, Dial. p. 330.
were erected to the memory of dead men, whom the people out of flattery or
affection had placed in Heaven; but evil Spirits as it were incorporated
themselves in those Images; and by working strange things about those who
worshipped them, they gained the reputation of Gods; and consequently the Images
were held to be Gods, and worshipped as such.


P. D. I am far from being satisfied with this account of the Heathen Idolatry
in the Worship of Images. For when a man pretends to give an account of a
thing, there are three things he ought to regard; First, that it be full;
Secondly, that it be clear and distinct; Thirdly, that it be general. But I
shall show you, that this account fails in all those particulars, and withal
that it does not clear the Image worship of the Roman Church.

(1.) That it is not full, because it supposes all their Idolatry as to Images
to lie in taking the Images of Deified men for Gods on the account of the
presence of evil Spirits in them. But I find another reason alleged out of the
Fathers against the Worship of Images by Dr. St. which T. G. takes no notice at
all of; Defense, 419. to p. 431.
viz. that Image Worship was very unsuitable to the Divine Nature, as well as
repugnant to the Will of God; and although the latter reason may seem to hold
only for those who received the Scriptures, yet the former does extend to all
mankind. For he shows from the Fathers, that Zeno the Stoic, Antisthenes,
Xenophon, Numa and others condemned the Worship of Images on this account,
because they were a disparagement of the Divine Nature. And for this, he
produces the Testimonies of Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin Martyr, Athenagoras,
Origin, Lactantius and many others. Is this account true, or false? if false,
why is it not proved to be so? if true, why is it not allowed? Is this fair or
honest dealing, in pretending to answer, and not taking notice of the main
objections; or to give account of the Fathers opinions of this matter, and to
say not one word to all this? But it is one thing to write an Answer to a Book,
and another to write a Book which must pass for an Answer.

(2.) This account is not clear and distinct. For it does not express whether
it were Idolatry or not, to worship Images, where there was no incorporation
supposed of evil Spirits, nor does it show how it could be Idolatry on that
supposition. I do not deny, that there was such an opinion among the Heathens,
that Spirits might possess Images, and be incorporated with them; but I say
this was a particular opinion, and not the general belief. For Hermes, from
whom S. Augustine gives the most exact account of this hypothesis (from the
Asclepian Dialogue) looks upon it as a Divine and peculiar art of drawing
invisible Spirits into Images in such a manner as to animate them; De Civ. Dei
l. 8. c. 23.
and thereby making Gods. Which, he says, c. 24.
is the most wonderful of all wonders, that it should be in men's power to make
Gods. Not by producing the Divine Being; but by so uniting it to the Image, as
to make that a fit object for divine worship. But you of the Church of Rome
pretend to do as much as this comes to with five words; and somewhat more, for
you pretend to annihilate a substance which they did not: but as to the main
wonder, yours is of the same nature, viz. so to unite the Divinity to the
species of Bread and Wine, as to make them together a fit object for divine
worship. And therefore T. G. does not at all clear the nature of Idolatry, as
to Images, by such an Hypothesis which does justify the Worship of Images upon
his own grounds. For this principle being supposed, that God was really
incorporated in the Image, it was as lawful for them to Worship that Image, as
for you to Worship the Host. If you say, those were evil Spirits, and not the
true God, that does not clear the matter. For we are not now disputing whether
they were good or bad Spirits which were in those Images; but on what account
they were charged with Idolatry in the Worship of Images. If it were for
worshipping their Images as Gods on the account of one of their Gods being
incorporated in the Image, this I say, is no account at all on T. G.'s
principles: for then such an Image was as fit an object of worship, on their
supposition, as the adoration of the Host is on yours. So that this is rather a
clearing the Worship of Images from the charge of Idolatry among the Heathens,
than giving any account of it: all the Idolatry in this case lying in the
worship of Evil Spirits, and not in the Worship of Images.

(3.) This Account is not general as to the Heathens. For many and those the
most learned among them declared, that they did not take their Images for Gods;
as Dr. St. proved in his First Book, not barely from the Testimonies of the
Heathens, but from the Fathers too; which passages he repeated and urged
against T. G. in his Defense. Defense, p. 466, etc.
And among others he produced the Testimony of Eusebius speaking of the
Heathens in general, who says, Eusebius. Praep. l. 4. c. 1. Dial. p. 293.
they did not look on their Images as Gods; and of him, T. G. says, that no
man understood the Heathens Principles better. And yet after all this, T. G.
hopes to have it pass for a good account of the Heathens Idolatry as to Images,
that they took their Images for Gods.

(4.) This Account does not clear the practice of your Church in the Worship of
Images.


R. P. There I am sure you are mistaken. For do we take our Images for Gods?
And T. G. well observes, that when the Fathers spoke against the Worship of
Images, Dial. p. 335.
from their vileness and impotency; they did not found their arguments merely
on the matter of the Images, and the Art of the Artificers, but upon these two
conditions conjoyntly taken, viz. that they were held to be Gods and yet were
made of such materials; whereas we do not believe our Images to be Gods, nor
worship them as such, as the Heathens did. For the Council of Trent declares
that it believes no Divinity in them, for which they ought to be worshipped.


P. D. This is the utmost which can be said in your Defense; and to show you
how far this is from clearing your Worship of Images, I shall consider, (1.)
The force of the Fathers arguments. (2.) The difference of the Heathens
opinions from yours as to the Divinity of Images. And if their arguments be
such as equally hold against your practices; and your answers do not really
differ from theirs; then the parallel will hold good between your Idolatry and
theirs in this particular.

1. For the force of the Fathers arguments; the thing to be considered is,
whether they held only in conjunction with believing their Images to be Gods.
What connection was there between this Hypothesis, and the disparagement which
Images did imply to the Divine Nature? For this was wholly on the account of
representation; (and this is the great argument the Fathers insist upon.) The
infinite distance between God and the Work of men's hands; the disproportion
that dull and senseless matter, however Carved and Adorned does bear to a
Divine Majesty: that no Image of God ought to be worshipped; but what is what
he is; i. e. his Eternal Son; the light of Nature teaching men that it was
greater purity of Worship, greater reverence to the Deity, less danger of
error to mankind to worship God without an Image; are all arguments used and
pressed by the Fathers against the Worship of Images; which have their full
strength and force supposing nothing were intended beyond bare representation.
What think you of the Christian Church condemning the Carpocratians for
worshipping an Image of Christ? Did they believe Christ incorporated in that
Image too? Or did Epiphanius believe him to be so in the Image on the Veil, or
the Council of Elvira in the Pictures upon Walls? By all which we see what
numbers of arguments the Fathers used against the Worship of Images, which have
no relation at all to the believing their Images to be Gods. Besides, several
other arguments they used which would lose their force upon this supposition;
as those taken from the meanness of subjecting our selves to vile and senseless
Images; and all the enforcements drawn from the matter and form of them; which
would have no great strength if this had been the general belief of the
Heathens, that the God whom they worshipped was incorporated in the Image: and
therefore why might not he be worshipped thereby, as well as God incarnate in
humane nature, notwithstanding all the vileness and contemptibleness of our
Flesh?

2. As to the difference between them and you about the Divinity of Images, I
do grant, that your Church does in terms declare against it. And so in
probability would a Council of the Wiser Heathens have done; as appears by the
Testimonies of Celsus, Julian, Maximus Tyrius and many others. But when men
attribute such divine effects, as miraculous cures to Images, what can they
believe but there is some Divinity either in or about them? And when this is
assigned as the reason of the Worship of such an Image, as at Loretto, or
Mointague, or elsewhere; and of the mighty resort thither on that account; what
is this but to believe such Divinity to be in or about them? which does inhance
the peoples Devotion to them. And this was the general persuasion of the
Heathens; not, that there was an Hypostatical union between the Deity and the
Image by incorporation: but that there was a vertual and powerful presence of
the Deity in and about the Image by reason of its Dedication. And upon this
account of a more peculiar presence of the Deity after consecration, and
because Divine Worship was given to them, it was that the Heathen Images were
called Gods. Minuc. p. 26.
According to Minucius his account of the Image-God; Quando igitur hic
nascitur? ecce funditur, fabricatur, scalpitur; nondum Deus est: ecce
plumbatur, construitur, erigitur; nec adhuc Deus est: ecce ornatur,
consecratur, oratur; tunc postremo Deus est, cum homo illum voluit and
dedicavit. From which it appears, it was solemn dedication and divine worship
which made the Heathen Images to be looked on as Gods. And on these accounts
the Scripture as well as Fathers call the Heathen Idols by the name of Gods, in
the places produced by T. G. As, when they are said to be molten Gods, Dial. p.
336.
Lev. 19.4. And the Gods of the Nations are Idols, Isa. 44.16, Hier. in Is. 44.
l. 12.
17, etc. Where St. Hierom observes, that the residue thereof is made a God,
when the maker worships what he has made; and begs for help from the work of
his own hands. And in this sense I grant the Heathens did make their Images
Gods; and so do all those who give Divine Worship to them.


R. P. But Dr. St. seems to say, that there never were any such fools in the
World who worshipped their Images as Gods: Dial. p. 336.
which T. G. proves abundantly from plain and express words of Scripture.


P. D. By the very same I have mentioned already: and which in the former sense
Dr. St. never denied. All that he says, Defense p. 541.
is this, As though there ever had been such Fools in the world, to say there
was no other God besides their Images: and as I remember he quotes Maimonides,
p. 724.
saying there were none such. But if T. G. can find out such Fools in the
world, by my consent, he shall have the begging of them.


R. P. T. G. grants there were some of the wiser Heathens, Dial. p. 340.
who did not worship their Images as Gods, but the Deities represented by them:
against these the Fathers prove at large, that they were but men whom they
commonly worshipped, and some of the worst of men.


P. D. Wherein did the nature of this Idolatry lie? In worshipping bad men
instead of good? or in giving divine worship to any men?


R. P. You are so troublesome, that you will not let a man show his skill in
the Fathers, but you interrupt him with such idle questions.


P. D. I have a mind to bring you to our business; for nothing is more easy
than to tell long stories of the Heathen Idolatries out of the Fathers. I must
press you again to tell me, wherein the nature of this Idolatry consisted.


R. P. I shall desire you as you are a lover of Truth, to answer me ingenuously
but this one question, which I take to be very material toward the true
understanding the nature of Idolatry, viz. whether you do not think that the
Heathens, Dial. p. 398, 399.
at least the generality of them did not acknowledge and worship more Gods than
one?


P. D. I will answer you as freely as you can desire, provided you answer me
another question which I take to be as material, viz. whether the generality of
the Heathens did not worship Deified men?


R. P. What need you ask that, when I have told you already? T. G. takes a
great deal of pains to prove it from many Testimonies of the Fathers: Dial. p.
340, to 343.
as I was about to have showed when you interrupted me; because the places of
their birth were known and their Sepulchers extant, etc.


P. D. I pray remember this; and now ask what questions you please.


R. P. I see you have no mind to answer: but T. G. proves that the generality
of the Heathens did believe them, whom they publicly worshipped, to be truly
and properly Gods, and not only in name, or by way of participation.


P. D. But have you forgotten already, what you so lately told me, that T. G.
proved that the generality of the Heathens did worship Deified-men? Dial. p.
403, 406.
and that these were their Gods; viz. Jupiter, Saturn, Juno, Aesculapius, etc.
I pray consider, were these their Gods or not?


R. P. Doubtless they were; for T.G. has plainly demonstrated it from the
Fathers.


P. D. And were those who were only Deified-men, truly and properly Gods and
not by way of participation?


R. P. I confess you stagger me, surely T. G. did not lay these two assertions
together, that the Heathen Gods were originally men, and yet were truly and
properly Gods; but he proves this later assertion, that I am sure of.


P. D. So you were but just now of the former; however these contradict each
other, let us hear his proofs of this later, which is not so true as the former.


R. P. First, Dial. p. 406.
The whole Christian world till Dr. St. did ever condemn the Heathens of
Polytheism.


P. D. And so does he too. Only he does not believe Deified-men to be
independent Deities. They were Gods as they gave them not barely the name and
title of Gods; but as they supposed them to be admitted into some share in
administering the affairs of the world; and had therefore Divine Worship given
unto them.


R. P. Secondly, The Heathens accused the Christians of Atheism, because they
denied them to be Gods who were publicly worshipped.


P. D. The Heathens did not believe there was any such God who disallowed the
worship of any other Gods besides him; and therefore when they found the
Christians utterly reject their worship, they charged them with Atheism. But is
not this an admirable way of reasoning, from the Heathens objections against
the Christians? Might he not prove as well that the Christians God had Asses
ears, that they eat Children, that they had promiscuous Conjunctions, etc. for
all these were objected by the Heathens, as well as Atheism? And Athenagoras
whom T. G. cites, shows what kind of Gods those were, whom the Christians
rejected, in the very beginning of his Apology, such as Hector, Helena,
Agamemnon, Ericttheus, etc. and because the Christians rejected such Deities
they were accused of Atheism; but does this prove Hector, and Agamemnon to have
been Original and Independent Gods?


R. P. Dial. p. 407.
Thirdly, They persecuted the Christians to death, and they willingly suffered
it, for maintaining there was but one only true God, who deserved Divine Honor
to be given to him.


P. D. Very true. Because they thought it unlawful to give Divine Worship to
any Creature whatsoever. But did not the Heathens require Divine Worship to be
given to Deified-men?


R. P. Fourthly, They erected Temples, instituted Priests, and appointed
Sacrifices to be offered to them.


P. D. That is, they gave them Divine Worship, and what then? they did so to
Deified-men, says T. G.


R. P. Fifthly, The Fathers bring infinite arguments to prove that those whom
the Heathens called Gods, were not really and truly Gods; which had been a
superfluous labor, if the Heathens had not believed as well as called them
Gods.


P. D. And did not the same Fathers bring infinite arguments to prove that
these Gods were but men? Their design was to show that nothing but what was
truly and essentially God, could deserve Divine Worship; which their vulgar
Gods were so far from being, that they were mere men, and some of the worst too.


R. P. Sixthly, Many of those who wrote against the Heathens had been such
themselves; and therefore would not charge them with more than they were guilty
of in this matter.


P. D. Those were the very men T. G. cited to prove their Gods had been Men,
and had Fathers and Mothers, and Uncles and Aunts as other Mortals have.


R. P. Seventhly, The Devils persuaded most of the Heathens that they were
Gods, as St. Augustine says, by their fallacious signs and predictions. Dial.
p. 408.



P. D. St. Augustine speaks of their dominion over mankind by reason of
Idolatry; De Civil. Dei, l. 8. c. 22.
which might have been, although the Heathens had only worshipped Deified men;
but I grant, that the Heathens did give divine worship to Demons too; whom
some believed to be intercessors between the Gods and Men; carrying up our
prayers to them, and bringing down their help to us: as he there expresses it;
and others thought them to be Gods, i. e. a superior kind of Spirits; however
all agreed in giving divine honor to them. But those who believed them to be
Gods, i. e. of a higher rank than the subservient Damons, did not suppose them
to be self-existent and independent Deities, but to have received their being
by participation from God; and supposing them good, St. Augustine thinks their
notion of them not much different from what Christians have of Angels: and that
it was a controversy about a name, whether they be called Gods or not; De
Civit. Dei, l. 9. c. 23. l. 10. c. 1.
but he is far from thinking it so, whether Divine worship were to be given to
them? For this he utterly denies, it being inconsistent with the Christian
Religion, as he proves in the beginning of his tenth Book. From whence it
appears, that the Controversy was not about the name of Gods; but about giving
Divine Worship to any Creature. For St. Augustine would allow them to call them
Gods, if they reserved Divine worship as peculiar to God; but if they did give
this to them, it was no excuse to call them Angels, or inferior Gods; as the
Platonists did. And when he says, the Devils had persuaded the greatest part
of mankind by their lying wonders that they were Gods: his meaning is no more
than that they were good Spirits; which he says, Apuleius and others observing
them more narrowly found they were not, but a sort of malicious and deceitful
beings; notwithstanding which, he says, these agreed with the rest in giving
divine worship to them. So that whatever men do give Divine Worship to, that
they do make a God of, whatsoever notion they have of its Original, and
receiving Being from another.


R. P. Eighthly, The wisest of the Heathens not only concurred with the vulgar
in the external practice of worshipping many Gods, but looked on it as a point
of State Policy, not to let the people know that they were no Gods whom they
worshipped.


P. D. And what then I beseech you? They were rather willing to maintain
Idolatry, than to hazard the disturbance of Government; therefore the Gods whom
they worshipped were truly and properly Gods. All that follows from hence is,
that there were many follies and superstitions among the people, which they
thought better to let them alone in, than to run the hazard of all by a change;
that the Poets, and Painters, and Statuaries had tainted the Religion of the
Vulgar with false and unworthy notions of their Gods; and would in spite of
Laws represent their Gods in the public Sports doing things unsitting for men
to do or see; that although they thought it were much better to have these
things redressed, yet they had so much greater regard to the safety of the
Government than to the honor of Religion, that they chose rather to let things
stand as they found them; and to join with the people in the same Acts of
public worship, retaining their opinions to themselves. But we shall have
occasion to discourse of these wiser men afterward.


R. P. I have one thing yet more to say, Dial. p. 411.
which I am sure ought and will weigh with you more than all the rest.


P. D. So it will, if it weighs any thing at all.


R. P. It is, that God himself forbids the Jews to have any other Gods besides
him: and yet he does not forbid the name of Gods to be given both to Angels and
Men.


P. D. Is this the weighty observation? the bit reserved to close up the
stomach with? God does allow I grant the name of Gods to be given to Creatures;
but where does he allow Divine worship internal or external to be given to any
other Being besides himself? Whether Angels, or Stars, or Elements, or
whatsoever creature it be, to give that worship to it, which is due only to
God, is to make other Gods besides him, and this I thought had been agreed on
all sides.


R. P. Dial. p. 412.
If they give Divine Worship to any one of these as an absolute Deity, as T. G.
well observes; and not if they refer the worship they give to them to the true
God.


P. D. What means the giving divine worship as to an absolute Deity? Is it to
suppose that which they worship to be truly and properly God, as T. G. says?
That is to suppose it, not to be a Creature. And upon this ground those who
supposed the Spirits, or Stars, or Elements to be Creatures could not be guilty
of Idolatry in the Worship of them: and so the greatest part of the Heathen
World will be excused from it. Or is it to give divine worship to the Creatures
without any respect to God the Maker of the World and of all things in it? But
then either they did at that time believe him to be the Maker of those Beings,
or they did not: if they did, either they worshipped them as created, or as
uncreated beings; if as created beings, how could they wholly pass by the
Creator? if as uncreated, how could they at the same time believe them to be
created by him?


R. P. T. G. was aware of this, for he puts the question concerning the
Heathens, Dial. p. 419.
how those who acknowledged one Supreme Being, could think any others to be
truly and properly Gods besides him? And he resolves it thus, that the
generality of the Heathens had no clear and distinct notion of one Supreme
Being; but only the Wiser Philosophers.


P. D. By this answer, none but the dull and stupid vulgar could be guilty of
Idolatry, such who believed (if any did) there were no other Gods besides their
Images; or if there were, they never considered more, than that they were all
called Gods alike, and they knew no distinction between one Chief and the rest:
but if they happened to suppose one Supreme and the others made by him, as I
have showed from Tertullian they generally did, then they are free from
Idolatry in all acts of worship performed with that opinion. For if Idolatry
does suppose a belief of more Gods than one truly and properly so called, then
all those who did own and acknowledge one first cause from whence all other
beings were derived, could not be guilty of it, and consequently all those who
had the true knowledge of God could not commit Idolatry: because they could not
at the same time believe but one true God, and many true Gods.

And if the true notion of Idolary does consist in believing and worshipping
many Gods truly and properly so called; then let us see how many of the
Heathens will stand clear from the guilt of it.

(1.) All those who worshipped Deified men and believed them to be such,
although they gave them the worship proper to true Gods. For as long as they
did not think them to be such, it could not be real Idolatry: and so Cicero,
Varro and Seneca, and the rest of the Wise Statesmen will be excused.

(2.) All those who believed Inferior Gods having their first being from one
Supreme; as the ancient Poets, Platonists and many others.

(3.) All those who worshipped the parts of the World with respect to one God,
as the Stoics and others.

(4.) All those who opposed Christianity upon this ground, that although there
were but one Supreme God, yet others might receive divine worship together with
him; and upon this principle the most bitter enemies of Christianity disputed,
viz. Celsus, Porphyrius, Hierocles, Julian, Maximus, Symmachus and others. And
to own it not to be Idolatry to give divine worship to created beings supposing
them not to be owned to be truly and properly Gods, is in plain terms to give
up the Cause of Christianity against Heathen Idolatry. And this I insist upon
as the main argument in this matter: and desire you or T. G. or any one else to
answer it. Dr. St. has made it evident from the Testimonies of Celsus, Defense
p. 81, to 102.
Julian and the modern Platonists, that the Dispute about Idolatry, between
them and the Christians was not, whether there were only one God truly and
properly so called, and others only by participation from him; for this they
yielded: but the question was, whether upon that supposition that they were
inferior and subservient Gods, they might not have divine worship given to
them in a degree suitable to their excellencies? And upon this point the hinge
of the Controversy turned. Either the Christians were right in condemning such
Worship for Idolatry, or not? If not, the Cause of Christianity is given up to
Celsus and Julian; if they were in the right, then Idolatry does not lie in
believing and worshipping many Gods properly and truly so called; but in
giving divine worship to any Creature whatsoever. And why did not T. G. answer
to this, which was the most material point of all others? but run out into long
discourses of the Ignorance of the vulgar Heathen (which no man doubts any more
than the Ignorance of vulgar Papists; although I hope not to the same degree)
concerning the true God. And yet we could tell him of another sort of
Statesmen, who love to keep the People in Ignorance, lest they should by the
help of the Scriptures see too far into these matters. And some of your own
Church have told us that they could find no difference between the common
peoples opinion of Saints, and what the Heathens had of their Gods. And thus
the parallel holds good still. But the common people though more gross in their
apprehensions and do commit greater follies in their practices, may yet be
safer in their Ignorance, than those who ought to inform them better. But when
we enquire what is lawful, we must not run to the practices or opinions of the
vulgar, as T. G. does here; but to the state of the case as it was managed by
those who best understood it. And they did not put it upon that issue whether
it were lawful to worship many independent Deities; but whether it were lawful
to give Divine worship to any created beings, on the account of that power and
authority which God had put into their hands? And if this were not Idolatry,
Celsus and Julian thought Heathenism justified, and the doctrine of
Christianity overthrown; and so did Origin, S. Cyril, and S. Augustine too.

(5.) The modern Idolaters will be excused too, if the nature of Idolatry does
consist in a multitude of independent Deities, or of Gods truly and properly
so called. For Dr. St. has proved abundantly, that the Eastern, Western,
Southern and Northern Nations, which are, or have been charged with Idolatry by
the Roman Church, do own one Supreme God, and others as inferior Deities. And
this he chiefly proves from the Testimonies of those of the Roman Church who
have been sent as Missioners to convert them from their Idolatry. And what
says T. G. to that?


R. P. Truly he had forgotten to speak to it, but a Friend of his putting him
in mind of it, he has added something by way of Appendix about it; to show how
unnecessary it was to speak to it.


P. D. All in good time: but it was well the Printer informed him of two or
three vacant leaves too, or else we might have wanted those rare observations.
But why so unnecessary to answer an argument of that consequence? which to my
apprehension has effectually overthrown this hypothesis of T. G. that Idolatry
lies in the esteem and worship of many Gods truly and properly so called; for
if that were the general supposition that Idolaters went upon, that there was
one Supreme and many inferior Deities, as Dr. St. has proved of the Defense
p. 103.
Arabians, p. 109.
Persians, p. 114.
Brachmans (who are showed to have no other p. 122, 123.
esteem of the inferior Deities than you have of your Saints, and that they
give only a relative worship to them, and to their Images) and of the very p.
141.
Tartars and p. 143.
West-Indians, and p. 157.
Northern Idolaters; how then can T. G. hope to make it appear to any man of
common sense that the nature of Idolatry lies in the worshipping many
independent Gods? If T. G. were sent upon a Mission to them, I would fain know
by what arguments he could convince any of these of Idolatry? T. G. charges
them with Idolatry for worshipping many Gods truly and properly so called;
they deny it, and say they worship only one Supreme and others in subordination
to him, what has T. G. further to say? Will he tell them, he knows better what
they do, than they do themselves? I say therefore it is impossible upon T. G.'s
principles to convince these Heathens of Idolatry. But there is another thing,
I think, very material in this Discourse concerning the modern Idolaters; which
is, T. G. insinuates, that although some few of the wiser sort of Heathens
might understand the difference between the Supreme God and inferior Deities,
Dial. p. 419, 421.
yet the generality of the People did not; and so might easily worship many
Gods properly and truly so called: whereas by this Discourse it appears that
the difference between the supreme and inferior Deities was a thing known and
received among the most rude and barbarous Nations. And it is no great civility
toward the Greeks and Romans to imagine them to be more sottish Idolaters than
the Tartars and West-Indians. I will confess freely to you, that I think there
was not a more absurd and impious Scheme of Divinity extant in the most
barbarous parts of the world, that are come to our knowledge, than the Poetical
Theology of the Greeks and Romans, if it be understood literally; and therefore
the common people who had the Poets in mighty esteem, lay under great
disadvantages; but yet, the Poetical Fables being rejected by their Laws as
well as by their Wise Men, and the Poets themselves confessing one Supreme God,
but above all, the natural sense of Conscience, did keep up the Notion of one
God among the People, who was Lord over all, insomuch that upon any solemn
occasions they made their appeal to him, as the Fathers observe. Lactantius
says, not only the Wise, Lact. l. 1. c. 3, 5.
but all sorts of People confessed the unity of God; even those who seemed to
assert the multiplicity of Gods truly and properly so called; for these are
his words, Quod quia intelligunt isti assertores Deorum; ita eos praeesse
singulis rebus ac partibus dicunt, ut tantum unus sit Rector eximius. Jam ergo
caeteri non Dij erunt, sed satellites ac ministri; quos ille unus maximus, and
potens omnium officiis his praefecit, ut ipsi ejus imperio ac nutibus serviant.
Let T. G. construe this to the confusion of his Hypothesis, that the Heathen
Idolatry lay in the worship of many Gods truly and properly so called: when
even Lactantius says the contrary so expressly: Those cannot be Gods truly and
properly so called who are under the command of another; and this is Lactantius
his own argument, Ergo Dij non sunt quos parere uni maximo Deo necessitas
cogit. And this truth, he says, of the Unity of God is so plain, that no man
can be so blind not to discover so clear a light. c. 5, 7.
Seneca in his Exhortations quoted by Lactantius, calls the inferior Gods, the
servants to the Supreme; Ministros Regni sui Deos genuit: and the difference
between them and the holy Angels he places in this, that these would not be
called Gods, nor be worshipped as Gods: the former we see S. Augustine makes
nothing of, so that the true ground why the Heathens attributed Divinity to
them, was because they gave to them Divine Worship which the Christians utterly
refused. The same Lactantius says, in general of the Romans, L. 2. c. 1.
that in any great distress they made their application to the supreme God, and
prayed to him, and expected help from him, and begged relief from others per
ejus Divinum atque unicum Numen; and these beggars surely were some of the
common sort of people; from whence it follows that the generality of the
Heathen even among the Romans did not esteem and worship many Gods properly so
called.


R. P. But methinks, You seem to have forgotten T. G. 's Appendix about the-
modern Idolatry, as well as he had to write about it, till he was put in mind
by a friend.


P. D. I am not very apt to believe T. G. could forget so material a part of
the Doctors Book: but there was some other reason, for passing it over; which
it is not hard to conjecture. But I thank you for putting me to ask you, why he
thought it so unnecessary to speak to it.


R. P. First, because the Doctor reduces their worship to one of these two
principles, either that God has committed the Government of the World to
inferior Deities; or that God is the soul of the World: now T. G. having
proved that those who do hold the latter principle are guilty of Idolatry; and
those who hold the former, of the exterior profession of it in concurring with
the Vulgar in the external practice of their Idolatry, it would have been but
actum agere to repeat the same things over again.


P. D. This is scarce a tolerable shift. For the great force of that discourse,
lay in two things; (1.) The almost universal consent of Idolaters that there
was one supreme God, against T. G.'s hypothesis of many Gods truly and properly
so called. (2.) That all these were charged with Idolatry by the Roman Church:
and therefore according to the sense of that, Idolatry could not lie in
worshipping many independent and absolute Deities. But the prettiest shift, is,
that he had condemned the Platonists for the exterior practice of Idolatry in
concurring with the Vulgar, and therefore he need not speak to whole Nations
who agreed in that principle of Worship, and yet are charged with Idolatry. If
I were given to quoting ends of Verses I would cry, risum teneatis amici.


R. P. Secondly, the force of the Parallel lies in Citations.


P. D And what then? ought he not to examine and disprove them?


R. P. No such matter: he has found out a far better away than that; he proves
that Dr. St. has forfeited all right of being believed in things of that kind.


P. D. Commend me to T. G. for shifting. This is really the notablest trick I
ever met with. He finds abundance of Authors quoted both new and old, to prove
something he does not like. What should he do? Must he search and examine them,
one by one? no, that is intolerable; and how if they prove true? Therefore the
only way is to say, he has lost all credit in his citations. Which is as much
as to say, he deserves to stand in the Pillory for suborning Witnesses, and why
should he be credited in any thing he says? But this is a very high
accusation, and T. G. in common justice is bound to prove it, or else he
deserves the same infamy himself.


R. P. Yes, he proves it, by his notorious misrepresenting and corrupting the
Fathers.


P. D. I think I have sufficiently cleared the Doctors integrity and
faithfulness therein; but I am sure you cannot so well clear T. G. from bearing
false Witness against his Brother.


R. P. But he gives one instance in this case, viz. a testimony of Trigautius
wherein he translates, certum Triadis modum inducit quo tres Deos in unum
deinde Numen coalescere fabulatur. They worship the Trinity after a certain
manner, with an Image having three heads and one Body. T. G. says, an ordinary
Reader will here find neither Head nor Foot.


P. D. That is very strange, when there are three. But must T. G.'s quibble
destroy all Dr. St.'s credit? Any one that reads Trigautius will find he
exactly expressed his sense; but our Dionysius will make him construe word for
word, or else he must be set in the Pillory, for suborning Testimonies.
Methinks this savours a little too much of Dionysius indeed.


R. P. But he charges him more with another Testimony of Trigautius, where he
leaves out the Emphatical words which show the difference between the Worship
which the Chinese give to Confutius and to the Tutelar Spirits. For first, he
omits the Ceremony of the Magistrates taking the Oath before the Tutelar
spirits; then he leaves out what Trigautius affirms, that the worship was not
the same. (3.) He omits nam and Divinam, which show the reason of the
difference to be the Divine Power which they believed to be in the Tutelar
Spirits.


P. D. And what if T. G. be mistaken as to every one of these? shall we not
applaud him for a man of wonderful integrity, and most commendable ingenuity?
(1.) Dr. St. does not omit the Ceremony of the Magistrates taking their oath to
or before these Tutelar Spirits; for he says expressly, that the Mandarines are
to swear in the Temple of the Tutelar Spirit when they enter into their office;
Defense, p. 132.
and he particularly insists upon it, as one of the instances of the allowances
the Jesuits gave to their Converts to go and perform all external Acts of
adoration in the Temple of the Tutelar Spirits, provided they directed all
those Acts to a Crucifix which they held in their hands or conveyed secretly
among the flowers of the Altar. (2.) He distinguishes the Worship of Confutius
from that of the Tutelar Spirits. For, he says, in that very place, that they
make no prayers to him, P. 130.
neither seek, nor hope for any thing from him; but that they acknowledge the
Tutelar Spirits to have power to reward and punish. Is not this enough to show
the difference of their Worship to any men of common sense? (3.) Is not a Power
to reward and punish in the Tutelar Spirits set down by Dr. St. out of
Trigautius? and to what end should he then leave out nam and Divinam, but that
he thought them needless when the sense was expressed? But the birchen Scepter
would be of little use, unless Dionysius showed his Authority upon such
occasions. Judge you now whether upon the account of such pitiful cavils, Dr.
St. has forfeited his right of being believed in his Citations?


R. P. T. G. gives a third reason, viz. because it appears from his own
Citations, that these modern Idolaters either worshipped a false God for the
true one; or false Gods together with the true one, if they worshipped him at
all.


P. D. This can be no reason at all* for Dr. St.'s design was to show that
inferior Deities were false Gods: and that it was Idolatry to give Divine
Worship to Creatures, although men did acknowledge one supreme God. But unless
T. G. can prove these false Gods to have been Gods truly and properly so
called, i. e. absolute and independent Deities, his Hypothesis is utterly
overthrown by this discourse of Dr. St. which was the true reason he had no
mind to meddle with it.


R. P. Lastly, It is not credible, he says, that the Cardinals de propaganda
Fide, with the full consent of the Pope should make such Decrees about
Idolatrous Acts, as should condemn the giving external Acts of Worship to
Saints and Images as Idolatrous.


P. D. Dr. St. punctually produced the resolution made by the Cardinals about
the Worship of Confutius and the performance of external Acts of Idolatry in
the Temple of the Tutelar Spirits by the Jesuits Converts in China. He names
the Date, the Place of Printing it, and says the Copy he had seen was attested
by a public Notary; nay, Defense* p. 136.
he directs T. G. where he might see not only the Decree but an explication of
it. And after all, is not this Credible?


R. P. Dr. St. sets down the resolutions and does not let us know what the
Quaeres were.


P. D. He thought those might be easily understood by the Case; viz. about
performing the same external Acts of Worship, with Idolaters, but with a
different intention; i. e. the Mandarins were permitted by the Jesuits to go
into the Temple of Tutelar Spirits, and to use all the external Acts of
adoration which others used, provided they directed them to the Crucifix and
not to the Idol; which the Cardinals declare to be utterly unlawful
notwithstanding this Intention. From whence Dr. St. observed, (1.) That they
called the Worship of the Tutelar Spirits Idolatry, although they looked on
them only as inferior Deities, and consequently Idolatry does not consist in
worshipping many absolute and independent Gods, or truly and properly so
called. (2.) That inferior Worship on the account of created excellency is
unlawful, when it appears to be Religious. This he proved from their condemning
the Worship of Confutius, which the Jesuits allowed. And T. G. is so much
mistaken in thinking that Dr. St. had any design to corrupt the Testimony of
Trigautius by confounding the Worship of Confutius and the Tutelar Spirits,
that his argument is the stronger for the distinction between them. For,
although no prayers be made to Confutius, no divine power be supposed to be in
him as in the Tutelar Spirits, yet because he had a Temple in every City with
his Image in it; and all other external Rites of adoration used, as
genuflections, wax-candles, incense and oblations; (such as your Church uses
to Images without prayers) yet these are condemned as Idolatrous. And although
the Cardinals might not then reflect on the consequence of this resolution as
to their own practices; yet I cannot but admire at the Wisdom of that
Providence, which once directed Caiaphas to speak a great Truth beside his
intention, that so overruled the Congregation of Cardinals to condemn their own
Idolatry under the name of Confutius. For if the using those external acts of
adoration toward the Image of Confutius be Idolatry; why shall it not be so,
where prayers are added, as they are in your Church to the Images set up in
your Churches? Let T. G. tell me wherein the Nature of that Idolatry lay, which
consisted in external Acts of adoration, without any opinion of Confutius being
a God truly and properly so called. (3.) That external Acts are capable of
Idolatry, however the intention of the mind be directed. For, although the
Cardinals believed the Crucifix to be a proper object of Divine Worship, yet
they condemned those Acts as Idolatrous which were directed to it in the Temple
of the Tutelar Spirits. And upon the whole matter, I think, no impartial Reader
will believe that T. G. has said any thing to purpose upon this matter, and
that he had better left those few leaves still vacant, than have filled them
with such an insignificant Postscript; and he has no reason to thank his
Friend for putting him upon laying open so much the Weakness of his Cause. For,
from hence it farther appears that the Modern Idolaters will likewise be
excused, if the nature of Idolatry does consist, as T. G. says, in Worshipping
many Gods truly and properly so called.


R. P. But you are mistaken, if you think T. G. places the Nature of Idolatry
wholly in this, for he says, that the Heathens were guilty of Idolatry in
worshipping Nature instead of God, either the several parts of the Universe as
Sun, Dial. p. 332, 343, 349, 413.
Moon, and Stars, etc. understanding the Fire by Jupiter, the Air by Juno, etc.
or the Soul of the World, as the Stoics did; whereby the Heathens did, as T.
G. often repeats it from Vossius, relicto Deo in Naturae Veneratione
consistere, forsaking God stay in the worship of the Creatures: and for this he
quotes Athanasius, S. Augustine, and Athenagoras.


P. D. It is sufficient for Dr. St.'s design, if the worship of Images, and of
intellectual Beings under one supreme God were Idolatry among the Heathens, for
then it must remain so among Christians; as well as Murder and Adultery are the
same wherever they are found. But since you have proposed it, I shall consider
with you how far the worship of the Creatures in general is Idolatry. But I
have some few questions to ask you about this sort of Idolatry. (1.) Whether
you think the Heathens Idolatry did lie in worshipping mere matter as God? Or,
(2.) In worshipping God as the soul of the world, and the several parts of it
with respect to him? Or, (3.) In acknowledging a Creator, but giving all the
worship to the Creatures?


R. P. In all these, according to their several opinions.


P. D. Do you really think any of them did worship mere matter, without life,
sense, or understanding for God? For, either they did believe some other God or
not? if they did, how is it possible they should not worship that, which could
hear, and understand, and help them; and worship that which could do none of
these? If they did not believe any other God, they were Atheists and not
Idolaters. For are not those Atheists who acknowledge no other God but mere
matter; i. e. no God at all? For so Vossius himself says, those who held mere
matter to be God, Voss. de Idolol. l. 7. c. 5.
verbo Deum fatebantur, re negabant: did only seem to believe a God whom they
really denied. For what kind of God, says he, was that which had neither sense
nor reason?


R. P. It was Idolatry then to worship the parts of the world with a respect to
God as the Soul of it; which as T. G. says in his Postscript, is to make a
false God.


P. D. There are two things which deserve to be considered as to this matter.
(1.) In what sense making God the soul of the world is setting up a false God?
(2.) How far the Gentiles could be charged with Idolatry, who worshipped the
parts of the world with respect to God as the soul of it?


R. P. Do not you think making God the soul of the world is setting up a false
God?


P. D. I pray tell me what you mean by the soul of the world. For either you
mean the natural series of Causes, or the more subtle and active parts of
matter diffused through the Universe without Mind and Understanding; or you
mean an Intelligent Being which by Wisdom and Providence orders and governs the
world, but withal is so united to it, as the Soul is to the Body; If you mean
the former, I say all such who held it were really Atheists, and only differed
in the way of speaking from those who worshipped mere matter; for let them call
God the soul of the world never so much, they mean no more than that there is
no other God but the Power of Nature. If you mean an Understanding Being
Governing the World whose essence is distinct from matter, but yet is supposed
to be so united to it as the Soul is to the Body; then I pray tell me in what
sense you make him to be a false God, and how it comes to be Idolatry to
worship the parts of the world with respect to him?


R. P. S. Augustine proves against Varro that God was not the Soul of the World,
if there were any such thing, but the Creator and Maker of it: Dial. p. 349.
and he shows that this opinion is attended with impious and irreligious
consequences.


P. D. I do not go about to defend the opinion, but I hope I may ask, wherein
the Idolatry lay of worshipping one God under this notion as he animated the
world and the several parts of it?


R. P. In worshipping the several parts of the world with Divine Worship; not
with a respect to the Body, but to God as the Soul of it; Aqu. c. Gentes l. 3.
c. 120.
for therein Aquinas places their Idolatry.


P. D. Is relative Latria Idolatry?


R. P. Why do you ask me such an impertinent question?


P. D. Nothing can be more pertinent, for this is mere relative Latria.


R. P. It was Idolatry in them, but yet not so in us when we worship the
Crucifix with respect to Christ.


P. D. You may as well say, Lying with another man's Wife was Adultery in them,
but not in You. I pray show the difference.


R. P. You would fain bring me back again to the worship of Images; but you
shall not. For I say their Idolatry lay in worshipping God as united to the
parts of the world; and giving Divine Worship to them on that Account.


P. D. Will you stand to this?


R. P. Why not?


P. D. Then I will prove worshipping the Host to be Idolatry on the same
grounds. For in both cases, there is a supposition really false, but which
being true would justify the Act of Worship; and if notwithstanding that
supposition that God is the Soul of the world, the worshipping of God as so
united is Idolatry, then the worship of the Host notwithstanding the
supposition of Christ's Body being united to the species is Idolatry too; they
being both acts of adoration given to those objects which in themselves deserve
no worship, but yet are adored upon such a supposition which being true would
justify the performance of them.


R. P. You are much mistaken in your parallel. For, as T. G. well observed, in
the worship of the Host, Cathol. no Idol. p. 327, etc.
the Act of adoration is not formally terminated upon the bread, supposing it
to remain, but upon God: but we conceive the bread not to be there at all;
Dial. p. 432, 433.
but in place thereof the only true and Eternal God. And whatever is taken for
an object of worship, the understanding must affirm (either truly or falsely) to
be; but Catholics, whether mistaken or not in the belief of
Transubstantiation, do not in their minds affirm the bread to be, but not to
be; because they believe it to be converted into the body of Christ. But they
who worshipped the parts of the world with a respect to God as the Soul of it,
did however believe those to have a real Being, and not to be turned into the
substance of God.


P. D. All that this proves is, that you do not take the Bread it self for God;
no more did they, who worshipped the parts of the world, as members of that
Body to which God was united as the Soul, take those parts for God. But in both
cases there is a supposition equal to justify the Worship if true; and if
notwithstanding this supposition, the Heathens were guilty of Idolatry; why are
not you upon a far more unreasonable supposition than that? If Christ's Body be
present in the Eucharist, you say, you may worship it as there present; so say
they, if God be the Soul of the world, we may lawfully worship the several
parts of it? But you say, whatever is an object of worship must be supposed to
be; whereas you suppose the bread not to be, but to be converted into the Body
of Christ; which alters not the case; for the question is not about the bare
being or not being of the thing, but of the being or not being of a fit object
of worship. I will make the matter plain to you by this Instance; One of the
most common Idolatries of the Heathen world was the worship of the Sun; they
who did worship it, did suppose it to be a fit object for worship, but they who
looked on the Sun as a mere creature could not think so: therefore to make any
creature a fit object for worship, there must go a farther supposition; viz. of
the Divinity being in it or united to it. Now the main point lies here, whether
on supposition that the substance of the Sun does not remain, it would not be
Idolatry, but on supposition that it does remain it would be Idolatry? I pray
then answer me, would it be Idolatry or not to worship the Sun, suppose a man
believed the very substance of the Sun to be turned into the Divinity?


R. P. No surely. For that is our own case.


P. D. How comes it then to be Idolatry supposing the Divinity united to the
substance of the Sun?


R. P. In one case we may be supposed to worship a thing which is; but in the
other we cannot be supposed to worship that which at the same time we believe
not to be.


P. D. If it be Idolatry to worship that as God which is not God, then the
worship of the Host may be Idolatry, though you suppose the bread not to be.
For to suppose that not to be which really is, does no more alter the case;
than to suppose that to be God which is not, for that is to suppose that not to
be a Creature which is. For the worshippers of any parts of the World might
profess as solemnly as you do about the Bread, that if they did believe the Sun
to be a mere creature, they should abhor the thoughts of worshipping it; but
believing it either to be God it self, or at least that the Godhead is united
to it; why are not they as excusable as those who declare they abhor the
thoughts of worshipping the Bread? but they believe it not to be Bread, but the
Body of the Son of God.


R. P. But T. G. observes, that the formal term of Idolatrous worship is an
undue object; Cath. no Idol. p. 328.
viz. a Creature instead of the Creator; but Catholics in case of a mistake,
would have no other formal object in their minds, but the Creator himself.


P. D. As though the nature of Idolatry did consist in the worship of a
Creature, knowing it to be a mere Creature. Might not the Heathens have said
they had no other formal object of adoration in their minds, but God; but
supposing him united to the parts of the world they might worship them on his
account; as well as those of the Church of Rome give adoration to that which
appears to be mere bread? If they who worship the Sun on the account of the
Divinity which is in it or united to it, be yet guilty of Idolatry, because
though on supposition the Divinity were so united the worship would be lawful,
yet the supposition being false they are guilty of Idolatry; why then should
not those be equally guilty of it, who worship a Divinity as present under the
species of bread, if the substance of bread does still remain? for then the
worship however intended falls upon a mere creature, as it did in the former
case.


R. P. Those who worshipped the Sun, did suppose the substance of the Sun still
to remain; but Catholics do not suppose the substance of bread to continue,
but in place thereof do worship the only true and Eternal God.


P. D. It is true they did suppose the substance of the Sun to remain; but they
did not intend to terminate their worship on that substance, but on the
Divinity united to it; and to suppose that not to be bread which is really
bread, does no more excuse from Idolatry, than supposing that not to be a mere
creature, which really is no more. But to drive this matter home to you, I will
ask a farther Question, Were those Idolaters who worshipped the parts of the
world as a part of the substance of God himself; so that he is One and All?


R. P. Suppose they were.


P. D. Did not they believe there was no other substance but of God present in
what they worshipped?


R. P. And what follows?


P. D. Do you not perceive? That to suppose that not to be which really is, and
that to be which is not, does not excuse from Idolatry.


R. P. I must talk a little farther with T. G. about this matter. But I have
another reason yet to charge the Heathens with Idolatry, viz. that they forsook
the Worship of the Creator, and staid in the Worship of the Creature.


P. D. Do you mean that they gave him no external Worship, or that they gave
him no worship at all? or do you think any that believed a God, gave him no
inward worship, i. e. no Reverence or esteem suitable to his Excellency?


R. P. Why do you ask these questions?


P. D. Because many of the Heathens thought external Worship beneath the
excellency of the Supreme God, as Dr. St. has fully showed from the
Testimonies of Porphyrius, Numa, the Platonists, Defense; p. 64, 65.
the Mandarins in China, and the Ynca's of Peru. Is it then Idolatry to deny
external Worship to God out of Reverence to his Majesty, and to give it to
inferior Beings?


R. P. It is Idolatry to give all external Worship to his Creatures and to
reserve none to himself: because some external Worship is due to him.


P. D. If external Worship be due to God, it is not because he needs it, but
because it is fit for us his Creatures to testify our subjection to him as our
Creator.


R. P. Be it so.


P. D. Ought not that Worship then to be so peculiar to him, as to manifest the
different esteem we have of the Creator and his Creatures?


R. P. Yes.


P. D. Is it not then an injury to Gods honor to give that Worship which ought
to be peculiar to himself, to any of his Creatures? and that which the
Scripture calls Idolatry?


R. P. But how will you know what external Acts of worship those are which are
peculiar to God? for therein lies the great difficulty.


P. D. Either we suppose God to have revealed his will to mankind, or not. If
not, we have the light of Nature, and the consent of mankind to direct us; if
he has, we must consider the Revelation he has made of his Will in this
matter. For since God has the power to determine our duty, and he knows best
what makes for his honor, it is but just and reasonable that we should judge
of these things according to his Will. What he appoints as due to himself,
becomes due by his appointment; and to give that to another which he has made
due only to himself, is without question the giving the worship due to God to
his Creatures; which is Idolatry. Our business therefore is, to consider
whether God has appropriated any Acts of worship to himself; what those Acts
are; how far the obligation of them does extend to us; what we find to that
purpose in the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; what the sense of the
Christian Church has been concerning them in the best and purest times of it.
If you can think of any better ways than these, I pray acquaint me with them.


R. P. I see what you are coming to, viz. the appropriate Acts of Divine
worship; but before we debate that business, I have something more yet to say
to you about the Heathen Idolatry.


P. D. What is that?


R. P. T. G. observes, that the Heathens did worship their Gods as sharers with
Jupiter in the Divine Power and Authority, Dial. p. 430.
and upon that account believed them to be truly and properly Gods, in whose
power it was to bestow those benefits upon them, which they desired, and they
were justly charged with Idolatry by the Fathers for so doing. And he observes
from T. Godwin in his Roman Antiquities, P. 425.
that some were Gods by their own right, others only by right of Donation: of
the former sort were those who were partners in the Government of the world.
Now, says he, to give worship to any other besides God as a sharer with him in
it, though but in this or that particular, P. 431.
will be Idolatry; and in this consideration, were there no other, they might
be justly charged with it by the Fathers; but in our Church we own God to be
the sole Giver of every good and perfect gift, and make our addresses to Angels
and Saints as his Ministers and Servants not to obtain of them the benefits we
desire, but of God alone by their intercession through his only Son and our
only Redeemer Jesus Christ, as the Council of Trent has declared.


P. D. Here are two things to be cleared, (1.) How far the Heathens did make
other Gods sharers with the Supreme in the Government of the World. (2.) How
far your opinion and practice differ from theirs.

1. How far the Heathens did make other Gods sharers with the Supreme in the
Government of the World. For which we are to consider a double Hypothesis which
was received among the Heathens.

First, Of those who worshipped the same God under several names and titles
with respect to particular powers; which Dr. St. proved from Plotinus,
Plutarch, Apuleius, and your own Simon Majolus, who on this account commends
the Poetic Theology beyond that of Pythagoras and Socrates. Dr. St. Defense p.
457, 458.
And this hypothesis S. Augustine takes particular notice of, viz. that the same
God was Jupiter above, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 11.
Juno in the Air, Neptune in the Sea, and in the bottom of it Salacia, Pluto
upon Earth, Proserpina under it, Vesta in the Hearth, Vulcan in the Forge,
Apollo in Oracles, Mercury in Trade, Mars in War, Ceres in Corn, Diana in the
Woods, Minerva among Wits; with many more which he reckons up, and then
concludes, that all these Gods and Goddesses are but one Jupiter; or the
several parts and powers of the same God; and this, he says, was the opinion
of many learned, and great men among them. (Quae sententia velut magnorum
multorumque Doctorum est.) All these made no sharers in Divinity by believing
them to be truly and properly Gods, but only different titles and powers of
the same God.

Secondly, There was another hypothesis more general than this, viz. of one
Supreme God and many inferior who were employed by him. Of which you may
remember the words of Tertullian, that the greatest part asserted the Supreme
Power to be in one, and the subordinate Offices to be in many. And Orosius
says, Oros. l. ^. c. 1.
that both the Philosophers and common Heathens did believe one God the Author
of all things; but under this God they worshipped many inferior and
subservient Gods. In the Council of Carthage under Cyprian Saturninus a Tucca
(who was both a Bishop and Confessor) says, that the Heathen Idolaters did
acknowledge and confess the Supreme God, Cypr. op. p. 448. Ed. Goulant.
Father and Creator. And this was so known a thing, that Faustus the Manichee
charged the Christians with being of the same faith with the Pagans, Aug. c.
Faust. l. (...) c. 10.
as to one Supreme God. Although therefore the Heathens did own and worship
many Gods, yet they looked on them as inferior and subordinate to the Supreme,
and only employed by him in the administration of things under him. And as for
the partners you mention, they were not such quoad plenitudinem potestatis; but
only made use of in their particular Offices; you know the distinction; and it
serves better here than in the Court of Rome. But I cannot but wonder, when T.
G. had upbraided Dr. St. for two pages together with his Father Livy, Father
Varro, Dial. p. 3.6, 317.
Father Cicero, Father Seneca, Father Virgil, etc. he should at last sink so
low as to quote Father T. G. in his Roman Antiquities against him; surely any
one of those Fathers in a matter of Roman Antiquities would weigh down a
hundred Father T. G.'s; and yet even this Testimony does not prove that the
Gods that were supposed to be in Heaven by their own right were supreme and
independent Deities, but the Dij Consentes were of a higher rank than the
semidei or indigites, the one having been always in Heaven according to the
Platonists supposition, the other being assumed from among men; which comes at
last to the distinction of Angels and Saints.

2. How far your opinion and practice do differ from theirs. And here I pray
remember that I go not about to compare the Heathen Gods with Angels and Saints
as to their excellencies, for the Apostle tells us, however the Gentiles
intended it, they did really sacrifice to Devils and not to God: but I am only
to compare the Heathens notion of worship and yours together. And if you do
allow Gods by participation, viz. Spirits assumed into such a share of
Government as to have the care of some things and places committed to some more
than to others; and if addresses and supplications are allowed to be made to
them on that account, I desire to know how the Heathens are justly charged with
Idolatry, and you not? Was it Idolatry to pray to Diana as an inferior Deity
which presided over hunting, and is it none to pray to S. Hubert on the like
account? Was it Idolatry to pray to Vesta to preserve from the Fire, and is it
none to pray to S. Agatha? If two persons in the same storm prayed as to their
Tutelar Deities, the one to Neptune, the other to S. Paul; is the one guilty of
Idolatry, and the other not? If two women in travail prayed for help, the one
to Lucina, the other to the B. Virgin, is the first only guilty of Idolatry?
They might be accused of Ignorance and Folly in making a bad choice, but I do
not see how the Heathens could be charged with Idolatry, and not the other.
When Saints are Canonized to be Particular Patrons of Places, as S. Rosa lately
for Peru; why may not the inhabitants make particular addresses to her as their
Patroness, and Tutelar Deity, as Lipsius did to the B. Virgin? Is not this to
make such a Saint a sharer in the Government of the World, as much as the
Heathens did their Tutelar Gods under one Supreme? And therefore upon T. G.'s
own ground, you are as justly charged with Idolatry as the Heathens were. For
the Heathens did not look on their Tutelar Gods as the Original Givers, but as
the subordinate Ministers.


R. P. But as T. G. says, we do not pray to them to obtain the things we
desire, but that they would be our Intercessors with God for us.


P. D. I wonder T. G. would say this again without answering what Dr. St. had
said in his late Defense to show (1.) That the very words of the Council of
Trent do allow more than bare intercession. Defense, p. 293, etc.
(2.) That formal prayers to them to bestow blessings are allowed and practiced
among them; of which he produces several Instances of present use in the
approved Books of Devotion. p. 296, etc.
(3.) That such prayers do not contradict any received Doctrine of the Roman
Church: and he challenges T. G. to show, p. 300.
what Article of your Creed, what Decree of your Church, what Doctrine of your
Divines it does contradict, for any man to pray directly to the Virgin Mary for
the destruction of heresies, support under troubles, Grace to withstand
temptations, and reception to Glory? And what can we beg for more from God
himself? But I do not yet understand how you can charge those Heathens with
Idolatry, who owned a Supreme God and worshipped inferior Deities as
subordinate to them, and their Images; but the charge will return upon your
selves.


R. P. Will you never be satisfied? Did not T. G. say, they were justly charged
with it on two accounts. (1.) Because those Images were instituted by public
Authority for the worship of false Gods; Dial. p. 437.
and they concurred with the vulgar in all the external practices of their
Idolatry. (2.) Because though in their Schools they denied them to be Gods, yet
they gave divine honor to them as the people did.


P. D. You must excuse me Sir, I have such an imperfection in my understanding
that it will not be satisfied, without the appearance at least of Reason; which
I confess I cannot yet see in this answer. For, I pray, how comes it to be
Idolatry in them who give only an inferior and relative worship, if that
worship be not Idolatry?


R. P. T. G. says, they were not guilty of internal Idolatry, Dial. p. 438.
but of external, complying with the vulgar who did worship them as truly and
properly Gods; and that in such a manner that they were judged to do the same
thing, and therefore it was at least an exterior profession of Idolatry in
them.


P. D. But you have not yet proved that the Gentiles did worship many
independent Gods; and I have very lately showed the contrary from the express
testimonies of the Fathers: and therefore this answer does not reach to the
case. Yet suppose, that against the general sense of understanding men, the
common people should take the inferior Gods for independent and absolute
Deities, is not this the case of your own Church? as Dr. St. observed, the
common people take their Images for Gods, or take the B. Virgin for the Queen
of Heaven, and pray to them accordingly, which is both internal and external
Idolatry in them, however T. G. and their learned men comply with them in all
their external Acts of Worship, are they guilty of the exterior profession of
Idolatry or not?


R. P. I thought where you would be, but is it the same case of some few men
complying with a common and public custom of Idolatrous worship; Dial. p. 441.
and of those who follow the public profession and do the same Acts with some
private men who turn them to Idolatrous worship?


P. D. But if the public profession of the Gentiles was to worship one Supreme
God, as I have already proved, then the case is the very same as to the
profession and practice of Idolatry; Dial. p. 444.
which is the main thing insisted on. And the showing of many other
circumstantial differences will not vary the case, and destroy the parallel. If
this be all you have to add about the Heathen Idolatry, I pray let us come to
the appropriate Acts of Divine Worship. For since God may appropriate Acts of
Worship to himself; since upon that they become due only to him; since Idolatry
is giving to the Creature the worship due to God; Dr. St. from hence proves,
that they who do those Acts by way of worship to any creature must be guilty of
Idolatry.


R. P. As to this mighty argument T. G. says, Dial. p. 447.
the only thing to be wondered at in it are the many Equivocations, False
suppositions, and Self-contradictions contained in it.


P. D. Fair and soft good Sir, let us not have so many charges at one time;
take which of them you please, provided you hold to it, and not ramble from one
to another.


R. P. What is it you understand by appropriate acts of Divine Worship? for
more or less may be required, and so the term be equivocal.


P. D. I mean such which by his appointment and command become due to him, and
by his prohibition to give them to any other they become due only to him.


R. P. There is something still wanting to make the Argument conclusive against
us, which is, Dial. p. 448.
that God has so tied these Acts to his own Worship, that in all cases, and
upon all occasions imaginable they become incommunicable to any other, and this
so fastened to them, that it cannot be separated from them. For if the
appropriation may be separated upon any accounts, we may and will pretend it
is.


P. D. How does it appear necessary, that such an appropriation must be in all
circumstances? Is it not sufficient that it be in all Acts of Religious
Worship? For instance, Adoration is an appropriate Act of Divine Worship, but
he does not hereby exclude men's bowing to each other on account of civil
respect, but where the circumstances of time, place, etc. do show it is for
Religious Worship, there Dr. St. says it ought to be given to none else but
God.


R. P. Dial. p. 449.
But if those Acts be communicable to any other besides God, as limited with
such and such circumstances, they are not absolutely appropriated to God in all
cases and upon all accounts imaginable; and so the Argument does not conclude.


P. D. I wonder to hear you talk at this rate. For the force of your Argument
lies in this, If it be lawful to bow to one another on a civil account, then
Religious Worship is not appropriated to God; what a strange consequence is
this? Dr. St. does say, that the circumstances of time and place, etc. do put a
sufficient discrimination between Acts of Civil and Religious Worship; as
between eating and drinking upon a natural account at a common Table, and
eating and drinking at the Eucharist. What a senseless way of reasoning were
this, for a man to say, that eating and drinking could not be appropriated to
that act of Divine Worship in celebration of the Lords Supper, because men eat
and drink upon other occasions? It is true, they do so and must do so if they
would live; but what then? May not Christ therefore institute a Supper of his
own with such rites and solemnities belonging to it, as may sufficiently
discriminate it from a common eating and drinking? And were it not a horrible
profanation to appoint such a Supper as that of our Lord is, in commemoration
of of S. Francis, or Ignatius Loyola? I see, I must put some questions to you
to make you apprehend this a little better, than I fear you do. Is not the
celebration of the Eucharist an appropriate Act of Divine Worship now under the
Gospel?


R. P. I do not well know what you mean.


P. D. So I thought by your way of talking. Is it lawful to meet together at
Mass, to set apart Bread and Wine, and afterward to partake of them with a
design to commemorate S. Francis and St. Rosa, by such a solemnity?


R. P. I think not; because that would be a profane imitation of our Lords
Supper, which was instituted by Christ himself for the commemoration of his own
sufferings.


P. D. But is it not lawful to eat Bread and to drink Wine together?


R. P. Who doubts of that?


P. D. But eating Bread and drinking Wine are the same Acts in substance which
are used at the Lords Supper.


R. P. And what then?


P. D. Then the substance of the Acts being the same when done upon a civil and
a religious account, does not take off from the appropriation of them to God
when the circumstances declare it to be an Act of Religious Worship. Therefore
when a dispute arises concerning the Nature of an Act, whether it be for Civil
or Religious Worship, common prudence is to judge of that from the
circumstances of it; if once it be found to be for Religious Worship, then
comes in the consideration of the Law of God, and the appropriation of all Acts
of Religious Worship to God alone. And by this time I hope you understand how
impertinent it is to say, that if there be appropriate Acts of Divine Worship,
they must be so in all cases and upon all accounts imaginable. Which is as much
as to say, that eating Bread and drinking Wine in a solemn manner, in a place
appointed for Divine Worship, cannot be appropriated to the Lords Supper,
unless we never eat Bread, or drink Wine, but upon that occasion.


R. P. But what are these appropriate Acts of Divine Worship? Dial. p. 450.
For it may be some farther light may be gathered from the Acts themselves.


P. D. Dr. St. has named six; Sacrifice, Religious Adoration, Solemn
Invocation; Erecting Temples and Altars, Burning of Incense, Making of Vows.


R. P. Has God tied us by his command to offer Sacrifice, or burn Incense, or
make Vows to him? How then can he argue the Romanists guilty of Idolatry upon
the account of giving Acts appropriated to God to others beside him, when
himself if put to it, will deny that God has commanded them to be done at all
to him?


P. D. To clear this matter a little more to you, you may consider two things
concerning appropriate Acts of Divine Worship. 1. The general prohibition of
giving Religious Worship to any thing besides God. Which our Savior has
delivered in those words, Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Which the
Primitive Church took for their fundamental Rule of Worship; and understood it
in this sense, That all Acts of Religious Worship were to be performed to God
alone. And therefore of what kind soever the Acts were, whether we were tied to
perform them to God or not, if they were looked on as Acts of Religious Worship
given to any Creature, they utterly and peremptorily refused to do them, and
rather chose to suffer Martyrdom; as was plain in the case of burning Incense
to the Emperors Image. No Christians did then think that we were tied to offer
incense to God, and yet they esteemed it Idolatry to offer incense to any
Creature; therefore it is not necessary to the nature of Idolatry, that the Act
of Worship be such as we are tied to give unto God; it being sufficient that it
is an act of Religious Worship; and the giving of any such to a creature is
Idolatry; and without this, it is impossible to defend the Martyrs of the
Primitive Church; which all Christians are bound to do.

2. As to particular Acts of Divine Worship, though they are always unlawful to
be given to any thing besides God, yet we are not tied after the same manner to
perform them to him. For (1.) Some Acts of Worship are natural and always
equally agreeing to the Majesty of God; such as Prayer and Invocation;
Dependence on his Goodness and Providence; Thanksgiving for Mercies received;
and all internal Acts of Worship, which result from the relation we stand in to
God, and the apprehensions we ought to have of his Perfections; as Fear from
his Power, Submission from his Providence, Faith and Trust in him from his
Truth and Wisdom, Love from his Goodness, etc. All these are necessary Acts of
worship, and proper to God. (2.) Some Acts of worship are appropriated to him
when they are due, but they are not always due: such as making vows, and
swearing by his name. Although we are not tied to perform these at any certain
times, yet whenever they are done, they must be done to God alone. (3.) Some
acts are not necessary to be done to God at all; and yet it is unlawful to do
them to any other. And of this kind are the offering Sacrifices and burning
Incense; which were strictly required under the Law, but that dispensation
expiring after the coming of Christ, the obligation to those Acts was wholly
taken away, and yet it was Idolatry to use them to any thing besides God;
because they were Acts of Religious Worship, and therefore if to be performed
at all, they were so due to him that they could not without Idolatry be applied
to any besides him. And thus, I hope, I have a little helped your understanding
about these appropriate Acts of Divine Worship.


R. P. But the force of the ceremonial Law being taken away; Dial. p. 452.
whatever is not obliging by the Law of Nature, or some express declaration of
the will of Christ, is left at liberty for the Church to use conformably to the
light of nature, and the design of Christ's Doctrine.


P. D. All this I yield. But that which I insist upon, is that fundamental
precept of worship as declared by Christ, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God
and him only shall thou serve.


R. P. But do you think that Christ has made a re-establishment of those Acts
in the new Law which were before peculiar to God, Dial. p. 454.
as Sacrifice, Incense, etc. for then Christians will be as much bound by this
precept to give them to God, as not to give them to any other. But if they are
not re-established, how does it follow, that because they were appropriated to
God by the Law, therefore now that Law is taken away, they are forbidden to any
other besides God?


P. D. I do not say that Christ did intend a re-establishment of those Acts of
Worship which were peculiar to the Law of Moses; but I do say, that Christ by
this Precept as explained by himself, does make it utterly unlawful to perform
any act of Religious Worship to any but God alone. And if this be all you have
to prove the Mass of Equivocations, False Suppositions, and Self-contradictions
in Dr. St.'s Discourse of appropriate Acts of Divine Worship, it had been more
for T. G.'s honor to have passed over this with as much silence as he did many
other places which he found too hard for him.


R. P. Suppose this argument were good, Dial. p. 455.
it proves nothing against us, who neither give any act absolutely appropriated
to God to any else besides him; nor any other in the manner it is appropriated
to him.


P. D. If you perform any act of Religious Worship either to Saints or Images,
this Discourse must concern you; because the Law against the worship of Images
is still in force among Christians; and our Saviors general Rule does forbid
all external Acts of Religious Worship being applied to any besides God.


R. P. Nay, supposing those external acts of worship to be now due to God by
his Law, Dial. p. 456.
the giving them to any besides himself will not be to give to the creature the
worship due to God, unless it be done with an intention to give them to a
creature as esteemed worthy of Divine Honor. For that is the definition of
real Idolatry.


P. D. Then the Mandarins in China who performed all external acts of adoration
in the Temple of the Tutelar Spirits secretly directing their intention to a
Crucifix were not guilty of Idolatry; notwithstanding the Decree of the
Congregation at Rome. For they did not perform those acts, with an intention to
give the worship to the Tutelar Spirits as esteemed worthy of Divine Honor.
Then the Thurificati of the Primitive Church who through fear offered incense,
could not be charged with Idolatry; nor Marcellinus though he sacrificed in the
Temple of Vesta, when he only complied with Dioclesian. But did not T. G. blame
the Philosophers for an exterior profession of Idolatry? What is that I
beseech you? Is it Idolatry or not? Does not T. G. grant, that there ought in
reason to be some peculiar external acts appropriated to the worship of God as
most agreeable to his incommunicable excellency? Dial. p. 467.
Why so I pray? Is it not, because Gods incommunicable excellency requires an
external worship peculiar to it self? And if so, is it not to give the worship
due to God to something else, to apply those acts which are peculiar to
himself, to any thing besides him? This debate in truth comes to this point at
last, whether there ought to be any such thing as a peculiar external worship
of God or not? For, if external worship be due to him, and such worship be due
to him alone for his incommunicable excellency, then the giving external
worship to a creature, must be giving to it what is due only to God. And to
resolve the nature of Idolatry into the inward intention, is all one as if one
should say, that Adultery were to lie with another man's Wife with an intention
to cuckold her Husband; but if a man did it out of love to her Person, it were
no adultery. Why is there not an external act of Idolatry, as well as of
perjury, theft, murder and the like? Where does the Scripture give the least
intimation that the nature of Idolatry is to be taken from the inward
intention, when the Law is express against the outward action: and all men are
charged with Idolatry who were guilty of the external acts, without running
into the thoughts and designs of their hearts? Nay, your own Authors cannot
deny that there is an external Idolatry as well as internal; and where the
outward acts are Idolatrous we ought to presume there was an implicit and
indirect intention; and no more is necessary to make an act Idolatrous than a
voluntary inclination to do it. This is therefore a mere subterfuge, and can
never satisfy a man's Conscience, nor excuse the Roman Church from Idolatry.


R. P. But T. G. grants that supposing such an appropriation of external acts
to remain in force; Dial. p. 457.
to apply such acts to a creature may and ought in reason to be interpreted to
be real Idolatrous worship; because Idolatry is a sin directly opposite to
Religion, as a false worship to a true one.


P. D. What is it then but to cavil about words, to deny that to be real
Idolatry which at the same time he confesses ought to be interpreted to be so?
For since we cannot judge of men's intentions but by their actions, when we
dispute about the Idolatry practiced in any Church, we can be understood only
of that which lies open to our judgment, and that can be only the external
act. And since T. G. grants, Dial. p. 461.
that the thing which the Dr. means is confessed by your selves to be
inconsistent with salvation, there is nothing further necessary to be done, but
to debate whether you are guilty of that sin or not, in applying appropriate
acts of Divine Worship to a Creature.


R. P. But does not Dr. St. himself show from Card. Tolet, Dial. p. 458.
that Idolatry does suppose an error in the mind, in judging that to deserve
divine honor which does not?


P. D. I grant it, but that only shows what practical judgment does precede a
voluntary act of Idolatry: as it is distinguished from an involuntary
compliance. In this later case, persons are really guilty as to the external
act; as a man that takes away his Neighbors goods out of fear of his own life
is really guilty of theft, although the fear he was in may lessen the
wilfulness of it: so in Idolatry when committed through the power of a sudden
passion is a sin of the same kind with other Idolatry, but not so wilful and
deliberate a sin. But in case of wilful Idolatry, there must be a practical
judgment determining the will to the act of Idolatry. If you ask me what that
judgment is, whether true, or erroneous; I say it is an erroneous judgment,
for it determines the giving divine worship to that which does not deserve it.
Dial. p. 459.
Not as though Idolatry implied the believing that to be truly and properly God
which is not; (which T. G. would infer from thence) but it implies only the
practical judgment determining the will to give Divine Worship to that which
really deserves it not. As for instance; suppose an Image of our Lady to stand
before two persons; the one declares against the Worship of it, though he may
be forced to do it, he is guilty of real but involuntary Idolatry (taking
involuntary as to the free inclination of the Will) the other readily and
spontaneously falls down upon his knees before it, and says his prayers to the
Image as gravely and devoutly as if the B. Virgin were present; both these do
concur in the same external act of worship, but from a very different
judgment; the one judges it fit to comply for his own safety; the other judges
the thing fit to be done: but it is not necessary that he judges the Image to
be the B. Virgin her self, but that he ought to give such worship to her Image;
so that judging divine worship to belong to that which does not really deserve
it, is all the erroneous judgment necessary to a wilful act of Idolatry; and
if this be any kindness to T. G. much good may it do him.


R. P. But T. G. says, Dial. p. 459.
that from hence it follows, that it is not real Idolatry to worship an Image
with divine worship unless it be done out of an erroneous judgment, as to a
thing that deserves Divine Honor.


P. D. No such matter; for from hence it only follows, that in a wilful act of
Idolatry there must be a practical judgment determining the act of Divine
Worship to an Image, though it deserves it not. So that this does not refer to
the manner of applying the external act to the object as deserving divine
honor, but only the antecedent judgment that the act of divine worship be
given to such an object.


R. P. Again T. G. says, that from hence it follows, that the case of the
Heathens and ours is different, because their Idolatry proceeded upon an
erroneous belief of a creatures deserving Divine Honor when it does not; but
we do no such thing.


P. D. Cannot T. G. understand the difference between an erroneous belief and
an erroneous practical judgment? I do not deny that the Heathens had a very
erroneous belief in many particulars; and so have other Idolaters too. But the
question now is, what error of judgment that is, which the wilful act of
Idolatry does suppose; and I say, it requires no more than an error in the
practical judgment, determining the will to give Divine Worship to that which
does not deserve it. And herein I see no difference between the Heathens
Idolatry and yours.


R. P. Dial. p. 465.
But let us now set aside the strict notion of Idolatry, and consider, whether
the Church of Rome be guilty of damnable sin in the manner of their worship,
which must either be in not giving to God the worship due to him, or by giving
the worship due only to him to his Creatures.


P. D. The later is that which Dr. St. chiefly insists upon, although, he
says, your Divines are to blame in the first particular, Defense, p. 204, etc.
because they reserve no one act of external adoration as proper to God and to
be performed by all Christians, and for this he quotes the resolution of
Cardinal Lugo.


R. P. I wonder you would mention that citation of Lugo, since T. G. says the
Dr. is so unhappy in his citations: and the Jesuits will say, Dial. p. 469.
that he evidently abuses both his Authority and his Eminency.


P. D. I have had so much experience of T. G.'s intolerable disingenuity in
this matter, that I durst venture an even wager (which is the way T. G.
proposes often in his Dialogues for ending such disputes) that Dr. St. has not
miscited Cardinal Lugo.


R. P. T. G. says, that Cardinal Lugo does not deny sacrifice to be an
external act of worship proper to God; for his words are, qui non potest
offerri nisi soli Deo, as may not be offered but to God alone; but, he says,
that sacrifice is not properly an act of adoration in the strict sense, but of
another kind distinct from it.


P. D. Those are not Lugo's words, but licet non possit offerri nisi soli Deo;
yet I shall not insist upon that. For that which sufficiently clears Dr. St.
is, the consideration of his design in bringing those words of Lugo, which was
to prove that there is no one external act of adoration which is proper to
Latria, or the worship peculiar to God. And are not Lugo's words plain and full
to this purpose?


R. P. That cannot be denied, but he takes adoration in the stricter sense.


P. D. Let him take it in what sense he will; does he not speak of the
adoration proper to Latria, or the worship peculiar to God? And does not Latria
take in any peculiar act of Divine Worship? And if there be no external act of
adoration peculiar to God, does it not follow, that there is no peculiar act
whereby you express your inward submission to God in all things? for that, Lugo
says, is the strict sense of adoration he there means. And does not this fully
prove what Dr. St. brought this Testimony for?


R. P. But the Church of Rome does hold sacrifice to be peculiar to God.


P. D. And does not Dr. St. say as much? Dial. p. 217.
For his words are, that you confess, that sacrifice is so peculiar to God that
it ought not to be offered to any else; but not as an Act of Latria says
Cardinal Lugo, for there is no act of adoration that is so; but upon another
account as it signifies Gods absolute Dominion over us as to life and death,
and that we ought to lay down our own lives when he calls for them* Which is to
make sacrifice a significant ceremony peculiar to God expressing his
Sovereignty, but not an immediate act of worship peculiar to him: for of that
kind, he says, there is none. And therefore according to him, your Church has
no one external act of Divine Worship so proper to God, that it may not be
offered but to him alone. And from hence it appears that Lugo did not take
adoration merely for that act of Religious Worship which is performed by the
motion of the Body, Dial. p. 468.
as T. G. suggests; but for whatsoever act that may tend to express the
submission of our souls to God; of which sort he denies any to be peculiar to
Gods worship. And what can be more contrary to that which T. G. admits for a
Law of Nature, viz. that man ought to use some external acts to testify his
submission to God, Dial. p. 467.
and therefore there ought to be some peculiar external acts appropriated to
the worship of God, as most agreeable to his incommunicable excellency? I could
not but rejoice to see T. G. own so reasonable a principle, and I desire no
other, as to the mere light of Nature to prove your Idolatry. For, if this be a
principle of Natural Religion; then Idolatry even by the light of Nature lies
in applying appropriate acts of Divine Worship to any but to God himself; for
since his excellency is incommunicable, and the submission we owe to God
peculiar to him, and that submission ought to be expressed by external acts,
all which T. G. grants; then all those who do use such acts to any besides God,
are guilty of giving the worship due to God unto a Creature. For God has not
only a right to our inward submission, but to the acknowledgement of it, which
cannot be done but by external acts: and which is observable as to this matter;
the honor of God as to his incommunicable excellencies with respect to mankind
as a body, does not lie in the bare Acts of the Mind, but in the external
performance of Religious Worship to him. For, if it be necessary that Gods
Authority be owned in the world, it is necessary it be done by visible acts of
Worship; which ought to be so appropriated to him, that any one who discerns
them may see the difference put between God and all his Creatures. For herein
lies the manifestation of that inward sense we have of Gods incommunicable
excellencies, when we set apart times, and places, and offices of Religious
Worship, by which we declare our submission to God, as our Creator and Governor
of the World. And the confounding this distance between God and his Creatures
is the great sin of Idolatry: from whence Aquinas and others conclude it to be
a sin of the highest nature, Defense, p. 194, to 199.
and including blasphemy in it, because it robs God of the honor due to him
for his incommunicable excellencies.


R. P. What do you mean by this appropriating acts of worship to God? Dial. p.
470.
Do you mean all of them so absolutely appropriated to God, that it is not
lawful upon any account to give them to any other? And then the Quakers will be
the only good Christians in the world; or only some of them, and not others, as
kneeling and prostrating, but not bowing; and then you must tell us what makes
the discrimination.


P. D. I mean that which all mankind meant, when they set apart times, and
places, and offices for Divine Worship; and every man by the help of his mother
wit knew the difference between going to serve God and going to Market. I say
then as Dr. St. did, that the circumstances do sufficiently discriminate Acts
of a Religious and of a Civil Nature. Defense, p. 192. Dial. p. 471.



R. P. May not the Churches declaration, that such acts are intended only for
inferior Worship toward Images or Saints, make a sufficient discrimination
between such acts, and those which are appropriated to God?


P. D. If you suppose the whole power of determining Acts of Divine Worship to
lie in your Churches Breast, you had asked a very material question; but in
this case, there is a Law of God antecedently prohibiting such acts being given
to any besides God himself; and this Law was so understood by the Christian
Church when the Christian Religion put men upon suffering Martyrdom on that
principle, that all Religious Worship was appropriated to God: because Christ
had said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve.


R. P. Dial. p. 472.
Who is so blind as not to see, that this prohibition fell upon the external
act as determined to be a sign of Religious Worship by the circumstances in
which it was required?


P. D. And what then, I pray? for does it not equally fall upon all external
acts where the circumstances do determine them to be signs of Religious
Worship? Which is all I desire.


R. P. Dial. p. 473.
Does not this justify the Quakers in denying to give any external honor to a
Creature?


P. D. So far from it, that it shows the folly of their doctrine, which arose
from not being able to distinguish acts of Religious and Civil Worship.


R. P. But Dr. St. allows some kind of Religious Worship to be given to a
Creature.


P. D. Not any which is Religious in its nature or by circumstances; but that
which might be so called being required by the Rule of Religion, as civil
worship is.


R. P. But he allows religious respect to places, and religious honor to
Saints, Dial. p. 474.
and then why not those acts we give to Images and Saints on the same accounts?


P. D. Because the circumstances do declare those are not acts of religious
worship; but those you give to Images and Saints are.


R. P. I see the weight of this whole debate lies at last upon this
determination of circumstances; Dial. p. 479.
but how comes the Dr. after all the great bustle he makes about Gods
appropriating external acts of worship to himself, to put the trial of his
cause at last upon the determination of circumstances?


P. D. What other way should the difference of moral actions be tried? What
incongruity is there between Gods appropriating acts of religious worship to
himself, and the finding out what those acts are by the circumstances? Is it
not thus in the other Commandments? God in general forbids Murder, Theft and
Adultery; but are not those prohibited acts to be judged by the circumstances?
For, there is the same substance of the act in and unlawful actions. If a man
kills another by chance, or out of malice; if a man takes away another man's
goods with his consent or without; it is the same act as to its substance; and
what discrimination can be made but by the circumstances? and therefore I
cannot but wonder to hear you object against this, or think it any repugnancy
to Gods appropriating acts of Divine Worship to himself.


R. P. Dial. p. 479.
How can the nature of such acts be determined wholly by circumstances, unless
the appropriation of them be taken away? for if that continues, the Law
determines the nature of the acts.


P. D. Do you not apprehend the difference between the discrimination of acts
of civil and religious worship, and the appropriation of the latter to God by
his Law? I say the Law makes them peculiar to God when they are found to be
acts of religious worship, but the circumstances are to determine whether they
are civil or religious acts. As all acts of murder are forbidden by Gods Law,
but whether such an act be murder or no, is to be judged by circumstances.


R. P. But then if the external acts of worship given to Creatures in the
Church of Rome chance to prove accompanied with such circumstances, by which
they may and generally are understood not to be acts of Divine Worship but of
inferior veneration, then they are acquitted from the guilt of Idolatry
according to the Dr.'s own principles.


P. D. No such matter; unless we suppose those acts to be wholly indifferent
and left free by any Divine Law: and that it is in the Churches Power to
declare what is to pass for divine worship, and what for inferior worship. But
no particular circumstances can make an act lawful, which the Law of God has
made unlawful. As suppose the Spartan Commonwealth allow pilfering or taking
away Goods from each other without consent of the owners, here is one
circumstance which goes a great way toward the altering the nature of such
actions; but if there be an antecedent Law of God which makes such acts
unlawful, they remain so still notwithstanding the declaration of the Spartan
State. Just thus it is in the present case, your Church declares such Acts of
Worship may be lawfully applied to Images and Saints; but what then? has your
Church the Power to repeal the Law of God? if not, the acts remain as unlawful
as ever, notwithstanding the circumstance of such a declaration.


R. P. But T. G. says, all Dr. St. 's discourse about discrimination of acts
of civil and religious worship by circumstances, Dial. p. 481.
is only a popular discourse, and upon enquiry will be found as incoherent and
weak as an adversary could wish.


P. D. I shall not take T. G.'s judgment in this matter; for I have not found
him so impartial and just, that I should submit to his arbitration. If you have
any thing to object against that discourse, I do not question we shall hear of
it.


R. P. P. 482.
First, Acts take their nature from the formal reason or account upon which
they tend to their objects, and from thence they become either civil or
religious, though they may receive another denomination from the circumstances
which do accompany them.


P. D. I pray consider; the thing we enquire after, is the difference between
Acts of Civil and Religious Worship; which Dr. St. says is to be taken from
the circumstances, no, say you, it must be taken from the formal reason, or
account on which they tend to their objects: but the formal reason of acts
being secret and invisible, the question is whether that be sufficient to put a
discrimination between Acts of an external and visible nature, as those of
civil and religious worship are. I will make this plain to you by a noted
instance: While the Christian Emperors required no more than mere civil
worship, the Christians made no scruple of giving it to them in the same
postures which were used in divine worship; but when they suspected that divine
worship was required, they utterly refused it: here we have the same acts as to
the substance of them in both cases; and yet the Christians could easily
discern which did belong to civil and which to religious worship; was it from
such a reason and intention of the persons which none could know but the doers?
or else from the circumstances which did make it appear that more than civil
worship was required? And yet this worship which the Heathens gave to their
Emperors was only an inferior sort of divine worship, and so understood by
the general consent of the Heathens themselves; from whence we gather (1.) That
the discrimination of acts of civil and divine worship do not depend upon the
intention of the Doer, but the outward circumstances of them. For, if it had
depended on the inward intention of the person, the Christians might have saved
their lives and honors by doing the external acts with a different intention;
and that which was divine worship in him that designed it for such, were but
civil worship in him that intended no more. (2.) That the declaration of an
inferior sort of divine worship does not make it lawful. For it could be no
otherwise understood by the Christians, and yet they refused it as Idolatrous
Worship.


R. P. (2.) If the circumstances of time, and place, and such like do so
restrain and limit the signification of external acts, that it is easy to
discern one worship from another, how can you make it out that the people did
not give religious worship to David when in a most solemn act of devotion, it
is said, that the people worshipped the Lord and the King? where we see the
same act at the same time, a time of solemn devotion given to God and the King,
and the People never charged for giving religious worship to the King.


P. D. T.G. need not have gone so far back for such an argument. For the Kings
Chaplains in a sacred place and at a solemn time of devotion, do bow three
times to the King, when they enter into the Pulpit; and yet who is there
imagines they give him divine worship? It is not therefore the circumstance of
time and place alone, which Dr. St. makes to discriminate civil and religious
worship; but the concurrence of all circumstances together. If I bowed to a
Friend at Church, is any man so senseless to take this for Idolatry? Where
there is an antecedent ground for civil worship and respect, which is well
known and understood among men, there is nothing like Idolatry, although we do
use the same external acts toward men which we use toward God himself. As
among the Israelites no man doubted that their bowing to the King was upon a
quite different account, from their bowing to God; although they bowed to the
King in a place dedicated to divine worship. And where the reason of worship is
so well understood to be of a quite different nature from that of religious
worship, that very reason makes a discrimination besides the circumstances of
time and place. Which I shall make appear from the case of Naaman the Syrian;
whose bowing in the house of Rimmon was therefore free from Idolatry because of
the known custom of paying civil respect every where else to his Prince in that
manner, and by his public protestatition against the Idolatrous worship there
performed, as T. G. shows at large from Dr. H. T. G. therefore very much
mistakes Dr. St.'s meaning, Dial. p. 486, etc.
if he thinks he assigned the discrimination of acts of religious and civil
worship barely to the circumstances of time and place without taking in the
object and reason of worship.


R. P. Dial. p. 484.
But from hence it appears, that bowing in the House and Presence of an Idol
and in the very time of worship, is not Idolatry: For then Naaman could not be
excused.


P. D. Where the worship is known to be given not to the Idol, but to the
Prince to whom it is acknowledged to be due elsewhere; Dr. St. never supposed
such an act of worship though done in an Idol-temple to be Idolatry.


R. P. Dial. p. 483.
But suppose men should ask a Bishop blessing in a Church and at Prayer-time,
this is not civil worship, and is this Idolatry.


P. D. Worship may be said to be civil two ways;

1. When it is performed on a mere civil account, as it is to Magistrates and
Parents.

2. When it is performed on the account of a spiritual relation, as in the
respect showed to Bishops as spiritual Fathers. The worship is of the same kind
with that which is showed to natural Parents, but the relation is of another
kind; on which account it may be called Spiritual Respect; but it is in it self
an act of civil worship arising upon a moral relation, which being of a
different nature from that which is between Princes and Subjects, and Parents
and Children; and being founded upon Religious Grounds may be said to be
Religious or Spiritual Respect rather than Worship.


R. P. If the first Christians had upon their knees in time of prayer begged S.
James his benediction, had this been an unlawful Act of Worship?


P. D. If they were upon their knees in prayer to God, I think it was a very
unseasonable time to ask their Bishop blessing; although the act in it self
were lawful.


R. P. But is not this an act of the same kind with that of invocation of
Saints in times and places of Divine Worship, when we only pray to them to pray
for us?


P. D. I say again, that is not all You do; for you own their Patronage,
Protection and Power to help you in your necessities; and your Prayers must be
understood according to your Doctrines. But suppose you did only pray to them
to pray for you, yet (1.) You do it with all the solemnity of Divine Worship in
the public Litanies of the Church, when you are in the posture of your
greatest Devotion. And the Angel rebuked no less man than St. John, for using
the posture of Divine Adoration to him. (2.) In kneeling to a Bishop to pray
for us we suppose nothing that encroaches upon the Divine excellencies; for we
are certain he hears and understands us, and we desire nothing from him, but
what is in his power to do, and is very fitting for us to request from him. But
when you pray to Saints, you can have no possible assurance that they do or can
hear what you say to them; and so it is a foolish and unreasonable worship: and
when you do it with the same external Acts of Devotion which you use to the
Divine Majesty, you take away that peculiarity of Divine Worship which is due
to God by reason of his incommunicable excellencies; and so it is superstitious
and idolatrous Worship, these two ways,

(1.) As it supposes as great excellencies in Creatures as those did who for
that reason were charged with Idolatry. I do not meddle with the possibility of
an intelligent being disunited from matter's hearing at such a distance as the
Saints are supposed to be from us, nor whether God may not communicate such
knowledge to them; but that which I insist on is this, I find those charged
with Idolatry not only in Scripture and the Fathers, but by the Church of Rome
it self, who professed to worship some inferior Spirits as Mediators between
God and men; and such Mediators as were never imagined to be Mediators of
Redemption but barely of Intercession, as being believed to carry up the
prayers of men and to bring down help from above. Now here is no Omnisciency,
or Omnipotency, or other incommunicable excellency attributed to these Spirits;
and all the addresses made to them was under the notion of Mediators to
intercede for them, i. e. to pray to them to pray for them; and yet these were
charged with flat Idolatry. It were easy to make it appear from unquestionable
testimonies, that the Heathen Idolaters did worship inferior spirits only as
Mediators, (as Apuleius expresses it, inter caelicolas terricolasque vectores
hinc preeum inde donorum, wherein he only interprets Plato's sense) and that
this was one of the most common and universal kinds of Idolatry; and therefore
I would fain know why they must be charged with Idolatry, and you escape?
Either be just to them, and vindicate the Heathen Worship, or else you must
condemn your own.

Dial. p. 467.
(2.) T. G. confesses, that by the Law of Nature there ought to be some peculiar
external Acts appropriated to the worship of God as most agreeable to his
incommunicable excellency: now among all mankind no one external Act of Worship
has been supposed more peculiar to the Divine Nature than solemn Invocation in
places and times appropriated to Divine Worship; but the Invocation practiced
in the Roman Church has all the solemnity and circumstances of Divine Worship,
and therefore it is robbing God of the peculiar Acts of his Worship which is
Idolatry. And he must be very dull indeed, who cannot distinguish this
Invocation from a casual or accidental meeting with a Bishop at Church and
kissing the hem of his Garment, or asking his Benediction on ones knees.


R. P. But where there are different objects in themselves, and a public
profession and consent that those acts are applied to those objects upon
different accounts; Dial. p. 485, etc.
it is intolerable impertinency to understand such Acts as are in themselves
equivocal in any other sense than the Church declares, viz. as applied to
Saints or Images, P. 490.
the outward Acts of Worship, as bowing, kneeling, etc. are used only as
tokens, or expressions of an inferior respect and Veneration.


P. D. If this be all you have to say for your selves, the Heathens must be
excused from Idolatry as well as You. For they acknowledged by common consent
and public profession a difference between the supreme God and inferior
Spirits; they allowed of different degrees of Worship; and without all question
did not look on their Emperors, as the Supreme Deity that made and governs the
world; and yet I hope the primitive Christians were not guilty of intolerable
impertinency in charging them with Idolatry. But it seems the holy Angel was
guilty of the same intolerable impertinency in so rashly rebuking the Apostle
for falling down to Worship him, for this was an equivocal Act, and in all
probability was intended only as a token of respect and Veneration inferior to
what was thought due to God over all, Blessed for evermore. But those Acts of
Divine Worship which by the Law of God become due only to himself, can by no
consent or declaration of a Church be made lawful to be given to any creature,
however they may call them Acts of inferior respect and Veneration; as long as
they are of the same nature with those which were condemned both by the
Scripture and Fathers as Idolatrous Worship.


R. P. Does not Dr. Hammond say that Naaman the Syrian was excused from
Idolatry, because of the public profession he made, Dial. p. 486, etc.
that he intended not the Worship to the Idol, but to his Master? And will not
the same plea hold for us who declare we do not give Sovereign Worship to any
Creatures, but only inferior Worship?


P. D. If Naaman had desired leave to worship Rimmon or Saturn with an
inferior Worship, declaring that he did not take Saturn for the true and
Supreme God, but the God of Israel; and therefore he might apply the same Act
after a different manner, and the Prophet had then bid him Go in Peace, You had
some reason for your parallel. But as long as Naamans question only related to
the performing an act of Civil Worship to his Prince in the House of Rimmon,
what color can be hence taken for giving any kind of Religious Worship to
Saints or Images in places and at times set apart for Divine Worship?


R. P. But Monsieur Daille says, Dial. p. 488.
that external signs whether of nature or Religion are to be interpreted by the
public and common practice of those who use them, and not by the secret and
particular intentions of this, or that Person.


P. D. And what then I beseech you? Monsieur Daille discourses against those
who would use all the external Acts of adoration of the Host which others did,
but with a different intention, and hoped this would excuse them from Idolatry.
Now in this case he says, that signs of Religious Worship, as uncovering the
Head, kneeling or prostrating the body at the sound of a little bell, and such
other actions are the plain and ordinary signs of the adoration of the Host;
and are so appointed by the Church of Rome, and so understood by those who
generally practice it; therefore, says he, those who do use these outward
signs are to be understood to give adoration to the Host. From whence it
follows, that men cannot comply with others in the Acts of adoration of the
Host without hypocrisy or Idolatry: which it was Mons. Daille's design to
prove. But what is all this to the proving that inferior worship is not
Idolatry? we desire that these signs of Worship may be interpreted according to
the common and public practice of those who use them; by which we say, it is
as truly Religious Worship, as the Nations used, which all Christians do charge
with Idolatry. But if your meaning be, that your actions are to be interpreted
in your own sense, it will come to this at last, that You are not guilty of
Idolatry, because you declare you are not guilty of it; And whoever condemned
themselves for it by public declarations? unless it were when they repented of
it as a great sin, which I do not find you are yet willing to do. I pray
remember this saying of Daille's, when you think to justify giving acts of
Divine Worship to a Creature, by your secret intention; for he says, and you
seem to approve his saying, that such Acts when they are of the nature of
Religious Worship, are to be interpreted by the common and public practice,
and not by particular intentions; if therefore the Acts of Worship be such, as
by the Scriptures, and sense of the Primitive Church belong only to God, no
intention of yours of applying them after an inferior manner can excuse you
from giving adoration to a Creature, Especially, if they be such Acts which God
has appropriated to himself, as the six mentioned by Dr. St. for who dares
alter what God himself has appointed?


R. P. I think you are turning Quaker, Dial. p. 492.
for this is their principle, do not they allege Christ's precept against
swearing, and then say who dares alter what God himself has appointed?


P. D. I may as well fear you are renouncing Christianity; for what Christian
ever said or thought otherwise, than that it is not in the power of men to
alter the Laws of Christ? If Christ's precept were to be understood of all kind
of swearing, do you really think it would be lawful to swear at all? I am
ashamed of this loose, not to say, profane way of talking about the obligation
of Divine Laws.


R. P. I only mentioned this by the by, to let you see what kind of principles
the Dr. makes use of to combat the Church of Rome.


P. D. Just such principles as all Christians own; and are bound so to do by
their being Christians. But do you think in earnest, that it is in the power of
men to alter the Laws of God?


R. P. No. But T. G. means, that there is now no Law of God binding men
concerning these external Acts of worship, and therefore it is in the Power of
the Church to appoint these as well as other Rites and Ceremonies, Dial. p, 493.
and to determine the signification of them.


P. D. If this be his meaning, it is very ill expressed. But I say, that our
Savior has declared the immutable obligation of that Law concerning applying
all Acts of Religious worship only to God; and that the Universal Church of
Christ in the first Ages so understood it; as appears not barely by their
words, but by the greatest testimony of their Actions: when such multitudes
laid down their lives upon this Principle. Therefore I say again, You must call
in question their Title to Martyrdom, or you must own this for a true Christian
Principle.


R. P. But we declare our meaning in those which Dr. St. calls appropriate Acts
of Divine worship, when we apply them to any creatures, Dial. p, 494, etc.
to be only to use them as tokens of inferior respect and Veneration: as
Invocation, Building of Temples and Altars, burning of Incense, making of Vows,
etc. But that which God has forbidden is, P. 497.
that we shall not use them to any besides himself, as tokens of that inward
submission of our souls which is proper to him.


P. D. Did not you say, Dial. p. 493.
that the Appropriation of these Acts by the Law of Moses, being taken away by
the ceasing of that Law, they are now to be looked on as indifferent Rites and
Ceremonies?


R. P. And what then?


P. D. Did that Law cease at the coming of Christ, that those Acts were to be
used only to God as tokens of that inward submission which is proper to him?


R. P. No; that does never cease.


P. D. But this you say was the sense in which God did appropriate them to
himself; and therefore the Appropriation does still continue.


R. P. I suppose T. G.'s meaning is, that the appropriation before extended to
them as tokens of inferior respect and veneration, which Law ceasing, it is
now lawful to use them in that sense.


P. D. Then these Acts under the Law, were forbidden in that sense, whatsoever
profession or declaration were made by those that used them. As suppose that
the Jews had invocated Saints and Angels in their Temple or Synagogues and
worshipped Images just as you do, and made the same professions of their
meanings and intentions as your Church does; this had been Idolatry in them,
but not in you. Is this his meaning?


R. P. I suppose it must be.


P. D. Then inferior Religious worship was once Idolatry, but it ceased to be
so at the coming of Christ. Is not this a rare invention? And by this means
Christ destroyed Idolatry, not by rooting it out, but by making that not to be
Idolatry which was so before: and so he might take away all other sins by
making those breaches of the other nine Commandments not to be sins to
Christians which were so to the Jews. But we have not only the express words of
Christ, making all Religious worship of a Creature unlawful, against this
invention, but the Doctrine of the Apostles who charged the Gentiles with
Idolatry without regarding this distinction, who were not under the Law of
Moses; and the Consent of the Christian Church which judged this inferior
Religious Worship to be Idolatry still. And if this be all you have to say, it
is impossible to clear your selves from the charge of Idolatry, notwithstanding
all your meanings and intentions.


R. P. I have one thing yet more to say, Dial. p. 498.
viz. that Christ appropriates the Titles of Good, Father, and Master to God,
and yet we apply them to men in a different sense, and why may we not do the
same in equivocal Acts of Worship?


P. D. Our Savior's design was to deter men from assuming or affecting such
titles of excellency, superiority, or Authority over others in teaching, as
seemed to encroach too much on the divine perfections: but this holds much more
against the pretense of infallibility in any person, than for the lawfulness of
inferior Religious worship. For Christ never forbids the common use of those
titles among men, when they have no respect to Divine Matters; no more than he
does the Acts of Civil worship in men toward Magistrates or Parents; and thus
far the parallel is good, as to Words and Actions: but as Christ does forbid
the affectation of Infallibility though of an inferior sort under the titles
of Rabbi, Father, and Master; so he does likewise all inferior sort of
Religious worship when he says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. And therefore the equivocation which lies in men's power
to determine, is not that of the degrees of Religious worship, but of the acts
of Civil and Religious worship. But if it be lawful to apply the signification
of external Acts of worship to higher or lower degrees, why may ye not do the
same as to Sacrifice, as well as Invocation, etc.


R. P. This is a scruple which has troubled the Doctors notions from the
beginning; But T. G. gives two answers to it. Dial. p. 500, 502.
1. That Sacrifice in general is both by the custom of the Church and the
consent of all mankind (as S. Augustine teaches) appropriated to signify the
absolute worship due only to God. 2. For the particular sacrifice of the Body
and Blood of Christ, the nature and dignity thereof requires that it be
offered to God alone.


P. D. I am sorry to see you dissemble the force of the Doctors argument, when
you pretend to give an answer to it. For he says, Defense, p. 225.
that S. Augustine joins adoration and Sacrifice together, as appropriated to
signify the worship peculiar to God. How then, says Dr. St. comes S.
Augustines Authority to be quitted for the one, and so greedily embraced for
the other? What does T. G. answer to that?


R. P. I do not find he takes notice of S. Augustine for any thing more than
the consent of mankind about Sacrifice.


P. D. Was it not wisely done? and then to talk a great deal about the
remainder of the Doctors Discourse, whether sacrifice of it self does signify
absolute worship more than adoration, without taking notice that S. Augustine
joined them together, though the Church of Rome separates them. And T. G. gives
no manner of reason why the antecedent consent of mankind as to one of these
should not prevail in your Church as well as in the other: which is the main
ground according to T. G. why sacrifice ought still to be appropriated to the
peculiar Worship of God. Dial. p. 508.



R. P. What advantage does the Doctor get, by insisting so much on that
question, why Sacrifice may not be offered to Creatures as well as other
external Acts of Worship, Dial. p. 501.
for he can only infer from thence that in such case the Church of Rome might
possibly have no external act of Worship appropriated to God, if she have none
but Sacrifice; but whilst she has no such custom de facto as offering
Sacrifice to Saints and Images, it is manifest he cannot accuse them in that
point of having no external Act of Worship proper to God, or of giving it to
any besides him.


P. D. It was to very good purpose that he insisted on that question, on these
accounts. 1. Because either it is in the power of the Church to appoint
appropriate Acts of Divine Worship, or it is not. If it be in the Churches
Power, then sacrifice may be as lawfully offered to the B. Virgin, if the
Church think fit, as prayers and invocations, notwithstanding the general
consent of mankind in appropriating Sacrifice to God. If not, then there is
some antecedent reason why some external Acts of Worship are appropriated to
the absolute worship of God; if so, then all such Acts are appropriated where
the same reason holds; whether it be Divine Institution, or the consent of
mankind in general, or of the Fathers of the Christian Church: and
consequently, though the Church of Rome may reserve Sacrifice to God as
peculiar to him, yet they may give other acts of Divine worship to his
Creatures, which have the same reason to be appropriated which Sacrifice it
self has. 2. Because though in words they seem to appropriate Sacrifice to God
as a peculiar act of external worship, yet they do in effect overthrow it by
these two assertions. (1.) That its peculiarity is not as being an Act of
Adoration, but upon another account as a significant Ceremony of our total
subjection to God. And this was that which Dr. St. charged your Divines with,
that they reserve no one Act of external adoration as proper to God; and that
they say, Defense, p. 204.
that Sacrifice does not naturally signify any worship of God, p. 226.
but only by the imposition of men. So that your Divines confess there is no
natural Act of Divine worship, no external Act of Adoration which is reserved
as peculiar to God; but only an outward Ceremony which does not of it self
signify the worship of God, nor our subjection to him. But solemn Prayers and
Praises do of themselves signify our dependence on God, and therefore have an
antecedent reason to the consent of mankind, why they should be appropriated to
the worship of God. (2.) That even Sacrifice is allowed by the Roman Church to
be offered for the honor of Creatures: which Dr. St. says, is joining
Creatures together with God in the honor of Sacrifice: Defense, p. 220, 222.
and if Sacrifice be so appropriate to the honor of God that it cannot
signify any thing else, then it is nonsense to sacrifice to God for the honor
of another; if it may signify any thing else, and be so used in the Church of
Rome, then you do not reserve so much as sacrifice for an appropriate sign of
the absolute Worship of God.


R. P. To what miserable shifts, Dial. p. 519.
says T. G. are men put when they would have such trivial kind of arguing as
this to pass for solid reasoning: and it must be a hard world when a man of the
Doctors abilities must be forced to feign that he does not know how the same
Sacrifice may be a propitiation for sins and a thanksgiving for benefits,
especially the Sacrifice of the Altar being the same with that of the Cross, in
which all the differences of the legal Sacrifices were fulfilled.


P. D. It is a hard world indeed, when such stuff as this must pass for
answering. Dr. St. never denied that thanksgivings might be offered to God in
the time of most solemn Worship for the Graces of his Saints; nor that the
circumstances of Divine worship might redound to their Honor, as the Primitive
Christians offering up their devotions to God at their Sepulchers: but the
question is, whether it be consistent with the appropriation of Sacrifice to
the Honor of God, to offer it up for the Honor of his Creatures; especially
the Sacrifice of the Altar, i. e. the Son of God, as a propitiatory Sacrifice
for the quick and the dead?


R. P. Why may not we say, Dial. p. 521.
We offer this Sacrifice to God in the honor of S. Michael, to testify our
application of it in thanksgiving for the favors and Graces bestowed on him?


P. D. I pray consider, (1.) You say, that Sacrifice in your Church is
appropriated to the Honor of God; (2.) That Sacrifice does not signify the
Worship of God of it self, but by institution or consent of mankind. (3.) Then
the intention of Sacrifice is to signify that Honor which is peculiar to God.
Now how can it signify the Honor due only to God, if it may signify the
honor due to his Creatures?


R. P. Dial. p. 522.
Is it not for the honor of a Person to praise God for him? and Sacrificing
being the offer of a present in token of gratitude, does that diminish or add
to the Act of thanksgiving? And if it be a greater declaration of thanksgiving,
it must consequently be a greater declaration also of the honor of the Person
for whom it is offered.


P. D. It is one thing to make the Graces of Saints an occasion of Thanksgiving
to God, and another to offer up a Sacrifice for the honor of the Saints, as it
is expressed in the Offertory. In the former case there is no question but the
Honor is designed wholly to God as the Giver of those Graces, although a
consequential Honor does redound thereby to the Saints themselves; but in the
latter case the intended and designed Honor of the very Act it self is
declared to be to the Saints as well as to God himself. If a Courtier gives the
King solemn thanks for great kindness showed to one of his Subjects, the honor
of the Action belongs wholly to the King, although occasionally and
consequentially it redound to the reputation of the Person for whom it is done:
but if a Courtier on New years day should make a present to the King upon his
Knees, and say, I offer this New years gift to your Majesty in honor of your
Majesty and of the Groom of your Stole, or Chamberlain of your Household, etc.
how do you think this would be taken at Court? And yet this is just the Form of
the Offertory in your Missal. We make this Oblation to thee O Holy Trinity, and
for the honor of the Blessed Virgin and all Saints; can any one say that this
is not the designed and intended honor which belongs to the Act it self, and
not merely that which is occasional and consequential? If those who offered
Cakes to the B. Virgin, had said, We offer these Cakes to the honor of the
Blessed Trinity and the Virgin Mary, had not this been joining them together in
the honor of those oblations? And is it not the same case here? Besides, you
are guilty of a greater absurdity, for those might be only Eucharistical
oblations, but in your Sacrifice of the Mass, you pretend to make a present you
say to God; but what is it? nothing less than his own Son; if your doctrine be
true. And for what end? to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the
dead. And is this indeed the present you make to Almighty God in honor of his
Saints? I cannot with patience think of the absurdities which follow from
hence. For how came you to make a Present to God of his own Son? When we make a
Present to any one, it is understood to be of something in our power to bestow,
and which we are willing to part with, for his sake to whom we offer it. Do you
indeed in this sense make a Present of the Son of God to the Father? Have you
the power of bestowing him in your hands? And are you willing to part with your
whole right and interest in him? You are excellent Christians the mean while.
Nay, no Sacrifice was truly and properly offered by any person, wherein he did
not abandon his right in that which was Sacrificed. And therefore you see upon
what terms, you make such a present to God by a proper Sacrifice of his Son to
him. But suppose the Son of God were to be made a true and proper Sacrifice for
sins on the Altar, How comes it into your hands to offer him up to the Father,
since the great Sacrifice of propitiation was not to be offered by any ordinary
Priests, but by the High Priest himself, who was to carry the Blood into the
Holy of Holies, and there to make intercession for the People? Are you the
Highpriests of the Gospel to offer unto God the great Sacrifice of Atonement?
Is not the great High Priest of our profession entered within the Vail, and is
there making intercession by virtue of his Sacrifice on the Cross? What need
then of your Offering him up again for propitiation, who Offered himself once
on the Cross for a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and
satisfaction for the sins of the whole world? We have all the reason in the
World to commemorate with great thankfulness and devotion that invaluable
Sacrifice of the Cross, and if you will call the Whole Eucharistical Office a
commemorative Sacrifice as the Ancients did, I shall never quarrel with you
about it. But how the Sacrifice of the Mass comes to be propitiatory as the
Sacrifice on the Cross was, I understand not; nor how it should be the same
with the Sacrifice of the Cross, and yet of so much less value than it, the one
being said by you to be infinite and the other finite; nor how the destruction
of his Sacramental and of his Natural Being should be the same thing; nor how
this Sacrifice should be propitiatory only for one sort of sins and not for
another; nor how the Son of God can be made a true and proper Sacrifice for Sin
under the Species of Bread and Wine; nor, what consumptive change that is in
him, which according to your selves is necessary to make him such a Sacrifice.
Is he slain again in the Mass? If he be, I can tell who is the Judas that
betrays him, and who are the Jews that Crucify him. If not, how comes a
propitiatory Sacrifice without shedding of Blood? If the consumptive change be
only in the Elements, then the Elements are Sacrificed, and not Christ. If it
be only a Sacramental change, what is that to a Sacrifice of propitiation? And
suppose all the other absurdities to be removed, and that the Sacrifice of the
Mass is a true, real, proper and propitiatory Sacrifice of the Son of God Body
and Soul upon the Altar, yet how at last comes this to be giving God thanks for
the Graces of his Saints? I thought such a Sacrifice had been much rather for
the expiation of their sins.


R. P. I pray Sir forbear; I have no longer patience to hear you talk at this
rate against the Sacrifice of the Mass; for if you destroy that, we are all
undone. Methinks as T. G. says, Dial. p. 511.
Dr. St.'s arguments against it, might have been expected from the pen of a
Crellius.


P. D. Of a Crellius? Why so I pray? He wrote against Christ's propitiatory
Sacrifice on the Cross; and as I remember, Dr. St. has answered his arguments;
how comes he then, of all men, to argue like Crellius?


R. P. Because his Reasons against the Sacrifice of the Mass will hold against
that of the Cross.


P. D. That would be strange; but let us hear them first and then judge.


R. P. Why, he looks upon it, as a monstrous absurdity for us to pretend, first
to make our God with speaking five words, then to offer up God himself unto God
as a Sacrifice and consequently to suppose him destroyed, and this all to
testify our submission to God.


P. D. And do not you think these horrible absurdities, and such as can never
enter into any man's head that is not first resolved to part with his
understanding?


R. P. And do not you think these expressions highly injurious to that
inestimable Sacrifice which Christ himself Offered upon the Cross? Dial. p. 509.



P. D. Not at all. For, do we believe, that the Jews made an ordinary man to be
the Eternal Son of God by speaking five words over him? And that the Jews then
slew him and offered up God, as a Sacrifice to God for the expiation of sins;
and all this, as an act of gratitude to God for the Graces of his Saints? If
not, what color or pretense is there, that the laying open the absurdity of
your Sacrifice of the Mass, should derogate from the Sacrifice of the Cross?


R. P. Were not the Jews scandalized at that most in the Sacrifice of the
Cross, viz. the Offering of God to God?


P. D. A crucified Savior, or a suffering Messiah, was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. But what do you mean by the
offering up of God to God, do you think the Divinity was the Sacrifice? or the
Blood of Christ, which he being the Eternal Son of God did offer up to his
Father, as a propitiation for the sins of Mankind?


R. P. Might not he be said, to offer up God himself to God as a Sacrifice?


P. D. Then you must make the Divinity the Sacrifice; and how can that be a
Sacrifice which is capable of no change? But suppose Christ as God and man be
said to offer up at least a Divine Sacrifice; what is all this to your Offering
up the Son of God as a Sacrifice to God for the sins of the World?


R. P. Might not those, as T. G. says, who were at the foot of the Cross,
Dial. p. 511.
offer up the Son of God on the Cross to the Father?


P. D. This is a piece of New Divinity; and far enough I dare say from arguing
like Crellius. Who ever thought, that the Jews had the same power to offer up
the Blood of Christ as a propitiatory Sacrifice, which himself had who had
power over his own life? If T. G. argues at this rate, none would imagine he
has ever considered the Nature of Christ's Sacrifice, since he talks so
unskilfully about these matters.


R. P. But what does Dr. St. talk of our making and destroying God in the Mass,
since we believe that the same Christ who is in Heaven is whole under either
species; Dial. p. 510.
and his Blood to be separated from his Body not really, but Mystically only
and in representation.


P. D. Do you believe a true, proper propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass, or not?


R. P. Do not you know the Council of Trent has expressly defined it, Sess. 22.
c. 1.2. can. 1.3.
and anathematized all those who say the contrary?


P. D. Is there any true, proper propitiatory Sacrifice, where there is not a
consumptive change of that which is Sacrificed? And what is that which is
Sacrificed in the Mass? not the Elements, but Christ under them, you say; If
Christ be the Sacrifice he must be slain again at every Mass, as he was once on
the Cross; or you can assign no destruction, which you say is necessary to such
a true and proper Sacrifice.


R. P. Do not you observe T. G.'s words, that Christ is whole under either
species, and his Blood separated from his Body not really, but Mystically only,
and in representation?


P. D. How is that? Whole Christ under the bread, and whole Christ under the
wine; and the blood separated from the Body not really, but mystically only,
and by representation. This is admirable stuff, and true Mystical Divinity. If
the body of Christ does remain whole and entire, where is the true proper
Sacrifice? where is the change made, if not in the Body of Christ? if that be
incapable of a change, how can it be a true and proper Sacrifice? If the blood
be not really separated from the Body, where is the mactation, which must be in
a propitiatory Sacrifice? If Christ do remain whole and entire after all the
Sacrificial Acts, where I say is the true and proper Sacrifice? T. G. had far
better said, and more agreeably to Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason, that there
is no real and proper sacrifice on the Altar, but only mystical and by
representation.


R. P. But T. G. says, that Religion which admits no external visible
Sacrifice, Dial. p. 512.
must needs be deficient in the most signal part of the public worship of God.


P. D. I pray remember, it is an external and visible Sacrifice which you
contend for, and now tell me where it is in your Church. Does it lie in the
mimical gestures of the Priest at the Altar in imitation of Christ on the
Cross? If that be it, the necessary consumption of the Sacrifice will be no
comfortable doctrine to the Priest. Does it lie in the consecration of the
Elements which are visible? But you say, the essence of the Sacrifice consists
in the change; and we can see no visible change made in them, and therefore
there is no external and visible Sacrifice. Besides, if the Sacrifice did lie
in the change of the Elements after Consecration into the Body of Christ, then
the Elements are the thing sacrificed and not the Body of Christ, for the
destructive change is as to the elements, and not as to the Body of Christ. Or
does it lie in the swallowing down, and consumption of the species after
Consecration by the Priest? But here likewise the change is in the accidents
and not in the Body of Christ, which remains whole and entire though the
species be consumed; and I think there is some difference between changing ones
seat and being sacrificed. For all that the Body of Christ is pretended to be
changed in, is only its being no longer under the species, but T. G. I suppose
will allow it to be whole and entire still. Does it then lie in pronouncing the
words of consecration upon which the Body of Christ is under the species of
Bread, and the Blood under that of Wine, and so separated from the Body? But
this can least of all be, since T. G. assures us that whole Christ is under the
Bread as well as under the Wine; and so there cannot be so much as a moment of
real separation between them; and we know how necessary for other purposes the
doctrine of Concomitancy is. Tell me then where is your external and visible
Sacrifice which you boast so much of; since according to your own principles
there is nothing that belongs to the essence of a sacrifice is external and
visible, and consequently your own Church labors under the defect T. G.
complains of.


R. P. But what makes Dr. St. so bitter against the Sacrifice of the Altar,
since the most true and genuine Sons of the Church of England do allow it;
Dial. p. 513, etc.
as Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Heylin, and Bishop Andrews? and does not this rather
look like betraying the Church of England than defending it?


P. D. I see now you are wheeling about to your first Post, and therefore it is
time to give you a space of breathing. Your great business is to set us at
variance among our selves, but you have hitherto failed in your attempts, and I
hope will do. I do not think any two or three men, though never so learned make
the Church of England; her sense is to be seen in the Public Acts and Offices
belonging to it. And in the Articles to which T. G. sometimes appeals, Articl.
31.
your Sacrifices on the Altar are called blasphemous Figments, and dangerous
Impostures. But as to these three persons I answer thus;

1. Mr. Thorndike, as I have showed already, P. 87, 88.
declares against the true proper Sacrifice defined by the Council of Trent as
an innovation and a contradiction. And that which he pleads for, is, that the
Eucharist is a commemorative and representative Sacrifice, about which Dr. St.
would never contend with him or any one else: and immediately after the words
cited by T. G. he adds these; Laws of the Church. p. 40.
It is therefore enough, that the Eucharist is the Sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, as the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross is represented, renewed,
revived, and restored by it, and as every representation is said to be the same
thing with that which it represents.

2. Pet. Heylins words are expressly only for a commemorative Sacrifice, Heylins
Introd. n. 24.
as T. G. himself produces them; and therefore I wonder what T. G. meant in
citing them at large: For he quotes the English Liturgy for the Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving; and S. Chrysostom calling it the remembrance of a
Sacrifice; and many of our learned Writers, a Commemorative sacrifice. What is
there in all this in the least repugnant to what Dr. St. had delivered?


R. P. But he quotes Bishop Andrews, saying, Take from the Mass your
Transubstantiation, and we will have no difference with you about the sacrfiice.


P. D. Bishop Andrews calls the Eucharist a commemorative sacrifice, Ad Bell.
Apol. Resp. p. 184.
and he says, it was properly Eucharistical, or of the nature of
peace offerings, concerning which the Law was, that he that offered should
partake of them; and a little after follow those words you mention: to which he
adds, We yield you that there is a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice; but we
shall never yield that your Christ being made of Bread is there sacrificed.
Which is the very thing, that T. G. is so angry with Dr. St. about. And have
not you bravely proved that Dr. St. has herein gone against the sense of the
genuine Sons of the Church of England? If you have any thing yet left which you
think material I pray let us have it now, for fear lest T. G. make use of it to
stuff out another Book.


R. P. I think we are near the Bottom.


P. D. So I imagine by the dregs which came last.


R. P. There is one thing yet left for a close: Dial. p. 523.
which is, Dr. St. says, supposing this sacrifice were allowed, yet this does
not prove that we reserve any external Act of worship belonging to all
Christians, because this sacrifice belongs to the Priests only to offer.


P. D. And what answer does T. G. give to that?


R. P. He says, that nothing is more notorious than that those of the Church
of Rome, are bound on every Sunday and Holy Day to hear Mass.


P. D. To hear Mass! A very Christian duty no doubt, especially if they
understand never a word of it, Dian. Sum. p. 446.
and as Diana says, a man is not bound to hear a word that is said: But what
then?


R. P. By this external Act, he says, Dial. p. 524.
they testify the uniting their intention with the Priest as the public
Officer of the Church in the Oblation of the sacrifice.


P. D. I have often heard of the skill you have of directing intentions, but I
never knew of this knack of uniting Intentions before. I know how necessary the
Priests intention is in your Church, but what if the People should fail of
uniting their intention with his, (as they often think and talk of other things
at hearing Mass) would it not be a sacrifice without the Union of their
Intentions? Suppose the Priests Intention should wander, what would the Peoples
uniting their intentions signify toward the Sacrifice? You will not say, they
have any power to offer the sacrifice; therefore the Act of sacrificing belongs
only to the Priest, whether the Peoples intentions be united or not. If the
People first offered that which was to be sacrificed, to the Priest, and then
he sacrificed it in their name (as among the Jews) they might be said to have a
share in the sacrifice; but when the sacrifice is supposed to come down from
Heaven upon the Priests words, and he does not represent the People but Christ
in the Act of sacrificing, What does the Peoples uniting their intentions
signify to the sacrifice? I pray tell me in whose name does the Priest pretend
to the power of offering up the Body of Christ in Sacrifice on the Altar, the
Peoples, or Christ's?


R. P. In the name of Christ doubtless, for the People have no power to do it.


P. D. If they have no power to do it, and all the Authority be supposed to be
derived from Christ for doing it, what does the uniting the Peoples intentions
with the Priests signify as to the offering up the sacrifice? You might as
well say, that the Jews under the Cross might unite their intentions to Christ's
in offering himself on the Cross to the Father, and so it might become their
Act as well as Christ's. But in my mind your phrase of hearing and seeing Mass
is much more proper (if men were bound either to hear or see, which your
Casuists say, they are not) than this of uniting their intentions with the
Priest, which is absurd and ridiculous. Does T. G. so little consider the
honor of the Priestly Office as to talk of the Peoples uniting their
intentions with the Priests in the oblation of the Sacrifice? The next step may
be, that the sacrificing may depend on the Peoples Intentions as well as the
Priests; and what a case are you in then? Aquinas and Cajetan were much wiser
than T. G. in this matter, for they both declare that this sacrifice belongs
only to the Priests and not to the People; Defense, p. 205.
as Dr. St. told T. G.


R. P. T. G. says, he cannot find the Citation in the place quoted by him; but
he dares affirm that Cajetan was not so silly a Divine as to deny it to belong
to the People to offer the sacrifice by and with the Priest. Dial. p. 525.



P. D. And I dare affirm Cajetan was much wiser than to say, that the offering
the sacrifice did in any sense belong to the People; and so much T. G. might
have found in the place cited by the Doctor, only qu. 86. was put for q. 85.
and not as Cajetans bare opinion, Cajet. 2.2. qu. 85. art. 4.
but as the judgment of Aquinas too. He says indeed, that the Priests do
offer the sacrifice for themselves and others; but he was not so silly to
imagine that they were to unite their intentions with the Priests in the
oblation; but that expression only shows for whose sake and not in whose name
the sacrifice was offered. For there are other sacrifices, says he, which
every one may offer for himself, and those, says Cajetan, are spiritual
sacrifices of Devotion and Virtue; but for the sacrifice of the Altar, that
belongs only to the Priests and Officers of the Church.


R. P. But the very Mass Book calls it meum ac vestrum sacrificium; and desires
God to accept it for all those pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt
hoc sacrificium.


P. D. I will tell you the mystery of this business, and so put an end to this
long Conference. It was the ancient custom of the Roman Church as well as
others for the Communicants to make an oblation of the Bread and Wine at the
Altar, of which they were afterward to partake. This I prove from the
Sacramentary of S. Gregory published by Pamelius, Liturg. Lat. ^0.2. p. 178.
where it is said, while the Offertory is singing; i. e. the Anthem then used,
the oblations are made by the People and laid upon the Altar that they might be
consecrated. And the Ordo Romanus declares these oblations to be the Bread and
Wine: of which, it adds, Cassandr. Liturg. c. 27.
that the Archdeacon took as much and laid upon the Altar, as would serve for
the people that were to communicate. These oblations continued in the Church a
long time, Council. Matis. c. 50.
and were enforced by Canons and Constitutions when the people began to slacken
in their devotion. Capit. Car. M. l. 6. c. 162.
Upon which the Church of Rome thought fit to bring in the use of Wafers
instead of common bread, and so these oblations grew into disuse, or were
turned into offerings of money instead of them. Sirmondus and Card. Sirmond. de
Azym. c. 2. Bona de r^bus Liturg. l. 2. c. 8.. 8.
Bona have proved beyond all dispute, that the ancient Latin Church did use
common and leavened Bread in the Eucharist that was offered by the people till
a thousand years after Christ. But then the doctrine of Transubstantiation
coming into the Roman Church, it was no longer thought fit that the Bread which
was to be turned into the Son of God should be made after a common manner, or
with the unsanctified hands of the Laity, but by those who did attend upon the
Altar: remembering what the good woman told Gregory I. that she wondered that the
Bread which she made with her own hands should be called the Body of Jesus
Christ; Joh. Diac. in vit. Greg. c. 41.
which the people had more reason to do, when they came to define the manner of
the presence, as they did about this time; although it were not made an Article
of Faith till afterward. From hence the dispute began between the Greeks and
Latins about unleavened bread; and from henceforward the custom of oblations
for the service of the Altar declined and is only kept up on some particular
solemnities, as Canonization of Saints, Inauguration of Princes, Consecration
of Bishops, Marriages and Funerals; however the same form of words continues
still in the Offices, as if the oblations of Bread and Wine were still made by
the People; Sirm. de Azy. c. 1. Bona de reb. Liturg. l. 1. c. 23.. 3.
and so Sirmondus and Bona both say those expressions of the Mass Book, you
mention, are to be understood of these oblations of the People, and not of the
Sacrifice of Christ's Body. And that these oblations were called sacrifices
appears by the known passages of S. Cyprian, Cypr. de Opere and Eleemosyn.
Locuples and dives es and Dominicum celebrare te credis, quae in Dominicum
sine sacrificio venis, quae partem de sacrificio quod pauper obtulit sumis? In
which he blames the rich women that came without an Oblation, which he calls a
sacrifice, and did partake of that which the poor offered; which S. Augustine
calls de aliena oblatione communicare; Aug. Sermon. 215. de temp.
and therefore he bids all Communicants to make their own oblations at the
Altar. But suppose these expressions were not to be understood of the oblations
of the people (as it is certain the prayers called Secretae and the first part
of the Canon of the Mass are) yet it was not fairly done of T. G. to leave out
a very significant word which immediately followed, viz. laudis, qui tibi
offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis. If the People be allowed their share in the
Eucharistical Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, what is this to their
offering up the proper propitiatory sacrifice of the Body of Christ? I do not
deny that the People had a share in the sacrifice according to the sense of
Antiquity; not only from their oblations, but because as Cassander well
observes, Cassand. consult. de Sacrif. Corp. and Sang. Christi.
the Ancients did call the whole Eucharistical Office, as it took in the
Peoples part as well as the Priests, by the name of a sacrifice; and so the
Oblations, Prayers, Thanksgivings, Consecration, Commemoration, Distribution,
Participation did all belong to the sacrifice. But since you restrain the true
and proper sacrifice to the oblation of the Body of Christ to God by the
Priest, Dr. St. had reason to say, that the sacrifice among you belongs to the
Priests, and is not an external Act of Worship common to all. And so according
to the sense you put on the Mass Book, you leave no one Act of peculiar
external worship appropriated to God which is to be performed by all
Christians; which was the thing to be proved.


THE END.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall.
A Rational account of the grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord-Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer of T. C. Folio. Sermons preached upon several occasions, with
a Discourse annexed concerning the true reasons of the Sufferings of Christ,
wherein Crellius's Answer to Grotius is considered. Folio. Irenicum: A
Weapon-Salve for the Churches wounds: in Quarto. Origines Sacrae: or, a
Rational Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to the Truth and Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, and matters therein contained, Quarto. A Discourse
concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of
Salvation in the Communion of it, in Answer to some Papers of a revolred
Protestant, wherein a particular account is given of the Fanaticisms and
Divisions of that Church, Octavo. An Answer to several late Treatises
occasioned by a Book entitled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced
in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the communion of it, the
first Part, Octovo. A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant grounds
of Faith, against the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer
to the Guide in Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and
Reason and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular
enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church, Octavo. An Answer to Mr.
Cressey's Epistle Apologetical to a person of Honor, touching his Vindication
of Dr. Stillingfleet, Octavo. A Defense of the Discourse concerning the
Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in Answer to a Book entitled,
Catholics no Idolaters; all written by Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St.
Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. The Rule of faith; or, an
Answer to the Treatise of Mr. I. S. Entitled, Sure Footing, etc. by John
Tillotson, D. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn. To which
is adjoined a Reply to Mr. I. S. his third Appendix, etc. by Edw.
Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty. The Antiquities of Nottinghamshire, Extracted out of Records, Original
Evidences, Lieger Books, other Manuscripts, and Authentic Authorities,
beautified with Maps, Prospects and Portraictures, by Robert Thoroton, Dr. of
Physic, Folio.
FINIS.

