A SERMON Preached before the KING Feb. 24. 1674/5.

BY ED. STILLINGFLEET D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Rob. White, for Hen. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1675.

HEB. iii. 13. -- Lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
WHen the Jewish Christians had formed themselves into an established Church,
and were become considerable for their number as well as for their zeal and
devotion, their obstinate Brethren thought it high time for their own security,
at least to weaken and divide them, if they could not wholly suppress and
destroy them. For this end, they made use of different instruments and means,
according to the different seasons, and dispositions of men. Sometimes, when
they had any encouragement, or connivence from the Roman Power, they set upon
them with rage and fury, Heb. 10. 32, 34.
spoiling their goods, and threatening their lives: But this hard usage did only
heighten the courage, and unite the affections of the more zealous Christians.
Sometimes, they suggested to them the mighty veneration, which their whole
Nation always had for Moses and the Law, and what an infinite scandal and
dishonor it would be to them all, to have that Law, which was delivered by
Angels, confirmed by Miracles, established by Prophets, admired by the
Gentiles, and had continued among them for so many Ages, now of a sudden to be
laid aside for the sake of a new institution, that expressed no more regard to
them than to any other Nation in the World. And so great was the love which the
Jews had to their own Country and Religion, such an opinion was generally
received among them of the peculiar favor of God toward them, that they who
could not be shocked by persecution, were in danger of being overcome by
flattery. From hence the Author of this Epistle make it his business to show
the excellency of Christ above Moses, and of his institution above that of the
Law, in respect of the Priesthood and Sacrifices, and the benefits which come
by them; and that although this new and living way were but lately discovered,
yet it was that which was always designed by God, foreseen by the Patriarchs,
foretold by the Prophets, and longed for by good men as the Consolution of
Israel: and it could be no more disparagement to Moses and the Prophets to
yield to the Glories of the Kingdom of the Messiah, than it is to the Stars not
to be seen when the light of the Sun appears. But besides these, there were
some among them capable of being wrought upon by other kind of arguments, such
I mean, who out of a sudden transport of zeal, and being convinced by the
miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost, had declared themselves Christians,
but yet retained a secret love to their sins, and the pleasures of this World:
these were the Persons whom the Apostle, not without reason, expresses the
greatest jealousy of, as in danger of Apostasy: and therefore in many places
of this Epistle, he represents to them the dreadful consequences of such an
Apostasy, Heb. 6. 6.
for it was no less than crucifying the Son of God afresh and putting him to an
open shame; it was counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were
sanctified an unholy thing, and doing despite unto the spirit of Grace; 10. 20.
nay it was not only crucifying, but treading under foot the Son of God; and
therefore he bids them consider, what punishment such persons would deserve at
the hands of God into which they must fall, and what hopes there could be of
pardon for those who so openly rejected the only means of obtaining it; 26. 27.
For if they did herein sin wilfully after they had received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour the
Adversaries. But he not only sets before them the sad effects of Apostasy, but
as one that loved their souls, and designed to prevent their ruin, he gives
them the best advice and counsel against it: He knew well enough, it was not
the dissatisfaction of men's reason, which was the ground of their infidelity:
but, as men's more open designs are governed by such springs which are least
discovered; so, whatever these warping Christians might pretend, as to zeal for
the Law, and their ancient Religion, the bottom of all was a principle of
infidelity, not arising from want of sufficient reason to convince them, but
from a close and secret love of sin which made them willing to quarrel with
what ever was so repugnant to it, as the doctrine of Christ. To this end, he
puts them in mind of the case of their Forefathers in the Wilderness, who
wanted no arguments to convince them of Gods Goodness and Providence; yet
nothing would satisfy them, but they were still murmuring and complaining,
Heb. 3. 11.
till at last God swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest.
And since you all acknowledge, they had reason enough to be satisfied, but out
of an obstinate and stubborn humor hardened their hearts in the day of
temptation in the Wilderness; take heed Brethren, says the Apostle, 12.
lest there be in any of you such an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God; and do not look upon this advice as vain and needless to you
that are called the believing Jews, but you have cause to be very watchful over
one another, especially in this Tempting Age, exhorting one another daily while
it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. As though he had said to them, You who now glory in the name of Believers,
and are hitherto as forward as any in the profession of Christianity, do not
think your selves to be above the need of any helps to confirm your faith, and
to arm you against the assaults of temptations, for your very security may
betray you; but consider the sin that does so easily beset you on every side,
the various artifices it makes use of to deceive men, and when it has once
gotten admission, how strangely it bewitches and infatuates the minds of men,
how unwilling they are to be convinced of their sins, how much more unwilling
to part with them, and how naturally the love of sin brings men to infidelity,
and then you will see how great reason there is, why you should be exhorting
one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin.

In which words, are these three things considerable.

1. The danger they are in of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
who have the most powerful motives and engagements against it.

2. The manner whereby sin does prevail upon men to harden them, through the
Deceitfulness of sin.

3. The care that all Christians ought to have to prevent being hardened through
the Deceitfulness of sin: Lest any of you, etc.

1. The Danger men are in of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
though they have the most powerful Motives and Engagements against it. For
never any Persons had greater arguments against returning to the practice of
sin, than these to whom this Epistle was written. They had embraced among the
first principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1, 2.
the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the
doctrine of baptisms and of laying on of hands (for the miraculous gifts of the
Holy Ghost) and of the resurrection of the dead and of eternal judgment. And
what can we suppose to have greater force and efficacy to restrain men from
sin, than what is contained in these fundamentals of Christianity? But we shall
find that no Motives have ever been great enough to restrain those from sin,
who have secretly loved it, and only sought pretenses for the practice of it.

Such is the frame and condition of humane nature considered in it self, so
great are the advantages of reason and consideration for the government of our
actions, so much stronger are the natural motives to virtue that to vice, that
they who look no farther, would expect to find the world much better than it
is. For why should we suppose the generality of mankind to betray so much
folly, as to act unreasonably and against the common interest of their own
kind? as all those do, that yield to the temptations of sin: For if we set
aside the consideration of a Divine Law, to sin is nothing else but to act
foolishly and inconsiderately. But on the other side, if men first look into
the practice of the World, and there observe the strange prevalency of Vice,
and how willing men are to defend as well as to commit it; they would be apt to
imagine that either there is no such thing as Reason among men, or that it has
very little influence upon their actions; and that the talk of Virtue was first
found out by some great enemy to the Felicity of Mankind. Such different
apprehensions would men have from the different ways of beholding the Picture
of Humane nature; either as it is in its own frame, or as it is to be seen in
the World. They who have with the greatest judgment and care searched into the
nature and first principles of humane Societies, have all agreed that the chief
end and design of men in joining together was, for the mutual benefit and
advantage of each other; and that in order to this, certain Laws of Justice,
Equity, Mercy, Truth, Gratitude, Temperance, as well as of Subjection to
Government, ought to be inviolably observed by men. And since these things have
the universal consent of mankind to be for their general good, how comes it to
pass, that men being joined in these Societies for such ends, make so little
Conscience of the practice of them? How come so many to live, as it were, in
open defiance to these Fundamental Laws of Nature? How come others, only to
make use of the pretense of virtue to deceive, and of honesty and integrity to
cover the deepest dissimulation? If they be not good, why are they pretended?
If they are good, why are they not practiced? So that whether we consider
mankind in it self, or in Society; we find the Motives to virtue to be much
more weighty, and considerable than those to sin; and yet that the practice of
men is directly contrary.

But it may be said, that all this might happen in the world for want of wit
and education to polish and improve the natural Faculties of men's minds, and to
direct and encourage the practice of virtue. I wish the world had not so many
instances that men of the greatest wit have not been men of the best Morals;
but if wit, and education, and Philosophy had been the most effectual means to
reclaim men from sin, where should we have looked more for the flourishing of
virtue, than in Greece and Rome? And yet in those times, when all the
accomplishments of wit were at the highest in those places, the manners of men
were sunk into the greatest filth of debauchery. It would make one astonished
to read the admirable discourses of their Philosophers, and to consider the
strange height that eloquence and wit were arrived to among their Orators and
Poets; and then to compare the account given of the manners of the Gentile
World, not only by their own Satyrists, but by the Apostles in their several
Epistles: What a monstrous Catalogue of sins do we meet with in the first
Chapter to the Romans? Romans 1. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
of sins of so deep a dye, and of so horrid a nature, and such an Inventory of
all sorts of Wickedness, that one might imagine the Apostle had been rather
describing some vision of Hell than the seat of the Roman Empire. To the same
purpose he speaks of the Corinthians and Ephesians, 1 Cor. 6. 10. Ephesians. 4. 17,
18.
who thought themselves behind none of the Greeks of that Age in the breeding
then most in Vogue; but we need not instance in particulars, when S. Peter
calls it in general the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 1 John 5. 19.
to live in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings and banquetings,
as well as abominable Idolatries; and S. John in short says, the whole world
lies in wickedness.

It might be worth our while to consider how so universal a degeneracy of
manners should happen in those ages, when men pretended more to Wit and
Learning, than they had done in any time before. And for this, it were very
unreasonable to assign any Cause that were equally common to all other Ages,
such as the corruption of human nature; which, how great soever it be, is the
same at all times; neither do I think it reasonable to lay it wholly on the bad
examples of the teachers of virtue, knowing how malicious the worst of men are
in endeavoring to make those who seem to be better, to be as bad as
themselves: but there are some peculiar reasons for it, and I wish they had
been only proper to those times: as,

1. Separating Religion and Morality from each other. When their Religion was
placed in some solemn Rites, and pompous Ceremonies, and costly Sacrifices; but
all the matters of Morality were confined to their Schools, there to be
enquired after by those that had leisure and curiosity for them. As though God
were more concerned for the color, and age, and pomp of their Sacrifices, for
the gestures and shows of their devotion; than for the purity of their hearts,
the sincerity of their minds, or the holiness of their lives. When once the
people had swallowed that pernicious principle, that Morality was no part of
their Religion, they had no great regard to the good or evil of their actions,
as long as a little charge, and four looks, and going to their Temples at
certain times were thought sufficient to expiate their sins. And they were much
more encouraged in Wickedness, when the Gods they worshipped were represented
on the stage as acting all manner of villainies: and no doubt, they thought it a
great comfort to them in their debaucheries, that their Gods were as good
fellows as themselves. And what could all the precepts of Philosophers, or
sayings of wise men signify to those who were so far from looking on virtue as
any necessary part of their Religion, that they thought those fit to be
worshipped for Gods, whom they never believed to have been good men?

2. When they had thus rendered virtue unnecessary, by making it no part of
their Religion, the next thing was to make it appear ridiculous; which was a
certain way to make Fools out of love with it; who do not consider, what is fit
to be laughed at, but what is so. When Socrates at Athens undertook with many
sharp and cutting Ironies to reprove the vices of his Age; and with a great
deal of Wit and Reason to persuade men to the sober practice of Virtue, the
licentious people knew not what to do with him, for they were not able to
withstand the force of his arguments; at last Aristophanes (having a Comical
Wit whereby he was able to make any thing seem ridiculous although he knew very
well the Wisdom and Learning of Socrates; yet) to please and humor the people,
he brings him upon the Stage, and represents his grave instructions after such
a manner, as turned all into a matter of laughter to the people of Athens:
which did more mischief to the reputation of Virtue among them, than the taking
away his life did. For, his dying convinced the people he was in good earnest,
and brought a great veneration to his memory; whereas the other exposed him
only to scorn and contempt; and the people were made judges whether it were
with cause or no: who besides their ignorance and want of judgment, were too
much parties to be Judges. This is the method which men take, when they set
their wits against virtue and Goodness; they know it is impossible to argue men
out of it; but it is very easy by ridiculous postures, and mimical gestures,
and profane similitudes, to put so grave and modest a thing as virtue is out of
Countenance, among those who are sure to laugh on the other side. I do not
think such things can signify any thing to Wise men; but when was the world
made up of such? and therefore it signifies very much to the mischief of those,
who have not the courage to love despised virtue; nor to defend a Cause that is
laughed down. And to these I may now add,

3. The bad examples of others, especially of those to whom it belonged to
teach and encourage virtue, above others. No man will pretend, that it is
ground enough for him to do a thing merely because he sees another do it; yet
in all Ages men have seen and complained that the power of examples has
outdone that of Laws. Some that think themselves more subtle than others,
question whether those mean what they say, who speak one thing and do another;
and therefore they will do what they think the others mean; which were a good
plea if their actions were better than their words. Others think, that all
discourses of virtue, and honesty, and true Honor, are mere matter of talk for
men to entertain some idle hours with, and that men are universally agreed in
nothing but in speaking well and doing ill. These look on virtue as a kind of
Phoenix, a thing often talked of, and believed by some, but never seen by any:
but such find all things so very bad at home, that out of charity to
themselves, they believe the whole World to be like them. Others have so much
natural modesty and sense of shame that they have not the courage to commit a
great wickedness, unless they were hardened to it by the example of greater
sinners before them. But the most common reason of the prevalency of example
is, that men find in themselves a strong propensity and inclination to do evil,
and are willing to meet with such a pretense for committing it, that they do
but as others do; and therefore I cannot think that bare example were enough to
corrupt the World if there were not some antecedent inclination in humane
nature to the practice of evil. For since there is less reason to follow bad
examples than good, why should one prevail more than the other in the World, if
there were nothing but the bare example to move? But that inclination being
considered, we may easily give an account of the ill consequence which the bad
examples of those who are to direct and encourage others in virtue, must needs
be of to the rest of mankind. Xen. ep. ad Aesch.
Xenophon was not without reason so much displeased, when he saw some of the
best of Socrates his Disciples, make their Court to Dionysius in Sicilie;
knowing how inconsistent the reputation of virtue is, with the very suspicion
of Flattery: and that nothing makes great men more suspicious of virtue, than
when they see Philosophers become Flatterers, and carrying on the restless
designs of ambition under the pretense of teaching the art of contentment to
others. It was this which made the very name of them become so odious at Rome,
that even virtue it self was hated for their sakes: so that the very teachers
of virtue contributed to the increase of vice. Especially, when by their
endless disputes and wranglings about words and terms of art, they made the
people suspect they did but play prizes before them; and only pretended to
quarrel, but were well enough agreed to cheat and deceive them. Upon such
grounds as these, all the Motives to virtue contained in the Writings and
instructions of Philosophers lost their due force and efficacy on the minds of
the people, who were rather more hardened in their sins by these disadvantages
which attended the means that were used to reclaim them from the practice of
them.

But when all other motives proved ineffectual by these disadvantages, what
could be more reasonably expected, than that the motives of the Gospel should
prevail with men, being of so great weight in themselves, and recommended with
so much advantage to the World, by the examples of those who delivered them?
The great arguments of Christianity against the practice of sin are not drawn
from any uncertain Topics, or nice and curious speculations; but from the
influence men's good or evil actions in this World will have upon their
happiness or misery in another. And what concerns another state is revealed
with much more clearness, and confirmed by stronger evidence, and enforced by
more moving considerations, than ever it was before among the best and wisest
of the Gentiles. The doctrine of Christianity is plain and peremptory in this
matter, Romans 2. 6. 1. 18.
that God will render to every man according to his Works: and that the wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men. And however prone men are to be deceived with vain words, yet let them
look to themselves, Gal. 6. 7.
God will not be mocked, (however men may be) for because of these things the
wrath of God will come upon the Children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6.
No Sacrifices, no prayers, no penances, no vows and promises will keep off
this wrath of God without a hearty repentance and timely reformation. Never any
Religion or institution in the World made it so much its business to keep men
from doing evil, and to persuade them to do good, as the Christian does. The
Apostles thought it the greatest contradiction to their profession, for any men
to be called Christians, and to live in the practice of their former sins, 1
Pet. 4. 3.
Let the time past of your life suffice you, says S. Peter, to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, i. e. that time past when you were no Christians. To
be a Christian then was all one as of a loose, profane, dissolute person to
become sober, religious, exact in his conversation To put on Christ, Romans 13.
14.
was but another phrase, for making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof; To learn Christ, was all one as to put off as concerning the
former conversation the old man, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 24.
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and to put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Those were the
blessed days of Christianity, when it was no hard matter to understand what it
was to be a Christian; when the niceties of disputes, and the subtle artifices
of men of corrupt minds had not yet debauched the notion of Christianity, to
reconcile it with the lusts of men. To be a Christian then, was not to be
versed in the subtilties of the Schools; or to be able to swallow
contradictions without chewing them; or to be as fierce and earnest for every
doubtful opinion and uncertain custom, as if the substance of Christianity
were like Epicurus his World made up of a great number of very small and
restless Atoms. To be a Christian, was not to fight for the Faith, but to live
by it; not to quarrel for good Works, but to practice them; In short, to be a
Christian was to depart from iniquity and to do good, to be meek, and humble,
and patient, and peaceable toward all men; to be charitable, and kind; to be
sober and temperate in all things, to be holy, sincere, and innocent in his
actions toward God and men. This is the true Idea of a Christian, and not a
mere Idea; but such as every one that owns himself to be a Christian is bound
by the most Sacred vow of Christianity in Baptism to be like; so that if either
the consideration of their own eternal welfare, or the nature, design, or
honor of Christianity, or their own most solemn engagements can restrain men
from the practice of sin, we see that those who are Christians, are under the
most powerful motives and engagements against it.

But yet such there have been (I wish I could not say such there are) who have
broken through all these things, and have been hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. One might have thought, if any persons had been out of
this danger, they had been such as the Apostle makes this exhortation to; who
had seen the miraculous operations of the Holy Ghost for confirming the
doctrine and Motives of Christianity; nay who had themselves been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
and had tasted of this Heavenly gift, and of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come: Who had testified their repentance for their
former sins in the most public and solemn manner, and had entered into the most
Sacred Vow of Baptism, never to return more to the practice of it: who had done
this in the heat of persecution, which they endured with courage and rejoicing;
yet after all these things, the Apostle expresses a more than ordinary
jealousy lest any of them should fall away, and their hearts be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. When Critias and Alcibiades had forsaken the
paths of virtue, which they seemed very forward in, while they continued under
the instructions of Socrates, (...). p. 416.
Xenophon says, there were some that contended that they never had any virtue
at all, because those who once had it could never lose it: but for his part, he
says, he was by no means satisfied with their opinion: for as men by
discontinuing bodily exercises make themselves incapable of doing those things
which they were most expert in before; so men by the neglect of improving their
minds in virtue; and giving way to the temptations of honor and pleasure
(which was the case of Critias and Alcibiades) may by degrees lose the force of
all the Motives to virtue and consequently the virtue it self. It is agreed by
all men who understand any thing in these matters, that even Grace, although it
be the effect of a divine power on the minds of men, is of it self capable of
being lost; the great dispute is, whether it may be lost past all recovery? But
as we have no more reason to set any bounds to the Grace of God in men's
Recovery, than as to their first Repentance; so we ought to consider, that
there is such a falling away mentioned by the Apostle, of those who have been
once enlightened, Heb. 6. 4, 6.
of which, he says, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance: and
that Scripture deals with all persons in its exhortations, and adomonitions,
and threatenings, as if they were capable of falling to the utmost degree: and
to suppose that thing impossible to be done, which the gravest counsels, and
the most vehement persuasions are used to keep men from the doing of, is to
make a severe reflection on the wisdom of them that give them. And the Apostle
here leaves none of them out; but bids the most forward believers beware of an
evil heart of unbelief; and those who had been most softened by repentance, take
heed of being hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. So that we see, how
powerful soever the motives to Virtue are; how great soever the engagements
against Sin; yet the Apostle thought it needful to give them warning against
the deceitfulness of sin.

2. But what kind of deceitfulness is this in sin, that the best and wisest men
are so much cautioned against it? What irresistible charms does it use to draw
men into its snares? with what infusion does it so far intoxicate mankind to
make them dote upon it, against the convictions of Reason, and dictates of
Conscience, and the power of persuasion, and the most solemn and repeated Vows
and Promises against it? nay to make men pursue it, to such a degree as rather
to be damned for it than forsake it? If we were to consider this only by
Reason, we could imagine nothing less than that sin at one time or other has
laid such a mighty obligation on mankind, that rather than part with it, the
greater part of men, out of mere gratitude, would be content to suffer for ever
with it: or, that it is a thing so absolutely necessary to the comfort of men's
lives, that they cannot live one good day without it: Whereas in truth, the
whole race of mankind has suffered extremely and continually by it: and it is
so far from being necessary to the comfort of men's lives, that the greatest
troubles and vexations of life have risen from it; and men may enjoy far
greater satisfaction, and more real contentment; and more noble, and solid, and
lasting pleasures if they did utterly renounce and forsake it. But this still
makes the difficulty so much the greater, how it should so far be witch and
infatuate the far greatest part of mankind; and of those who know how dearly
they must suffer for it in another World? And yet to assoil this difficulty, we
have only two Accounts to give how sin comes to deceive mankind so generally,
so fatally; and those are 1. By subtle insinuations; 2. By false reasonings.

1. By subtle insinuations. The great Masters of pleading in ancient times have
told us, that there are some Causes which are never to be managed by plain and
downright reasonings, (because they are too weak to bear that method of
handling) and then they bid men have a care in their beginning, of coming close
to the business; but they must fetch a compass about, and by secret arts and
degrees insinuate themselves into the good opinion of the Judges before they
are aware of it. This is the very method which is made use of by the
deceitfulness of Sin; it dares not stand the examination of any close
reasoning, for all its artifices would presently be discovered then; but it
makes use of these arts of insinuation. 1. It endeavors to raise a good
opinion of it self by false colors and representations of things. 2. When it
has done that, it draws men on by degrees to the practice of it. 3. When men
are engaged in the practice of sin, then it represents to them how much it is
their own interest to defend it, and so brings them from the counsel of the
ungodly, and the way of sinners, to the seat of the scornful.

1. It endeavors to raise a good opinion of it self by false colors and
representations of things. The first precept of insinuation is to remove
prejudice; for while that continues, all that can be said will be of no force.
While men look on sin as vile, and loathsome; as mean and unworthy of a man; as
inconsistent with the peace and contentment of their minds, so long temptations
are easily resisted: all arts must therefore be used to make it appear with all
the address and flattery which is most apt to entice a poor deluded sinner.
Then, the fetters and shackles which it brings to enslave men with, must be
looked on and admired as ornaments; its most sordid and filthy pleasures must
be thought great and manly; and a little present honor and advantage appear
more valuable than an eternal state of Happiness and Glory. These are things we
should think it very hard for men to be deceived with; and yet every day we
find they are so; and which is far more, they are ready to take it very ill of
those who go about to undeceive them. In other cases, if a man tells another,
that he is like to be deceived with a false and counterfeit Jewel instead of a
true one; or to buy a bad Title to an Estate instead of a good one, he thinks
himself very much obliged to him for his fidelity and kindness; only in the
case of man's beloved sins, although they will prove the greatest cheats in the
World to him, yet he cannot well endure to be told so; but his blood is apt to
fire and inflame him into a passion against him that does it; and although it
be meant with the greatest innocence and kindness, it is ready to be
interpreted to be only the effect of malice and ill will. For now sin has
insinuated it self so far into him, that no one can be thought a friend to the
person, who is not so to his sins; and they are then come to that height of
friendship and community of interests, to have common friends and common
enemies. Now all the discourses of the freedom, and pleasure, and satisfaction
of a man's mind in the practice of virtue appear very dull and insipid things;
and fit only for Learned Fools or Philosophers to talk of.

Nothing deserves the name of Liberty with them, but a power of doing what they
please. What nonsense and contradiction does it seem to them for those to be
accounted free, who are under any bonds or restraints? No matter to them,
whether they be from God, or Nature, from Reason or Conscience, as long as they
are restraints, they look on them as inconsistent with their notion of liberty.
And next to those who threaten men with punishments in another World for what
they do amiss in this, they account those the greatest Fools that first found
out the distinction of good and evil, and just and unjust in the actions of
men, What Fools (say they) were they to fasten dishonorable and reproachful
names on some of the most pleasant and beneficial actions of life? For thus a
man is debarred that noble and manly Vice of Drunkenness for fear of losing the
reputation of Sobriety; and the extravagancies of Lust, for fear of doing
injury to his neighbors Bed; and supposing a man has never so much advantages
in his hands to enrich himself by defrauding another, yet he must not do it,
because although an estate be in the keeping of a Fool, yet another must not be
a Knave to get it from him.

Thus do these miserable Slaves to Vice pity the weakness of those who have so
little wit (as they think) not to understand the Liberty they enjoy: But thus
do mad men pity the dullness of those that are in their wits, that do not sing,
and rant, and despise the World, as they do: and fancy themselves to be Kings
and Princes, while they are tied fast in their chains, and lie in Straw. And
upon such grounds as these, the most rude and barbarous Indians did better
understand the liberty of mankind, than the most civilized Nations. For all
civility is a debarring men of some part of this natural liberty, i. e. of
those things which men have a power to do; and upon this ground all ancient
Lawgivers and Wise men, who by degrees brought several Nations to Order and
Government, and to live by Laws, ought to be hated as the greatest Tyrants and
Usurpers upon the liberties of mankind: and the natural consequence of this
would be the overthrow of all Laws, and Order, and Government in the World. But
if there must be some restraints upon men, then we are to consider what
restraints are just and reasonable, within whose bounds we are to contain our
selves; and whatever tends to the dishonor of God, to the injury of others, or
to our own destruction, it is all the reason in the World we should abstain
from. And if men would but do this, they would be kept from the practice of
sin: And so this imaginary notion of a boundless liberty will appear to be only
one of the false colors that sin puts upon evil actions, on purpose to tempt
men to the commission of them.

But there is another Poison which more subtly and dangerously insinuates it
self into the hearts of men, and by which sin gets the possession there, and
that is the love of pleasure; I do not mean the pleasure of the mind, or the
pleasure of a good conscience, for there is no danger in these; but it is the
love of sensual pleasure which is most apt to ensnare men in the practice of
sin. It is under this representation chiefly, that sin deceives, betrays,
entangles, bewitches, destroys the souls of men: It is this which fills the
imagination, and darkens the understanding with filthy steams and vapors, and
hurries a man on with the impetuous violence of passions, without considering
the mischievous consequence which attends it, either as to his honor in this
World, or his salvation in another. Perzoes Proleg. 3. c. 10. ad Specim.
sapient. vet. Indorum.
This danger which attends the pleasures of sin was well represented in one of
the Eastern Parables, of a man violently pursued by Wild Beasts to the top of a
Precipice, where there was a Tree growing on the side of a great lake, and at
the foot of it a prodigious Serpent lying ready to devour him; the man being in
this astonishment gets upon the first branch of the tree he could reach; but he
was no sooner there, but his horror increased at the apprehension of his
danger on every side of him; and that which added the most to his consternation
was that the very branch on which he stood was almost eaten off; while he was
in this terrible fright, he looks up to the top of the tree, and there sees
some wild honey trickling down the body of the tree, which he was so taken
with, and so pleased with the sweetness of it, that he forgets his danger, till
of a sudden the branch breaks, and down he drops into the lake without
recovery. This is the true representation of the pleasures of sin, which men
are so much entertained with, that they never consider the hazard they run, and
scarce think of their danger till they drop into that state of misery from
whence there is no redemption.

But besides these soft and voluptuous sinners, (who are easily deceived and
hardly drawn out of the snares they fall into) there are others of a more
busy, restless, and designing temper, and to these sin appears under another
shape to deceive them, with all the advantages of external Splendor and
Greatness. And thus they who possibly might escape the baits of pleasure, are
carried away by the more plausible temptations of Riches and Honor. It is
supposed by some, that when the Devil tempted Christ with the offers of the
Kingdoms of this world, Mat. 4. 8, 9.
if he would fall down and worship him, he did not know, who he was, but had a
mind to try him by the most probable way of discovering what was within him:
But surely the Devil thought him some extraordinary person, or else he would
never have made so large an offer at first, viz. of no less than all the
Kingdoms of the World, whereas very much less than one of these has served to
corrupt and debauch the minds of many who have been great pretenders to Piety
and Virtue. It was indeed somewhat a hard condition the Devil joined with his
offer, to fall down and Worship him, because he then designed not only a
Victory but a Triumph; but with others he conceals the condition and draws them
on by degrees, still rising higher and higher in his temptations, thereby
feeding and enlarging their desires; till the love of this World has gotten
such an entire possession of their hearts, that they scarce ever in good
earnest think of another till their souls are passing into it. And then it may
be, they sadly reflect on their own folly, in that they have preferred the
deluding scenes and pompous shows of worldly greatness, before the complete and
endless felicity of another life. But it very often happens, that it is not so
long, as till their leaving this World, that men come to understand the
restless folly of ambition. For the things of this World are like Epicurus his
Atoms, always moving and justling one against another; and one man's ambition
serves to supplant another, and they who cannot raise themselves may yet help
to ruin others; and ofttimes those very designs by which they most hoped to
advance themselves, prove the occasion of their fall and destruction. The
Mahumetans have a story to this purpose; Warn. Prove. Persic. p. 33.
In the time of Jesus three men in a journey happened to find a Treasure; but
being hungry, they sent one of their number to buy provisions; he consults how
he might get this treasure to himself, and for that end resolves to poison
their meat, the other two agreed to share it between them, and to kill the
third as soon as he returned; which they did, and themselves soon after dyed of
the poisoned meat. Jesus passing by with his disciples, said, This is the
condition of this world! see what the love of it has brought these men to! Woe
be to him that looks for any other usage from it. This is the first way whereby
sin does insinuate into the minds of them; viz. by false colors and
representations of things.

2. But when sin has so far insinuated it self to bring men to a better
opinion of it, it does not presently hurry them on to the greatest height of
wickedness; but leads them gently and by easy steps and degrees, lest they
should start back presently with the fright of some dreadful sin. Which will
appear if we consider, how one comes to be corrupted by sin that has had the
advantage of a modest and virtuous education: if those who design to debauch
him speak out at first in plain words what they aim at, a sudden horror seizes
upon him at the apprehension of it, and it may be he hates their company for
ever after. But there is so much a sense of shame left in humane nature, that
men dare not tempt others to sin, at least at first, in plain terms; and the
same temptation which being represented one way would affright, appearing with
greater art and dissimulation may easily prevail. And sin is a thing, that men
hate to be forced, but too much love to be cheated into the practice of it. How
does a young sinner struggle with himself, and would if it were possible get
out of the noise of his own Conscience, when he has offered force and violence
to it! He is very uneasy to himself, and wishes a thousand times he had never
committed the sin, rather than to feel such horror and disquiet in his mind,
upon the sense of it. But if this does not make him presently repent, and
resolve never to be guilty again of the same folly, (as in all reason it ought
to do) then by time and company he wears off the impression of his guilt, and
the next occasion of sinning makes him forget the wounds of his Conscience, and
the smart he endured before; and the fresh temptation revives the sense of his
former pleasure, and then he is able to withstand no longer; and thus by
repeating the same acts, by degrees he becomes a very hopeful sinner, and the
reports of his Conscience are but like that of sounds at a greater distance;
they lessen still more and more, till at last they cannot be heard at all. And
when he has thus mastered his Conscience, as to any one sin, which at first he
was fearful of committing, and has found such an Ice upon his Conscience as
will bear him, he goes on still farther and farther, till nothing be too hard
for him. He that at first started and trembled at the hearing of an horrid
oath, now can hear whole volleys of them discharged without shrinking; and can
bear his part in that hellish Concert: and he that was so hardly brought to be
wicked himself, may in a little time (as some men are strange proficients in
wickedness) tempt and encourage others to the practice of it.

3. And when men are arrived to an habitual continuance in sin, then for their
present ease and security, they cast about for any ways to defend it. For
whatever is become of Conscience, they may have such a sense of reputation
left, that they would not be thought Fools, and be contemned and despised by
others. But although it be impossible for such to avoid scorn and contempt
among all those who have any true regard to Virtue or Honor, yet they will
endeavor rather to defend themselves in doing ill, than recover their
reputation by repentance. And because it would puzzle the wits of the most
subtle and concerned persons to find out pretenses and excuses for some kinds
of sins; therefore the easiest way is to represent all the World as alike bad,
although not alike cunning; and although it may be not in the same way, yet in
something as ill in it self, but more agreeable to their Age, temper, and
condition of life. Thus the greatest sinners love to herd themselves in a
crowd, and think it some poor defense for their sins, that they would have
others believed to be as bad as they: as though a man were in the less danger
by the plague, because it is a general contagion. But if it happen that some
persons in the World should have any reputation for Virtue among them, then all
the weaknesses, and indiscretions of such, are sure to be enquired after, that
so what is accounted virtue, may be thought only natural sourness of temper, or
want of wit to be otherwise. But if any such should be found in a miscarriage,
what Joy and Triumph does this make? what load of circumstances and
aggravations do they lay upon them; as though one single miscarriage of such
persons were to weigh down a thousand enormities of theirs. And because it is
impossible to defend their extravagant courses by Reason, the only way left for
them is to make Satirical Invectives against Reason; as though it were the most
uncertain, foolish and (I had almost said) unreasonable thing in the World: and
yet they pretend to show it in arguing against it: but it is pity such had not
their wish, to have been Beasts rather than men, (if any men can make such a
wish that have it not already) that they might have been less capable of doing
mischief among mankind; by representing all the excellencies of humane nature,
which are Reason, and Virtue, and Religion, but as more grave and solemn
fopperies. But how hard are such men put to defend their vices, that cannot do
it, without trampling under foot the most noble perfections of their own nature!

These however are the more ingenuous sort of sinners, that yield Reason and
Religion to be of Virtues side; but there are others that make use of some
shallow pretenses of Reason to excuse themselves in their sins: which is the
second way whereby sin deceives men, viz.

2. By false Reasonings: and those taken either, 1. From their Present
impunity: 2. Or from their Future Repentance.

1. From their present impunity in sinning, men are apt to deceive themselves
into a continuance in it. This is the account the Wise man has long since
given of men's being hardened in sin; Eccl. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the
hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. It seems somewhat
hard to understand the consequence, why men should grow more desperately
wicked, because God gives them a space to repent? Is it necessary that if God
does punish at all, he must do it presently? that would seem to be rage and
fury, or a necessity of nature, and not justice. Cannot judgment be duly
executed, unless the Judge break open the Prison doors, and torment the
Malefactor in his chains? Why may not God respite the punishment of sinners,
when he pleases, to another state, since he has declared that he has
appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness? Act. 17. 31.
What incongruity is there in this to any principle of reason or justice? Will
not this time of Gods patience, be a sufficient vindication of his lenity and
goodness in order to the drawing men to repentance? And will not the day of his
future judgment be a full vindication of his justice? Will not the
insupportable honors of a miserable eternity discover far more Gods abhorrence
of sin, than present sufferings in this life, which, the greater they are, the
less they continue? But all this false way of reasoning arises from that gross
piece of self-flattery that such do imagine God to be like themselves; i. e. as
cruel and revengeful as they are: and they presently think, if any persons did
offend them at the rate that sinners are said to offend God, and they had so
much power in their hands to punish them as he has, without any fear of revenge
upon themselves, they would be sure to dispatch them presently; but because
they see God does it not, therefore they conclude that all the talk of Gods
anger and hatred against sin is without ground: and from hence they take
encouragement to sin. So the Psalmist says in Gods name, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things thou did and I kept silence; and they presently took his
silence for consent; for it follows, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether
such a one as thy self: but the Psalmist adds, how ill he took this at men's
hands, and that he would one day make them know the difference between the
forbearance of sinners, and the love of their sins; but I will reprove thee,
and set them in order before thee. And therefore he bids them be better
advised, and consider this while they forget God, v. 22.
lest he tear them in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

2. Men are hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, from the hopes of their future
repentance. For that is one of the great cheats of sin, that every one thinks
he can repent and shake off his sins when he has a mind to do it. Sin does not
lie like a heavy weight upon their backs, so that they feel the load of it; and
therefore they think it is easily removed, if they would set themselves to it.
Most of those that believe a God and a judgment to come, and yet continue in
sin, do it upon this presumption, that one time or other, they shall leave
their sins, and change the course of their lives before they go out of this
world. They have not only thoughts of repentance, but general purposes of doing
the acts of it at one time, or other; but that time is not come, and God knows
whether it ever will or no. For sin entices them and draws them on still; and
when any motions toward repentance come into their minds, that presently
suggests, It is time enough yet; why so much haste? there will be trouble
enough in it when you must do it, what need you bring it so fast upon you? Are
not you likely to hold out a great many years yet? what pity it is to lose so
much of the pleasure of life, while you are capable of enjoying it? There is
old Age coming, and when you will be good for nothing else, then will be time
enough to grow wise and to repent. But O foolish sinner, who has bewitched
thee to hearken to such unreasonable suggestions as these are! For

3. In the last place, it ought to be our present, our constant, our greatest
care to prevent being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. For to this end, it
is not enough to consider of it at one time or other in our lives, but we must
be exhorting one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of us be
hardened through the witchcraft and deceitfulness of sin: And if it be so much
the duty of others to show that regard to one another souls; how much more
does it become us to do it, who expect to be called to an account at the great
day for the discharge of our trust in this matter? It is a dreadful passage we
read of in the Prophet Ezekiel, and enough to make our ears to tingle at the
repeating it, Ezekiel. 33. 8.
When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man thou shall surely dye, if thou do
not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. We would fain believe
this to have been some particular and extraordinary commission given to the
Prophet by God himself, which does not concern us; for what will become of us,
if not only our own faults (which God knows are too many) but other men's shall
be charged upon us? when either through neglect, or flattery, or fear of
displeasing, or for any mean and unworthy ends, we betray our trust, and
instead of preventing prove the occasion of men's being too much hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. But although we neither pretend to be Prophets, nor
Apostles, yet it is our Office to take care of the Souls of men, and can we
discharge that, as we ought to do, if we do not with all faithfulness warn men
of the danger they run into through the deceitfulness of sin? It were happy for
us if we could say, that all the Lords people are holy; for then we should have
nothing to do, but to praise and commend their Virtues, which were an easy and
a delightful task: but what pleasure is it to rake into the sores, or to
reprove the Vices of a degenerate age? to be thought troublesome and
impertinent, if we do our duty; and men of no conscience, if we do it not? But
our work is neither to libel our Auditors, nor to flatter them; neither to
represent them as better, nor worse than they are; nor to charge them with more
guilt than their own consciences do charge them with: but our business is, to
beseech and exhort them by the mercies of God, by the sufferings of Christ, by
the love and tenderness they have for their immortal souls, that they would to
day, while it is called to day, take heed lest they be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. And that will appear to be very reasonable on these
considerations.

1. That none are out of the danger of it, while they live in this tempting
World. What need have we to take care of being deceived by that, which has
been too hard for the best, the wisest, and the greatest of men? Man in his
best state, even that of Innocence, was deceived by the insinuations of sin:
when there was no matter within for the temptation to work upon, no reason
suggested that could move a common understanding, no interest or advantage that
could sway him; no other moving cause appears to us of that fatal Apostasy of
Adam, but either the imagination of some unknown pleasure, or the bare
curiosity of trying an experiment what the effects would be of tasting the
forbidden fruit. And ever since so general has the corruption of mankind been,
so successful have the artifices and deceits of sin been in the World, that the
best of men have not wholly escaped them; but have sometimes fallen in those
very Graces which have been most remarkable in them, as Abraham in his trust in
God, Moses in his meekness, Job in his patience, Peter in his zeal for Christ.
What cause then have others to look to themselves!

If wisdom and experience would have secured men, we should have thought, of
all men in the World, Solomon the least in danger of being deceived by the
insinuations of sin, who had given such excellent cautions against those very
snares he fell into himself; and that to such a degree, that his case is left
disputable to this day, whether he ever recovered by repentance or no. What
numbers are there upon record of those mighty men, who have made the earth to
tremble at the noise of their Armies; who have led Kings in chains after their
Triumphal Chariots, and have been served by those whom others have adored; yet
have, notwithstanding all this, been enslaved themselves by some mean lust, and
destroyed by the power of an effeminate passion? What can be strong enough to
resist those charms, which neither innocence, nor wisdom, nor power are
sufficient security against? Nothing, but the Grace of God, and continual care
of our selves.

2. The less men suspect their danger, the more cause they have to be afraid of
it. None are more fatally deceived by sin, than those who apprehend no danger
in it, or think they can escape it when they please. How strangely infatuated
are those through the deceitfulness of sin, who think with themselves, that
after they have spent their lives in sin, they shall make God amends by a few
dying groans, and such a repentance as can have no amendment of life? Most men,
who are the greatest slaves to their sins, are so much deceived by them, as to
think they have them wholly at their command, and can when they please cast
them off: and such imaginations keep them faster in subjection to them. For if
they did apprehend themselves under such slavery, as really they are, they
would grow weary and impatient of the yoke; whereas now because they are not
forced to commit their sins, they suppose they can with ease forsake them. But
none are such incurable Fools, as they that think themselves Wise; and none are
so miserably deceived as they that think themselves too cunning for their sins.
If it be so easy to shake off your sins, remember that your condemnation will
be so much more just, if you do it not; for God required no hard thing for you
to do: and if it be so easy, why is it not hitherto done? Why do you mock God
so often, and pretend every year to repent, and yet are every year as bad, if
not worse than other? Why are not the fruits of repentance seen in the
amendment of life for one year, or a month, or one bare week? Is it not worth
while to do so little for him, that has done so much for you? Methinks, common
ingenuity might prevail with men, at least to let God have some part of their
lives entire to himself, without interfering with the Devil. But therein lies a
great part of the deceitfulness of sin, that it falls out here, as in some
malignant Diseases, men seldom understand their danger, till they are almost
past recovery.

3. None are so likely to be hardened in sin, as those who delay and put off
their repentance. For the very putting it off is a sign that sin has a greater
power, than the convictions of Conscience: for why should men ever intend to
repent, if they did not think it necessary? and if they think it necessary and
yet do it not, it is plain there is something within them stronger than
Conscience, which keeps them from it. So that he that intends to repent, and
yet lives in sin, has that aggravation of sin above others, that he sins
against his Conscience all that time. Tell me then, O thou subtle sinner, that
hopest to be too hard for God and for sin too, by enjoying thy sins as long as
thou can, and then repenting at last, to escape the vengeance of God: do
thou in good earnest intend ever to repent or no? If thou do not, never
deceive thy self; God will not accept these pretenses and promises instead of
real repentance. If thou do intend it sincerely, what makes thee to intend
it? is it not, that thou art convinced it is much better to be done than not,
but can not find it in thy heart to do it yet? Thou know all this while it
were much better to leave thy sins, than to live in them, it were far better to
be sober, and temperate, and pious, and devout, than to be debauched and
profane; and yet for all this, thou do not repent, but go on in the same
course. Consider then, that this very circumstance deeply aggravates every sin
that is committed after it. For it is not a bare neglect of repentance, which
thou art guilty of, but a contempt of God and Goodness; it is, not only not
repenting, but it is an obstinate and wilful resolution of sinning: for there
is no medium between living in sin and forsaking of it; and nothing deserves
the name of Repentance, that is short of that. And if thou art so wilful and
unreasonable now, as notwithstanding thy resolutions to repent, to live still
in thy sins, how can thou ever hope to repent at last, when thy heart will be
so much more hardened by continuance in sin?

4. Lastly, Consider the sad condition of those who are hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Ephesians. 4. 19.
They are said in Scripture to be past feeling, Romans 1. 28.
and to be given over to a reprobate mind, i. e. to have lost all sense of
their danger, and of the ill condition they are in; they despise all means of
instruction, and scorn all those who would do them good, and who mean them no
other injury but to persuade them to be happy. With what disdain and contempt
do those proud and lofty sinners, who are once arrived at this height of
wickedness, look down upon all those, who endeavor by Reason and Scripture to
convince them of their sins! As though it were not possible for any thing to
make men seem more ridiculous to them, than to see them concerned to plead the
cause of Virtue and Religion. To what purpose is all this ado about Repentance?
why should not men be let alone to do as they think fit? for let them preach
their hearts out, men will do as they please. This is the language of those who
are already hardened in their sins; but God forbid, it should be so of any here
present; who make it our prayer to God to be delivered from hardness of heart,
and contempt of his word and commandments. And we have great reason so to do;
for there is no judgment short of hell, like to the being given up to a
reprobate sense: for all the most weighty arguments and most forcible
persuasions are to such but like showers falling upon a Rock, that make some
noise and slide off again, but make no impression or entrance into them. God
Almighty give us all his Grace to understand our danger and to repent in time,
that none of us be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

FINIS.

