THE DOCTRINE OF Instituted Churches Explained and Proved FROM THE WORD OF GOD

By Solomon Stoddard, A. M. Minister of the Gosp^ Northampton, New England.

LONDON: Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the Piaz^ Exchange in
Cornhil. 1700.

THE DOCTRINE OF Instituted CHURCHES Explained, and Proved from the WORD of GOD.
CHAP. I. The Word of God gives us sufficient Light, to direct us about
Instituted Churches and all Administrations therein.
THE Nature of an Instituted Church and the Ordinances to be attended therein,
have been matter of great Inquiry in these latter Ages. And those Inquiries
have been Accompanied with great Animosities, Discords and Persecutions: Those
forms and methods that have been admired by some, have been decryed by others,
and Multitudes of People are left at a loss whether there be any certain Rule
to Guide us; or any certainty to be attained in these things.

Two things especially have hindered those that have been studious in these
points, from giving satisfaction to others: One of them is, that some of them
have been exceeding tenacious of the Traditions and Ancient usages of the
Church, not considering how dismal a Corruption and Degeneracy did in a little
time prevail: whereby it comes to pass that those things are obtruded upon us
as Rules, which were the Blemishes and Errors of the Ancient Church: They have
a Veneration for antiquity and adopt the sayings of Ancient Fathers for
Canonical. The other is, that some have attempted to compile a complete
Platform, out of the Books of the NewTestament alone, looking on all Old
Testament Rules, relating to Church Affairs, as out of Date: but if we would
have a right understanding of the mind of God in these things, must not be our
dependence upon traditions, neither must we confine our selves to one part of
Scripture, but search into the whole Word of God impartially.

It is certain that God does fully direct us in the Scripture, concerning the
Affairs of his House; as the Word of God does perfectly direct us how we should
behave our selves in the Family and in the Commonwealth, so in the Church:
There is no need of any Addition to the Scriptures: There needs an
Interpretation of the Word, but nothing at all to be added to it: God does not
give us some broken pieces of a Platform; but has revealed his whole will in
that matter: We are not left under a necessity of missing the Rule or guessing
at it. God has described to us the whole Body of Church Affairs: For the
Scripture is a perfect Rule of Life, Psalm. 19.7. 2 Timothy 3.17,18. Men shall be
blamed for nothing at the Day of Judgment, but what the Scripture does Condemn,
Rev. 20.12. What God has not revealed to us, is no Rule to us: And God has
no where else revealed the Rule but in the Scripture. As we have no
extraordinary Prophets to reveal the mind of God; So there are no unwritten
traditions to make known the mind of God in this matter.

There be three sorts of Rules in Scripture to guide us in Church Affairs.

1. General Moral Rules: These Rules give us light in many Church Affairs: So
that Rule of Loving God and our Neighbor, Mat. 22.37,38,39. So that Rule of
not partaking in other Men's Sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. So that Rule of Peace and
Edification, Romans 14.19,20. So that Rule of doing things decently and in order,
1 Cor. 14.20. So that Rule, Phil. 4.8. So that Rule of Humility, 1 Pet. 5.3.
These Rules and such like show us our Duty in many Cases. For,

1. There be many things necessary which there is no Institution about: God was
more particular with the Jews, because the Church then was in its Infancy, than
he is with us: So we have no institution, how many Elders to have in a Church,
how often to Pray or Sing on the Sabbath: How often to partake of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. So there is no particular institution for Moderators in
Churches, in case of a vacancy of Elders: About Preaching without ordination:
About the Limits and Bounds of particular Churches: There be abundance of other
particulars, about Fasts, matters of Discipline, the Age of Persons to be
admitted to the Lords Supper; which are to be determined by Moral Rules.

2. Many things that are commanded in Church Affairs are the proper
consequences of Moral Rules: And so don't need an institution: There be many
things occasionally commanded: Which do not properly belong to Divine
institutions, that are not Branches of the second Commandment, but proper
deduction from Moral Rules; So that about Reconciliation to an offended
Brother, Matthew. 5.23,24. For Christ did not now make new Jewish institutions:
So that about private dealing with an offending Brother, Matthew. 18.15,16. So
those Rules, 1 Timothy 5.17,19. 1 Cor. 11.28. And many others are plain Moral
Duties.

3. Moral Rules must be attended in Church Affairs as well as in other things:
Rules for doing things that are for Peace, Edification, and for the good of our
Neighbors, bind in Ecclesiastical cases as well as in Civil and Domestical:
Therefore they are Generally Propounded, Phil. 4.8. Yea, there is more weight
to be laid on them, then on institutions, Mar. 12.33. We must never Act
contrary to Moral Rules; Churches are bound to Moral Rules, as well as other
Societies: We have n2o liberty in the Administration of the things of Gods
House to break Moral Rules.

2. Old Testament institutions: A great part of Old Testament institutions are
abolished: All typical Laws are out of Date: But some institutions that were in
force then are in force now: Thus Church Societies, the Preaching of the Word,
Fasts, Thanksgivings, are to be attended still. Consider,

1. They and we are under the same Gospel, there was the same way of Salvation
then as now, they were under a Covenant of Grace and Saved by Christ as well as
we, Heb. 4.2. Hence there be several things common to them and us: Hence the
People of God under the Old and New Testament must be such as have a visible
Union to Christ; they and we must have signs representing Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3,4.

2. The Nature of a Church is the same under both Testaments: A Church is not
one kind of thing in the Old Testament and another in the New: But it has the
same essence and definition: The matter of the Church and the form is the same:
The Church then stood in the same relation to God, was appointed for Communion
with God, and enjoyed his presence as now.

3. There were several Ordinances in the Jewish Church, that had no particular
reference to the times before Christ; or to any particular condition of that
People: And such Ordinances seem to be of force still, as their, having an holy
Convocation, Lev. 23.13. So, much of the work of the Priests, they were to
teach the People, Deuteronomy. 33.10. They were to bless the People, Number. 6.23. So it
was their manner in solemn Prayer and Blessing to lay on hands: So
Excomunication, which is to continue in the Christian Church, Matthew. 18.17.

4. We are referred in some cases to those institutions: God sends us to the
Law for light, directs us to do as was appointed in the Old Testament: So about
Women's not speaking in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. So about the maintenance of
Ministers, Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.13,14.

3. New Testament institutions, there were some institutions appointed by
Christ under the Gospel, these are few; principally, what Officers shall be in
the Church, The Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and the first day
Sabbath.

1. We must distinguish between Temporal and Perpetual institutions: Some
institutions were only for a time, as the Office of the Apostles: So the
anointing of the sick with Oil, Jam. 5.14. There are others that are to
continue to the end of the World: So is Baptism, Matthew. 20. The Lords Supper, 1
Cor. 11.26. These Ordinances will not be removed as Jewish Ceremonies, Heb.
13.28.

2. Distinguish between approved practices and institutions, there were many
practices and institutions, there were many practices in the primitive times
that were approved, yet not binding to us: The Church at Jerusalem had seven
Deacons, Acts 6.5. They did Baptize in private Houses, Act. 10.33. Christ sent
out his Disciples two and two, Luke 10.1. This does not show that these things
were institutions; that is meet to be done in one case, that is not meet to be
done in another: One or two Examples show the Lawfulness of a practice, but do
not make it a binding Rule.

CHAP. II. The Nature of Instituted Churches Explained.
THE Word Church is used Equivocally, there are three senses especially,
wherein it is used in the Scripture.

First, It is taken for those that are Spiritually United unto Christ, the
mistical Body of Christ, Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present it to himself a
Glorious Church.

Secondly, For that part of the World that does profess the true faith for them
that are visible Christians, 1 Cor. 15.9. I persecuted the Church of God.

Thirdly, It is taken for an Instituted Church; this Church is invested by
Christ with Spiritual Power and is thus defined: A Church is a Society of
Saints joined together, according to the appointment of Christ for the constant
carrying on of his public Worship: A Church is a Society, a single Person is
not a Church, a Church is a Collection or Congregative Body, consisting of many
Members, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the Body of Christ and Members in particulars,
hence it is compared to a flock and other C^ective Bodies: It is a Society of
Saints, The Members of a Church are Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 11.12. To the
Church of God which is at Corinth, to them, which are sanctified in Christ
Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. In all the Churches of the Saints,
the Church of the Jews was a Society of Saints, Psalm. 79.12,11. Psalm. 1. None
are to be Members of Instituted Churches, but those that are Members of the
Catholic Church. Particular Churches are but parts and branches of the
Catholic Church, they are the Churches of God, the Body of Christ, the Temple
of God, therefore must be Holy. Therefore Societies of Papists are abusively
called Churches: A Church does join together for the Public carrying on of the
Worship of God: A Family joining together for the private carrying on of the
Worship of God is not a Church; we read of a Church in the House of Aquila,
Romans 16.5. And in the House of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. Because there the public
Worship of God was attended: The Church does join, for the carrying on of
public Worship; as the Preaching of the word, the Administration of Sacraments
and dispensing of Censures in a public way.

A Church does join together for the constant carrying on of the public
Worship of God, for a Church is a Body Corporate, which may continue from
Generation to Generation, it is not any occasional Meeting together, that gives
being to a Church: A Church is a standing Society, not depending on any
occasional Meeting; Therefore a Congregation that meet together on a Lecture
Day, from several Towns to hear the Word Preached are not a Church, neither
have any Ecclesiastical Power: Yea, a synod that meet now and then
occasionally, though it may be called a representative Church, is not a Church
properly; the Members thereof are chosen for a particular occasion: A Church
does join together according to Christ's appointment; Christ has given a Rule
according to which they ought to join together, and if Men join in Worshipping
with a Church irregularly, that does not make them to be Members of that
Church: If a man that lives in one Town where there is a Church, does join
constantly in worshipping with another Church, that does not make him a Member
of that Church.

Quest. Who are visible Saints?

Answ. This Question has been matter of great debate, and an occasion of great
contention in the Church; we may not count those only to be Saints, who after
the strictest Examination, give considerable evidence that they are Saints: We
have no such Rule, the practice of the Apostles in admitting Members into the
Christian Church does not Countenance any such Opinion, neither are we to make
Baptized Persons and Visible Saints to be the same; for Persons must be Visible
Saints before they are Baptized; and some that are Baptized, may cease to be
Visible Saints; neither are they only Visible Saints, that make a profession of
the true Religion joined with an Holy Conversation: Some Men may behave
themselves so as to deserve a sentence of Excommunication, and yet be Visible
Saints: Visible Saintship and real Saintship, may consist with a great deal of
iniquity in the Conversation for a time.

Visible Saints are such as make a serious profession of the true Religion,
together with those that do descend from them, till rejected of God.

1. Such as do make a serious profession of the true Religion, are Visible
Saints; we find the Apostles did really accept of such, not waiting to see,
what their Conversation would be, Act. 16,14,15. So did John, Luke 7.29,30.
Such are to be accepted without delay.

2. Their Infant Seed are likewise Visible Saints, God gives that Testimony for
them, 1 Cor. 7.14.

3. Such also as descend from them, from Generation to Generation, until they
are rejected by God are Visible Saints for they that are Visible Saints don't
cease to be so, till God has cast them off; So it was with the Posterity of
Abraham, if they should carry it wickedly, or if they should fall into Heresy,
yet they are Visible Saints, till God has rejected them; and there are two
ways whereby God may show his rejection of them: One is when they do depart
from the Churches of God to Heathen or Antichristian Societies, the other is,
when the People that they belong unto and they with them are unchurched by God.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature of a Congregational Church.
AS a Civil Society does consist of one Town, or more Towns, so an instituted
Church is either Congregational, or that which consists of Diverse Congregations.

A Congregational Church is a Church that is bound by the appointment of God to
assemble together in one place in a constant way for the Celebration of his
Public Worship; A Congregational Church, is a Church consisting of one
Congregation: Such we read of, Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 14.23. The form of a
Congregational Church is, that they are bound by the appointment of God to
assemble in one place in a constant way for the Celebration of his Public
Worship. Some have thought that the form of a Congregational Church is a Church
Covenant, explicit or implicit, wherein they bind themselves to walk together
according to the order of the Gospel. It is thought that the Children of
Isreal's Covenanting with God is a Foundation for this whereas that Covenant of
theirs is no other, then what all Christians do make, when they make a
profession of Faith and Obedience; we never read of any parti^lar Covenant made
in the Synagogues, which Answer to our Congregations, whereby the Members of
one Synagogue were bound one to another: It is pleaded that nothing else can
bind a^e People one to another but an Ecclesiastical Covenant; but there (...)
somewhat else that binds a free People in the same Town to mutual subjection,
to the Government of the Town; and tho Christians are a free People, yet they
have not a Licentious Liberty but are bound by God, and likewise by their own
profession to the Rule of the Gospel: Neither is there any necessity of such a
bond to distinguish one Church from another, and to avoid confusion of
Churches, we read of no such particular Covenant in the New Testament, we have
no precept for it, we have no president for it; we read of many Congregational
Churches, but there is no Syllable in the Word of God, intimating any such
thing, neither is there any need of it.

The Members of a Congregation are bound to carry on the Worship together, this
is Gods appointment, that his People that live together should carry on his
Worship together, the Christians at Corinth are the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
1.2. And the Christians at Ephesus are the Church of Ephesus; Order calls for
it, that where Men live, there they join together to carry on the Work of
Christ. If a Christian live in a Town, where there is a Church, he is
immediately bound to join with that Church; and that Church is bound to him to
govern him, and give him Christian Privileges; there be some cases wherein
there is need of humane prudence in determining how many Churches shall be in
some Towns: Some Towns arise to be numerous, so that it is fit they should be
joined in several Societies: And some are so small and lie so near together,
that it is fit that two or more should make one Church, in such cases God has
appointed that the bounds of Churches be set either by General agreement, or by
order from Authority, but there is no occasion that every Member should
Covenant particularly with the Church: Grant this particular Covenant to be the
form of a Church, and then a Christian may continue a considerable time,
without any relation to a particular Church, tho he lives, where there is a
Church: And then a Man may be a Member of the Church of Corinth for seven years
together, and live all that while in Communion with the Church at Jerusalem; a
Covenant which he lives in the continual breach of, makes a Member at Corinth,
and according to some, gives him a right to all Ordinances: Grant this
particular Covenant and we shall be to seek, what Church many Children do
belong to, the father is in Covenant with one Church, the Mother with another,
the Child was Baptized in a third and lives in a fourth: This Doctrine of the
particular Covenant which is wholly unscriptural, is the ^on that many among us
are shut out of the Church, to whom Church Privileges do belong.

CHAP. IV. of the Privileges of Congregational Churches.
THE great Privilege of Congregational Churches is to choose their own
Officers, they have a liberty given to them by God to choose suitable Persons
to Office, they are limited to Persons fitly qualified, but the Privilege of
choosing them does belong unto the Church, it is very probable, that the
Synagognes of the Yews had liberty to choose their own Ministers; if they were
confined to the Tribe of Levi, yet out of the Levites they choose for
themselves; However, thus it ought to be in Christian Churches, the Apostles
ordered the Church of Jerusalem to choose their own Deacons, Act. 6.3,4. They
did not take upon them to prescribe, who the Persons should be, and impose
Deacons on them, but referred the matter to their own choice; and the People
nominated two, out of which God chose one to be an Apostle, Act. 1.23.

Besides, it is the Privilege of all free Societies to choose their own
Officers; such Countries as are conquered don't choose their own Rulers, nor such
Countries where the Government is Hereditary, but such as are free, neither
under the Power of Conqueroes, nor the Bond of a Covenant do choose their own
Officers either mediately or immediately: All the Power that Men have over a
free People is by their own consent, directly or indirectly, excepting such
cases wherein God is pleased to ^oint Rulers, or some who shall appoint Rulers
over them; God appointed Aaron and his Posterity to the Office of the
Priesthood in Israel, but God has not appointed any Officers in Churches now,
neither has he appointed any that shall impose Officers over them, but has
left them to their free choice.

Yea, where a Church has teaching, or Ruling Elders, or both, there is no
necessity that they should consent to the choice, if they do not consent, yet
if there be the consent of the Major part, the choice is vallid; the Officers
ought to submit thereto, unless they have some weighty Objection, the Act of
the Major part, is the Act of the Community, that which is the Privilege of
the Community, must not be wrested out of their hands; It is beyond the Power
of the Officers to disanul their Act.

And as the Church has Power to choose their own Officers, so in case of need
they have Power to choose those that shall supply the want of Officers for a
time, the Church is entrusted with sufficient Power in order to the carrying on
of Gods work: Therefore in case of the vacancy of a Pastor, they may choose one
to Preach to them for a time, in case they have no Elders, they may choose a
Moderator; In case they have no Deacons they may choose one to do the Deacons
work, yea in case there be need, they may choose some other Minister of the
Gospel, to Administer the Seals of the Covenant, or perform some Act of
Government upon a particular occasion.

By the same reason that a Church may choose its own Officers, it may also
choose its own Servants; Phebe is called a Servant of the Church, Romans 6.2. So
were Widows, for they were not ordained; So their Sexton and such as shall
over-see the Buildings, or any other Servants that may be for the convenience
of the Church. This Church Privilege of choosing Officers, does only belong to
the Brethren of the Church, the Brethren are said to choose the Deacons, Act.
6.3. And Women have not Power in this matter, 1 Cor. 14.33. Let your Women keep
silence in the Churches, 1 Timothy 2.12. Suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp
Authority over the Man, it is inconsistent with that State of subjection which
God has put them into, if they might vote, they might overruled the Men, and
by the same Rule, those Males that are not their own Masters, (as Children that
are not at their own dispose, and Servants) have nothing to do to vote in the
Church they that are not free, are not to partake of this Liberty.

CHAP. V. Of the Officers of Congregational Churches and their Power.
THE Officers of Congregational Churches are either Elders or Deacons, the
Elders are either teaching Elders, or Ruling Elders. The work of the Teaching
Elders lies principally in these five things; they are to be the mouth of the
People to God, both in the public Assembly, and privately in case of sickness,
they are to Preach the Word of God, they are to Administer the Seals of the
Covenant, they together with the Ruling Elders, are to Govern the Church, and
they are to bless the People.

Such Learned Men as are suteably qualified, but not in Office may upon
occasion discharge some part of this work; but there are some other parts of
it, that they may not meddle with, those Acts which are Acts of Natural Worship
may be performed by them, as praying and Preaching; but such Ministerial Acts
as do depend wholly upon institution, they may not perform, as the
Administration of Sacraments, the dispencing of Censures and an Authoritative
blessing; these are performed only by Virtue of an Institution, therefore are
to be done only according to an Institution.

A teaching Elder by Virtue of his relation to a particular Church, is bound to
attend his work in that Church: And by Virtue of that relation, he has no
Authority to perform Acts of Office to any other Church, or to the Members of
any other Church Assembling with his own Church: Pastoral Power over a
particular Church gives him no Power over any that are of that Church, his
relation to them gives him no Power over any other.

But every Man that is a Pastor of a particular Church stands in a more General
relation, as a Minister of Christ; some that are not Pastors to particular
Congregations are yet Ministers of Christ; and every Man that is a Pastor to a
particular Church is a Minister of Christ, and by Virtue of that Relation he
may do Acts of Office to the Members of other Churches occasionally assembling
with (...) own, and toward other Churches being desired, when he can
conveniently be spared from his own, and toward particular Persons that are
Members of no Church.

The Levites were the Ministers of God before they had Relation to any
particular Synagogue; Paul has Office Power over the Brethren as well as the
Church of God, Act. 26.17,18. The Church at Jerusalem sent Barnabas to Antiock,
to officiate as a Minister, Act. 11. And they that have Authority to Preach
have also to Baptize, Mat. 28.19,20. We find that Paul did not Baptize such as
he brought over to the Christian faith, but committed that work to some other
inferior Ministers that were in Company with him, 1 Cor. 1.14. And this he did
after the Example of Christ, John 4.2. There is need that some have
Office-Power now to Preach to the Heathens, as well as there was in the Days of
the Apostles, and there may be several now that Baptism does belong to; as well
as Cornelius, the Eunuch and the Jallor and others, therefore there are some
appointed by God for that Service.

The Teaching Officer is appointed by Christ to Baptize and Administer the
Lords Supper, and therefore he is made the Judge by God, what Persons those
ordinances are to be Administered to, and it is not the work either of the
Brethren or Ruling Elders, any ways to intermeddle in that Affair or Limit him;
we never read that the Apostles did advise with the Church, whether they should
Baptize such as offered themselves. As the Administration of these ordinances
is committed to them, so the Judging concerning those who they are to be
Administered unto, as they are to Judge what subject to teach upon, and as the
Deacon is to Judge who is to be relieved; So the Minister is to Judge who is to
be Baptized and Admitted to the Lords Supper. The Ruling Elders are to join
with the Teaching Elders in Rule and Government; these Officers are called
Governments, 1 Cor. 12. Such as Rule, Romans 12. Distinguished from such as
Labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. The Teaching Elders with the Ruling
Elders, make the Presbytery of the Church; with whom the Government of the
Church is entrusted: The Power of Censuring offenders in the Church, and
absolving of Penitents, does belong alone to these, the Brethren of the Church
are not to intermeddle with it. The Elders are to Rule over the Church, and
therefore not to be overruled by the Brethren, it is the work of the Elders to
rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Members of the Church are to be obedient to the
Elders, therefore not to control them in their Government, Heb. 12.17. The
Elders of the Jewish Church, had the Power of Government of the Church in their
hands, hence we read of the Rulers and Chief Rulers of the Synagogues, Act. 18.
Deuteronomy. 21.5. The Elders have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed to
them, Matthew. 16.18. The meaning is, that he should be an Elder and Ruler of the
Church, it is spoken of as a Personal reward of his profession.

Obj. Matthew. 18.17. Tell it to the Church, this implies the Power of the
Brethren.

Answ. 1. By the Church is meant the Ecclesiastical Authority in distinction
from the Civil.

2. It is not harsh by the Church to intend the Elders of the Church. See,
Numb. 24.25.

3. By the Church must be meant the Elders of the Church; for this was a Rule
in the Day when it was spoken, and there was now no Church in Being, but the
Jewish Church; in which all the Power of Government was with the Elders.

Obj. 1 Cor. 5.1,4. The Church was ordered to cast out the Incestuous Person,
and 2 Cor. 12. His Punishment is said to be inflicted by many.

Answ. 1. They may be only required to publish a sentence of Excommunication
from Paul.

2. It is common in Scripture, to attribute that which is done by the Ruler to
the Public Society; as when God requires that the People of Judah do Acts of
Public Justice, he does not intend that the People should intrude into that
work, but that the Ruler do it.

3. Whereas it is said that the Punishment was inflicted by many, it may be
read before many; Deacons were chosen at first to have an oversight of the
Poor, Act. 6. And there is nothing plainly declared to be their work besides
that. It is intimated, Romans 12.8. That it is their work to show mercy and to
give; It is Generally put upon them to take care about the Ministers dues, and
about the Provision for the Lords Table, which is gathered from that phrase,
Act. 6.2. It is not meet that we should leave the Word of God and serve Tables,
but there seems to be no necessity, that there must be a Church Officer to do;
all that work which the Church is to see done; some things may be done by
Servants.

CHAP. VI. Of the Ordination of Church Officers.
THere are none to be ordained Officers in the Church of God, but those that
have a regular call to those Offices; Ordination is the Admission of Persons
into their Office, or the consummation of their call, needful to the regular
Execution of their Office; it includes in it first, a solemn imploring of the
presence of God with them in their Office.

Two things are requisite unto a call; One is, the approbation or invitation of
those whom God has entrusted with that care; the other is, the consent of the
Person invited; the former may be a call to the latter, and bind the Person to
accept, but there must be both, before he is called of God to enter immediately
upon the work of the Office; before he be accepted of God as an Officer.

The work of the Deacon being confined to one Congregation, the invitation of
that Church, is sufficient without any further approbation, Act. 6.7.

God having appointed all his Holy Ordinances to be Administered in a particular
Church; in case of necessity, the choice of a Church is sufficient (without any
further approbation) unto the calling of Elders, as when Luther and others
broke off from Popery.

Yet Elders having not only Power over their particular Churches, but also over
others, and God having committed to National and Provincial Churches, the care
of particular Congregations, it is requisite, when it may be obtained, that
there be an approbation of Men chosen to be Elders, by some deputed by the
National or Provincial Church.

Furthermore, some Persons being to be entrusted with the Office of being
Ministers of Christ, who have no call to any particular Congregation, there is
need that they have the approbation of some deputed by the Church in that
Country, or at least by a particular Congregation: The Persons that are to
perform this Act of Ordination, ought to be such as are most suitable to the
Ends of Ordination, viz. The signifying approbation and the obtaining the
presence of God with him; sometimes we find that extraordinary Persons have
ordained a Person to extraordinary Office, 2 Timothy 1.6. Sometimes we find that
extraordinary Persons have ordained ordinary Officers, Act. 14.23. And there is
command given to extraordinary Officers to ordain ordinary, 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Tit.
5. Sometimes we find that extraordinary Officers, and ordinary have joined in
the ordaining of extraordinary; Act. 13.1,5. Sometimes we find that ordinary
Officers, have ordained an extraordinary Officer; 1 Timothy 4.14. In a Provincial
Church that is in order, Ministers ought to be ordained by such Elders, as are
appointed by the Public Ecclesiastical Authority of the Land.

In such Countries where the Church is not in order, it is meet that the
Ministers be ordained by some suiteable Persons deputed by the Neighboring
Elders, but in case of necessity, Ministers may be ordained by some of the
Brethren appointed by the Church to that service.

The Ordination of Deacons ought to be performed by Elders of the same Church,
in case there be any, or by the Brethren in case there be none.

A Minister removing from one Church to another, may be ordained a second time,
as Paul was, and probably Timothy.

It is the manner in some places to give to Churches at their Constitution, and
to Ministers at their Ordination, the right hand of fellowship, from the
Example of the Apostles; but it may be doubted whether that was any more then a
civil Act, if it be an Institution, we are to seek whether it be to be done to
all those Persons, that we have fellowship with, and when it ought to be
performed.

CHAP. VII. Of the Worship that is to be attended in Congregational Churches.
THE End of this Constitution of Congregational Churches is the joint
Celebration of the Worship of God, herein they differ from civil Societies,
that meet together for the management of civil affairs.

The first part of Worship that is to be attended in the Church of God is
Prayer; Prayer which includes in it, besides Petitions, confessions and
thanksgivings, is a principal part of Gods Worship, Prayer is a part of Gods
Worship, Psalm. 107.32. Psalm. 149.1. This is to be attended in the Church, Act.
1.14. Act. 4.24. Act. 6.4. These public Prayers are to be ordinarily performed
by the Teaching Elders; in case there be a Vacancy it may be performed by the
Ruling Elders, or some of the Brethren, but ordinarily the Minister is to be
the mouth of the People to God, Act. 6.4.

These public Prayers ought not to be made by the reading of prescribed forms
of Prayer, out of a Book, he that has not the gift of Prayer, is not fit to be
a Minister; there may be some exempt Cases wherein it is Lawful for a Man to
Pray in a form which they have Learned out of a Book, but the imposing of such
a thing on Men is an addition to Divine Institutions, and the ordinary
practicing of it is of very bad Consequence; it quenches and stifles the Spirit
of Prayer, indulges Men in Idleness and is very unprofitable to others.

The second part of Worship to be performed in the Church, is Singing of
Psalms; this is a Moral Duty not belonging peculiarly to the time of the Old
Testament, as Christ with his Disciples did practice it; So afterward Paul and
Silas, Act. 16. And we have positive commands for it, Ephesians. 5.16. Col. 3.16.
Jam. 5.13. In the primitive times when God gave to all extraordinary Gifts of
his Spirit.

It was the manner sometimes for one Man to sing a Psalm, and the Congregation
to say Amen, 1 Cor. 14.15,16. But now it is most proper for us to join together
in Singing of Psalms, as Christ and his Disciples did, and as Moses and the
Children of Israel did, Exodus 15.1.

As the Church of Israel were wont to Sing the Psalms of David, so (tho we are
not forbidden to Sing Psalms of a private composure) it is Lawful for us to
Sing the Psalms of David and other Scripture Psalms, the Apostle when he
directs us to Sing Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. Col. 3. Has a
manifest respect to the division of David's Psalms, some things in those Psalms
are not so suitable to our present Case, so it is in what we read, yet those
Psalms are very suitable for us to meditate upon; and contain in them much
Instruction and Encouragement, and because they were indicted by the Spirit of
God, are more proper to affect our hearts and excite the workings of Grace,
then such as are of a private Composure.

A third part of Worship is the Preaching and Teaching of the Word; the
Preaching of the Word is to be attended to the End of the World, Matthew.
28.19.20. It is the Duty of Ministers to Preach the Word, 2 Timothy 4.2. A
Minister is called a Preacher, Romans 12.14. This is a special means to advance
the Conversion of Sinners and Edification of Saints.

Although it be the special Office and Duty of Teaching Elders, and ordained
Ministers of the Gospel, yet Preaching being a Moral Duty, it is lawful for
those, who are not ordained Ministers, to Preach the Gospel; Yea, in some cases
it is Lawful for such Men who are not devoted to the Ministry, provided they
have suitable abilities.

The reading of large Portions of Scripture upon the Sabbath Day, which was
constantly Practiced by the Jewish Church, is not so particularly now required
by God, there was great need of it in those Ages, when the World had not the
benefit of Preaching; but there is no institution requiring any such service of
us, any further then the Rule of Edification calls for it.

Ministers are not bound to observe any particular method in their Preaching,
they may Preach either by expounding some Portion of Scripture, or by raising a
Doctrine from a particular Text, and applying of it, or by explaining of a
Catechism, or in any other profitable way. Ministers have Power to Catechize
their hearers, not only that they may know their fitness to participate at the
Lords Table, but also in order to their growth in knowledge, tho it may be
presumed that many Persons are inquisitive and studious, yet there are many
others who are not to be confided in, and the Minister has Power by Virtue of
his Pastoral charge, to see that they Learn; reason dictates this to be a most
suitable method, as in the Learning of Arts and Languages, so in the Learning
of the way of salvation, the most proper and profitable ways of teaching, are
to be used by Ministers.

A fourth part of Worship is Baptism; this is an ordinance appointed by Christ
himself to be a perpetual Ordinance in the Christian Church, It was published
by John before, by Virtue of an Institution, but afterward declared by Christ,
to be a standing ordinance in the Church.

It is very likely that the form afterward used by John and his Disciples was,
that they did Baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 19.5. But seeing
Christ did expressly command his Apostles before his assention, to Baptize in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we have no reason to think that
the first Teachers of the Gospel did use any other form, and when we read that
the Samaritans, were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 8.18. And
that Peter ordered that Cornelius and his Company should be Baptized in the
Name of the Lord, Act. 10.48. No more seems to be intended by it, then their
being Baptized according to the institution of the Lord Jesus.

The Persons that are sent to Administer Baptism, are the same that are sent to
Preach the Word, Matthew. 28.19,20. Tho the Apostles did sometimes decline it,
yet we have reason to conclude that they committed it to Inferior Ministers;
After the Example of Christ, who did not commit it to the People, but to his
Disciples, John 4.2. Therefore such Preachers as are not ordained Ministers,
are not to Baptize.

Baptism may be Administered either in the Public Assembly or in private, there
is no appointment that necessitates the public performance of it, there is
nothing in the Nature of the ordinance that does necessitate it; and we find
that the Apostles and Apostolical Men, did it as there was occasion, both
publicly and privately, Act. 8.38. and 9.18. and 16.33.

There is no necessity that Persons be Members of any particular Congregation
before they be Baptized; Persons before they be Members of any particular
Congregation, may have that qualification that gives them a right to Baptism.
viz. Visible Saintship; many that were Baptized in the first times did not
belong to any particular Congregation of Christians, and tho many of them did
belong to particular Jewish Congregations or Synagogues, yet some did not, Act.
16.33.

Such adult Persons as make such a profession of the Christian Faith, as is
Morally sincere, are to be Baptized; as does appear by the Example of John,
Christ himself, Phillip and others, who were directed by the Spirit of God; and
none were refused that did seriously tender themselves to be Baptized.

Such Infants as are descended from the Covenant People of God by either
Parent, are to be Baptized, 1 Cor. 7.14. Such Infants as do descend from
Parents that are under Church consures, for immoralities, are not to be denied
Baptism, because Excommunication does not cut Men off from the Covenant of God;
such Infants as are the Children of Heathens, belonging to the Families of the
People of God, are Incorporated into the Covenant and are to be Baptized; when
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, he speaks of
them as they come into the World; yet it follows not, but when they are taken
into the Families of Christians, they do become Holy; such were to be
Circumcised under the Law.

A fifth part of Worship is the Lords Supper; which was instituted by Christ a
little before his Death, to be a standing Ordinance in the Christian Church;
all such Professo^ ^f the Christian Faith, as are of blameless Conversation,
and have knowledge to exa^ themselves and discern the Lords Body, are to be
admitted to the Lords Supper.

Three things are requisite in order to admission to the Lords Supper; First,
Visible Saintship, and that is found in such Persons; all professors walking
blamelesly are Visible Saints; the Members of the Jewish Church are often
called Saints in the Scripture, who did give no further evidence of their
Saintship, a Profession of the faith joined with a good Conversation, is a
sufficient ground for Charity, these are marks that we are directed in the
Scripture to Judge of Men's Saintship by; The Apostle did accept of such Persons
for Visible Saints, Men that have these Characters, are not visibly wicked,
therefore they are Visible Saints; these properties are the proper Fruits of
Saintship, and therefore constitute Men Visible Saints; such a profession as
being sincere makes a Man a real Saint, being Morally sincere, makes a Man a
Visible Saint. That whereby Godly Men do make their Saintship Visible, does
make Men Visible Saints, viz. A profession of the truth and a good Conversation.

A second requisite is, that they be not scandalous; a Man that is really and
visibly Godly may fall into a scandal, and upon that account be forbidden to
participate at the Lords Table, but when their Conversation is good, they
cannot be hindered upon that Account.

A third requisite is, that they have knowledge to examine themselves and
discern the Lords Body; for the want of this Infants are denied the Lords
Supper.

Those Adult Persons that are fit to be admitted into the Church, are to be
admitted to the Lords Supper.

All Adult Persons that are fit to be admitted into the Church, ordinarily have
all those qualifications requisite to the participation of the Lords Supper.

They make profession of the true Faith and are of good Conversation, they have
knowledge of the principles of Religion, and so are able to examine themselves,
and if any of them should not understand the Nature of that ordinance, they may
soon be sufficiently informed.

Two things are evident in the practice of the Apostles, one is, that they
readily admitted such into the Church, as made a profession of the Christian
Faith, Act. 2. Act. 6. We never read that ever they denied Admission to any Man
or Woman that made that profession; the other is, that all that were thus
received by them, were admitted to the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.17. Act. 2.24.
They made no distinction of the Adult Members of the Church, into Communicants
and Non-Communicants.

Those that are commanded by God to participate of the Lords Supper, are to be
admitted to the Lords Supper, but all professors that have a good Conversation
and Knowledge are commanded by God to participate in the Lords Supper; if Men
have not these Qualifications they are not obliged immediately to participate
in the Lords Supper, for it would be a sin if they should: But having these
Qualifications they are bound, provided they have opportunity. Christ has laid
this Law upon Professors, 1 Cor. 11.24,25. The persons here commanded are not
only true Believers, then none can do it with a good Conscience but those that
know themselves to be true Believers; then the Church Authority can require
none but true Believers to come, the Persons therefore required to partake are
such professors as carry it inoffensively, and if such are bound to come, the
Church is bound to receive them, they may not hinder any Man from doing his
Duty.

There can be no just cause assigned, why such Men should be debarred from
coming to the Lords Supper, they are not to be debarred for not giving the
highest evidence of sincerity; There never was any such Law in the Church of
God, that any should be debarred Church Privileges because they did not give
the highest evidence of sincerity, nor for want of the Exercise of Faith; it is
unreasonable to believe Men to be visible Saints from their Infancy till they
be forty or fifty years of Age, and yet not capable of coming to the Lords
Supper, for want of the Exercise of Faith; they are not to be denied because of
the weakness of Grace, they that have the least Grace need to have it Nourished
and Cherished.

Such Adult Persons as are worthy to be admitted into the Church, or being in
the Church are worthy to be continued without censure, are to be admitted to
the Lords Supper; it is utterly unreasonable to deny the Adult Members of the
Church, the Lords Supper, and yet not lay them under censure; If they are
guilty of any such offense as to be denied the Lords Supper, why are they not
censured? If they are not worthy to be censured, why are they kept from the
Lords Supper?

There are some Scriptures that have been thought to hold forth a need of
somewhat further, in order to participation in the Lords Supper, which if they
be examined will be found to be strained beyond the Import of them, Psalm. 6.16.
David says, I will tell you what the Lord has done for my Soul, hence it is
argued, that Men should give an Account of the manner of their Conversion, in
order to their Admission; but if it should be granted that David does respect
the work of Regeneration, does it follow because he was willing to talk of it,
that they might make a Law to bind him to do it in the Synagogue, or does it
follow that David offered to do it in order to his joining with the Jewish
Church, Act. 2.37. They were pricked at the heart, before they were admitted
into the Church, but let it be considered that many others were joined to the
Christian Church, of whom we read no such thing, and here is no living Rule
that others must declare that they are pricked at the heart before their
Admission; yea it is certain, that these did not declare their trouble, in
order to their Admission into the Church, but in order to their Direction; yea,
it does not appear that these Men were under a work of Conversion at this time,
they might be Godly Men before, the thing that stung them was a National sin,
which in probability, they had no hand in; For the greater part of them, were
strangers, come up to keep the Feast of Pentecost, and were greatly affected
with the sin which the Nation of the Jews were guilty of in Crucifying of
Christ, Act. 9.26,27. The Church at Jerusalem refused to admit Paul to their
Communion, till they were informed by Barnabas, of his Conversion, but it does
not appear that Paul did then desire to participate with them in the Lords
Supper, possibly it might be only in hearing of the Word and Prayer, and the
reason why they were unwilling to receive him, was not any doubt whether his
Conversion was sincere, but whether he was a Christian; As if in a Popish
Country, one who had been a violent Persecutor should Essay to join himself to
a Protestant Congregation, it would be no wonder if they should be afraid of
him, until they were informed that he was become a Protestant; this is no
foundation to require of all that join to the Church, an Accout about the
manner of their Conversion. 1 Pet. 3.15. Men are required to be ready to give
an Answer to every one that asks them a reason of the hope that is in them;
but here by the reason of the hope that is in them, we are not to understand
their experiences of the Grace of God, but the grounds of their Faith, the
reason why they did believe the Christian Doctrine? This is evident, because he
is speaking of Persecution, v. 14. and because he directs them to give their
Answer with meekness and fear.

Quest. Here it may be enquired, whether such Persons as have a good
Conversation and a Competent Knowledge, may come to the Lords Supper, with a
good Conscience, in case they know themselves to be in a Natural Condition?

Answ. They may and ought to come, tho they know themselves to be in a Natural
Condition; this Ordinance is instituted for all the Adult Members of the Church
who are not scandalous, and therefore must be attended by them; as no Man may
neglect Prayer, or hearing the Word, because he cannot do it in Faith, so he
may not neglect the Lords Supper.

The Lords Supper is Instituted to be a means of Regeneration, it is not
appointed for the Converting of Men to the Christian Religion, for only such as
are Converted may partake of it; but it is not only for the strengthening of
Saints, but a means also to work saving Regeneration.

There be many, according to the Ordinance of Christ, to be admitted to the
Lords Supper, who are not Regenerate, Matthew. 25.1,2. The Kingdom of Heaven is
like ten Virgins, five of them were Wise, and five Foolish, and it can have no
other immediate end respecting these, but their Conversion; the end of all
Ordinances is salvation, and therefore to these Men it must be Regeneration,
for without it, they cannot be saved.

This Ordinance has a proper tendency to draw sinners to Christ; in this
Ordinance there is a particular Invitation to sinners, to come to Christ for
Pardon, here is an affecting Representation of the Virtue of Christ's
sufferings, here is a Seal whereby the Truth of the Gospel is confirmed, all
which are very proper to draw sinners to Christ.

If the Lords Supper be only for the strengthening of Saints, then they who are
not Saints do profane the Ordinance, when they do partake, and it is not Lawful
for them to partake, and then they that do not know themselves to be Saints,
don't know that it is Lawful for them to partake, and so far as any Man has
scruples about his Saintship, he must proportionably have scruples about the
Lawfulness of his Participation, and so Sacrament Days which should be Days of
Comfort, will become Days of Torment.

All other Ordinances are appointed for Regeneration, Prayer, hearing the Word,
Baptism; so likewise the censures are, that the Soul may be saved in the Day of
the Lord Jesus; they are to further Men's Regeneration, in case they be not
Converted already, and it would be strange if the Lords Supper alone should not
be appointed for that end, whereas it has a proper tendency thereunto, and
many that come to that Ordinance by the appointment of Christ, stand in as much
need of it, as those that partake of other Ordinances.

A sixth part of the Worship is Ecclesiastical censures, these were appointed
in the time of the Old Testament, and are to continue in use unto the end of
the World, it does evidently appear, both from the Writings of the Jews and
likewise from the Scripture, that the Jews did make use of Ecclesiastical
censures, John 4.34,35. John 3.22. and 12.42. And it is evident, that these
censures were according to Divine Institution, from Matthew. 16.17,18. Christ
does not here make a new Institution for the Gospel Church, for that Church was
not yet in Being, but he urges them to the practice of an Old Institution; if
it be enquired where we find any such Institution in the Old Testament, I
Answer, in that expression which we often find in the Old Testament, that they
should be cut off from Israel, Genesis 17.14. Exodus 12.14. When one Brother is
required to reprove another, and in case of Incorrigibleness to complain to the
Church, that command does not only bind the Brethren of the same Congregation,
but also the Brethren of any other Congregation; for there lies the same Bond
upon us according to opportunity, not to suffer sin in others, as well as in
the Members of the same Congregation.

There is no need of a particular Institution, who shall have the Power of
Judgment, to determine whether a Person be to be censured or not; it is a part
of Rule, and where God appoints Rulers in his Church, he appoints that they
shall Judge these matters; therefore when Christ appoints a Pastor to be a
Ruler in the Church; he expresses it by having Power of binding and loosing,
Matthew. 16.19.

A Person that is under Church censures, is not thereby cut off from his
Membership, he stands in a Brotherly relation to other Members of the Church, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Lying under offense and under censure for his offense, does not
deprive him of his Visible Saintship, therefore his Children are to be Baptized.

Such offenses as are of a more Heinous Nature, don't call for Church censures,
provided there be a suitable Spirit of Repentance; if the end of censures be
obtained, there is no occasion for them; Persons under the sentence of
Excommunication, are not only to be debarred from the Lords Supper, but also to
be exclued from the familiar Society of the People of God; where there is no
special Bond, we are not to have that Society with them, that we may have with
Heathens, 1 Cor. 5.9,12.

To this Act of Worship appertains Absolution, when the Person that has
offended does manifest a Spirit of Repentance, whether he has been censured or
not, he is to be acquitted.

The seventh Act of Worship is the Blessing of the Congregation; there is a
Blessing of Men by way of supplication, that may be performed by any Person,
and there is a Blessing by way of Confirmation, this is pronounced in the Name
of God; this is either extraordinary, by way of prediction, so the Patriarchs
did bless their Children, and others endued with a Prophetical Spirit, did
bless the People, as Moses; or else ordinary, pronounced in Gods Name by
ordinary Ministers; this may either be pronounced by way of assertion, as when
the Minister does say, Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and do it; Or
in way of supplication, as when he says, The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be
with you; Yet this is more then a Prayer, Viz. A Declaration in Gods Name what
shall come to pass, and therefore it must be understood in such a way as is
according to Gods Covenant, Deuteronomy. 20.34. God appointed the Priests of Old to
Bless the People, Numb. 6.23. And this work seems to be a common work to the
rest of the Levites, who were teachers in Israel, Deuteronomy. 10.8. There is no need
of any new Institution in the Gospel, impowring Ministers to bless in the Name
of God, it being a proper part of the work of a Minister; Christ by appointing
Ministers, has appointed Men to bless the People; yet that seems to be
Instituted, Matthew. 10.12,13. Deuteronomy. 21.5.

Such Men as are Preachers of the Gospel, yet not separated to that work by
Ordination, have no Power to bless the Congregation, because this depends
merely upon Institution, therefore is not to be done, but according to
Institution.

Ministers being appointed to bless Authoritatively in the Name of God, it is
utterly improper for them to speak in the first Person, including themselves,
Numb. 6.24. It is also improper for them to Bless the Church of God, that are
dispersed all over the World.

CHAP. VIII. Of Churches consisting of Diverse Congregations.
A Church consisting of Diverse Congregations, is a Society of Diverse
Congregational Churches, joining together according to Gods appointment, for
the constant carrying on of the Public Worship of God; such Churches are
acknowledged in the greatest Part of Protestant Churches; but some in latter
times do make a Question whether there be any such Churches.

That there are National Churches, does appear, First, from the light of
Nature, the light of Nature teaches us, that Man was made for the Worship of
God, that Man is fitted for Society, and the great end why he is so, is, that
in Society he may carry on the Worship of God, and as the light of Nature
teaches us, that lesser Societies ought to carry on the Worship of God in
Conjunction, so that Kingdoms and Countries should join together in promoting
and advancing the Worship of God; it is most agreeable to the light of Nature,
that they that are one People, should Unite together in carrying on Gods
Worship, and should have Power to regulate and govern the several parts of that
Body. Nature teaches, that every Kingdom should see that the Worship and
Ordinances of God, be attended in the several Congregations therein.

2 dly, From Gods appointing the Nation of the Jews to be one Church, Act.
7.38. And God has not appointed any new forms of Churches in the times of the
New Testament; there are no other kinds of Churches appointed now;
Congregational Churches are no new kind of Churches, but according to the Old
Institution; for ev^y Synagogue of the Jews was a Congregational Church, they
had Ecclesiastical Rule and Government in them; they are called Churches by
Christ, Matthew. 18.17. That the Old Testament Institution does continue still,
appears partly because the Christian Churches of the Jews were subordinate to
the National Church of the Jews; they were Members of the National Church, and
did attend Jewish Ordinances; and th^fore by Institution, Christian
Congregations are not absolute, but Subordinate to a National Church; it is
further evident, because the Jewish National Church did not cease as their
Ceremonies did, because their Date was out, but because they rejected Christ,
Romans 11.20. Had they kept Gods Covenant, they would have continued a National
Church to this Day.

3 ly, From the Public Covenant that is between God and a professing People;
God made a Public Covenant between him and the People of Israel, wherein he
engages public Prosperity unto them, upon condition of their obedience; and
all professing Countries are under the same Covenant for substance; the
promises, and so the threatenings declared are of force unto the end of the
World, and we have the like encouragement to obedience that they had, and are
in the like danger in case of ^sobedience.

God deals with professing Countries at this Day according to the Tenor of that
Covenant, those promises will never be out of Date to the end of the World, God
makes the same to Israel with respect to the time of their Restoration, this
abundantly Witnesses that every Christian Nation is a Church; if God has made
a Covenant with them upon condition of obedience, then they are a Society in
Covenant with God, then they are one body in Covenant with God, and the whole
has Power over the parts, and they are invested with sufficient Authority to
see the Covenant kept: If they were in Covenant, and had not Power to make the
several parts to keep Covenant, the Covenant would be a snare to them;
particular Societies might bring guilt upon them, and they would have no Power
to remove it; if they be all engaged in one individual Covenant, the Country
has Power to regulate all Maleadministrations that any of the parts are guilty
of, if they are in one individual Covenant, they are as one body Expoused by
God, the People of God, the flock of Christ, and therefore one Church; here is
all that made Israel to be a Church, therefore such a People are a Church.

4 ly, From the promises that God has made of making Gentile Nations to be his
People; God did not only promise to set up so^ Churches among the Gentiles, but
to take whole Nations into Covenant with himself, Isa. 24.22. And it is
expressly foretold by Christ, that whole Nations should receive the Gospel, and
become Churches, Matthew. 21.43. Yea, the Scripture declares that when Israel is
Converted, they should be in the same Covenant as formerly, the same promises
are made to them in E^iel, as the Fruits of their obedience, as were made to
them in Deutrenomy; and if the whole Jewish Nation will be one Church, when
they are restored, then it will be so with every other Christian Nation, the
difference between Jews and Gentiles is now abolished.

5. Because the supreme Ecclesiastical Authority does not lie in particular
Congregations; if there be no National Church, then every particular
^ngregation is absolute and independent, and not responsable to ^y higher
Power: This is too Lordly a principle, it is too ambitious a thing for every
small Congregation to arrogate such an uncontrollable Power, and to be
accountable to none on Earth; this is neither a probable way for the Peace of
Churches, nor for the safety of Church Members; appeals (...) admitted in all
Kingdoms; and it is more probable that in a wh^ Country, Persons may be found
that may rectify the Miscarria^ of particular Congregations, then that
particular Congregations will not miscarry; this absoluteness of particular
Congregations is a dignity that the primitive Churches did not enjoy, this is
not the common Privilege of Gospel Churches; the primitive Churches were under
the Government of the Apostles, and it seems that God gave them this Power,
because the ordinary way of Government could not then be practiced, the greater
part of all Gentile Nations lying in their Heathenism.

Obj. 1. We don't find in the New Testament, any National Church among the
Gentiles.

Answ. The reason of that is, not that National Churches are not according to
the mind of God, in the Days of the New Testament, but because there was no
Nation that did receive the Christian faith. Tho there were many Congregations
gathered among the Gentiles, yet there were very few of them, comparitively,
that did entertain the Gospel; the bulk of all the Gentile Nations, lay in
their Heathenism, during all that time that we have the History of in the
Scriptures.

Obj. 2. God has not appointed in the New Testament any National Officers, as
the High Priest in Israel, nor any National place of Worship as Jerusalem,
therefore there is no National Church.

Answ. 1. To have one National Officer over the ^le, is not essential to the
being of a National Church; Israel was a National Church, when they had no such
National Officers, while the first Born did Exercise the Office of the Priests,
before the separation of the Levites to that work. There be several sorts of
civil Government, none of which are essential to a Republic. The being of a
National Church does not necessitate this or that form of Government: If there
be a National Church, it follows that there must be some to Rule over the
whole, but that this Power should reside either solely, or principally in one
Man, does not follow at all. It was suitable to the State of the Jewish Church,
that there should be one supreme Officer to be a Type of Christ; but now there
being no such occasion, the Church may be governed witho^ any such.

2. To have one National place of Worship, is but ^cidental to a National
Church; Israel was a National Church in Egypt, yet had no National place of
Worship; all the Worship of God, besides that which was tipical, might be
attended in their Synagogues. The not having a National place of Worship, is no
hinderance to their being Governed by a Nati^ Authority. There may be a
National Government as well wi^, as with a National place of Worship.

This National Church is to be divided into provincial, and those again
subdivided into Classical. The Light of Nature teaches us to make such
Divisions of great Political Bodies, that Government may be more easily
managed. Natural prudence teaches Men in the civil State, to make such
Subordination of Courts of Justice, for the benefit of the Common Wealth. This
is according to the Counsel which was given to Moses, by his father in ^aw, and
approved by God, Exodus 18. By the same Rule that the whole is to Rule over the
parts, the greater parts are to Rule over the lesser parts, for a greater part,
is an whole respecting the lesser parts into which it is divided. A County is a
part with respect to a Province, but an whole with respect to the several
Congregations therein, and accordingly may Exercise Government over them; yet
with Subordination to that Authority that is over the whole. A gradation both
in Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority is founded in the very Law of Nature.

Obj. If we grant a National Church under the Gospel, we may as well grant an
Ecumenical Church: those that plead for the Jurisdiction of Synods, refer
things at last to the Judgment of an Ecumenical Synod.

Answ. (...) is no such thing as an instituted Ecumenical Church; there is a
^lick Church, but that Notes all those that profess the true Religion; but
there is no Instituted Ecumenical Church, for the several Christian Nations
are not in the same Covenant; they are indeed in the same special Covenant, but
not in the same individual Covenant; so it is here, one Nation may keep
Covenant, while other Nations brack Covenant.

Neither is there any Institution for Ecumenical Synods; if they could
convene, they have no Authority; their consultations might be of some use to
others, but they have no Authority. A National Synod, is the highest
Ecclesiastical Authority upon Earth.

CHAP. IX. Of the Government of National Churches.
SUch Protestants as have acknowledged National Churches, have been divided
about the form of Government to be practiced among them; some of them are for a
mixed Government, partly by Archbishops, and Bishops, and partly by Synods, so
the Church of England; Some have Governed by a Synod alone, so the Church of
Scotland; and this Government seems most Consonant to the Word of God. Synods
have been generally acknowledged in all Churches, but upon differing grounds,
some have founded them upon that Rule of prudence, Prove. 24.66. In the
Multitude of Counselors there is safety, but if they be grounded upon this,
they have no other work but to counsel and advise, and they can have no
Authority; all Ecclesiastical Authority does depend upon an Institution, their
Authority must be derived from God. Some do found it upon that Example, Act.
15. But this was not properly a Synod, this was not the meeting of the Elders
of many Churches, but of the Apostles and Elders of the Church of Jerusalem,
together with the Brethren; yet no doubt but the Apostles, who were part of
that Assembly, had the Power of a Synod. But the Foundation of Synods is partly
that Public Covenant, which is between God and his People, partly his
Institution in the Old Testament, and partly the Rules laid down for the
Churches to walk by in the New Testament.

1. This Public Covenant shows that the whole must Rule the parts. The Rule
and Government does fundamentally belong unto the Church; the Church has a
right to Govern it self. Thus it is Originally with all Nations as to their
civil Government, so also as to Ecclesiastical, and therefore the Exercise of
this Government must be in the hands of some that do legally represent the
whole; if it be not by some that represent the whole, then the whole do not
Govern, the Rulers must be the representation of the whole Church. Thus it is
with a Synod, they are either the Elders of the several Churches, if the
Country be not too Numerous, or such as are chosen by the Elders, if the
Country be large and numerous, and these are a legal representation of the
Churches; the Elders of the Churches are chosen to the Office, to be Rulers of
the several Churches, and in case there be need. They have Power to select out
of themselves, such a Company as may conveniently meet, with whom their Power
shall be entrusted. The Light of Nature teaches, that the Government must be
committed to such a Number, as shall not be incapable by reason of their
Number, to assemble and discourse together, for otherwise the Government of the
Church would not be a thing practicable.

Thus it is not with Bishops, they do not legally represent the Church; for
they are not chosen by the Church, they are not Persons elected by the Church
to Act in their behalf, but are put into their Office by civil Authority; and
how can they represent the Church who do not desire any Authority from the
Church; and secondly, their Office is not of Divine Institution, and how can
they who are not of Divine appointment, legally represent the Church? Those
whose Office is not acknowledged in the Law of God, cannot legally represent
the Church of God.

2. The Church of the Jews was Governed by a Counsel of seventy two Persons.
Some are of Opinion that the Jews had both an Ecclesiastical and a civil
Sanedrim, this is evident, that in Christ's time they had a Council that did
consist in a great part of the Priests, Act. 14.6. and 22.30. And that God
appointed the Priests and other Judges to join together in hearing of
Controversies, Deuteronomy. 19.17. So also that there was an assembly of the chief of
the Priests and Levites, appointed by Jehoshaphat to hear Ecclesiastical
causes, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. And that the High Priest was over them in those
Ecclesiastical causes, v. 11. By these things it is evident, that the Church of
Israel was Governed by an Assembly of the Principal Men of the Church. Christ
Jesus does approve of their form of Government that was in his time, Matthew.
23.2,3. By Priests, Scribes, Pharisees. By this it is not only evident, that
the Government of a National or Provincial Church, by an Assembly of its
Principal Elders, is a proper suitable and hopeful way; but likewise that this
way is to be observed in Christian Nations, seeing no other Provision is made
for their Government; many of the appointments that God made for the Jewish
Church, do continue in force still, and this among the rest, no other Provision
being made yet it does not follow that our Assemblies must have any standing
president, as the Jewish Assemblies had their High Priest, who was their
president, and was a Type of Christ; neither does it follow, that we are
limited to the same Number that they were, Circumstances being a sufficient
reason for a variation in such cases.

3. The appointment of Christ, that Teaching and Ruling Elders should Govern
the Church, shows the Power of Synods; these are appointed by Christ to be the
Rulers of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. There are no other appointed to
be Rulers of the Church since the Age of the Apostles, therefore the Government
of the National Church must be in their hands; none but they have any Interest
in the Public Government; there is no Warrant from the Word of God to entrust
the Government in the hands of any others, and there is sufficient Warrant for
them, to take upon them the Government of the National Church, and this by
Virtue of their Office. If there be a Public Covenant, every Church is bound
in Conjunction with others to see the Covenant kept, and their Rulers, with
whom their Power is entrusted, are bound by Virtue of their Office, to join
with others to see their Covenant kept; so that their Acting in a synod, is not
by Virtue of any New Office. A Minister by Virtue of his Ministerial function,
has Power in Conjunction with others, to Govern the National or Provincial
Church.

Obj. If Ministers have a Bond upon them, to join with others in the Rule of
the National or Provincial Church, then they seem in their own Persons to be
bound to attend that Service; which if all should do in National Synods, the
Synods would be so large a Body, that they could not Discourse together, and it
would be an intolerable prejudice to their Congregations, being much deprived
of their Labors.

Answ. The Power of Intrusting delegates is Warranted by the Light and Law of
Nature, there being a necessity of it for the good Government of Societies, and
there is no necessity of a particular Institution in this case; the necessity
of humane affairs does require that Government be entrusted with such a Number
that it may be managed to advantage to the Public, neither is there any hazard
of being involved in guilt by such a method; a select Number of the most
Prudent and Holy of the Elders, are as likely to Govern the Church according to
the mind of God, as the whole Body of the Elders of a Nation.

CHAP. X. Of the Power of Synods.
THE Power of Synods does consist principally in these things.

1. They are to teach the People, they are to hold forth Light unto the Church,
that was a part of the work of the Sandedrim at Jerusalem, to teach the People
the will of God, Matthew. 23.2,3. That was the special work of the Levites, Deuteronomy.
33.10. That Assembly mentioned, Act. 15. Met together to give Light to the
People of God.

It is very meet that Synods do Publish confessions of faith, not only to bear
Testimony to the World, and other Christian Kingdoms, of their acknowledging
the Truth, but especially to be a Light unto the Churches, to guide them in the
way of Life, this has generally been practiced by the Synods of the reformed
Churches.

They should particularly Vindicate the Truth, and bear their Testimony against
those Errors that are Springing up, Act. 15.24. It is meet also in case of
Corruptions in manners, that they do declare what the mind of God is, and
Vindicate the Rule; that, if it be possible, they may root out such Licentious
principles as are prevailing amongst the People, and advise them to repent of
such degeneracies as bring down the Judgments of God. Yet no Man is bound to
receive the Doctrines, or practice the Rules held forth by a Synod, because
they are taught by them. A Synod is not infallible, and therefore no Rule, or
Doctrine, is to be taken up on trust from them; Men do owe that respect to a
Synod, as it is an Ordinance of God, solemnly to weigh the Doctrines held forth
thereby, but they are not to receive them by an implicit faith; we are bound
to prove all things, and if a Man do practice against the Light of his own
Conscience, because a Synod has otherwise determined, he greatly sins, Romans
14.23. The Synod may direct him in a wrong way, and no Man can be bound to any
thing that God has forbidden, Deuteronomy. 13.3.

2. They are to bind and loose, to inflict Ecclesiastical censures, or to take
them off; the supreme Ecclesiastical Authority must have Power of Judgment,
that so there may no public guilt lie upon the Church; if they have not Power
of Judgment, Particular Persons may be oppressed by the rigor of Presbyteries,
and many irregularities committed by the Church, whereby the Country does
become guilty, and there would be no sufficient way to deliver the Land from
guilt. Synods have Power to Admonish, to Excommunicate, and deliver from those
censures, and every Man must stand to the Judgment of the National Synod, Deuteronomy.
17.12.

They are to Judge in case of Complaint; when any Person Judges himself wronged
by the Judgment of a particular Church, and complains to a Synod, they are to
hear the case, and upon the hearing of it, not to advise the Church either to
confim the sentence, or to take it off; but if there be occasion, they are to
take off the sentence and restore the Man unto his privilege.

They are to judge in case of other Complaints; if any Man has a Complaint
against another, and cannot obtain a hearing in the Church that he belongs
unto, or if the Elders of a particular Church be Complained of for any
Maladministration, or if a Church with the Elders be complained of for
Heresy, or other scandalous Corruption, the Synod is to hear and Judge the
case, and they may not only censure particular Persons, but whole Churches also
in case of need.

3. Synods have Power to oversee the calling of Persons to the Ministry, and to
appoint those who shall examine them; if the Synod have the Government of the
Church in their hands, tho they should not abridge Congregations of their
Liberty, yet they should see that Churches Act regularly, and that none should
be set in the Ministry but such as are duly qualified, therefore it belongs
them to appoint meet Persons to examine such as are called to the Ministry, and
to testify their approbation by the laying on of hands, Tit. 1.5.

The appointing of Ceremonies of Worship is properly the work of Jesus Christ;
the making of orders concerning the external concernments of the Church, is
properly the work of the Civil Magistrate; but the appointment of such as shall
oversee the calling of Persons to the Ministry, does properly belong to the
Ecclesiastical Authority.

FINIS.

