PAGANO-PAPISMVS: Or, An Exact PARALLEL Between ROME-PAGAN, AND ROME-CHRISTIAN,
In their Doctrines and Ceremonies.

By Joshua Stopford, B. D. Rector of All Saints, in the City of York.

JER. 10. 2. Learn not the way of the Heathen. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell,
for R. Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

To the Right Honorable Richard Medcalfe Lord Mayor, the Worshipful the
Aldermen, the Sheriffs, and Commons of the Ancient and Faithful City of York.
THAT Religion has a superlative Excellency, is confessed more than once by
the wisest of Kings, Prove. 3. 15. 4. 7, etc. And would Men of the meanest
Parts, and slowest Conceptions desist a little from the laborious pursuit of
their sinful pleasures, and give their Faculties, some intermission, so much
breath from that hot chase, as may qualify them for a calm, considerate view
of things; it is certain they would discern, that Virtue has a much more
ravishing appearance, infinitely more delectable and enamouring, than all the
Devils Optics could put upon their most gustful Sensualities. The great
Advantages, that come to Mankind by Religion and Virtue, both to Humane
Societies and Particular Persons, bespeak the transcendent Excellencies of it.

1. Religion brings great Advantages to Humane Societies, Cities, Countries and
Kingdoms. I know some great Ones of the World have been jealous of the Kingdom
of Christ, as Herod was troubled when he first heard of his Birth: yet others,
who have followed the Dictates of natural Reason only, and been superstitiously
over-awed by a Deity, have looked upon it as a necessary Basis to found
Government upon, without which it can no more subsist than a Castle in the Air.
I will mention two great Advantages that will come to Human Societies by
Religion, and wherein their Happiness does consist, viz. Peace and Plenty.
Where these two are enjoyed a People cannot be miserable, and where either of
them is wanting they cannot be happy.

1. Religion brings the Blessing of Peace along with it; and this is no mean
Blessing. Outward Peace is the chiefest of outward Blessings; it gives
sweetness and beauty to all other Blessings. The very Name of Peace is sweet,
says the Philosopher. The Psalmist pronounces that People happy, who have it.
Psalm. 144. 15. Happy is the People, that is in such a case. Now this great
Blessing is the product of Religion: And this it effects two ways. 1. By
removing the Causes of Quarrels and Contentions. 2. By obliging Men to the
observance of such Precepts, and infusing into them such Principles, as
naturally tend to Peace.

1. By removing the Causes of Strifes and Contentions; and they are chiefly
two: the Curse of God upon them, and their own Lusts within them. 1. The feud
and hostility, jars and quarrels among men are part of that Curse, which lies
upon Mankind for his Apostasy from God. We read Genesis 3. 17, 18. How the Ground
was cursed for Man's sake: Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee. But
a far greater Curse 'twas, that one Man should become as a Thorn and Briar to
fetch blood of another. As Soon as Man fell out with God, there was a Fire
kindled at his own door, in his own nature. Now where Religion is cordially
embraced, this cause of Quarrels and Contentions, the Curse of God, is removed.
2. Their own Lusts within them. Jam. 4. 1. From whence come wars and fightings
among you? Come they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members?
Lust is the Makebate in a Community: Covetousness, pride, passion, hatred,
envy, intemperance, ambition -- make Men quarrelsom and contentious. Now
Religion mortifies these vile and corrupt affections; Romans 6. 6. Gal. 5. 24.
Religion files off the ruggedness in men's spirits, removes the harshness of
their tempers, and extirpates all those passions and vices, which render men
unsociable and troublesome one to another.

2. By obliging Men to the observance of such Precepts, and infusing into them
such Principles, as naturally tend to Peace. 1. By obliging men to the
observance of such Precepts, as have a natural tendency to the Peace of Human
Societies. This is most clear from that one general Rule propounded by our
Savior (with which Severus the Emperor was so taken, that he caused it to be
written in his Palace, and other public Places), Mat. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye
would, that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. When we have to do
with others, we must put our selves into their condition, and consider how we
should desire to be dealt with in such a Case. Were this Precept of Christ
generally observed, all Quarrels and Contentions would presently cease. How
gently and tenderly would Superiors behave themselves toward their Inferiors?
And with how much respect and observance would Inferiors carry themselves
toward their Superiors? The Rich would not withold from the Poor, nor the
Poor by his idleness be unnecessarily burdensome to the Rich. The Lender would
not take advantage of the necessity of the Borrower, nor the Borrower
ungratefully defraud the Lender. The Seller would not deceive or overreach the
Buyer, nor the Buyer under-value the Goods of the Seller.

There are likewise more particular Precepts, that have a natural tendency to
preserve and promote Peace among men; as That we must forgive wrongs, love our
Enemies, keep in our places, mind our own business, be content with our present
state etc. 2. By infusing into men such Principles, as naturally incline to
Peace; as love, self-denial, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, --
The Alcoran says, God created the Angels of light, and Devils of the flame.
Wicked men, who are like unto, and acted by the Devil, are furious and
wrathful, all of a flame: But where Religion is embraced, and prevails upon
men, there is light and love, coolness and calmness of temper. Grace smooths and
polishes the most knotty piece; it turns the Vulture into a Dove, the Briar
into a Myrtle-tree, the Lyon-like fierceness into a Lamb-like gentleness. Es.
11. 6 -- The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
down with the kid: and the calf, and the young lion and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their
young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
The sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall
put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my
holy mountain.

Here is laid down the strange effect, that the Gospel should have upon those,
who by the ministry thereof shall be subdued unto Christ, and become loyal
Subjects of his spiritual Kingdom. O what a metamorphosis does it make! Those
who before were full of rage and fierceness, hereby become gentle and
peaceable. Religion fills men with a spirit of universal love and good will.
And so much for the first great Advantage, that Religion brings to Human
Societies, the Blessing of Peace.

2. Plenty is likewise the product of Religion; and that both Naturally and
Morally: Naturally, as it makes men frugal, and temperate, and diligent in
their Callings: Morally, as it brings the Blessing of God upon their enjoyments
and undertakings, Levit. 26. 3 -- If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my
commandments, and do them; Then I will give you rain in due season, and the
land shall yield her increase. Again, Deuteronomy. 28. 2 -- All these blessings shall
come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shall hearken unto the voice of the
Lord thy God. Blessed thou shall be in the City, and blessed thou shall be in
the field -- And ver. 8. The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy
storehouses, and in all that thou set thine hand unto. Thus you see what
Advantages come to Human Societies by Religion: it procures the choice
Blessings of Peace and Plenty, wherein their Happiness does consist.

2. Let us in the second place consider how advantageous Religion is to
particular Persons; and in reference only to the Good things of this life viz.
Honors Pleasures, and Profit: Things which all men carnestly desire, and set
the highest value upon. 1. It brings Honor. Observe what honorable Titles are
given to good men in Scripture; they are called princes in all Lands, a crown
of Glory, a royal Diadem, a chosen Generation, the Excellent of the earth, etc.
What Diogenes said of Learning, is applicable to Religion: It makes young men
sober, old men happy, poor men rich, and rich men honorable. Virtue is a
lasting Pillar, that causes the righteous to be had in everlasting
remembrance. The disgrace which wicked men cast upon them, is at worst but like
the noise of some loud tongue-Gun gone as soon as heard; but the Honor, which
God and good men put upon them, is a pillar that endures to all Eternity; such
a monument, as neither time nor envy can waste or wear out. 2. It brings
Pleasure. I know Satan would represent Christians under uggly Vizards, and
Christianity in the most frightful averting forms, to make men loath both the
one and the other: But Religion is far from such a crabbed face, and austere
countenance. Joy is one essential part of it. Romans 14 17. The Kingdom of God
consists not in meats and drinks, but in Righteousness, and Peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost. Her ways (says Solomon speaking of Wisdom) are ways of
pleasantness. Prove. 3. 17. The Pleasure which Religion yields, is. 1. Cordial;
it does not only, with Oil cause the face to shine, but with Wine make the
heart glad. The Blessed Virgin's expression is: My spirit rejoiceth in God my
Savior, Luke 1. 47. 2. It Is pure and unmixed. There Is nothing adhering to it to
make an abatement, or put a check to it. 3. It Is permanent and lasting. Carnal
Pleasure is of a short continuance. Job. 20. 5. The triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment. And Solomon compares it
to the crackling of thorns under a pot, Eccles. 7. 6. Carnal Joy, like a
standing pool quickly dries up, and leaves nothing but the mud of discontent:
Whereas the Pleasure, that Religion yields, is like a fountain of water, ever
running. That is like a candle, which goes out in a snuff, a stink; This, like
the morning-light, shines brighter and brighter unto the perfect day. 3. It
brings Profit. And what is more earnestly desired, and highly valued by the
Sons of men? The Soldier for this will scale the Walls, and leap upon the
Pikes; The Merchant for this will plow the Ocean, and dance upon the surging
Billows; the Husbandman for this will rise up early, and go to bed late, etc.
Now Godliness with Contentment is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Wealth and Riches
shall be in his House, Psalm. 112. 3. Length of days is in her right hand, and
in her left hand Riches and Honor, Prove. 3. 16.

This just (Right Honorable and Worshipful) but imperfect Account, which I
have given you of Religion, discovers unto us two Things:

1. That Religion is no unreasonable thing. God has graciously conjoined Man's
Duty and his Interest; in serving God he serves himself; in promoting Gods
Glory he promotes his own Happiness. Though God have the Right of absolute
Dominion, and might exact Obedience on his bare Command; yet he is more pleased
to show himself a Benefactor, than a Lord; and therefore descends to treat with
men by the more gentle and inviting methods of Promises and Rewards. Nay,
indeed the end of his Commands is only to make us capable Subjects, of those
eternal Felicities he desires to bestow. And this surely is enough, to excite
Men to a faithful Improvement of those Talents they have received, since it is
indeed themselves they are trading for. It Is true, the Stock is Gods; but all
the Increase of it will by his bounty certainly devolve on them.

2. That we should in our several places zealously endeavor the Advancement of
Religion. This is a Duty incumbent on all, but more especially Persons in
Authority; and the Relation (Right Honorable and Worshipful) I stand in to
You, obliges me at this time to press it upon you. And your Professions of Love
and Zeal for Religion give me no small encouragement, that this Exhortation
will be kindly entertained. That it may make the deeper Impression, let me add
to the former Considerations, That in advancing Religion, you will be highly
serviceable both to your King and Country.

1. To his Majesty; for Religion lays the strongest obligation upon men to give
tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, and honor to whom honor is
due; in a word, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Prove. 24.
21. My Son fear the Lord and the King. 1. Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, honor the
King. Observe the order; first Fear God, and then Honor the King; implying,
that men must be good Christians, before they can be good Subjects. Our late
Sovereign does acknowledge that natural influence, which Religion has upon the
obedience of Subjects; Take his own Words: It Is no wonder (says he) if men,
not fearing God, should not honor their King. They will easily contemn such
Shadows of God, who reverence not that supreme and adorable Majesty, in
comparison of whom, all the glory of men and Angels is but obscurity. And
therefore he gives it in charge to his Son (our gracious Sovereign) to
countenance and promote solid Piety. None are more observant of Laws, than they
that are most a Law to themselves.

2. To your Country, yea the whole Kingdom. The Wiseman tells us, That
righteousness exalts a nation: It brings the Blessings of mirth and joy,
peace and prosperity, wisdom and policy, riches and plenty, success and
victory. God promises Israel to enrich them with all Blessings, and advance
them above all Nations upon their faithful Obedience, Deuteronomy. 28. And the Heathen
Poet could acknowledge, That so long as Rome stood Religious, so long she
continued Victorious and Prosperous.

Did Religion universally prevail and influence the hearts and lives of men,
then might we beat our Swords into plough-shares, and our Spears into
pruning-books; then every man might sit under his own Vine, eating the fruit
thereof, and none should make him afraid; then there would be no leading into
Captivity, no complaining in our Streets; no vexatious Suits, no groanings of
the oppressed, no private injuries, no public Seditions. In a word, this would
make England a Land of desire, an heritage of glory, even the glory of all
Nations.

And in order to the advance of Religion, so advantageous to Mankind, let me
recommend two Things to your special care and observation.

1. The suppression of such Doctrines, as subvert Religion; particularly those
of the Romish Church. How dangerous they are to Government, and destructive of
Virtue, you cannot be ignorant; and how malepert the Promoters and Professors
of them are lately grown, is visible to all. I am not for your sheathing the
Sword of Justice in their Bowels (such severity becomes Romanists best), yet
let them know, you have one, and that you dare draw it in the defense of that
Faith you own, which is truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical.

2. The strict Observation of the Christian Sabbath. That this day is of Divine
Institution, and grounded on the fourth Commandment, is expressly asserted in
the Homily of the Time and Place of Prayer, in these words: Whatsoever is found
in the Commandment, appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly,
most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods Glory, it ought to be
retained and kept of all good Christian People; and therefore by this
Commandment we ought to have a Time, as one Day in the week, wherein one ought
to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works. For like-as it appears by
this Commandment, That no man in the six days ought to be slothful or idle, but
diligently to labor in that state, wherein God has set him: Even so God has
given express charge to all men, That upon the Sabbath Day, which is now our
Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and work-day labor; to the intent,
That like-as God himself wrought six days, and rested the ^eventh, and blessed,
and sanctified it: Even so Gods obedient People should use the Sunday holily
(not in Sports and Plays) and rest from their common and daily business, and
also give themselves wholly (not an hour or two) to heavenly Exercises of Gods
true Religion and Service. So that God does not only command the Observation of
this Holy Day, but also by his own Example does stir and provoke us to the
diligent keeping of the same. If we will be the Children of our Heavenly
Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian Sabbath Day, which is the
Sunday; not only for that it is Gods express Commandment, but also to declare
our selves to be loving Children in following the Example of our gracious Lord
and Father. In which words we may observe, 1. That by virtue of the fourth
Commandment one day in seven is perpetually to be kept holy. 2. That the
keeping of the Lord's Day is grounded upon, and commanded in the fourth
Commandment. This Testimony I have urged to check those, who confidently Preach
and Print too (contrary to their own Subscriptions), That our Sabbath has only
the Churches Authority to support it, and have no better Name, than Judaick
Precisians, for the strict Observers of it.

But let me further add, and it is what I mainly intend, That the devout and
conscientious Observation of this Day is the Support of Religion. A great
Divine tells us; The Commandment for the Sabbath is put in the close of the
First, and in the beginning of the second Table, to denote, That the
Observation of both Tables depends much upon the sanctification of this Day.
And another observes, That Religion is just as the Sabbath is; it decays or
grows as the Sabbath is esteemed; it flourishes in a due veneration of the
Sabbath, and it pines and consumes, when the Sabbath is neglected. I never knew
any Place or Person eminent for Piety, that was not careful in the
sanctification of this Day.

My next request therefore (Right Honorable and Worshipful) is, That you would
unanimously and zealously endeavor to promote the strict Observation of our
Christian Sabbath: Let not the notorious Profaners of it escape unpunished. I
will not further oppress your Patience; only crave your Patronage and
favorable acceptance of this Treatise, and a thankful acknowledgment of the
great Obligations you have laid upon me.

That God would incline your hearts to contribute your utmost endeavors
toward the advancement of true Religion and Virtue, and Succeed you in them,
and Reward you for them; That he would Confer on you all the Blessings you
want, and preserve and sanctify those you have, and Crown all with the
unconceivable Glories of another World, is now, and shall be the humble and
fervent Prayer of

Your most obliged, and Devoted Servant, Joshua Stopford.

The Epistle to the Reader.
IGnorant Persons, who know little or nothing of Rome, but from the Pamphlets
of her Parasites, may be induced to fancy it to be no less, than a Heavenly
Jerusalem; and they, whose Ears are continually filled with the Venerable
Expressions of Catholic Faith, Holy Fathers, General Councils, Perpetual
Successions, S. Peter's Chair etc. ingeminated by Romanists, may (says a late
Writer) by the very sound of such Words, be somewhat disposed to entertain a
favorable Opinion of the Romish-Religion.

The Design of the following Treatise is to fortify These against such
allurements, by representing both the one and the other in their true native
Colors: And to expose unto public View such dismal Pieces of their Catholic
Doctrine and Worship, as whosoever observes them well, shall have, I hope, no
great temptation to look over-friendly toward Rome. And in Order to this end,
I have used no arguments, but such as all, that can read, may understand: My
present intention being only to instruct common Christians, and to lead them in
a plain way.

In discovering their Corruptions, Superstitions, and Idolatry, I have used all
sincerity (urging nothing material to their prejudice, but what is found either
in their public Liturgies, or their best Authors) and as much moderation, as
the matter in hand was capable of. Indeed I am forced sometimes to call Things
by their proper Names, as lying with another Man's Wife, Adultery; purloining
another man's goods, Robbery; adoring Stocks and Stones, Idolatry: And if our
Romanists think these Expressions uncivil, and instead of confessing themselves
guilty of what is most justly charged upon them, complain that I reproach them;
I must answer somewhat like Elijah in the like case, That they are the only
men who have reproached themselves. For I only say that which they do, and cast
nothing upon their Face but what I find in their Bosom; and not the hundredth
Part of it. Some Hours and Days, and Weeks, I have spent in Reading their
Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, and Authors of chiefest note amongst them; and
find their Religion and Worship, so contrariant to Scripture, so absurd and
Ridiculous, that I must publicly profess an utter detestation of it: Yet I
think it not a much less sin to make Papists worse than they are, than to make
Widows more destitute, or add Affliction to the afflicted.

I have entitled this Book, An Exact Parallel between Rome-Pagan and
Rome-Christian, etc. And how truly, I leave it to any one, upon an impartial
View, to judge. Many things are purposely omitted for brevity sake, and several
Reflections upon what I have mentioned (which perhaps might have made this
Discourse more acceptable to some) to prevent the imputation of a Railer.

There are two Positions laid down, and not with more Zeal than Policy defended
by the Roman Church; for I do not see, how they could secure their deluded
Proselytes without them.

1. That it is not convenient, the common People should know much of Religion;
and therefore they take from them the Key of Knowledge, I mean the use of their
Bibles. Bellarmin says, That Faith is to be defined rather by ignorance, than
by knowledge, De Justificat. Lib. 1. cap. 7.
Thieves will blow out the Candles for fear of being discovered. I know the
common Plea, is, That Scripture is dark, and that the ignorant might be seduced
by it: But they that speak thus, do not only accuse Scripture of obscurity, but
of untruth also; for Scripture bears witness to it self, That it is clear, and
made to give Light to the Understanding. Psalm. 19. 8, The Commandment of the
Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes. Psalm. 119. 105, Thy Word is a Lamp unto my
Feet, and a Light unto my Path. The Books of the Prophets are of all Scripture
the most obscure; yet S. Peter says, That they are like a Light shining in a
dark place. Thus they accuse Scripture of untruth, when they accuse it of
darkness; and with that cast a great reproach upon God, as if he had dug a
pit, to make men fall into it in the dark, and delivered the Doctrine of
Salvation in obscure Terms, to lead men into error; like one, that makes his
Will in ambiguous words, purposely to occasion Strife among his Heirs. Should
the Father of Lights study obscurity? He that gave his Son to save his
Enenemies, Should he be envious of the Salvation of his Children? If the
Scripture must be prohibited to the People, lest they fall into Heresy; by the
same, nay, by a stronger reason it ought to be prohibited to Bishops and
Priests, since from them, not from the People, all Heresies have proceeded.
Read the Catalogues of ancient Heretics made by S. Austin, Epiphanius -- and
you will find, that almost all the Heresiarchs were Clergymen.

But It Is no wonder, that our Adversaries of Rome find Scripture dark, since
they cannot find in it, what they would. For he must needs have piercing Eyes
and a reaching Wit, that can find in Scripture a Command for Sacrificing the
Body of Christ in the Mass, or the Invocation of Saints, or the Veneration of
Images and Relics, or the Popes Succession in S. Peter's Primacy, etc.
Doubtless the Scripture is not so dark, but these Gentlemen desire that it were
a thousand times darker, that none might find in it their condemnation.

The advice, which certain Bishops in Bononia gave unto Pope Paul 3. was, That
no Mortal should be permitted to read more of the Scripture, than that little,
which was wont to be read in the Mass. And they give two weighty Reasons for it.

1. Because so long as men were content with that little, your Affairs
succeeded according to desire; but quite contrary, since so much of the
Scriptures was read. 2. Because if any one read that Book, viz. the Scriptures,
and observe the Customs and Practices of our Church, he will see, that there is
no agreement betwixt them, and that the Doctrine, which we Preach, is
altogether different from, and sometimes contrary to that contained in the
Bible. The Doctrine of an Implicit Faith is of singular Use, and admirable
Advantage to the Church, that delivers it.

Unhappy Papists like the Andabatae of Old, must wink and fight, and are
obliged to follow their Guides in spite of Christ's Caution, given upon the
like occasion, Mat. 15. 14. Protestant Ministers bespeak their Hearers in the
words of S. Paul: I speak as to wise men, judge what I say, 1 Cor. 10. 15. while
Popish Priests must, if they would speak out, say; I speak as to Fools, believe
all that I say: A plain sign their Gold is adulterate, because they dare not
suffer it to come to the Touchstone.

And this piece of Policy they seem to have learned of the old Pagans, who kept
the common People in ignorance of their Sacred Mysteries. Plutarch in vita
Numae, p. 58, and 62. Alexander ab Alexand. in Genial. Dier. lib. 4. cap. 17.
And Tiraquellus in his Annotations upon him, says: Sacra seclusa dicebantur
Graecis Mysteria, quod ea intus oporteat occludere, nec cuiquam profano, i. e.
non sacris initiato, explicare; There Is nothing feigned (says S. Ambrose)
nothing is done in the dark, as it is among the Gentiles, whose eyes they cover,
lest the People seeing those Things, which they call Sacred, might perceive,
how they are abused with diverse Vanities, In 1 Cor. cap. 14. And so much for
their first Position.

2. The second is, That unwritten Traditions are of Equal Authority with
Scripture, and the Rule of Faith and Manners, Council. Trident. Sess. 4. ^e
Canonicis Scripturis. Bellarmin ^ffirms, That the Scripture is not a ^ufficient
Rule of Faith, de verbo Dei non script. Lib. 4. cap. 12. The Church (says
Lindanus) was not tied to Scripture by the will of Christ. Panopl. Lib. 5. cap.
5. Christ would not have his Church to depend on Scriptures of paper, and would
not commit his Mysteries to Parchment, Costerus Enchirid. cap. 1. p. 43. And
Salmeron gives us a Reason, why God would not have all the Mysteries of
Religion to be written, viz. That the Commandment of Christ should be kept;
Give not holy things unto dogs, Tom. 13. disput. 8. p. 216. Which Reason is
also given by Costerus, Enchirid. cap. 1. p. 48.

Nay it is most evident, That they have exalted Traditions above Scripture.
Costerus calls the Tradition, Printed in the Heart of the Church, another
kind of Scripture. The Excellency of that Scripture (says he) far surmounteth
the Holy Scriptures, which the Apostles have left in parchments, Enchirid. cap.
1. p. 44. Stapleton affirms, That the Church's determination is of greater
Authority than the Scripture, de Auth. Script. Controvers. 7. Lib. 12. cap. 15.
And in another place he says; That Scripture in it self is not so much the
Rule of Faith, as the Faith of the Church (that is, the Tradition of the Roman
Church) is the Rule of Scripture.

And they speak more reverently of Traditions, than of the Scripture; Did they
ever call them a nose of Wax, a stumbling Block, a dumb Rule, an obscure and
ambiguous Doctrine -- as they have too often the Scripture. Again, sins against
these are more severely punished, than those committed against the express Law
of God. Priests and Bishops can give Absolution for Murder, Perjury, Adultery
-- But the other are often reserved to his Holiness, except in the Article of
death. If a Priest marry to avoid fornication, according to the Apostles
command, he falls into Irregularity, and becomes unable to sing Mass; but not
for keeping a Whore, or for being a Sodomite, Decret. Par. 1. did. 34. cap. 4.
Navarrus Manual. Confess. cap. 27. number. 249.

Lastly, they are a thousand times more careful to instruct the People in these
Traditions, than in the Doctrine of Salvation, contained in the Holy Scripture.
And no wonder, that These should be exalted by Romanists above Scripture, since
they are infinitely more serviceable to them; For when Scripture fails them
(as often it does according to the confessions of their own Doctors) they have
recourse to These. How frequently are Traditions urged for the Popes Supremacy,
Indulgences, Purgatory, Suffrages for the dead -- For their Ridiculous and
superstitious Ceremonies: Some of which are mentioned in the following
Discourse.

In short, here the Reader may see the true Original of those Traditions (so
much admired, and confidently urged by Romanists) the besotting Nature of
Popery, and the tremendous judgment of God, punishing Error with an (...) a
reprobate sense.

I have but one thing to add, That some Authors, which I have mentioned as
Cited by Others, viz. Lib. Sacrar. Ceremoniar. S. S. Eccles. Roman. Gregorius
Turonensis, etc. I have procured since the Copy was sent away, and find the
Citations most true.

A Catalogue of the Principal Authors produced in the following Discourse, with
the Place where, and the Time when they were Printed.
ADrianus Junius Nomenclatura. Londini, 1585. Apuleius de Asino aureo, etc.
Lugd. Batavor. Alexander ab Alexandro in Genialium Dierum, cum Annotat. Andreae
Tiraquelli. Lugduni, 1586. Arnobius adversus Gentes, Basileae, 1560. Alfon.
Villegas de Vitis Sanctorum, 1628. Aquinas Summa totius Theologiae Coloniae
Agrippinae, 1622. S. Augustinus. Basileae, 1529. Azorius Institutiones Morales.
Parisiis, 1601. Barnab. Brissonius de Formulis and Solemnibus Roman. Moguntiae,
1649. Beda Histor. Eccles. Lovanii, 1566. Baptista Mantuanus de Sacris Diebus.
Francofordiae, 1573. Breviarium sec. us. Eborum. Parisiis, 1526. Breviarium
Romanum. Parisiis, 1519. Bellarminus de Controversiis Christianae Fidei.
Coloniae Agrip. 1628. Baronius Annals Eccles. Antverpiae, 1589. Baronius
Notat. in Martyrol. Roman. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1610. Cornelius Agrippa de
Vanitate Scientiarum. Antverpiae, 1530. Clemens Alexandrinus. Basileae, 1556.
Chamierus Panstrat. Cathol. Genevae. 1626. Caelius Rhodiginus Lection.
Antiquar. Basileae, 1550. Chemnitius Examen Council. Trident. Francofurti, 1596.
Elias Schedius de Dis Germanis. Amstelodami, 1648. Escobar Theologia Moralis.
Lugd. 1659. Eusebius de praeparat. Evangelica. Basileae, 1559. Eusebius --
Histor. Eccles. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1581. Franciscus Costerus Enchirid.
Controversiar. Coloniae Agrip. 1589. Filliucius Quaestiones Morales. Coloniae
Agrip. 1629. Franciscus Suarez Commentar. in Aquinat. Moguntiae, 1604. Franc.
Cyprien Heaven opened. 1663. Guliel. Durandus Rationale Divinor. Officior. cum
Explicat. Divin. Officior. per Johan. Belethum. Lugduni, 1584. Gisbertus
Voetius Selectar. Disputat. pars 3. Ultrajecti, 1659. Gregorius Turonensis de
Gloria Confessor. 1512. Gavantus Thesaurus Sacrorum Rituum. Romae, 1635.
Gabriel Biel super Canon. Missae Lugd. 1524. Georgius Cassandrus de Articulis
Religionis Consult. Lugd. 1608. Curiae Episc. and S. Inquisit. Concessu. And
reprinted at Francfurt, 1582. Cum Gratia and Privilegio Caesar. Majest. This is
added, to evidence the great Authority of this Book in the Roman Church.
Hieronymus Mengus Flagellum Daemonum. Bononiae, 1580. Horae B. Virginis sec.
us. Sarum. Parisiis, 1527. Horae B. Virginis sec. us. Sarum. Parisiis, 1531.
Holinshed's Chronicle. London, 1586. Henricus Pantaleon Histor. de Ordine
Johannitar. Basileae, 1581. Jacobus de Voragine Historia Lombardica. Coloniae,
1485. Johannes Kirchmannus de Funeribus Romanorum. Brunsuigae, 1661. Johan.
Stephan. Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. Cathol. Coloniae Agrip. 1592. Johannes
Filesacus Opera varia. Parisiis, 1621. Johannes Gerhardus Loci Theolog.
Genevae, 1639. Johannes Wolfius Lection. Memorab. Lavingae, 1600. Innocentius
3. Sermones de tempore. Coloniae, 1575. Lilius Gregor. Gyraldus Historia de
Diis Gentium. Basileae, 1555. Layman. Theologia Moralis. Antverpiae, 1634.
Laurentius Beyerlinck Magnum Theatrum Vitae humanae. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1631.
Missale sec. us. Eborum. Rothomagi. Missale sec. us. Sarum. Parisiis, 1527.
Missale sec. us. Sarum. Rothomagi, 1509. Missale sec. us. Sarum. Parisiis,
1555. Manuale sec. us. Sarum. Londini. 1554. Missale parvum pro Sacerdotibus in
Anglia, Scotia, and Hibernia itinerantibus, 1626. Missale Romanum Reformat.
Macrobius in Somnium Scipionis, and Saturnal. Lugd. Batavor. 1597. Minucius
Felix Octav. Cantabrigiae, 1643. Natalis Comes Mythologia. Venetiis, 1600.
Navarrus Manuale Confessariorum. Wirtzburgi, 1586. Nicolaus Serarius Comment.
in Tobiam, Judith, etc. Moguntiae. Ordo Romanus, Rabanus Maurus, Gemma animae,
etc. apud Hittorpium de Divinis Eccles. Cathol. Officiis. Parisiis, 1610.
Processionale sec. us. Sarum, 1545. Petrus Thyraeus de Daemoniacis, etc.
Coloniae Agrip. 1594. Polydorus Virgilius de Inventor. Rerum. Basileae, 1557.
Pontificale Romanum Clement. 8. jussu restitutum. Antverpiae, 1627. Plutarch's
Lives. London, 1656. Plutarch's Morals. London, 1657. Philostratus de Vita
Apollonii, etc. Parisiis, 1608. Platina de Vitis Pontificum, 1529, and 1626.
Rosinus Antiquitat. Roman. cum Notis Thomae Dempsteri. Aureliae Allobrogum,
1620. Rivetus Orthod. Cathol. Lugd. Batav. 1630. Rodolphus Hospinianus de
Origin Festor. Judaeor. Graecor. Romanor. and Turcar. Tiguri, 1592. Idem de
Origin Festor. Christianor. Tiguri, 1593. Idem de Origin Templorum. Tiguri,
1603. Rituale Romanum Pauli 5. jussu editum. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1620.
Sacrarum Ceremoniarum S. S. Romanae Ecclesiae Libri tres. Coloniae Agrippinae,
1558. Salmeron. Comment. in Epistol. Coloniae Agrip. 1604. Tileman. Heshusius
Sexcent. Errores Pontific. Francofurti, 1577. Tertullianus. Franakerae, 1597.
Valerius Maximus cum select. Varior. Observat. Lugd. Batav. 1655. Wolfgangus
Lazius Comment. Reipub. Romanae. Basileae, 1550.
The Contents.
INtroduction, Page 1 Canonization of Saints, 5 Invocation of Saints, 12
Patronage of Saints, 26 Particular Offices of Saints, 31 Images, 52 Festivals,
68 Altars, 71 Vows, 81 Temples, 87 Gifts, 107 Sacrifices, 114 Purgatory, 118
Prayers, Oblations, and Sacrifices for the Dead, 125 Consecration of Bells, 141
The single Life of Priests, 150 Shaven Crowns and Beards, 156 Lights in
Churches, 162 Worshipping toward the East, 169 Holy Water, 172 Agnus Dei's,
183 Sacred Relics, 191 Exorcisms, 211 Observation of Holy Days, 231
Mass-Ceremonies, 260 Processions, 270 Funeral Ceremonies, 278 Some other
Doctrines and Ceremonies, 288

THE Introduction.
CAESAR said of his Wife, That she ought to be without suspicion of fault, as
well as without fault. Valentinian having a drop of the water sprinkled upon
his Garment, which was cast by the Priests in their Heathenish Services, cut
out that piece of cloth upon which that drop fell, from the rest of the
Garment. The ancient Christians would not set up Lights and Bays at their
doors, though for this they were persecuted as Enemies to the Emperor, because
the Temples and the doors of Idolaters were wont to be thus garnished,
Tertullian de Idolatria, cap. 15. The primitive Worthies would not endure that
any Christian should look toward Jerusalem praying, because they would avoid
all show of Judaism. S. Austin thought it in his time unlawful to fast on the
Sabbath day, because the Manichees did so: And he retracted even Ironies,
because they had the appearance of lying. God appointed his own Ceremonies, so
as a Wall of Partition might be put between the Israelites and the Gentiles; in
which respect his people are forbid to eat Swines flesh (the ordinary food of
Pagans), to make their heads bald, to shave their beards, to cut their flesh.
And Aquinas thinks, that because the Heathen set their Temples Eastward,
therefore God's was set Westward, 12 Quest. 102. Art. 4. The Apostle commands
his Thessalonians, and in them all Christians, to abstain from all appearance
of evil; not only apparent sins, but sins in appearance are to be avoided by
Christians. If we look back to the old Law, how often do we find God giving it
in charge to his people, that they should not imitate the Heathen, especially
in their superstitious Customs and religious Ceremonies? Lev. 18. 3, After the
doings of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do; neither shall ye
walk in their Ordinances. The Hebrew Doctors (says Ainsworth) explain it thus:
We may not walk in the statutes of the Heathen, nor be like unto them either in
apparel, or in hair. A man must not let the locks of his head grow like the
locks of their heads; nor shave off the sides, and leave the hair in the midst,
as they do, etc. and the reason is given, Because, the Lord had separated them
from other people. This Command is repeated, and a Commination annexed, Levit.
20. 22, 23. and afterward they were often admonished by the Prophets, Jer. 10.
2, Learn not the way of the heathen; do not symbolize with them.

How little these repeated Injunctions are observed by those of the Roman
Communion, is too evident to considerative minds. That most of the principal
Doctrines and Sacred Ceremonies of that Church are derived from Pagans, or at
least have a perfect agreement with them, is so manifest a Truth, that
certainly none can doubt of it who pretend to any knowledge of them. When I call
to mind the Institutions of the Holy Mysteries of Ethnicks (says Beroaldus) I
am even forced to believe, That most things appertaining to the celebration of
our Solemnities and Ceremonies, are taken thence. As for example, From the
Gentile Religion are the shaven heads of priests, turnings round at the Altar,
sacrifical pomp, and many such like Ceremonies which our Priests solemnly use
in our Mysteries. How many things (good God!) in our Religion are like to the
Pagan Religion? How many Rites common? Apud Wolsium Lection. Memor. Tom. 1. p.
907.

Baronius confesses, That in many things there is a conformity between Popery
and Paganism; That many things have been laudably translated from Gentile
Superstition into the Christian Religion, has been demonstrated by many
Examples, and the Authority of Fathers. And what wonder is it, if the most holy
Bishops have granted that the ancient Customs of Gentiles should be introduced
into the Worship of the true God, from which it seemed impossible to take off
many, though converted to Christianity: Annal. Tom. 1. ad annum 58. p. 606.

And he comes to particulars, ad annum 44. p. 382, Anniversary Vigils thou have
in Suetonius de Vespaniano, cap. 7. Holy water and sprinkling of Sepulchers, in
Juvenal Sat. 6. and others. Lights, in Suetonius de Octavio. Candles and
Torches, in Seneca and Macrobius. Polydor Virgil having in several Chapters
described the ancient Usages and superstitious Ceremonies of the Pagan
Religion, concludes that Book with these words: Atque tale fuit apud Romanos
rerum sacrarum initium quarum bonam nos partem accepimus, uti apposite per nos
explicatur. And such was the beginning of Sacred Rites and Ceremonies among the
Romans; a good part of which have we embraced, etc. de Inventor. rerum lib. 4.
The pomp of Rites and Ceremonies (says Cornelius Agrippa) in Vestments,
Vessels, Lights, Bells, Organs, Music, Odours, Sacrifices, Gestures, rich
Pictures, choice of Meats, Fastings, etc. are not the least part of Religion.
And then a little after he adds, Quorum magna pars (Eusebio test) exinde ab
Ethnicis in nostram quoque religionem migravit; A great part of which (as
Eusebius testifies) has been taken from Ethnicks, and received into our
Religion. De Vanitate Scient. cap. 56.

But to make this more evident, I will instance in several Doctrines and
Ceremonies of the Roman Church, and show their perfect agreement with those of
the Pagan Religion.

CHAP. I. Canonization of SAINTS.
IT was an ancient Custom among the Heathen, and universally observed, That men
famous for Virtue, and eminently serviceable to their Countries either in
repelling evil, or procuring good things, were admitted into the number of the
gods, and decreed to receive Divine Honor, Cicero de natura deorum, lib. 2.
Eusebius de preparatione Evangel. lib. 2. cap. 9. Hesiod tells us, That when
those happy men of the first and golden Age of the World were departed this
life, great Jupiter promoted them to be Demons, that is, Keepers, and
Protectors or Patrons of earthly Mortals, and Overseers of their good and evil
works, givers of Riches, etc. And Eusebius from Diodorus says, That the
Egyptians affirmed, That such as had been virtuous, and great Benefactors to
the world, were deified after their death: De praeparat. Evang. lib. 3. cap. 3.
So Polydore Virgil de Inventor. rerum lib. 1. cap. 5.

And the manner of this Consecration is thus described by Herodian. Histor.
Romans lib. 4. where he speaks of the deisication of Severus: The Body of the
Emperor being buried according to the usual custom, with many pompous
solemnities, his Effigies of Wax was placed at the entry of the Palace, upon a
large Bed of Ivory, sumptuously adorned; about this Bed sat the Senate on the
left hand, and honorable Matrous on the right, in their Mourning Habits, for
seven days; during which time the Physicians did visit the Effigies, and treat
it as if it were alive in he fit of sickness. When these days were expired, he
was concluded to be dead, and transported to the old Court, where the
Magistrates quitted their Offices. Here Benches were built round about the
Court, and on the one side were placed the children of Noblemen and Patricins;
and on the other side Noble and Honorable Women, which sung Hymns in praise of
the deceased Emperor. This being done, they took up the Bed, and carried it out
of the City to the Field of Mars, where a Pile of Wood was made in form of a
great Tent or Tabernacle, with three other lesser Tabernacles, one on the top
of another, the lowest having in it dry combustible matter, but on the outside
richly adorned with Gold, Ivory, and painted Tables; and in the second
Tabernacle was the Effigies placed with great solemnities. After this, the
Nobility and Gentry did ride about the Field several times in order, and at
last the New Emperor set the pile of Wood on fire with a Torch; at which time
an Eagle was dismissed from the top of it, which was supposed to carry the soul
of the deceased Emperor into Heaven; and ever after He was reputed and
worshipped as a god. This form of Consecration is also recorded by Rosinus
Antiq. Roman. lib. 3. cap. 18. and by Hospinian de Origin Festor. Christian.
p. 20. and by Polydor Virgil de Invent. rerum. lib. 3. cap. 10.

Thus our Romanists canonize those that were eminent for Virtue, Miracles, etc.
which Ceremony is thus described by Maiolus dies Caniculares, p. 769 -- ex
Authore sacrarum Ceremon. And by Hosp. de Orig. Fest. Christ. c. 6. ex lib. 1.
Ceremon. Romans Eccles. and Bull. Leo. 10.

After the fame is spread far and near concerning the excellency of life,
opinion of sanctity, and manifestation of Miracles; and the Pope informed by
Kings, Princes, or the people and desired that such a person may be received
into the Catalogue of Saints, and decreed to be worshipped as a Saint; his
Holiness maturely debateth the matter with his Brethren; and if he shall think
fit to proceed to an Inquisition, a Commission is given to some Bishops in
those parts where the person lived, and is buried, That they use all means to
inform themselves touching those things, and make their report to his Holiness.
If this Relation answer the common fame, the Pope propounds it to the sacred
College, and deliberates with them whether this Information be sufficient to
proceed upon, or a further enquiry ought to be made: If this latter be thought
necessary, a new Commission is sent to the same, or some other Bishops, and
certain Articles or Interrogatories upon which Witnesses are to be strictly
examined touching his sanctity of life, purity of faith, and working of
Miracles; and to transmit the depositions under hand and seal unto the Court.
These being received, the Pope commits the examination of them to some Auditors
of the Sacred Palace, whether they be full and satisfactory. When all things
are sufficiently proved, the Pope decrees the Canonization, and appoints a day
for it. In the mean time great preparations are made: as, 1. A Stage is built
in the Church of that largeness, that upon it there may be a Chapel with an
Altar, a Pontifical Throne, etc. 2. A great Standard or Ensign is made with the
Image of the Saint, which must be carried before the Religious, or those who
procure the Canonization. 3. Wax Candles are prepared, which must be
distributed: For the Pope two Candles of white Wax of Twelve pounds a piece;
for Cardinals, of Four pounds. Also for the elevation of the Sacrament twelve
Wax Tapers, every one of Six pounds; for the Altar Seven Wax Candles, and two
for the This Credentia is a Table to set Vessels upon.
Credentia of Two pounds. Also for the Offertory two great Wax Candles of
Twelve pounds, which the first Cardinal offers; also three Candles of Six
pounds, which the Orators or Deputies with three Cardinals must offer. And all
the foresaid Candles must be white; besides Eighty Wax Tapers for the Church.
4. There must be prepared Candles of common Wax for Bishops, Orators, and
Noblemen, of Two pounds; for Officials and Singers, of One pound; and for the
Clergy and others as they please. On the day of Canonization, the Pope, with
his Cardinals, Bishops, and Officials, all in their proper Robes and Ornaments,
goes in procession to the Church. In the Camera Paramenti the Candles are
distributed, and all carry them lighted. When the Pope comes to the Porch of
Saint Peter, he is received by the Clergy of the City after the manner of
Supplicants. His Holiness enters the Church, and ascends the stage with the
Cardinals and other Officials; but the Clergy stand about it. And having prayed
before an Altar, he makes a Speech, in which he gives them an account of what
has been done, and relates the Life and Miracles of this Saint. This being
ended, his Holiness exhorts all to pour forth their prayers unto God, That he
would not suffer his Church to err in this matter. Then the Litany is sung,
etc. And then, after the Proctor has earnestly requested the Pope in the name
of the Prince or people, That he would declare blessed N. to be enrolled in the
Calendar of Saints, and to be worshipped as a Saint by the faithful of Christ:
I say, then the Pope with a loud voice utters these words: To the honor of the
holy and undivided Trinity, the exaltation of the Catholic Faith, and increase
of the Christian Religion; by the authority of the same Omnipotent God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul; and by our own,
with the advice of our Brethren, we decree and ordain N. of blessed memory to
be a Saint, and to be received into the Catalogue of Saints; and we do admit
him into this Catalogue, and appoint that every year on such a day, his Feast
and Office, as for a Confessor (if he be a Confessor), or Martyr (if he be a
Martyr), be devoutly and solemnly celebrated by the Universal Church. After
this, the Pope begins Te Deum laudamus; and then a Deacon on his right hand
says, Pray for us, O blessed N. Thus you see how their Saints are canonized;
where I have omitted several things for brevity sake.

And as the Heathen gods must be deified before they could receive them for
gods (as you heard), and give any worship and adoration to them: So the Saints
departed must be canonized by the Pope before they can be publicly prayed
unto. Bellar. de sanctor. Beat. lib. 1. cap. 10.

CHAP. II. Invocation of SAINTS.
1. THE Heathen invocated their Gods or Demons as Mediators and Intercessors to
the Supreme God. Thales, Pythagoras, Plato, and other Ethnic Philosophers,
held only one Supreme Eternal Being, which they called GOD. Now this chief God
was, as they supposed, at such an infinite distance from poor Mortals and
Sinners, as that there could be no approach to him, or communications of good
things from him, but by some Mediators or Midling-gods; these Middle-gods or
Mediators were no other than their great Heroes, or persons who had been
greatly famous in their Age for some noble Exploits (says Minutius Felix) or
virtuous acts; and after their death were by common consent deified or made
gods; and called by some from their Office Medioxumi; from the place of their
main residence (which was supposed to be in the Stars), Deastri; from their
relation to the Superior God, the lesser gods, the made gods; and from their
knowledge of humane affairs, Demons. Of these Demons Plato discourses very
largely in several places; where, 1. Touching their natures, he calls them made
gods, visible gods, etc. 2. Touching their Office, he says, They were placed in
the middle, 'twixt the great God and Man, to be Mediators and Porters, for
conveying the Sacrifices and Prayers of men to the great God; as also, for
transmitting gifts and all good things from God to men. 3. That by the
mediation of these Demons there is a communion and friendship maintained
betwixt God and men, which otherwise could not be. God is not approached by men
(says Plato in his Symposium); but all the commerce and intercourse between
him and men, is performed by the mediations of Demons. And then he comes to
particulars: Demons are Reporters and Carriers from men to the gods, and again
from the gods to men; of the Supplications and Prayers of the one, and of the
Injunctions and Rewards of Devotion from the other. Demons are middle powers
(says Apuleius), by whom both our desires and merits pass unto the gods; they
are Carriers between men on earth, and the gods in heaven; hence of prayers,
thence of gifts; they bring to and fro, hence petitions, thence supplies: or
they are certain Interpeters on both sides, and Conveyers of recommendations:
for (says he) the Majesty of the Sovereign gods will not permit them to manage
these things of themselves; De Deo Socratis. And S. Austin gives the same
account of them, De Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 24. From these testimonies it is
clear, That the Heathen invocated these Demons as their Mediators and
Intercessors with the Supreme God.

Thus do Papists invocate the Saints departed, as Mediators and Intercessors to
God for them. They attribute the same Offices to their Saints, that the Heathen
did to their Demons, and urge the very same reasons. When they are ashamed
(says S. Ambrose speaking of the Pagans) of having neglected God, they use a
pitiful excuse, saying, That they had access to the Supreme God by these gods;
as by the Lords and Earls about the Court, subjects have access unto the King.
The weakness and vanity of which argument, he fully discovers in the same
place, in Romans cap. 1. And the same reason is urged by Celsus in Origin, viz.
That none dare to approach the person of an earthly Prince with a petition, but
by the intercession of some Courtier or other about him; therefore it should be
so on our part toward God, unto whose glorious Majesty we must use the
Mediation of some which are in his favor. The absurdity of this comparison is
there also fully demonstrate. Contra Celsum lib. 8.

And do not our Romanists urge the very same Argument? It is good and
profitable (says the Council of Trent, Ses. 25.) to call upon the Saints, and
to have recourse to their prayers, aid and assistance, whereby to obtain from
God many benefits by the merits of his Son Jesus Christ, who is our Redeemer
and Savior. This is further clear from many forms of prayer used to particular
Saints.

We humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as the blessed Apostle Andrew was a
Preacher and Rector of thy Church; so he may be with thee a perpetual
Intercessor for us. In Festo S. Andreae.

Almighty and everlasting God, who make us glad with the Festivity of Blessed
Osmund thy Confessor and Bishop; we humbly beseech thy Clemency, that we who
venerate his solemnities with devout Offices, may obtain the remedies of
eternal life by his suffrages: In Festo S. Osmundi. The like you have in Festis
S. Sulpicii, S. Priscae, S. Vincentii, S. Blasii, S. Bonifacii, etc. Missale
secundum usum Sarum.

2. The Heathen in their Invocations urged the merits of these Demons, or
middle-gods. These Demons (says S. Austin according to the opinion of the
Gentiles) are Interpreters and Messengers between God and men, that hence they
might carry our Petitions, and thence bring us Supplies. And observe the ground
or reason; Because they excel us mortals in Merits. De Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap.
22.

Thus do Papists in their prayers to Saints, urge their merits, that is, desire
to be heard for their merits. The truth of this is most evident from these
following prayers.

O Lord, let the holy prayer of B. Andrew make our Sacrifice pleasing to thee;
that being solemnly exhibited to his honor, it may be made acceptable by his
Merits, through our Lord. In Festo S. Andreae.

O God, who have adorned blessed Nicolas thy Bishop with innumerable Miracles;
grant unto us, we beseech thee, that by his Merits and Prayers we may be
delivered from the flames of Hell, through, etc. In Festo S. Nicolai.

O Lord, we beseech thee graciously to hear the prayers of thy people, that we
may be assisted by the Merits of Blessed Marcellus thy Martyr and Bishop, in
whose passion we rejoice, through our Lord. In Festo S. Marcelli.

Look, O Lord, we beseech thee, upon what we have now offered unto thee; and by
the merits of Blessed Bishop Julian deliver us from all our sins, through, etc.
In Festo S. Juliani.

The like you have in Festis S. Valentini, S. Julianae, S. Potentianae, S.
Aldelmi, S. Marcellini, S. Bonifacii, etc. Missale sec. us. Sarum.

3. The Heathen invocated their Demons or Gods, for help and all good things,
as the immediate Authors and Donors of them. Certain gods with you (says
Arnobius) have certain Guardianships, Licenses, and Powers; neither do ye ask
from any of them, that which is not in their power and donation. Ye believe
that Liber can give Wine, but not Physic; Ceres fruit; Aesculapius health;
Neptune another thing; and another thing Juno; Fortune, Mercury, Vulcan, they
are givers of certain particular things: Adversus Gentes, lib. 2. And that of
S. Austin imports no less; The knowledge of the gods is necessary, that we may
direct our Petitions to them aright, and not ask Water from the god of Wine; or
Wine from the goddesses of Water: De Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 22.

Thus do our Romanists pray unto their Saints for all good things both of this
and the other life, as the immediate Authors and Donors of them. They call the
B. Virgin not only an Advocate, but also a Mediator, Helper Redeemer; the
Throne of Grace, the Gate of Heaven, etc. But more particularly: They pray unto
the Saints,

1. For Remission of sin. Have mercy upon me, O Lady, who art called the Mother
of Mercy; and according to the bowels of thy compassions cleanse me from all
mine iniquities, Psalm. 50. O Lady, in thy Name make me safe, and deliver me
from mine unrighteousnesses, that the craftiness of the Enemy may not hurt me,
Psalm. 53. In Psalterio B. Mariae. We call upon thee with devout sighs, and pray
unto thee with affectionate piety. Blot out the internal sins of our thoughts,
and the external sins of our works. And a little after: We sigh with weeping
for our sins; yet we trust in thee, Mother of Piety: Give pardon freely to them
that are penitent. Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sarum, p. 147.

Omnes quos Dei gratia
Ab hac exemit patria,
Bona donans coelestia,
Nostra laxate crimina. Hymnus de Omnibus Sanctis.
2. For Reconciliation. Let us humbly call upon the Childbearing Virgin; let
us offer unto her our sighs and groans; Propitiation is not to be found without
her, nor Salvation without her fruit: By her sins are purged, and by the fruit
of her soul they are made white, etc. Psalm. 136, in Psalterio Mariae.

O all ye Saints and Elect of God, for whom he has from the beginning prepared
a Kingdom, I beseech you by the love wherewith he has loved you, help me most
miserable sinner, before death shall snatch me hence; and reconcile me to my
Creator before Hell shall devour me, etc. Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sarum, p. 71.

3. The donation of grace and spiritual gifts. Remember us, O Savior of them
that are lost; hear the groans of our hearts; infuse grace into them out of thy
treasuries, Psalm. 61. Conserve in us the good things of Nature; and let the
good things of grace be multiplied by thee, Psalm. 135. in Psalterio Mariae.

Thou art full of Virtue above all the Citizens in Heaven; give us virtues and
assistance, etc. And a little after: Thou do replenish all women with the
best riches; fill us who are indigent, with thy grace: Horae B. Virg. sec. us.
Sarum. p. 146.

Ave Agnes gloriosa,
Me in fide serves recta.
Dulcis Virgo, and dilecta
Te exoro precibus:
Charitate da perfecta
Deum, per quem es electa,
Colere pie omnibus. De S. Agneta.
4. Illumination of mind. O Lady, be thou my light; let the splendour of thy
face and serenity of thy grace shine upon my mind, Ps. 26. Be merciful unto me,
O Lady, Mother of light and splendour; enlighten us, O Lady of Truth and Virtue,
Ps. 109, in Psalterio B. Mariae. They sing this Hymn to S. Agnes.

Agnes agni foemina,
Nos intus illumina,
Radices extirpata Peccatorum.
Which is thus Englished by that learned and worthy person in his Reflections
upon the Devotions of the Roman Church, p. 385.

Agnes, who art the Lamb's chaste Spouse,
Enlighten thou our minds within;
Not only lop the spreading Boughs,
But root out of us every Sin.
O holy Patriarchs, holy Prophets, pray for my sins; and all the darkness of
error being utterly expelled, illustrate the eyes of my mind with the light of
true Catholic Faith. Ad omnes Patriarchas and Prophetas.

5. Protection from enemies. Let Mary arise, and let all her enemies be
scattered. Dissolve the Empire of our Enemies, and destroy all their iniquity:
Ps. 67. in Psalterio B. Mariae.

When Pope Gregory 7, went to deprive the Emperor of Germany, and absolve his
subjects from their obedience; he used this prayer:

Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, I beseech thee incline thine ears, and
hear me thy Servant, whom thou have brought up from mine Infancy, and to this
day delivered me from the hands of wicked men who have hated and persecuted me,
etc. Platina in ejus vita.

O S. Denis, Doctor of France, and excellent Martyr, I beseech thee do not
despise me, but deliver me from all poverties and tribulations of soul and
body. Holy Denis, I beseech thee and thy companions that ye receive my soul
when it shall be presented before the Tribunal of the Judge; and entreat the
mighty King, That by your suffrages I may merit to be delivered from eternal
torments. Ad. S. Dionysium.

I will conclude this with part of a most devout prayer (for so it is called)
to the B. Virgin Mary.

O most Illustrious, and most Excellent, Glorious, ever-Virgin Mary, Mother of
our Lord Jesus Christ; my Lady, Queen, and Lady of the whole Creation; who
forsakest none, despisest none, sendest none away desolate, that humbly and
devoutly comes unto thee with a good and pure heart; do not despise me for my
most grievous sins; do not forsake me for mine innumerable iniquities; neither
for the hardness and filthiness of my heart, cast me out of the sight of thy
Grace and Love: But for thy greatest Mercy and sweetest Piety, hear me firmly
confiding in thy Mercy. And help me, most Holy and Glorious Virgin, in all my
tribulations, straits and necessities. And in all my undertakings grant me
counsel and assistance; and deliver me from all mine enemies visible and
invisible. Give me virtue and fortitude against the temptations and
machinations of the World, the Flesh and the Devil -- Horae B. Virg. sec. us.
Sar. p. 128.

6. Deliverance from the power of Satan. Judge me, O Lady, etc. Deliver me from
the malignant Serpent, and pestiferous Dragon. Let thy blessed Virginity bruise
his head, and thy holy merits subdue his power, Ps. 42, in Psalterio B. Mariae.

Hail sweet Mother of Christ, whom thou sorrowing and weeping saw taken,
bound, beaten -- Remember this sorrow, O Mother of Mercy, keep me from the
snares of the Devil, and from reproaches. Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p. 144.

Holy Michael, be thou to me a Breast Plate. Holy Gabriel, be to me an Helmet.
Holy Raphael, be to me a Buckler. Holy Vriel, be to me a Defender. Holy
Cherubin, be to me Health. Holy Seraphin, be to me Truth. And all ye holy
Angels and Archangels, keep, protect, and defend me, and bring me to Eternal
life. Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sarum, p. 97.

7. Presence and assistance at the hour of death: Unto thee, O Lady, have I
lift up my soul; let not the snares of death prevail against me; Ps. 24. in
Psalterio B. Mariae.

Ave dulcis Matter Christi,
Quem dolens and flens vidisti
Cruci nexum speciosum
Jesum factum, seu leprosum.
Per dolorem hunc tam fortem,
Et per Nati tui mortem:
In hora mortis ultima
Assis mihi charissima.
Ave Mar. Hor. B. Vir. sec. us. Sar. p. 144. But of this I shall have occasion
to speak more fully afterward.

8. Eternal life. Thou holy Virgin art the Mother of my Life; the Nourisher of
the reparation of my Flesh; because thou art the Nurse of the Salvation of my
soul; the beginning and the end of my whole Salvation; Ps. 41. in Psalt. B. Mar.

Ave quae post mortem Christi
Dolendo saepe vidisti
Cunct a loca martyrii
Ejus plena suspirii.
Ob poenas quas susceperas,
Ista loca cum videras.
Da post haec transitoria
Mihi locum in gloria.
Hor. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p 144.
But as great as this Privilege is, yet you must not look upon it as
appropriated to the B. Virgin, but common to other Saints. So much is clear
from this Sequence.

Vas virtutum via morum,
Flos odorum, odor florum,
Nos tuere, nos coelorum
Transfer ad pallatia. Missale sec.
us. Ebor. in Officio S. Katharinae.
And we find them praying thus to S. Paul; O blessed Paul, Apostle, I beseech
thee that thou would preserve me from the evil Angel, and deliver me from the
wrath to come, and bring me to Heaven.

To conclude this; There Is no Good, either corporal or spiritual, temporal or
eternal, the donation of which they do not ask from their Saints; and no evil
from which they desire not to be delivered by them; as most evidently appears
from many examples in their Rosaries, Breviaries, etc. And no wonder if that be
true which is asserted by Costerus, viz. That the Saints receive the same power
from God immediately after death, that Christ received from his Father,
promised in the second Psalm. Enchirid. de Venerat. Sanctor. Propos. 4.

CHAP. III. Patronage of SAINTS.
THE Heathen had particular gods for every Country, City, and Place; yea, for
every thing: Minutius Felix Octav. p. 12. Arnob. Adv. Gent. lib. 8. They had
particular Gods or Demons for every Country, to whom the protection of that
Country was committed, and Sacrifices offered by the Inhabitants thereof. To
clear up this, we need go no further than Holy Writ. The Chaldeans had Baal,
Judge. 8. 33. The Sidonians Ashtaroth, 1 King. 11. 5. The Ammonites Moloch, v.
7. The Moabites Chemosh, ibid. The Philistines Dagon, Judge. 16. 23. And every
Nation that came out of Ashur, had a several god. The men of Babel,
Succoth-Benoth, 2 King. 17. 30. The men of Cuth, Nergal, ibid. The men of
Hamath, Ashima, ibid. The Avites, Nibhar, and Tartake, v. 31. And the
Sepharvites, Adramelech, and Anamelech, ibid. And if we look into their own
Historians, this will appear to be a great truth. The Egyptians had Isis; the
Moors Juba; the Macedonians Carylus; the Poenians Vramus; the Latins Faunus;
the Sabines Sancus; the Romans Quirinus; the Samians Juno; the Lemnians Vulcan;
the Naxians Liber; the Lybians Psapho; the Phoenicians Enenthius; the Assyrians
Adad; the Sicilians Adramus; the Baeotians Amphicaraus; the Africans Mopsus;
the Aethiopians Osiris; the Syrians Astartes; the Arabians Diasares; the
Noricans Tibelenus; the Novarians Hercules, etc. Alexand. ab Alexandro in Genesis
Dier. Macrobius Saturnal. Gyrald. de Diis Gentium. Rosin. Antiq. Roman. Polyd.
Virg. de Invent. rerum, lib. 1. cap. 1. with many others.

Thus do Papists appoint Tutelar Saints over particular Countries: S. George
for England, S. Patrick for Ireland, S. Andrew for Scotland, S. Martin for
Germany, S. Peter and Paul for the Territories of Rome, S. James for Spain, S.
Michael and S. Denis for France, S. Gallus for Helvetia, S. Lewis for Hungary,
S. Stanislaus for Poland, S. Nicholas for Muscovia, etc. This is so well known,
that I need not cite Authors for it.

2 The Pagans had Tutelar gods for every City: Macrobius tells us, That all
Cities are under the tutelage and protection of some god, Saturn. lib. 3. cap.
9: and a little after he says, That it was the custom of the Romans when they
besieged a City, to use a certain charm (two or three he mentions in the same
Chap.) to call away their Tutelar god; because otherwise they thought it
impossible to take the City. And to prevent this, the Romans were prohibited to
name or enquire after their Tutelar god, Plut. in Quaest. Romans Quaest. 61.

The Prophet Jeremy says of Revolting Judah, chap. 2. 28, According to the
number of thy Cities are thy gods; after the manner of the Heathen; Paphos had
Venus, Athens Minerva, Ephesus Diana, Delph Apollo, etc.

Thus our Romanists have Tutelar Saints for every City; S. Mark for Venice, S.
Ambrose for Millain, S. Genovesa for Paris, S. Stephen for Vienna, S. Vlderick
for Augusta, S. Anatolius for Salina, the three King, for Cologne, etc.

3. The Pagans had gods for every place, the Mountains, Valleys, Woods, etc. as
S. Austin de Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 21. Arnob. Advers. Gent. lib. 4, and
others write. Jugatinus was a god for the ^ops of Mountains; for Hills,
Collatina; for Valleys, Vallonia; for the Woods, Feronia; for the Sea, Neptune,
etc.

Dii sumus agrestes, and qui dominantur in altis
Montibus, imperium est in sua tecta Jovi.
Thus Papists have Saints for every place; S. Barbara for the Hills, and S.
Agatha for the Valleys, S. Silvester for the Woods, etc.

4. The Pagans had gods for every Thing, as well as every Place, whether
animate or inanimate; Hippona for Horses, Alexander ab Alexandro, in Genial.
Dier. lib. 3. cap. 22. Tert. Apol. cap. 16. Bubona for Oxen, Rosinus Antiq.
Romans lib. 2. cap. 20. Gyrald. de diis Gent. Syntag. 1. p. 55. Pan for Sheep,
Natal. Comes Mythol. lib. 5. cap. 6.

O Pan pascendis gregibus custodia fida. Mellona for Bees, Rosin. Antiq. Romans
lib. 2. cap. 20. Gyrald. Synt. 1. p. 40. Bacchus for Wine, Rosin. Antiq. Romans
lib. 2. cap. 11. Pomana for Apples, Vossius Physiol. Christiana and Theolog.
Gent. lib. 5. cap. 47. Gyral. Syntag. 1. p. 42. Tutelina for Corn. S. Aust. de
Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 8. Gyrald. Syntag. 1. Pales for Fodder, Alexand. ab
Alex. in Genial. Dier. lib. 2. cap. 22. Brissonius de Formul. lib. 1. p. 58.

Thus our Romanists have Saints for every thing: Jodocus for Corn, Otho
Gualtperins apud Wolfium Lection. Memor. Tom. 2. p. 990. Pelagius for Oxen,
Eulogius for Horses, Wendeline for Sheep, Urban for Wine, etc. Conr. Nucerinus
apud Wolf. Tom. 1. page 954.

Wendlinus custodit oves, oviumque Magistros,
Atque boves idem pingues, ut fecit and olim:
Setigeros vero porcos Antonius ille,
Qui coluisse olim vastum narratur eremum.
And a little after he adds,

Urbanus vina secundat,
Et multo replet spumantia dolia musto,
Jodocus fruges tristi a rubigine servat,
Et bruchos tollit Magnus. Thomas Naogeorgius in Regno Papistico apud Gerhardum
de Morte, p. 474, and Wol. sium Lection. Memor. Tom. 2. p. 644.
CHAP. IV. Particular Offices of Saints.
THE Heathen fancied, that their gods had a peculiar power, and thereupon
assigned them their several Offices, says Arnobius adv. Gent. lib. 3. And S.
Austin speaking of them (lib. 4. de Civit. Dei, cap. 22) says, Varro affirms,
That the knowledge of the gods is necessary, that we may direct our Petitions to
them aright, and not ask Water from the god of Wine, or Wine from the goddesses
of Water. Certain gods with you (says Arnobius) have certain Guardianships,
Licenses, and Powers; neither do ye ask from any of them that which is not in
their power and donation. Ye believe that Liber can give Wine, but not Physic;
Ceres fruits, Aesculapius health, Neptune another thing; and another thing
Juno, Fortune, Mercury, Vulcan, etc. Adver. Gent. lib. 2. They tell us, that in
such and such cases, under such and such grievances, we must pray to this, or
that, or another god. And the very same thing is affirmed by our Romanists of
their Saints, That saying of Virgil, Non omnia possumus omnes, is true of the
Saints, says Biel: For all gifts are not granted to all, but diverse Virtues to
diverse Saints, as Gerson writes de Oratione and valor ejus; Turn thee to some
of the Saints for the supply of all necessities, or to obtain some particular
grace; apply thy self to that Saint who is reputed famous for it, Lect. 32, in
Can. Missae. That herein there is a perfect agreement between the Pagans and
our Romanists, will more fully appear in the following particulars.

1 The Heathen prayed to Apollo or Aesculapius, or both of them, when visited
with sickness, S. Aust. de Civit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 17. lib. 4. cap. 21.

Thus do our Romanists in the like condition, or under the same circumstances,
pray to their Saints; yea, they have a particular Saint for every Disease,
which they pray unto.

1 When visited with the Plague, they pray unto S. Roch and S. Sebastian.
Whosoever says this following prayer in the Worship of God and S. Roch, shall
not dye of the Pestilence by the grace of God, Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p.
138. First we have this Antiphona.

O Venerable Confessor of God, thy prayer and intercession has obtained in
Heaven, That whoever shall devoutly call upon thee in affliction, shall be
forthwith by thy merits delivered from the peril of Plague and Pestilence. Pray
for us blessed Roch.

And then we have this most excellent Prayer:

Almighty, Everlasting God, who by the merits and prayers of the most blessed
Roch, thy Confessor, did remove a certain general Plague; grant to thy
Supplicants, That they who for the removing the like Plague, fly to him,
confiding in thee, by the prayer of this glorious Confessor they may be freed
from the Pestilence, and from all perturbation; Through our Lord, etc.

They pray likewise to S. Schastian for the removal of the Pestilence, Hor. B.
Virg. sec. us. Sar. p. 79.

O God, who have so confirmed Blessed Sebastian, thy glorious Martyr, in thy
faith and love, that he could not be removed from thy holy Worship by any
carnal allurements, threats of Tyrants, arrows or torments; We pray for, by his
Merits and Intercession, help in all tribulation, comfort in persecution, and
in all times of danger remedy against the Plague, etc.

2 In Fevers and Agues they invoke S. Sigismund: Missale sec. us. Sar. p. 47.

Almighty, Everlasting God, who by thy holy Apostles and Martyrs have
vouchsafed to bestow diverse gifts of Healing: Grant, we beseech thee, to thy
servant N, here present, who is wearied with the vexation of Fevers, that by
the Intercession of thy servant Sigismund, King and Martyr, thy Medicine may
raise him to health, and mercifully vouchsafe to restore him to his former
soundness, Through our Lord, etc.

If those that are afflicted with Agues (says Gregory Turen. cited by the
Author of the Reflections, etc.) do devoutly celebrate Mass in honor of him,
and offer an Oblation to God for the Rest of his soul, presently their shakings
cease, their Fevers are extinguished, and they are restored to their former
health.

3 For the Toothache they pray to S. Apollonia: Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p.
71. Antiphona.

Virgo Christi egregia pro nobis Apollonia:
Funde preces ad Dominum, ut tollat omne noxium,
Ne pro re^^u criminum morbo vexemur dentium.
And in the Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Romans we have this prayer:

Almighty, Everlasting God, who did deliver S. Apollonia thy Virgin and
Martyr, from the hands of her enemies, and did hear her prayer; I entreat
thee by her Intercession, and the Intercession of S. Laurence thy Martyr,
together with that of all the He and She-Saints, to expel pain from my Teeth,
and to make me safe and sound, that I may return thee my eternal thanksgiving,
etc.

4 For Inflammations they pray to S. Antony the Hermit: Hor. B. Virg. sec. us.
Sar. p. 138. Antiphona.

Antoni pastor inclyte,
Qui cruciatos resicis,
Morbos sanas and distruis
Ignis calorem extinguis;
Pie pater ad Dominum
Ora pro nobis miseris.
The PRAYER.
O God, who by the help of thy blessed Confessor S. Antonie, do vouchsafe the
extinguishing of the fiery disease, and to give refreshments to sick members;
we beseech thee grant, that we being freed by his Merits and Prayers from the
flames of Hell, may be happily presented sound in mind and body before thee in
glory; Through, etc.

5 For Convulsions and Palsies they pray to S. Marus: In the Brev. Eccles.
Trev. (cited by the Learned Author of the Reflections, etc.) we have this
prayer:

O God, who by the Intercession of S. Marus thy Confessor and Bishop, do
vouchsafe to preserve and deliver men that invoke him, from any diseased
contraction of the body and members, and from the Palsy; Grant that we, by the
Merits of the same Saint, may so enjoy health of bodily life, that we may find
the remedy of the eternal salvation of our souls in heaven; Through our Lord,
etc.

There are many other Saints, whose aid and assistance they implore in
particular diseases and distempers of body; as S. Venisa for the
Green Sickness; S. Otitia for sore-eyes; S. Hubert for biting with mad-dogs; S.
Flacrius for the French Pox; S. Valentine for the Falling Sickness; S. Blasius
for bones that stick in the throat; S. John the Evangelist for poison; and S.
Benedict for the Stone; S. Liberius for the Fistula; S. Cuirinus, etc.
Heshushius de Errorib. Pontif. Loc. 28: and Otho Gualiperius apud Wolf. Lect.
Memor. Tom. 2. p. 989. But these, with many more, for brevity sake I pass over.

2 The Heathen commended their Warriors to Mars and Bellona; S. Aust. de Civit.
Dei, lib. 4. cap. 11. Gyrald. de diis Gent. Syntag. 9. p. 308, and Syntag. 10,
p. 312. It Is reported of Appius, that in the heat of a Battle he was seen to
lift up his hands to Heaven, and pray in these words; O Lady Bellona, if thou
give us victory, and the honor of this day, then I vow unto thee a fair
Temple: And when he had thus prayed, as if the goddess had put life into him,
and animated his courage, both himself matched the courage of his Colleague,
and his Army answered the Virtue of their Commander: Tit. Live. Hist. Romans lib.
10.

Our Romans commend their Warriors to S. George: Mantuan says, That he is
invocated in the place of Mars, Fast. lib. 4.

Maxim bellorum Rector, quem nostra juventus
Pro Maverte colit. --
And in the Horae B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p. 70, we have this Antiphona, thus
Englished by a late Author:

George, Holy Martyr, praise and fame
Attend upon thy glorious Name;
Advanced to Knightly dignity,
The Daughter of a King by thee
(As she was making grievous moan
By a fierce Dragon all alone)
Was freed from death: We thee entreat
That we in heaven may have a seat;
And being washed from every stain,
May there with all the faithful reign
That we with thee together may
Sing gladly many a sacred Lay,
The gracious Throne of Christ before,
To whom be praise for evermore.
Verse. Pray for us St. George, the Soldier of Christ.

Ans. That our Enemies visible and invisible, may be very weak in opposing us.

3 The Heathen commended their women in travel to Diana or Juno, surnamed
Lucina; S. Austin de Civit. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 21. Plutarch in Quest. Romans
Quest. 2. Callimachus says, That she dwells in the Woods, and never goes into
a City, unless she be invocated by Childbearing Women.

Vrbes accedam virorum
Solum, cum gravibus doloribus pressae mulieres
Auxilio vocant ad pariendum. Apud Schedium
de diis Germanis, cap. 9. p. 163.
Montium ^ustos, nemorumque Virgo,
Qu^ laborantes utero puellas
Ter vocata audis, adimisque lethe
Diva triformis. Horat lib. 3. Carm: And Macrobius gives us the reason, Quia
proprium ejus munus est distendere rimas corporis and meatibus viam dare, quod
est ad celerandos partus salutare; Saturn. l. 7. c. 16. Our Romanists at such a
time pray to S. Margaret. The old Roman and Sarisbury Breviaries tell us (Lect.
6.), that when she came to dye she prayed, That whosoever writ, read, or heard
of her passion, might obtain pardon of his sins; and whosoever would build a
Church to her honor, and minister Candles out of his just labor for her
service, might have whatsoever he asked that belonged to his salvation; and in
a more especial manner she prayed for women in labor, That when they invoked
her patronage, they might have a speedy delivery, and escape the danger; and
that the Infant might be born without any defect of its members. When she had
done praying, there was a great Thunder, and a Dove came from Heaven, saying,
Blessed art thou Margaret, the Spouse of Christ; behold, thy Petitions are
granted thee by Christ, come into the rest of the Heavenly Country.

4 The Heathen prayed to Neptune in storms by Sea, of which they supposed that
he had the command; Rosin. Antique Romans lib. 2. cap. 13. And to Castor and
Pollux; Alexander ab Alexandro in Genial. Dierum, lib. 3. cap. 22. And Andreas
Tiraquellus in his Annotations upon him, produces many other Testimonies; and
amongst the rest, these Verses of Catullus:

Ac velut in nigro jactatis turbine Nautis,
Lenius aspirans aura secunda venit.
Jam prece Pollucis, jam Castoris implorata,
Tale fuit nobis Mallius auxilium.
And the reason of this Invocation is given by Natal. Comes; They accompanied
Jason and his Argonants in their expedition to fetch back the Golden Fleece. In
this Voyage, when a dangerous Tempest had overtaken them, two flames of fire
appeared about the heads of these two Brethren, and a wonderful calm
immediately followed; hereupon they believed that there was a Divine power in
these young men, and afterward invoked their assistance in storms and tempests
by Sea; Mythol. lib. 8. cap. 9.

Our Romanists in the like danger pray to S. Nicholas. In the Salibury Missal
(In Festo S. Nicolai) we have this Sequence.

Quidam Nautae Navigantes,
Et contra fluctuum saevitiam luctantes
Navi pene dissoluta.
Jam de vita desperantes
In tanto positi periculo clamantes,
Voce dicunt omnes una.
O Beat Nicolae,
Nos ad portum maris trahe
De mortis angustia;
Trahe nos ad portum maris
Tu qui tot auxiliaris
Pietatis gratia.
Dum clamarent nec incassum,
Ecce quidam dicens, Assum
Ad vestra praesidia:
Statim aura datur grata,
Et tempestas sit sedata,
Quieverunt maria.
This seems to be grounded upon that famous ^tory we meet with in the Breviary
of York, Lect. 8, and the old Roman Breviary, Lect. 9. Certain Mariners were in
great danger by a Tempest at Sea; and being sore afraid, cried out, O Nicolas,
the servant of God, if those things be true which we have heard concerning
thee, let us now in this danger experience thine aid. While they were speaking
these words, one appeared, saying to them, Ye have called me, behold I am here:
And he began to help them in ordering their Cables and Sails, and other
Tacklings; and presently the Tempest ceased. The Mariners when they came to
shore, enquired where Nicolas was; and when they learnt that he was in the
Church, they went thither; and which is wonderful to be related, they
immediately knew him without any bodies showing, though they had never seen him
before; and falling prostrate at his feet, they paid their thanks to him,
relating how by his suffrages they had been delivered, when they were even at
the brink of death. This Story is related by Jacobus de Voragine in ejus vita;
and their Mantuan gives us this account of it, Fastor. lib. 12.

Cum turbine Nautae
Deprensi Cilices magno clamore vocarent
Nicolei viventis opem, descendere quidam
Coelituum visus sancti sub imagine patris:
Qui freta depulso fecit placidissima vento.
And lest any should question the truth of this, and many suchlike pleasant
Stories which the forecited Authors, and Alf. Villegas de vitis Sanctor. have
recorded concerning this Saint; their great Durand mentions another, not less
pleasant, or more to be credited than the former. We read (says he) that in a
certain Church called Crux, belonging to the Monastry of B. Mary de Charitate,
the History of S. Nicolas was not read. The Brethren of that place earnestly
requested their Prior, that they might sing it; but he absolutely denied,
saying, That it was not convenient to admit Innovations: and when they renewed
their Petition, in anger he answered, Depart from me, for new Hymns, especially
such as are joculary, shall not be sung in my Church. But the poor Prior paid
dear for his peremptory denial and indecent expressions: for behold, B. Nicolas
appeared to him in the night, and drew him out of his bed by the hair of his
head; and having laid him on the ground, and beginning the Antiphona O pastor
aeterne, etc. did beat him with rods while he was repeating it. The whole
Monastry being awakened with the noise, came into the Chamber, where they found
the Prior half dead; who after he was a little recovered, said, Go and sing the
History of S. Nicolas: Rational. Divin. Officior. lib. 7. cap 39.

5 The Heathen commended their Wayfaring men when they went from home, to
Abeona; and when they came toward home, to Adeona; S. Aust. de Civit. Dei,
lib. 4. cap. 21. And to Vibilia, to be kept from wandering out of the way;
Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. 4. Rosin. Antiq. Romans lib. 2. cap. 18.

Our Romanists pray to the three Kings of Cologne; Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Sar.
p. 64.

O God, who by the guidance of a Star did lead without impediment the three
Eastern Magi, Jaspar Melchior, and Belthasar, to thy Cradle, to worship thee
with Mystical gifts; mercifully grant, That by the pious Intercessions of these
three Kings, and Merits, thou would afford unto us thy servants, that in the
journey which we are undertaking, with speed, joy, grace, and peace, we may
come to the places we design to go to, in peace and safety; and after the
dispatch of our business, may be able to return safe and sound with all
prosperity; Who with the Father, etc. Amen.

6 Lastly, The Heathen had particular gods for every man in every condition and
relation, from his conception to his dissolution; yea, for every thing relating
to man. So much is affirmed by S. Austin out of Varro, De Civit. Dei, lib. 6.
cap. 9. Varro begins to enumerate the gods from the conception of man, in which
number Janus is the first, and proceeds gradually to old age; and concludes the
gods appertaining to men, with Nenia the goddess of Funerals. And then he
mentions certain gods for every thing relating to man, and shows what their
office is, and for what every one ought to be supplicated. For Students they
had Minerva; for Lawyers, Juno; for Physicians, Apollo and Aesculapius; for
Thieves, Laverna; for Whores, Flora, etc: S. Aust. de Civit. Dei, Arnobius adv.
Gent. Gyraldus, Rosinus, Alexander ab Alexandro, etc.

Thus our Romanists have particular Saints for every Condition and Profession.
Take a few instances.

S. Gregory for Scholars: This Pope was a great Scholar, and the Founder of
many Schools, and therefore is made the Patron of young Scholars. On the
Festival of this Saint (says Hospinian) Boys were, and still are in many
places, called to the School with certain songs by a suborned Bishop,
personating S. Gregory. De Orig. Festor. Christian. p. 42.

S. Katharine for Students. Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. p. 103. This Saint
was eminent for her knowledge in the Tongues, Natural Philosophy, etc. She
confuted and converted Fifty Philosophers appointed to dispute with her; and
therefore is deservedly honored by Students, who by her means receive much
knowledge and wisdom from God. Als. Villegas in ejus vita.

S. Cosma and Damian for Physicians. Jacobus de Voragine, and Villegas have
recorded several Miracles wrought by these Saints, in recovering sick persons,
upon which their Patronage is grounded. Mantuan Fastor. lib. 9.

S. Leonard for Captives. He obtained of Clodoveus King of France, lately
converted to Christ, That all Prisoners visited by him, might be released; and
wherever he heard of any Captives, he posted to them, and procured their
Liberty. Petrus de Natalib. lib. 10. cap. 29.

God so adorned S. Leonard, that whoever being cast into prison invoked his
Name, his Chains fell off, and he was set at liberty without any impediment.
Hence it came to pass, that many in remote Countries who were freed by him from
their chains and imprisonments, came to him, and brought their irons and
fetters with them. Hereupon he is made the Patron of Captives, and invocated by
them. Jacob. de Voragine Legenda 150.

S. Julian for Pilgrims. Mantuan calls him Johanus, and gives us this account
of him: As he was hunting, the Heart which he pursued told him that he should
kill both his Parents. To prevent this, he left them, and went to a Prince in a
remote Country, where he behaved himself so well, that the Prince gave him in
marriage a noble Matron. This being known to his Parents, they came to visit
him; and though they found their Son from home, yet his Wife when she
understood who they were, received them honorably, and lodged them in her own
Chamber. But early the next morning, when she was at her devotions, her Husband
returned; and going into the Chamber, killed both his Parents, supposing he had
found a stranger in bed with his Wife. But he was presently convinced of his
mistake, and told who they were. And then it follows:

Obstupuit, facinusque animo deflevit amaro.
Et placare Deum cupiens discessit ab armis.
Ac prope torrentis ripas, ubi magna solebat
Turba inopum ferri, rapidoque in flumine mergi,
Constituit lectum, quod praetereuntibus esset
Hospitium commune, dicuns seque and sua tali
Officio gratis. Festor. lib. 2.
Hence it is that this Saint is called Hospitator (one that most courteously
entertaineth strangers), and in the Roman Church is invoked by Pilgrims for
good lodging. Hospin. Fest. Christ p. 37.

S. Agatha for Nurses; and hence her Festival is solemnly observed by them. So
much is affirmed by their Mantuan, Fast. lib. 2.

Gloria Sicaniae gentis pulcherrima Virgo
Diva Agatha nonas mensis tua Festa secundi
Sacravere: Nurus illa votiva serentes
Dona die veniunt digitis fulgentibus auro:
Sericeisque tuas adeunt in vestibus aras.
S. Mary Magdalen for Whores. Very remarkable is that which their Alf. Villegas
writes concerning this Saint; and though it be something long, yet I cannot
well pass it over, since it may be very serviceable to the Modish Ladies of our
times, not perfectly instructed in the Roman Religion.

Moses the great Friend of God, has left written in the Book of Genesis, That
when God in the beginning created the World, he made two great Lights, but one
bigger than the other; and placed them in Heaven: The greater was to give light
in the day, and the lesser to shine in the night. These two Lights, viz. the
Sun and the Moon, adorn the Heavens very much. Jesus Christ our Lord, when he
founded his Church, put therein two Lights, that is, the Sun and the Moon: The
Sun was to give light to them that walked by day, and the Moon to illuminate
those that travel by night.

Now let us see who is this Sun in the Church, and who is this Moon. We may
well say, This Sun, clear, resplendent, and without any spot or stain, is the
glorious Virgin Mary, for her very great clearness and beauty, for that she
bore in her Womb Jesus Christ our God, who is the true Sun of Jestice; and
because she is clothed with the Sun, as the Evangelist S. John says of her in
his Revelations; I saw a Woman clothed with the Sun, whom all the holy Doctors
say is the Mother of God. But how comes it to pass that she is said to be the
President of the Day, and to give light thereunto? They are like the clear and
bright Day, that be in the grace of God, because these do works worthy to be
seen. Of these then is this Sun President, and to them gives light, in showing
them the way of Virtue, by which men go to Heaven. We have found who is the
Sun, and the greater Light of the Church, viz. the religious Virgin Mary. Let
us now see who is the lesser Light that illuminateth the Church by night: This
is the Second Mary, the B. S. Mary Magdalen; and this Name fitteth her very
well: For as the Moon on one side is dark; and on the other side, where the Sun
beholds her, clear and resplendent; even so part of the life of this blessed
Saint was ugly, dark, and spotted with many sins; but on the other part
whereunto the true Sun of Justice Jesus Christ directed his beams, and
converted her to him, it was clear and beautiful.

But why, will you say, is she President of the Night, and does illuminate it,
and gives light to them that walk by night? With great reason we may call them
Night, which be in mortal sin, that do works unworthy to appear before the eyes
of men. Of these persons S. Mary Magdalen is President, showing unto them the
way of Penance wherein they ought to walk. In ejus vita.

S. Luke for Painters. Villegas tells us, That he made two excellent Pictures
of Christ and the B. Virgin, which he constantly carried about with him, and
wrought Miracles by them. In vita S. Lucae. Hereupon these Artists make choice
of this Saint for their Patron.

They have many more Saints for particular Professions; as S. Crispin for
Shoomakers, S. Eulogius for Smiths, S. Gotarus for Potters, S. Severus for
Fullers, etc. So that what is affirmed by Arnobius concerning the Gentile gods,
viz. That they were Presidents of Arts, Adv. Gent. lib. 3. may as truly be said
of our Romanists concerning their Saints, They are Patrons of Arts and Sciences.

Thus Papists have a particular Saint (as the Pagans had a Demon) for persons
of all Professions, and in all Conditions, even from their conception to their
dissolution; yea, at death they have a particular Saint, into whose hands they
commend their spirits, viz. the Virgin Mary. This is clear from a certain form
of prayer in many old English Books, where they are taught to pray thus at the
hour of death:

O Blessed Mary, Holy Mother of God, grant that I may end my life in the true
faith of holy Kirk; and I commend my soul to thee, etc. See the like Prayer in
the Rosary, p. 59.

O most prudent Virgin, who entering the Heavenly Palace, did fill the holy
Angels with joy, and men with hope; vouchsafe to intercede for us in the hour
of our death, that free from the illusions and temptations of the Devil, we may
joyfully and securely pass out of this temporal state, to enjoy the happiness
of eternal life.

And the dying person is directed in the Roman Ritual to say these words; or if
he cannot, the Priest is to repeat them in his ear:

Holy Mary pray for me. Mary, Mother of Grace, Mother of Mercy, defend me from
the Enemy, and receive me in the hour of death, p. 169.

CHAP. V. IMAGES.
1. THE Heathen made Images and Statues of their gods, 2 King. 10. 26, 27. The
Trojans had the Statue of Pallas (their Goddess) called the Palladium, in which
they reposed a great deal of trust; for the Oracles had proclaimed, That they
should never be overcome by their Enemies whilst they could keep it amongst
them. The Rhodians dedicated to Apollo that famous Colossus of Brass, 800 foot
in height, and of a proportionable bigness, which was broken down by the
Saracens in the year of our Lord 684. We read also of the Statue of Diana,
which Orestes took out of her Temple to appease the Furies for the murder of
his Mother Clytemnestra. And of the Statue of Jupiter Olympias, made by
Phidias, it was an hundred and fifty Cubits high.

Holinshead in his Description of Britain, p. 22. tells us, That the Statues
and Images of the Pagan gods were of a monstrous greatness; and that each
Nation contended which should honor the greater Blocks; and yet all pretended
to have the just height of the god or goddess whom they did represent.

Apollo Capitolinus, that stood at Rome, was thirty cubits high at the least;
Tarentinus Jupiter of forty foot; Tuscanus Apollo, that stood in the Temple of
Augustus, of fifty foot; another made under Nero, of an hundred and ten foot:
But one in France surpassed all, which Zenoduris made unto Mercury at Avernum
in ten years space, of 400 foot.

Eusebius affirms, That Images are taken from Pagans, who were wont to honor
after this manner such as they accounted Saviors, Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap.
17. And Arnobius spends the greatest part of his sixth Book Advers. Gent. in
confuting this practice of the Heathen.

The Pagans did not only make Images and Statues of their gods, but they
adorned them with variety of Ornaments, Jer. 10. 4. They deck it with silver
and with gold. V. 9. Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and
gold from Vphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the Founder: blew
and purple is their clothing, they are all the work of cunning men. With
garments of costly stuff and gorgeous colors, they were wont to adorn and set
out their Idols, Isa. 30. 22. Baruch 6. 9, 10, 12. So Arnob. Advers. Gent. lib.
6. Tertul. de Idolat. cap. 3. And Vossius describes their various Habits, De
Physiol. Christian. and Theol. Gent. lib. 9. Valerius Maximus reports of
Dionysius the Tyrant, King of Sicily, a notorious contemner and spoiler of
Images, That entering into a Temple, he took from Juiter Olympus a garment made
of beaten gold, of a great weight, wherewith Hiero had adorned him out of the
spoils of Carthage; and for this he put upon him a Woollen Mantle, affirming,
that the other was too heavy for Summer, and too cold for Winter; but this
Mantle is fit for both seasons. And coming into another Temple where the
Statues of Apollo and Aesculapius were together, and that of Aesculapius had a
great Beard of massy-gold; he told him, It was not fit that he should have a
Beard, and that Apollo his Father should have none; therefore he caused it to
be taken away, and melted for his own use. Lib. 1. cap. 1. Arnobius and
Tertullian relate the same Stories in the forecited places.

Thus our Romanists make Images and Statues of the Virgin Mary, S. Peter, S.
Paul, etc. and beautify them with many rich Ornaments. Durantus informs us,
That the ancient Romans used to crown their Statues, which he proves out of
Ammianus Marcellinus, and Velleius Paterculus. Hence (says he) to this day the
Images of Saints are engraven and painted cum solari corona. And then he gives
us the reason of it. Tursellin mentions several garments richly embroidered and
adorned with Orient Jewels for the B. Virgin, presented by Princes and
Noblemen. Justus Justeius Earl of Verona, gave to the B. Lady of Loreto, a
garment of Cloth of Gold, faced with costly skins, being the Prize of the
Tilters, gotten at the Games of Florence. The Duchess of Cleve presented her
with a Chain of Gold, notable for weight and workmanship; golden Bracelets
beset with Carbuncles and Diamonds, and a gold Ring of great worth by reason of
an excellent Jewel. Histor. Lauret. lib. 5. cap. 13. Polydor Virgil tells us,
how the people were inveigled by their Priests to adorn the Images of Saints;
and reproves their excess and folly herein; De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 6. cap.
13. And a little before in the same Chapter he affirms, That Images were
derived from Pagans.

2. The Heathen consecrated these Statues and Images of their gods with certain
Prayers and Ceremonies (before they paid any reverence and veneration to
them); by virtue whereof they supposed some extraordinary Virtues were acquired
to them, and resided in them. Dan. 3. 2, Then Nebuchadnezzar the King sent to
gather together the Princes, the Governors -- to come to the dedication of the
Image which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up. So Arnob. Adv. Gent lib. 1.
lib. 6. and lib. 8. Minutius Felix in Octav. Tert. Apol. cap. 12. cum notis
Franc. Zephir. de Spectaculis, cap. 13. and de Idolat. cap. 4. S. Aust. De
Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 23, 24.

Thus do Papists consecrate the Statues and Images of their Saints with certain
Prayers and Ceremonies. The manner of this Consecration is thus described;

The Bishop standing without his Mitre, says,
Our help is in the Name of the Lord.
Ans. Who made Heaven and Earth.
Lord hear my prayer.
Ans. And let my cry come unto thee.
The Lord be with you.
Ans. And with thy spirit.
Almighty, Everlasting God, who forbiddest not the Images and Representations
of thy Saints, that as often as we behold them with corporal eyes, so often we
may meditate with the eyes of our memory, to imitate their acts and sanctity,
we beseech thee vouchsafe to bless, and sancti fie this Image (or Graving)
adapted to the honor and memory of B. N. thy Apostle (or Martyr, or Confessor,
or Bishop, or Virgin); and grant, that whosoever shall endeavor humbly to
honor this thy most glorious Apostle (or Martyr, or Confessor, or Bishop, or
Virgin) before this Image; by his prayers and assistance he may obtain of thee
Grace in this present, and eternal Glory in the life to come; Through our Lord,
etc. And in the last place, the Bishop besprinkles the Image with holy water.
Pontif. Roman. p. 367.

And as the Pagans of old did believe, that by the Consecration of their Images
some extraordinary Virtues were derived to them; Even so do our Romanists now,
as is most clear from these following prayers. The Image of S. John the Baptist
is consecrated with these words:

Grant, O Lord, that all beholding with reverence this Image, and pouring out
their prayers before it, may be heard in whatever they shall ask. Let this
Image be the expulsion of Devils, the advocation of Angels, the protection of
Believers, etc. Pontificale Antiquum apud Rivet. Orthod. Cathol. Tom. 1. Tract.
2. Quaest. 34.

And the Image of the blessed Virgin with these words:

O God, sanctify this Image of the B. Virgin, that it may bring the gift of
saving-help to thy faithful, that hurtful Thunder and Lightning may be more
speedily expelled; that the Inundation of Waters, or Commotion of Civil Wars,
or Devastation of Pagans, may be suppressed at the presence of it, etc. Pontif.
Antiq. apud Gerhard. de Lege Dei.

And what wonderful Virtues do they attribute to their Agnus Dei's, three of
which were sent by Pope Urban the fifth, to the Emperor of Greece with these
words:

Balsamus and munda Cera cum Chrismatis unda
Consiciunt Agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum.
Fulgura desursum depellit, omne malignum,
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis, and angit.
Praegnans servatur, simul and partus liberatur,
Dona defert dignis, virtutem destruit ignis,
Portatus mundae de fluctibus eripit unde.
Ceremoniale Romans apud Rivet. Orthod. Cath. Tom. 1. Tract. 2. Quaest. 17. and
Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. p. 67.

Thus our Romanists blasphemously attribute to their Agnus Dei's what is proper
to the Word of God, and the Blood of Christ, viz. That they blot out
iniquities, purge away the filth of sin, obtain pardon, confer grace, and
defend from all evil.

3. The Heathen gave great honor and reverence to the Statues and Images of
their gods, which they expressed several ways:

1. By cringing, bowing, and kneeling before them, 2 King. 5. 18, 44. Isa. 15.
17. He makes a god, and worshippeth it; he makes it a graven Image, and
falls down thereto, etc. Adorant simulachra in terram prostrati, says
Arnobius, speaking of the Gentiles, lib. 6. Adv. Gent.

2. By kissing of them, 1 King. 19. 18. Yet I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which
has not kissed him. Job 31. 27, And my heart has been secretly enticed, or my
mouth has kissed my hand. Because they could not reach the Sun and Moon, the
Heathen used, when they saw them shine bright, and as it were show themselves
in their glory, to lift up their hands to them, and then put them to their
mouths, by this sign adoring them as gods. If the things they worshipped were
nigh, they kissed them; If out of reach, they put their hands to their mouths,
as acknowledging they had their breath and life from them. This was a Rite and
Ceremony of Adoration among Idolaters. Minutius Felix reports of Caecilius, who
looking upon the Image of Serapis, according to the use of the superstitious
Vulgar, he put his hand to his mouth, and kissed it.

3. The Heathen lighted Candles, and burnt Incense before their Images. Baruch
6. 19, 21, They light them Candles, their faces are blacked through the smoke
-- Their gods are black in the face by the smoke (as our Roman Doctors expound
it) which proceeds from the Incense burnt in honor of them. The Images
perfumed and discolored with smoke, grow black. Arnob. Adv. Gent. lib. 6.
Macrob. Saturnal.

4. The Heathen prayed before their Images. Isa. 44. 17, He falls down unto
it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my god. Minutius Felix speaking of the
Gentiles, says, They invocate their gods, pray before Images, etc.

The very same honor and reverence is given by our Romanists to the Images of
their Saints.

1. They bow and kneel before them, and kiss them. For this we have the
determination of their much admired Council of Trent, Ses. 25. We kiss them,
uncover the head, and fall down before them.

2. They light Candles, and burn Incense before their Images. Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury in his Provincial Council held at Oxford 1408, made
this Constitution: From henceforth let it be taught commonly, and preached by
all, That the Cross, and the Image of the Crucifix, and the rest of the Images
of the Saints, in memory and honor of them whom they represent; as also their
Places and Relics ought to be worshipped with Processions, bendings of the
knee, bowings of the body, incensings, kissings, offerings, lighting of
Candles, and Pilgrimages, together with all other manners and forms whatsoever,
as has been accustomed to be done in our Predecessors times. Lindewods
Constit. Provin. lib. 5. cap. de Haeret. And Durantus gives the reason, and
mystical signification of lighting Candles, and burning Incense before the
Images of Saints. Sensible lights (says he) are a symbol of that material
light given by God. Burning of Incense signifies the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, and sincere repletion, De Ritibus Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 9: n. 11.

3. They pray before their Images. This is clear from the prayer used in the
consecration of the Image of Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint.

Almighty, Everlasting God, we beseech thee vouchsafe to bless, and sancti fie
this Image made to the honor and memory of thine only begotten Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, or of the most blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord Jesu
Christ, or of blessed N thy Apostle, or Martyr, or Confessor, or Bishop, or
Virgin; and grant, that whoever shall endeavor humbly to honor and worship
thine only begotten Son, or the most blessed Virgin, or N. thy most glorious
Apostle, or Martyr, or Confessor, or Virgin, before this Image, he may obtain
of thee grace here, and eternal glory hereafter; Through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Amen. Rituale Romanum, p. 240.

The like Prayer we have in the Consecration of the Image of the Blessed
Virgin. Pontif. Roman. p. 367. And before the Veronica they say this Prayer:

Hail holy Face impressed in cloth, purge us from every spot of Vice, and join
us to the society of the Blessed. Bring us to our Country, O blessed Figure,
to behold the undefiled face of Christ. Be thou to us, we beseech thee, a safe
help, a sweet refreshment and consolation, that no hostile displeasure may hurt
us, but we may enjoy a blessed rest, etc. Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trident. de
Imagine.

Nay, there are many prayers to which, if said before an Image, are granted
pardons for many thousand years.

Whosoever, being in the state of Grace, shall devoutly say these Seven
Prayers, with Seven Pater-Nosters and Ave-Maria's, before an Image of Piety,
shall merit a pardon for Fifty six thousand years; which was granted by Three
Popes, viz. Gregory 14, Nicholas 5, and Sixtus 4 Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p.
67. And in the Rosary of the B. Virgin, a plenary Indulgence is granted to
those of that Arch-Confraternity, who (not being able by reason of sickness,
journey, imprisonment, etc. to visit the Altar of the Rosary), shall say the
Rosary before some devout Picture, p. 21.

Thus you see, that Papists give the very same honor and adoration to the
Statues and Images of their Saints, which the Pagans did to those of their gods.

I know it is here objected by our Adversaries, That the Heathen worshipped the
Statues and Images of their gods absolutely considered, the very Images
themselves; but the honor we give them is referred to the Prototype or thing
represented; insomuch that by the Pictures we kiss, or before which we kneel,
or put off our Hats, we adore Christ, and reverence the Saints whom these
Pictures represent.

But the weakness of this Objection will appear, if we consider these two
particulars:

1. That the Heathen have often returned the very Answer. They tell us, They
are not so ignorant, but that they know the power and value of the Image before
which they fall, which is fashioned and framed by a Workman. We know (say they)
that the Image is but metal, or stone; but as it is dedicated to represent such
a god, or such a virtue of god, named Jupiter, Apollo, Mercurius, Juno, etc. do
not think that our reverence and adoration does terminate there; our thoughts
direct our Worship to the god, and his Attributes, which we adore in and by
such an Image. Arnobius brings in the Heathen uttering these words: We worship
the gods by these Images. And a little after, Thou art deceived, and grossly
mistaken; for we (the Heathen) do not believe the substance of brass, or
silver, or gold, or any other thing of which these Statues are made to be in
themselves gods; but we worship the gods in these. Adv. Gent. lib. 6.

2. Their great Doctors and Schoolmen tell us, That the very Images are to be
reverenced, yea and with the same kind of reverence and veneration that is
given to the Prototype, or person represented. Their Angelical Doctor lays down
this conclusion; That the same reverence is to be given to the Image of Christ,
and to Christ himself; and by consequence, since Christ is adored with the
adoration of Latria (or divine worship) that his Image is to be adored with the
adoration of Latria. Pars 3. Quest. 25. Art. 3. And Suarez affirms, That the
Image may, and ought to be worshipped with the same Adoration with the
Exemplar. And this assertion he confirms by the testimony of Cajetan,
Paludanus, Capreolus, Ferrariensis, Antonius, Soto, Albertus, Ricardus,
Bonaventura, Major, Almainus, Alex. Ales, Marsilius, Waldensis, Turrianus,
Albertus Pighius, Turrecremata. And to these he subjoins the Authority of the
Seventh General Synod, and of the Council of Trent: In Part. 3. Aquinat. Quest.
25. Art. 3. Disput. 64. Sect. 4. It Is the constant opinion of Divines, That the
Image is to be honored and worshipped with the same honor and worship which
is due to that whereof it is an Image, Azorius Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. lib. 9.
cap. 6. Thus it is evident, there is a perfect agreement between the old Pagans
and our Romanists, in the adoration of Images. Ludovicus Vives (a learned
Papist) confessed, That there could no other difference be found of Paganish
and Popish Worship before Images, but only this, That Nam^s and Titles are
changed, in S. Aust. de Civit. Dei, lib. 8. cap. 27.

4. The H^athen placed the Statues and Images of their gods in their Temples.
This is so clear from all their Historians, that I need not cite particular
Authors.

Thus do our Romanists place the Images of their Saints in their Churches:
Which custom (together with the Adoration of them) Cornelius Agrippa derives
from Ethnicks. Hinc caepimus divorum nostrorum muta simulachra in Templa nostra
traducere, etc. Hence we begun to receive the mute Images of our Saints into
our Churches, and with great veneration to place them on Gods Altar, which for
a man to approach, though the true Image of God, we account piacular; we bow
the head to them, kiss them, offer lights, worship them, etc. De Vanitate
Scientiar. cap. 53. The same is affirmed by Polydor Virg. de Inventor. Rerum.
lib. 6. cap. 13.

5. To all these we may add one more, viz. That the Heathen at a certain time
covered their Images, and omitted to burn Incense before them. Ovid, who gives
us a very large and full account of their Customs and Ceremonies, says Fastor.
lib. 2.

Dii quoque templorum foribus caelentur apertis:
Thure vacent arae, stentque sine igne foci.
Thus do our Romanists in the time of Lent cover their Altars and Images, and
omit to burn Incense before them, Durand. Rational. Divin. Officior. lib. 1.
cap. 3. number. 34. and lib. 6. cap. 32. numb. 12. And Gavantus tells us what kind
of vail or covering this must be: 1. It must not have any Image or Picture
painted on it. 2. It must rather be of a violet color than black; but white by
no means, except it shall be so ordered. Thesaurus Sacrorum Rituum Pars 4. Tit.
7.

CHAP. VI. FESTIVALS.
THE Heathen appointed Festivals in honor of their gods. As Numa divided the
Year into Months (says Macrobius), so every Month into Days; and these were
called either Festi, Profesti, or Intercisi. The Dies Festi called also
Feriati, and Feriae, a feriendo victimas, Festival or Holy Days, were to be
spent in Religious Rites and Ceremonies. The Dies Profesti (so called quasi
procul a festis) were spent in the works of their particular Callings and
Secular Employments. The Dies intercisi (ab intercidendo, as it were days cut
asunder) were half Holy Days; one part of them being appointed for worldly
business, and the other for holy and religious exercises: Now the first and
last of these days were dedicated to their gods; the first wholly, and the last
in part. Every god had a Festival appointed for him, called by his Name, which
Ovid mentions in his Fastorum. The Saturnalia were Festival-days instituted at
Rome in honor of Saturn, in the Month of December. The Bacchanalia were in
honor of Bacchus; Carmentalia in honor of Carmenta, Evanders Mother;
Robigalia in honor of Robigus, instituted by Numa in the eleventh year of his
reign. Rosin. Antiq. Romans lib. 4. cap. 8.

The Greeks also were very much addicted to the observation of these
Festival-days; as the Athenians in keeping their Panathenea that were appointed
in honor of Minerva.

And thus other Nations dedicated Festivals in honor of their gods; to such as
were proper to certain places, called Indigetes; as also to their Domestic
Divinities.

Thus do our Romanists institute Festivals in honor of their Saints. This is
most evident from all their Missals and Breviaries, where particular Offices
are appointed for every day. The Church (says Durand) does celebrate the
Festivals of Saints for many reasons: 1. That we may observe the Law of
Retaliation; for they celebrate a Feast for us, there being joy in Heaven over
a repenting sinner. 2. Because in honoring them, we do our own work. 3. That
we may have them Intercessors for us. 4. That we may imitate them; for by their
Examples we are drawn to walk as they did. 5. For the increase of our security,
and confirmation of our hope. 6. For the honor of the Divine Majesty, which we
honoua in honoring them. 7. That by beholding their beauty and purity, man may
be confounded for his own sins, and contemn earthly things, even as they did.
8. And principally for the honor of the Saints; and he gives two reasons why
they ought to be honored, Rationale divin. Offic. lib. 7. cap. 1.

Bellarmine affirms, That the honor of Festival-days belongs immediately and
terminatively to the Saints, even as Invocation it self does. De Cultu Sanctor.
lib. 3. cap. 16.

And as the Pagans had half Holy Days for some of their gods, so have Papists
for some of their Saints.

CHAP. VII. ALTARS.
1. THE Heathen erected Altars to their gods. We read of wicked Ahab, 1 King.
16. 32, that he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal which he had
built in Samaria. And of Manasseh 2 King. 21. 2, 3, that he did that which was
evil in the sight of the Lord after the abominations of the Heathen; for he
buil^ up the high places, and reared up altars for Baal And for all the Host of
heaven, v. 5. Plutarch mentions a golden Altar of Jupiter Idaeus made by Midas,
Parallela Roman. and Graecor. p. 743. And he tells us of another erected to
Apollo in his Temple at Delos, made all of Horns, and reckoned among the seven
Wonders of the World, 802. The Gentiles (says S. Austin) built Temples, made
Altars, instituted Priests, and offered sacrifice to their gods, De Civit. Dei,
lib. 22. cap. 10. The Romans erected Altars (by which I understand both Altaria
and Arae, betwixt which they made a difference) to every god, as Jupiter,
Pistor, ^esta, Minerva, etc Rosin. Antiq. Roman. passim. Among the Latins
Altars were every where erected to their gods and goddesses, Elias Schedius de
diis German. p. 219.

Thus do our Romanists erect Altars to their Saints, as the Virgin Mary, S.
Peter, S. Paul, etc. Durand mentions some cases wherein the lesser Altars may,
and ought to be re consecrated; and the second is this: If the Repository
within the Altar be broken, where the Relics are put, and the Letters
Testimonial of its consecration, ought carefully to be kept, containing the
Name of the Bishop by whom it was consecrated, and the Name of the Saint to
whose honor it was dedicated, Ration. Divin. Officior lib. 1. cap. 6. numb.
32, 33, 34. Temples and Altars (says Polydor Virgil) are dedicated to the
Saints, that we may worship both them and God with due veneration, De Invent.
Rer. lib. 6. cap. 1. And Bellarmine affirms, That there is a seven fold honor
due to canonized Saints: 1. They are put into the Catalogue of Saints. 2. They
are invocated in the public Prayers of the Church. 3. Temples and Altars are
dedicated to them. De Sanctor Beat. lib. 1. cap. 7.

2. The Heathen consecrated their Altars before they offered sacrifice on them;
in which Consecration they used a certain form of words, says Rosinus Antiq.
Romans lib. 2. cap. 2. And we have three of these dedicatory forms recorded by
Brissonius de Formul. lib. 1. p. 114.

Thus our Romanists consecrate their Altars. The form and manner of this
Consecration is thus prescribed in the Roman Pontifical, p. 286.

Before the day of consecration, the Bishop prepares Relics to be laid
within the Altar, which he puts in a decent and clean vessel, with three
grains of Frankincense: He puts also therein this Testimonial in Parchment:

M. DC. XXVII, Nov. 9. I N. Bishop of C. have consecrated this Altar to the
honor of Saint N; and the Relics of the holy Martyrs N. and N. placed within
it; and I have granted to all the faithful of Christ this day (according to the
custom of the Church) one year, and on the Anniversary day of this
Consecration, forty days of true Indulgence to all that visit this Altar.

There are likewise provided in the Church all things necessary to this
Consecration, viz. Holy Chrism in a little vessel or vial; holy Oil in the like
vessel; a pound of Frankincense, of which the half is to be in grains; a Censer
with a long Dish and a Spoon; a vessel with burning coals; a vessel full of
water; a vessel with ashes; a vessel with salt; a vessel filled with wine; an
Aspersory made of Hysop; Napkins to wipe the Table of the Altar; five little
Crosses made of Wax-Candles, etc.

In the morning the Bishop comes to the Church in his ordinary habit; and
having placed himself either on the right or left hand of the Altar; he puts on
his Ornaments: Then he goes to the Altar, and standing before it, says this
Prayer:

We beseech thee, O Lord, by inspiring prevent, and by assisting further our
actions, that all our prayers and works may always begin from thee, and being
begun, may be finished by thee; Through Christ our Lord, Amen.

After this, the Litanies are sung or read by the Bishop, in which the Saint is
twice named, in whose honor the Altar is dedicated.

Then he dips the first finger of his right hand in Holy Water, and makes a
Cross in the midst of the Altar, saying, Let this Altar be sancti fied to the
honor of God Almighty and the glorious Virgin, and all Saints, and to the name
and memory of Saint N. In the Name of the Fa there, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

Then he makes four Crosses in the four corners of the Altar, at every Cross
repeating the foresaid words; Let this Altar be sancti fied, etc. And then
follows this Prayer:

We humbly beseech thee, O Lord, command that the polished matter of this Stone
may be enriched with the plenty of thy sanctification, who in times past did
write the Law in stony Tables; Through Christ, etc. Amen.

After this the Bishop walks about the Altar, sprinkling it with Holy Water,
Ashes, and Wine, with an Aspersory made of Hysop: And standing before the
Altar, he begins this Antiphona

Sprinkle me with Hysop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter
than snow.

After this, he makes the Mortar or Cement with Holy Water, which he blesses,
saying:

O most high God, who keep all things whether high or low, and environest
every creature; sancti fie, and bless these Creatures of lime and sand; Through
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then he goes in procession with the Cross and Clergy to the place where the
Relics were laid the night before; and standing at the door, he says this
Prayer:

O Lord, we beseech thee remove from us our iniquities, that we may merit to
enter into the Holy of Holies with pure minds; Through, etc. Amen.

The Bishop being returned to the Altar with the Relics, dippeth his finger
in the Chrism, and signeth the Repository or Sepulcher where the Relics are
to be kept, with the sign of the Cross in four corners, and at every Cross
saying:

Let this Sepulcher be consecra ted, and sancti fied. In the Name of the Fa
there, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

And then he reverently places in it the Vessel, with the Relics, etc. and
perfumes them with hallowed Incense: This being done, the Bishop takes the
Stone, or Table, which is to cover the Sepulcher, and makes the sign of the
Cross with his finger dipped in Chrism in the midst of it, saying:

Let this Table (or this Stone) be consecra ted, and sancti fied by this
Unction. In the Name of the Fa there, etc.

After this, he lays the Table or Stone upon the Sepulcher, and begins this
Antiphona:

I heard under the Altar of God the voice of them that were slain, saying, Why
do thou not judge and avenge our blood? And it was said unto them, Have
patience for a little time, till the number of your Brethren be completed.

Then the Masons fix the Table or Stone upon the Sepulcher, with the
consecrated Mortar; after which the Bishop makes a Cross upon it with Chrism,
saying:

Let this Altar be sign ed, and sancti fied. In the Name of the Fa there, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

After this, he incenseth the Altar from the right to the left side, before and
above: And then follows this prayer:

We beseech thee, O Lord, that our prayer may come before thee as incense, and
all Christian people obtain copious gifts; that whosoever shall devoutly offer
sacrifices to be consecrated upon this Altar, or receive such as are
consecrated, he may have the helps of this present life, and the remission of
all sins, and receive the grace of eternal redemption; Through, etc.

Then the Bishop dips his finger in the holy Oil, and makes with it five
Crosses, viz. one in the midst, and one in every corner of the Altar, saying at
every Cross:

Let this Stone be sancti fied, and consecra ted: In the Name of the Fa there,
etc.

After this, he makes other five Crosses in the same place, repeating the same
words. And then follows this Prayer, with which I will conclude:

Almighty, Everlasting God, sanctify with the virtue of thy Bened iction, this
Altar which we, who are unworthy, consecrate to thy honor, and the memory of
thy Saint N; and show the reward of thy help to all that invoke thee here, and
trust in thee; that thou would vouchsafe to accept the gifts laid upon this
Altar; and let the virtue of Sacraments, and the effect of Vows, be obtained;
Through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Many things are here omitted, lest I should be over-tedious. Give me leave to
add a few mystical significations given by their great Durand, of the aforesaid
Ceremonies; and then I will pass on to the next.

The four Crosses made with Holy Water, represent the fourfold Charity which
all should have that approach the Altar, viz. That they love God, themselves,
friends, and enemies. And these Crosses are made in the four corners of the
Altar, to signify, 1. That Christ by the Cross has saved the four parts of
the World. 2. That four ways we should bear the Cross of Christ, viz. in the
heart by meditation, in the mouth by confession, in the body by mortification,
and in the face by continual impression. And the Cross in the midst of the
Altar denotes the death of Christ which he suffered in the midst of the earth.

The Bishop's walking seven times about the Altar, signifies, 1. His great care
and vigilance. 2. The seven Meditations which we should have of the sevenfold
virtue of Christ's Humility. 3. The seven ways of Christ from Heaven to the
Virgins Womb, from the Womb to the Manger, etc.

1. The Altar is sprinkled seven times to denote, 1. That in Baptism we have
seven gifts of the Holy Ghost. 2. That we should remember the seven effusions
of Christ's blood, viz. In Circumcision, Prayer, when he was whipped, crowned
with thorns, had his hands and feet nailed, and his side pierced. The Aspersory
is made of Hysop, which is an humble herb, to denote the Humility of Christ.

The Sepulcher where the Relics are laid, is consecrated with four Crosses
made of Chrism, to signify, That we should have in our hearts the Four Virtues
described in the Book of Wisdom, viz. Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, and
Justice. The Relics are laid in the Sepulcher with three grains of
Frankincense, to denote, That we should keep in memory the Examples of the
Saints, with the Faith of the Trinity, viz. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

The Altar is incensed in five places, viz. the midst, and the four corners, to
signify, That we should exercise our five Senses, etc. Ration. Divin. Offic.
lib. 1. cap. 7.

3. The Heathen prayed before their Altars: so much is affirmed by Brissonius,
who produces several Testimonies.

Nunc O Bacche tuis humiles advolvimur aris. Propertius lib. 3. Eleg. 15.

Persidus ille Deo, quamvis non persidus urbi,
Augustum caput ante pedes curvare Minervae.
Fictilis and soleas Junonis lambere, plantis
Herculis advolvi, genua incurvare Dianae,
Quin and Apollineo frontem submittere gypso.
Prudentius in Apotheosi.
Affusus aris supplices tendo manus,
Matura poscens fata -- De Formulis
lib. 1. p. 40.
Thus our Romanists pray before their Altars. This is so clear from their daily
practice, that I need not cite any Authors.

4. The Heathen washed their Altars every year. Pausanias informs us, That
among the Eleans the Priests or Soothsayers on a certain day yearly, viz. 19 of
February, carried ashes from the Prytaneum, and mixing them with water taken
out of the River Alpheus, washed the Altar of Jupiter Olympius. In Eliacis.

Thus do our Romanists wash their Altars yearly with wine, water, etc. three
days before Easter. Durand. Rational. Divin. Offic. lib. 6. cap. 76. Belethus
Explicat. Divin. Officior. cap. 104. And they are washed (says Durand) with a
penitential-Psalm and Passion-Hymn.

CHAP. VIII. VOWS.
THE Heathen made Vows to their gods. The Gauls of Insubria, making War against
the Romans, vowed to consecrate a golden Chain to the god of War, to be made of
such spoils as they took from our Soldiers, says Florus, lib. 2. cap. 4. The
Romans had their Votivos Ludos, which were performed in honor of one of their
gods, upon some special Vow made: For whenever they undertook any desperate
War, one of their Magistrates did vow Plays or Temples upon condition they got
the Victory. The Vow was put in writing, and fixed to the Statue of the god,
with Wax; and this was called Signare vota. Godwin Roman. Hist. lib. 2. sect.
3. cap. 9.

Many forms of these Vows we have recorded by Brissonius, Form. lib. 1. p. 95.
And he gives us an account of certain Rites and Ceremonies observed in making
these Vows, p. 107, and 108. The people of Rome being punished with a sore and
tedious Famine (the effect of unseasonable Weather) their Magistrates vowed a
yearly Feast to their gods if they would make the earth fruitful. Vossius de
Origin. and progressu Idol. lib. 1. cap. 12. This Ovid mentions, Fastor. lib. 5.

Convenere patres, and si been floreat annus,
Numinibus nostris annua Festa vovent.
Thus do Papists make Vows to their Saints. Bellarmine affirms, That Vows may
be made properly unto Saints, as unto God; but with this distinction: We vow to
God in sign of our thankfulness to him as unto the Author of all good things;
but to Saints, in sign of our thankfulness to them as our Mediators and
Intercessors, by whose means we receive these good things from God. De Cultu
Sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 9. But Cajetan goes further, and says, After the same
manner is the Vow made to God and the Saints; and, We absolutely vow to Saints,
as unto God. And he proves it from the profession made by the Brethren of his
Order; for when they profess, they say, I vow to God, and the Blessed Virgin,
and all Saints, That I will be obedient to such and such a Governor -- Whereof
two promises; the one is directed to the Governor, and that is materially a
Vow; the other, which is formally a Vow, to God and the Saints together. And he
gives this reason, Because they are Gods participative. It were easy to give
you several forms of their Vows made to Saints, but I Will only mention that of
offering one's self to the B. Virgin Mary, to be admitted into her
Confraternity. Rosar. p. 36.

Thrice Sacred Virgin Mary Mother of God! I N. N. though most unworthy to be
registered amongst your Servants; yet moved (by that Goodness the Angels admire
in you) to an ardent desire of honoring you, loving and serving you; do here
this day with all possible humility, sincerity and devotion (in the presence of
my Guardian-Angel, and the whole Court of Heaven) make choice of you for my
singular Lady, Advocate, and Mother, firmly purposing to honor, love, and
serve you with all filial duty, diligence, and fidelity; and to procure (as
much as it shall lie in my power) that all others may do the same. I therefore
most heartily beseech you (O merciful and compassionate Mother) by the precious
blood which your dearly beloved Son, my blessed Savior, shed for me in his
bitter Passion, That you will be graciously pleased to receive and admit me
into the number of your devout Clients, as one dedicated to your perpetual
Service.

Be you favorable to me (O Blessed Lady), and obtain for me of your
All-powerful Son, that I may so behave my self in all my thoughts, words, and
actions, as never more to think, speak, or act any thing displeasing to his
Sacred Majesty.

Grant furthermore (O my good and gracious Mother) that I may never forget you,
nor forfeit this my now-made Promise (or Vow) of honoring, loving, and serving
you all the days of my life; that so I may never be forgotten, forsaken nor
abandoned by you; but be always protected, aided, and assisted by you,
especially in the hour of my death. Amen.

And as Pagans made Vows to their gods in time of distress; so do Papists to
their Saints. Tursellin tells us, That Laurence Medices, when oppressed by the
Arms of Zistus the Pope, vowed to the Virgin of Loretto a silver Statue of
great value. Hist. Lauret. lib. 2. cap. 4. And he relates (cap. 24.) a great
danger which Pope Clement escaped by the protection of this Blessed Virgin. The
City of Rome being taken by the Imperialists, he retired into the Castle of
Adrians Fort, where he was closely besieged; and not being able to hold out any
longer, he implored the help of the B. Virgin, by a solemn Vow, which was to
good purpose, for soon after he was delivered from the rage and fury of his
Enemies.

The City of Firmo (says the same Author) presented the Virgin Mary with a
Silver Image of thirty three pound weight, with this Inscription:

In performance of a public Vow, the City of Firmo dedicated this Silver Image
to our B. Lady of Loreto, for the recovery of their Commonwealth, lib. 4. cap.
13.

Polixena Pernestaina presented to the B. Virgin, the Image of S. Gerion in
Armor, enclosed in a worthy Case. The Armor it self is adorned with Silver
and Gold, and on the Martyrs head does stand a Crown of precious stones, etc.
This was a votive Gift to the B. Lady of Loreto for restoring health unto her
Husband, lib. 5. cap. 21.

To these might be added many other Instances, which I shall pass over for
brevity sake.

Their conformity herein with the old Pagans, is acknowledged by Polydor
Virgil. As often as any part of the body is hurt or diseased; as for example,
the head, foot, breast, etc. we presently make vows to God and his Saints, to
whom when health is restored, we immediately offer that hand, foot, or breast,
that is, the Image of it made of gold, silver, and sometimes of baser metal and
matter. Concerning which practice, any one that is but modestly scrupulous,
perhaps will say, that he knows not whether we emulate the Religion of the
ancient Pagans, or their Superstition. De Invent. Rer. lib. 5. cap. 1.

CHAP. IX. TEMPLES.
1. THE Heathen dedicated Temples to their gods, 1 King. 16. 32. 2 King. 5. 18.
They commonly boasted of Seven stately Structures that were called, The Seven
Wonders of the World: The first was the Wall of Babylon, and the pleasant
Gardens which Queen Semiramis planted; About this Work Three hundred thousand
men were continually employed for many years. The second was the Labyrinth of
Egypt, in which Sixteen sumptuous Palaces were built. The third was the
Pyramids of Egypt, which were of a prodigious height. The fourth was the
Mausolaeum of Caria, which Queen Artemisia built as a Sepulcher for her
deceased Husband Mausolus. The fifth was the Colossus of Rhodes, which was
before mentioned. The sixth was the Statue of Jupiter Olympus, made by Phidias,
an hundred and fifty Cubits high. But the greatest Wonder, and most
incomparable Work was the Temple of Ephesus, dedicated to Diana; It was 425
foot long, and 220 broad, and 127 stately Pillars were in it; Every one of them
had been the sole enterprise and work of a King. And many other Temples very
rich and magnificent, were dedicated to the Heathen gods; the Temple of Athens
to Minerva, and another in the same City to Mars, where the Judges did meet to
examine Causes of Life and Death. The Temples also dedicated to Neptune,
Vulcan, Saturn, Aesculapius, Hercules, Vesta, Janus, etc. are noted by Authors
to have been stately Structures worthy of the Roman Grandeur: As also the
Pantheon, consecrated to all the gods. And the Temples all over the World were
very magnificent. I shall not stand to name them. It Is sufficient to know, that
Princes and Nations did employ their Riches and ingenious Inventions of
Architecture, only in the building of Temples to their gods.

That our Romanists herein agree with the old Pagans, is most evident, and
confessed by their great Baronius. In dedicatione Templorum multa fuisse
Gentilibus cum verae pietatis Cultoribus similia ex Suetonio intelliges: That
in the dedication of Temples many things were alike to the Gentiles and
Christians, thou may learn out of Suetonius. Annal. Tom. 1. ad annum.

To build Temples to their gods was the greatest part of Gentile superstition,
in imitation of whom Christians begun to build Temples to their Saints. Cornel.
Agrippa de Vanit. Scientiar. cap. 54. Our Romanists dedicate Churches to their
Saints; as to the Virgin Mary, S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John, S. Denis, S. Martin,
S. Nicholas, etc. And as the Pagans dedicated their Pantheon to all their Gods,
so do Papists dedicate Churches to all their Saints. Durantus speaking of the
Pantheon in Rome, says: That Temple dedicated to Devils, was by Boniface 4.
with the consent of the Emperor Phocas consecrated to the honor of the B.
Virgin, and all Saints. De Ritib. Eccles. Cathol. Lib. 1. cap. 4. Bellarmin not
only says, that Temples are built to God in Honor of the Saints, or that they
are called by their Names, though dedicated and consecrated to God: but
affirms, That these sacred Places are rightly built and dedicated not only to
God, but also to the Saints. De Cultu Sanctor. Lib. 3. cap. 4. I grant,
afterward he makes a distinction inter Templa and Basilicas, and says; That
they are dedicated to God qua Templa and to Saints qua Basilicae. But it is
clear from the Fathers, even those cited by him, that these Names are
Synonymous: so that this Jesuitical distinction is a vain subterfuge, and mere
delusion; as if diverse Names could change the nature of a thing: as if an
Adulteress prostituting her self under several Names could purge her self from
that foul sin.

2. The Heathen consecrated these Temples with certain Prayers and
superstitious Ceremonies.

First, Some Ceremonies were observed before the Temple was built, of which
Brissonius has given us an account. De Formul. Lib. 1. p. 113. -- Rosinus
Antiquit. Roman. Lib. 2. cap. 2. Alexander ab Alexandro in Genial. dier. Lib.
6. cap. 14. But most fully the Learned Dr. Godwin in these words (most of which
we find in Tacitus Histor. Lib. 4. cap. 20.)

When the Place, where the Temple should be built, had been appointed by the
Augurs (which appointing or determining of the Place the called Effari Templa,
and sistere Fana) then did the Party, which formerly in time of need, upon
condition of help from the Gods, had vowed a Temple, call together they
Aruspices, which should direct him in what form the Temple should be built;
which being known, certain Ribbands and Fillets were drawn about the Area or
plat of ground, with Flowers and Garlands strewed underneath, as it was
probable, to distinguish the limits of this ground now to be hallowed. Then
certain Soldiers marched in with boughs in their hands, and after them
followed Vestal Nuns leading young Boys and Maids in their hands, who sprinkled
the Place with holy Water. After this followed the Praetor, some Pontife going
before, who after the Area had been purged by leading round about a Sow, a Ram,
and a Bull, sacrificed them, and their entrails being laid upon a turf, the
Praetor offered up Prayers unto the gods, that they would bless those holy
Places, which good Men intended to dedicate unto them. This being done, the
Praetor touched certain ropes, wherewith a great stone, being the first of the
foundation was tied; together with that, other chief Magistrates, Priests, and
all sorts of people did help to pluck that stone, let it down into its place,
casting in wedges of Gold and Silver, which had never been purified, or tried
in the fire. These Ceremonies being ended the Aruspex pronounced with a loud
voice, saying; Let not this work be unhallowed, by converting this stone or
gold into any other use. Histor. Romans Lib. 1. cap. 20.

Secondly, Other Ceremonies were observed after the Temple was built. Fanum a
Temple comes from fando; because the Pontife, when he consecrates a Temple,
speaks certain words. Brisson. de Form. Lib. 1. p. 113. And a little after,
he sets down the form of words used, and other ceremonies observed in the
consecration of their Temples. And that they were consecrated only by Pontifes,
Durantus produces several testimonies out of Livius, Vopiscus, etc. Lib. 1.
cap. 24. number. 9.

Thus our Romanists consecrate the Churches dedicated to their Saints; wherein
they are not less superstitious than the old Pagans. Indeed Durand derives this
dedication or consecration from the practice of the Jews and Gentiles; and
Durantus urges the latter as an argument for it. De Ritib. Eccles. Cath. Lib.
1. cap. 24.

First, They consecrate the ground, where the Church is to be built; and the
form and manner of it is thus prescribed in the Roman Ritual and Pontifical.

The Place being appointed by the Bishop, where the Church is to be built, the
day before the first Stone is to be blessed or consecrated, the Bishop or some
Priest deputed by him, fixes a venerable Cross of wood, where the Altar is to
be erected.

The next day the Stone to be laid in the foundation of the Church (which must
be four square and the Corner stone) is consecrated after this manner. The
Bishop, or his Deputy having put on his Robes, and standing in the place where
the Church is to be built, blesses the Salt and Water, and while the Clergy is
singing an Antiphona, and Psalm 83. sprinkles the place where the Cross is set
with holy Water. The Psalm being ended, the Bishop or Deputy, turning himself
toward the place thus sprinkled, prays:

O Lord God, though Heaven and Earth cannot contain thee, yet thou art pleased
to have a House upon Earth, where thy Name may be always called upon: We
beseech thee, visit this place with the serene aspect of thy Piety, the merits
of the Blessed Mary, ever a Virgin, and B. N. (naming the Saint in whose Honor
and Name the Church shall be built) and by the infusion of thy grace purify it
from all defilement, and being purified preserve it; and thou who did
complete the devotion of thy beloved David in the work of his Son Solomon,
vouchsafe to perfect our desires in this work, and let all spiritual wickedness
fly away. Through our, etc. Amen.

Then the Bishop or Priest blesses the first Stone, saying:

O holy Lord, Father Almighty, Eternal God, be pleased to bless this Stone to
be the foundation of the Church in honor of S. N. Through our Lord, etc. Amen.

Then he sprinkles the Stone with holy Water, and with a Knife makes the sign
of the Cross in every part of it, saying; in the Name of the Fa there, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And then this Prayer.

Bless, O Lord, this Creature of Stone, and grant by the invocation of thy holy
Name, that whosoever shall with a pure mind assist in the building of this
Church, may obtain soundness of body, and health of soul. Through, etc.

And after some other Ceremonies (which I omit for brevity sake) the Bishop, or
his Deputy touches the Stone, and puts it in the foundation, saying:

In the Faith of Jesu Christ, we lay this first Stone in this foundation; in
the Name of the Fa there, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; that true Faith
may flourish here, and the fear of God, and brotherly love; and that this place
may be destinated to Prayer, etc.

And when the Mason has laid the Stone with Mortar, the Bishop sprinkles it
with holy Water, saying: Sprinkle me with Hysop, O Lord, and I shall be clean;
and wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow.

After this he sprinkles every part of the place, where the Church is to be
built (if it be not covered); but if it be covered, then he walks round about
sprinkling the foundation of the Church.

Many other Ceremonies are observed and Prayers added, which I must pass over.
Pontificale Romans p. 199. -- Ritual. Roman. p. 241. --

And that they cast in silver and gold with the first Stone (as the Heathen
did) Hospinian gives us two Instances out of Bruschius. De Origin Templor.
Lib. 1. cap. 11.

Secondly, They consecrate the Church after it is built. And that their
Ceremonies used herein are as superstitious, idle, and ridiculous, as those of
Pagans, needs no other proof than the mere relation and mystical signification
of them. And here I will follow their Durandus Rational. Divin. Officior. Lib.
1. cap. 6. and Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. Cathol. Lib. 1. cap. 24.

All being put out the Church, except a Deacon who remains shut within, the
Bishop halloweth the water mixed with Salt before the door of the Church: and
in the mean time twelve Candles burn within before twelve Crosses painted on
the Walls. After this, the Bishop, the Clergy and People following him, goes
three times about the Church, and with a Branch of Hysop sprinkles the Walls
with holy Water, and every time coming to the door, smites it with his Pastoral
Staff, saying, Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting doors; and the King of Glory shall come in. And the Deacon within
answers; Who is this King of Glory? To whom the Bishop replies; The Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. At the third time the door being
opened, the Bishop with a few Ministers enters the Church, saying; Peace be to
this house, etc. Then he begins at the left Corner of the East to write with
his Pastoral Staff on the Pavement, sprinkled with ashes, the Greek Alphabet,
to the right Corner of the West; and again from the right Corner of the East
the whole Latin Alphabet to the left Corner of the West, viz. in this Form
according to the Roman Pontifical. p. 222.



Then the Bishop makes new Holy Water, mixed with Salt, Ashes, and Wine;
wherewith he sprinkles the Altar, Walls, and Pavement of the Church.

After this he anoints with Chrism the Twelve Crosses painted on the Walls,
saying, Let this Temple be sancti fied; In the Name of the Fa there, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Lastly, These and other Ceremonies being ended, the Bishop celebrates Mass.

And then follows the mystical signification of these Ceremonies.

The Holy Water wherewith the Church is sprinkled, signifies Baptism, because
the Church after a certain manner is baptized. And the water is mixed with
salt, to denote our Prudence, which is the condiment of all Virtues, as Salt is
of all Meats. Again, the threefold sprinkling of the Church within and without
with this Holy Water, signifies the threefold immersion in Baptism: And this is
done for three reasons: 1. For the expulsion of evil Spirits. 2. For the
purgation and expiation of the Church. 3. For the removal of every Malediction.
For the Earth from the beginning was subject to a curse, because man fell by
its fruit; but the Water was under no curse; Hence our Savior did eat fish,
and we do not read that he ate flesh, except of the Paschal Lamb. And this
sprinkling in their going about the Church, signifies the care that God has of
his, who sends his Angel to guard those that fear him. Again, the Bishops
thrice going about the Church, denotes our Savior's threefold Circuit for the
sanctification of the Church: The first was, when he came from Heaven to Earth.
The second, when he descended from Earth into Limbus. The third, when he
ascended from thence into Heaven. It also signifies the threefold state of
those that shall be saved, viz. Virgins, Continent, and Married persons.

2. The twelve lighted Candles signify (according to Rabanus Maurus) the
twelve Patriarchs and Apostles; or (according to Ivo) that the shining and
burning light of the Apostles is to be commended.

3. The Bishop's thrice smiting of the door with his Pastoral Staff, shows that
the Powers of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, yield unto him; and that Christ has a
threefold right to his Church. Again, by this threefold smiting of the door
with his Staff, is understood the preaching of the Gospel. And the opening of
the door denotes, that by the preaching of Pastors, Infidels are converted to
the Faith. The Deacon's Interrogation, Who is the King of Glory? signifies the
peoples ignorance of Christ. And the Bishop knocks thrice, Because that is the
most noted and sacred Number; and because without the invocation of the
Trinity, there is no Sacrament in the Church.

4. The door being opened, the Bishop enters, to note, that nothing is able to
resist his Office. when rightly executed; according to that, Lord, who can
resist thy power? And he enters the Church with two or three, that in the mouth
of two or three Witnesses, every word of Consecration may be confirmed; or
because few were present when Christ in his Transfiguration prayed for the
Church. And when the Bishop is entered, he says, Peace be to this House,
because Christ came into the world to make peace between God and Man.

5. The Bishop begins at the left corner of the East, and goes to the right
corner of the West; and then at the right corner of the East, to the left of
the West, writing on the Pavement, sprinkled with ashes, the whole Alphabet in
Greek and Latin: 1 By the Alphabet we are to understand the first Principles
and Rudiments of the Christian Faith, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 5.
2. 2. This Alphabet is written in Greek and Latin, and not in Hebrew, because
the Jews departed from the Faith. 3. It is written in an oblique (after the
manner of a Cross), and not a direct line, Because no man can attain to this
holy knowledge, who receives not the Mystery of the Cross. 4. He goes from the
left corner of the East, to the right of the West; and then from the right
corner of the East, to the left of the West; where we have a twofold figure:
1. Of the Cross, signified in such a Scheme. 2. The collection both of Jews and
Gentiles into one Church. And he begins at the left corner of the East, to show
that Christ was born of the Jews; and goes to the right corner of the West, to
show that though Christ was born of the Jews, the Doctrine and belief of his
Incarnation and Passion was received by the Gentiles. And his going from the
right corner of the East to the left corner of the West, seems to signify,
that when the fullness of the Gentiles is come, all Israel shall be saved.

6. Twelve Crosses are painted on the Walls for three reasons: 1. To affright
Devils. 2. To be Ensigns of Christ's Triumphs. 3. To excite Devotion. And these
Crosses are anointed with Chrism, and have Candles burning before them, to
signify, that the Twelve Apostles, who received the first fruits of the
Spirit, have revealed the Mystery of the Cross to all Nations. And so much for
the mystical signification of these Ceremonies, and the second particular.

3. The Heathen beautified their Temples with many noble Gifts, and much costly
Furniture. The Capitol in Rome, consecrated to Jupiter Imperator upon Mount
Torpeius, was adorned with the Statues and Images of all the gods. Maiolus
mentions a Temple in Vpsalia, of such splendour and glory, that the Pavement,
Walls, and the very Pillars of it were covered with Gold, Dies Canicul. p. 405.
And Ruffinus, speaking of the Temple of Serapis, says, that the Walls within
were covered with Plates of Gold, apud Maiol. ibid. The Heathen when in any
distress or danger, frequently vowed to enrich and adorn the Temples of their
gods with magnificent gifts.

Hinc Augusta nitent sacratis munera Templis
Aurea, Phoebeis certantia Lumina Templis.
Manilius apud Rosin. Antiq. Romans lib. 2. cap. 2.
Instituit pulchram, solidavit robore Templum,
Caepit, perfecit donisque ornavit, and auxit.
And a little after he adds:
Plurima votorum sacravit dona suorum,
Immensoque pium ditavit munere Templum.
Corippus Africanus apud cundem.
Tertullian, speaking of the old Romans, says, Deum victimis, Templum donis
honorastis: Ye have honored God with Sacrifices, and beautified the Temple
with gifts. Apol. cap. 26.

Thus do Papists adorn and beautify their Churches. For this their great
Doctors urge many Arguments: Bellar. de Cultu Sanctor. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Stapleton Antidota Evangelica in Caput. 12. Johannes Durantus de Ritib. Eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 4. And Durandus and Belethus tell us, That this adorning
consists in three things, viz. in the decking and trimming of the Church,
Quire, and Altar.

The Church (that is, the body of the Church) is to be adorned with Curtains
and Princely Hangings of Silk and Arras, the Quire with Tapistry, or Hangings
wrought with Pictures of diverse colors, etc. the Altar with rich Coverings,
Crufixes, Phylacteries etc. Rational. Divin. Officior. lib. 1. cap. 3. numb. 23
-- Explicat Divin. Officior. cap. 115.

And answerable hereunto is their Practice, as all Travelers into those parts
where the Roman Religion is established, and Historians declare. The Palaces of
Princes come far short of many of their Churches in splendour and glory. How
richly and magnificently the Church of Loreto is adorned by Popes, Kings, and
Emperors, Turselin gives us a large account. Pope Julius 2. beautisi'd this
Church with many noble gifts. He enriched the high Altar with sacred Ornature,
viz. an excellent Suit of Cloth of Gold, a Silver Cross of Forty pound weight,
gilt, and carved with rare art; two Candlesticks a cubit and an half high, of
twenty six pound weight, being of the same substance and work: Histor. Lauret.
lib. 2. cap. 12. Francis Cajetan, a Nobleman of Rome, gave Golden Ornaments
for the Altar; Cardinal Arigonio other Vestments of Silver, and beset with
Pearl; and the Cardinal of Vrbine most of the Sacred Ornature of his Chapel,
which was very rich and costly; lib. 4. cap. 13. lib 5. cap. 1.

4. The Heathen every year celebrated the Dedication of their Temples, which
they called the Feast of Dedication. Hospinian mentions a famous Fountain in
Italy called Juturna, from which the Romans fetched water for all their
Sacrifices. At this Fountain a Temple was built, and dedicated to Juturna; and
the Dedication of it was solemnly observed on the Ides of January, De Origin
Festor. Pagan. lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 51. And on the 17 of February (or then-about)
was celebrated the Dedication of the Temple Concordia, which Camillus vowed
upon a great dissension in Rome between the Senate and common people, says the
same Author, p. 52

The Emperor Adrian built a Temple to Fortune, and the day of its Consecration
was yearly observed by the Romans as a great Festival. And so was the
Dedication of the Temple to Jupiter Victor, to the Mother of the Gods, etc. as
the Learned Hospinian proves out of their own Authors. On these days they
feasted, sported -- after their religious Rites were over.

Thus our Romanists celebrate every year the Dedication of their Churches.
Solemnitates dedicationum Our Wakes in many Towns of England, are grounded upon
this Popish Custom.
Ecclesiarum per singulos annos solemniter sunt celebrandae; The solemnities of
the Dedications of Churches, are to be solemnly observed every year, Gratian de
Consecrat. Did. 1. cap. 16. We have a particular Office appointed for this day
in the Roman Missal, p. 48. and in the Missal of Sarisbury, p. 173. the several
parts of which Office are explicated by Durandus, Rational. Divin. Officior.
lib. 7. cap. 48.

And as the Heathen did, so Papists do, after the Service is over, spend the
rest of the day in feasting, drinking, and sporting. Gregory the first, in an
Epistle to Mellitus, permitted the English on the day of the Dedication of
their Churches, to celebrate the solemnity with Feasting -- as the Pagans did.
Beda Eccles. Histor. lib. 1. cap. 30. And this Custom of Feasting on these
days, is derived from the Heathen, and condemned by B. Rhenanus Annot. ad Lib.
Tertulliani de Corona Militis.

Their Ceremonies and Exorbitances (wherein they seem to exceed the old Pagans)
are thus described by Naogeorgius apud Hospinian. de Orig. Festor. Christian.
p. 114.

Templi sacrati celebrantur festa quotannis,
Catholice nimis. E turri suspenditur alta
Vexillum crucis, and redolenti gramine templi
Sternitur omne solum: ramisque virentibus arae.
Suggestumque nitet, sellaeque omnesque columnae.
Panduntur tabulae, idolorum armaria, pictae,
Praecipue vero sertis habituque Patronus
Excolitur diti, atque sua resplendet in ara.
Pastor pastores alios invitat, and ipsa
Scorta jubet simul adduci, turbasque nothorum.
Vndique convenient quoque vicini atque remoti
Ruricolae, pars sponte sua partimque vocati.
Arma ferunt omnes, gladios, venabla, secures,
Bombardas, fustes, ferratas atque bipennes.
Adveniunt juvenes culti, comptaeque puellae.
Caupo disponit mensas, and pocula profert
Omnia venturis: neutrum spes fallit avara,
Namque fere referunt summa ex hoc commoda festo
Prae cunctis aliis, etc.
CHAP. X. GIFTS.
1. THE Heathen offered Gifts unto their gods. This has been sufficiently
cleared in several Instances; yet a few more I will add in this place. Adrian
the Emperor offered unto Juno a Peacock, her beloved Bird, of pure Gold, with
wings round about; at the Extremities he caused all manner of sparkling and
precious Stones to be put, that they might serve in lieu of eyes, and represent
the perfect form of a Peacock, Marius d' Assigni, p. 21. The Gauls of Insubria
promised to offer the Armours of the Romans to Vulcan; but (says Florus) it
fell out otherwise: for Verdumarus their King was slain, and Marcellus hung the
third Opima, that is, magnificent and pompous spoils, which since the reign of
Romulus had been offered to Jupiter, Feretrius. Histor. Roman. lib. 2. cap. 4.
In a word the old Romans upon every eminent deliverance offered very splendid
Gifts to that god who was the supposed Author of it.

And thus do Papist^ offer Gifts unto their Saints. This is clear from the
Offices appointed for them.

Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord, these Gifts which we offer in veneration
of S. Nicholas thy Bishop -- Missale sec. us. Sar. in ejus Festo. Respect, we
beseech thee, O Lord, the gifts of thy people offered in honor of S. David thy
Confessor -- Idem in ejus Festo.

O Lord, we beseech thee, accept the Gift offered in honor of thy Virgin. S.
Praxedes -- Idem in ejus Festo.

The like Prayer we have in the Feast of S. Patrick, S. Benedict, and many
others in the foresaid Missal.

Tursellin spends a considerable part of his Book, entit'led the History of the
Lady of Loreto, in recounting the Gifts presented by Popes, Princes, Noblemen,
etc. to that one Saint. The Citizens of Recanati, upon their deliverance from a
grievous Plague, which they imputed to that Virgins Intercessions, gave unto
her a golden Coronet beset with precious Jewels, l. 2. c. 8.

George Monachus of Padua gave a Silver Image of our Blessed Lady, of five
pound weight. Cardinal Tranensis another of the same substance and form, but of
double weight, lib. 2. cap. 9.

Albertus Marquess of Aquaviva, sent his own Image of Silver of ten pound
weight. Albertus Duke of Bavaria, a great Cross of Emeralds, garnished with
Gold and Carbuncles, and set as it were in a Mountain of Crystal. Lib. 5. cap.
1.

2. The Gifts, which the Heathen offered to their Gods, had the cause of their
Oblation for the most part engraven upon them, or expressed in Tables hung up
in the Temple of that God, to whom they were presented. Take two or three of
these Inseriptions, as I find them recorded by Brissonius de Formulis, Lib. 1.
p. 1^7.

Minervae memori Caelia Juliana indulgentia medicinarum ejus infirmitate gravi
liberata, D. P. Again,

Soli sacrum pro salute Cl. Juliani Pr. Vr. Praef. Annoneti. Julius Balbillus
S. Sol. ded. XIII. Kal. Febr.

And when the Gift was votive, that was also put into the Inscription, says
the same Author.

Q. Servilius vulnere servatus Herculi Deo invicto signum aereum ex voto posuit
pro Martem Argenteum in magna ara. Again,

Silvano sancto C. Aucturnius Medicus Lud. Gallic. porticum and Exedram and
Signum aeneum voto suscepto libens merito dedit. Kal. Maii. L. Martio and sex.
Coss.

Thus do Papists many times engrave upon their Gifts to Saints, the cause of
their Oblation. To clear this take a few Instances out of Tursellin.

Mary of Aragon Marquess of Guasto gave unto the Lady of Loreto the silver
Image of a young Man, wherein the cause is written in manner following.

Mary of Aragon Marquess of Guasto, sent it in performance of a Vow, for
restoring health to Anthony, a young Man, my Brothers Son. Lib. 3. cap 8.

Stephen Bathorius Prince of Transylvania (whom they call the Vayvode) sent to
the B. Virgin of Loreto for a Gift, a silver Image of our B. Lady, almost a
Cubit and an half, of excellent Workmanship, and curiously in laid with gold.
At whose feet the Vayvode himself being all in armor is expressed in a silver
Image, as if he were praying; which the Inscription of the base declares to be
a Votive Gift.

The magnificent Lord Stephen, Earl of Bathor, Vayvode of Transylvania, Earl of
Siculum, and Judge of the Court of the most excellent Prince Matthias, by the
Grace of God King of Hungary, Bohemia, etc.

Dedicated this silver Image, in honor of God, and his most Blessed Mother;
For that by the Intercession of the said glorious Virgin, he was delivered from
a certain great danger in the Year

M. CCCC. LXXXIX.

Lib. 2. cap. 6.

I will add but one more. Henry the third King of France sent a Princely Gift
to the Virgin of Loreto, viz. a worthy Cup, to obtain Issue-male by her
Intercession; a Gift for substance and work most excellent. For the Cup it self
is of hollowed Gem, at this day called the Azure-stone. It Is also very big, and
intermingled with golden Veins, the Cover whereof is of turned Crystal set in
gold, and adorned with many excellent Jewels. In the Top of the Cover an Angel
of Gold does hold in his hand a Lilly of Diamonds, the Arms of the Kingdom of
France; which Lilly does consist of three Diamonds joined together in the gold
with admirable art. The foot of the Cup, being Emerald, is bound about, and
supported with gold, and beautified with precious Stones, and rich Orient
Pearls. In the bottom of the foot, the Giver, and and the Cause of his Gift, is
engraven in manner following.

O Queen, who by thy worthy Son
Did joyful blessing bring
To all the World, bless with a Son
The Kingdom, and the King.
Henry III. King of France, and Polonia, the Year of our Salvation.

M. D. L XXXIV.

Lib. 5. cap. 4.

I will conclude this with the words of Polydor Virgil: The Priests and others
(says he) who reaped the Profit, excited the People to offer liberally, whose
Gifts they hung in public places, and added Titles to them, that so the Names
of the Persons might be better known both to the Saints, and to Men. Thus a
great part of the people were induced sometimes to make long journeys, that
they might visit such an Image, and leave their Gifts there: and in so doing
they thought enough was done, though all other duties both of piety and charity
were omitted. De Inventor. Rerum. Lib. 6. cap. 13.

3. The Heathen offered these Gifts upon the Altars erected to their Gods.

Dona ferunt, onerantque aras --
Virgil Aeneid. Lib. 2. And Lib. 12.
Cumulant altaria donis.
More Testimonies are produced by Brissonius de Formul. lib. 1. p. 30.

Thus do our Romanists offer these Gifts to Saints upon their Altars. One
Instance will be sufficient to clear both this, and that Papists have a greater
love and respect for their Saints, than for Christ himself.

The Church of Canterbury (says Mr. Foulis) before the dissolution of Abbeys,
had three several Altars; one dedicated to Christ, another to the Virgin Mary,
and another to Thomas Becket. The yearly Offerings at these will show the
peoples affection; take an Instance or two out of the old Leger-Book of that
Church.

This Year.
The Oblations offered at the Altar of the Virgin Mary -- ^53 5 6 0 Item, At
the Shrine of S. Thomas Becket -- 832 12 3 6 Item, At Christ's Shrine -- 003 2 2
0

The next Year.

Item, To the Blessed Virgin 004 1 8 q Item, To S. Thomas -- 954 6 3 0 Item, To
Christ -- 000 0 0 0

Thus Papists offer Gifts to Saints, and upon their Altars, even as Pagans did
to their gods.

CHAP. XI. SACRIFICES.
THE Heathen offered Sacrifices in honor of their gods. This is most evident
from all Histories both Sacred and Profane. Here a choice was made of Animals
according to the disposition of the gods to whom the Sacrifice was to be
offered. For Mars loved no creatures but only such as were furious and warlike;
as the Bull, which might not be sacrificed to Jupiter. Neptune affected the
Horse and the Bull: the He-goat was dedicated to Bacchus, because it is a
creature that spoils the Vineyards. Cows were killed in honor of Ceres and
Juno. She-goats were offered to Diana. Young Kids to Faunus, etc. Rosin. Antiq.
Romans lib. 3. cap. 33. Arnobius deriding these Sacrifices, says, What is the
cause, that this god is honored with Bulls, and that with Kids or Sheep? this
with sucking-Pigs, and that with unclipped Lambs? this with virgin-Heifers, and
that with horned-Goats? this with barren Cows, and that with great Sows? this
with Male, and that with Female Animals? this with white, and that with black?
Adv. Gent. lib. 7. And a little after he adds, Omnium Animalium facta est inter
Deos divisio; There Is a division of all Animals amongst the gods. And not only
these, but several Plants and Fruits of the Earth were sacrificed to their
gods, as the Learned Vossius informs us out of their own Authors: De Physiol.
Christ. and Theol. Gent. lib. 9. and Natal Com. Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 17.

Nay, in some places they sacrificed Men and Women to their Idols. Bacchus had
an Altar in Arcadia, upon which a great many young Damsels were beaten to death
with bundles of Rods. This was also practiced by the Lacedaemonians, who
scourged their Children in honor of Mercury. The Germans and the Cimbri also
sacrificed men after they had cruelly tormented them. Galtruchius Caesar in his
Commentaries speaks of the ancient Gauls, who did trim up a great Statue made
of branches of Ozier, and then filled it with men alive, to burn them together
to their Idols. Alexander ab Alexandro makes mention of Aristomenes, who in a
Sacrifice caused three hundred men to be slain in honor of his god.

Many of them did offer their own Children, which was an ordinary practice
amongst the Egyptians and the people of Palestina. The Holy Scripture does
reproach it to the Israelites, who were so vile as to imitate these abominable
Inhumanities in causing their Children to pass between two fires so often, till
they were miserably scorched. They also shut them up in a hollow Idol of Brass
called Molech, which was red hot; and whilst these innocent Victims were
consuming in this manner, they sounded Trumpets, and beat Drums and other
Instruments, that the people might not hear the complaints and outcries of
these poor Creatures; therefore this place was called Tophet, that is, a Drum.

Thus do Papists offer Sacrifices in honor of their Saints. When a person is
canonized, there is a sevenfold honor (says Bellarmine) due unto him. 1. He
is put into the Catalogue of Saints, that is, it is decreed and commanded, that
he be publicly esteemed and called a Saint by all men. 2. He is invocated in
the public prayers of the Church. 3. Temples and Altars are built in honor of
him. 4. Sacrifices, as well of the Eucharist, as of Prayers and Praises, are
publicly offered in honor of him. 5. Holy Days are observed in memory of him.
6. They make Statues and Images of him, which are painted with a certain light,
in sign of that glory he is believed to have in Heaven. 7. His Relics are kept
in a precious Box, and publicly reverenced. De Sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 1. cap.
7.

This will further appear, if we cast our eye upon the particular Offices
appointed for them. In the Feast of St. Andrew we have this Prayer.

We beseech thee, O Lord, that the holy Prayer of blessed Andrew may render our
sacrifice pleasing to thee: that as it is offered to his honor, so it may be
accepted by his merits, etc.

O Lord, we bring the sacrifices of praise to thine Altars; which we humbly
pray, may be commended to thee by their Patronage, in veneration of whom we
offer these sacrifices to thy piety. In Festo Vedasti and Amandi.

God of the Apostles, God of the Martyrs, God of Confessors, God of Virgins,
God of all the Elect, we humbly beseech thee, that thou would vouchsafe to
sanctify and bless this holy sacrifice offered in honor of S. Sanson. In
Festo Sansonis.

We offer sacrifices unto thee, O Lord, in honor of blessed Rufus thy Martyr,
humbly beseeching thee, that as thou did grant unto him the Confession of the
holy Faith, so thou would give unto us pardon and peace. In Festo S. Ruphi.

These and many more such Prayers we find in the Roman and Sarisbury Missals.

CHAP. XII. PVRGATORY.
THE Heathen taught, that there is a place in the lower parts of the Earth,
where the Souls of men are purged from the spots of lesser sins, by suffering
most grievous torments, before they can be admittted into the Elysian Fields,
places that abound with all manner of delights and satisfactions.

Plato having described the Infernal Rivers according to the Traditions of
their Poets, says, That when the dead are arrived at the place, whither they
have been transported by their Demons, it is discussed in judgment, who have
lived virtuously, and who have lived wickedly. Those, who are judged for the
greatness of their sins, as sacriledg, murders -- to be incurable ((...)) they
are immediately cast into the lowest place of Hell; out of which they shall
never be delivered. Others, who have committed great sins, but such as are
curable ((...)) that in passion have offered violence to Father or Mother, etc.
but spent the rest of their lives in penance, these according to the nature of
their crimes are cast into diverse Rivers of Fire, where they lie for a year or
more, and then come to a Fenny, Marish place, called Acherusia, where they pray
unto those, whom they have hurt and injured, that they may come forth, and be
received into the Mansions of Bliss and Happiness. If their Prayers and
Supplications prevail with these persons, they presently come forth, and cease
to be tormented. But those who have lived virtuously, ascend into most pure
habitations, the beauty and glory of which is not easy to be expressed. And
others, who have lived in a middle way, they are carried along the Acheron to a
Fenny place, where they are purged and absolved by suffering grievous torments;
and being delivered thence, they are rewarded with honors according to the
merit and dignity of their good works. Phaedo prope finem. Again, in his
Gorgias he says: Those that have lived just^y and virtuously, when they die,
pass to the Regions of blessed souls, where they are far removed from the
wicked, and enjoy all manner of delights: But those who have lived unjustly and
wickedly, they are cast into a prison of punishment, called Tartarus. These
things I have heard (says he) and believe them to be true. And hence he
argues, that such a thing will come to pass; because some sins are curable, and
others incurable.

And it is observable, that Plato speaking of the two places, viz. of the
Blessed, and of the Damned, he says; These things I received by Tradition: but
when he comes to speak of a third and middle state of the dead, he endeavors
to demonstrate it by reason; As these (says he) who are punished for their
offenses in this life, are so punished, that they may either receive the profit
of reformation, or be an example to others: So it is in the other world; these
who have committed sins that are curable, receive benefit by pains and
torments; But those, who for the greatness of their crimes are incurable
((...)) nothing can profit them, but they become an example to others.

Another reason which he urges is purely Philosophical; As the body retains
its marks, scars and deformities, even after death; so vices impress blots and
stains upon the soul; when therefore Radamanthus (one of the Judges of Hell)
sees the soul, when separated from the body, polluted with spots, he judges
whether they be curable or incurable. And therefore I study (says he) to
appear before his Judgment Seat having a soul altogether pure and holy. And the
same Doctrine is delivered by him, De Repub. lib. 10.

And thus Plato made up three degrees of men; The eminently virtuous, whom he
lodges in the Elysian-Fields; the desperately wicked, whom he adjudgeth to
everlasting fire; and the middle sort, who have committed some light and venial
sins, and these his Purgatory is reserved for.

Infinita secula dinumeranda esse, quibus nocentum animae in easdem paenas
saepe revolutae, sero de tartaris emergere permittitur, and ad naturae suae
principia, quod est coelum, tandem impetrata purgatione remeare: Infinite ages
are to be numbered in which the souls of nocents, suffering the same
punishments, are at last delivered out of Tartarus, and return, when purged, to
Heaven: Hermagoras Platonicus Philosophus apud Macrobium in Somn. Scipion. lib.
2. in fine.

And Virgil speaks to the same purpose, Aeneid. lib. 6.

Quin, and supremo cum limine vita reliquit
Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes: penitusque necesse est
Multa diu concreta modis molescere miris.
Ergo exercentur paenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt, altae panduntur inanes,
Suspensae ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
Quisque suospatimur manes, exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci leta arva tenemus:
Donec longa dies, perfecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aethereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
And do not our Romanists teach the very same Doctrine? Their Council of Trent
only decrees, That the sound Doctrine concerning Purgatory should be firmly
believed and carefully taught by Christians, Sess. 25.

I confess those Fathers do somewhat explain the nature of it, Sess. 6. Can.
30. If any one shall affirm, That the guilt of eternal punishment is so
forgiven, as that there remains no guilt of temporal punishment to be paid
either in this life, or hereafter in Purgatory, before there can be any
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, let him be Anathema.

From whence it evidently follows, That the Doctrine of Purgatory, as it is
delivered by the Council of Trent, does depend upon this Principle, That there
is a guilt of temporal punishment remaining after the sin is pardoned, which
temporal punishment is to be satisfied for either in this life, or in
Purgatory. So that all those who are in Purgatory are there on that account,
that they might satisfy the Justice of God for the temporal punishment of sin.
For the guilt of mortal sin being remitted by the merits of Christ, the
punishment is supposed still to remain; which being changed from eternal to
temporal by the Keys of the Church, this punishment remains to be satisfied for
in the pains of Purgatory.

But more fully is this place described by their Doctors. Bellarmine gives us
this definition of it: Purgatory is a certain place, where, as in a prison,
souls are purged, that were not perfectly cleansed and purified in this life,
before they can be admitted into Heaven. De Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 1.

They tell us, That all souls are not admitted into Purgatory, but only those
for whom Heaven is prepared; and not all these, for some have an immediate
passage into Heaven: 1. Such as have no pollution and defilement at all; which
privilege (say they) is proper to the Virgin Mary. 2. Such as have no actual
sin, as the Prophet Jeremy, and S. John the Baptist. 3. Such whose sins,
whether venial or mortal, are fully expiated. For whom then is this place
prepared? I answer, For such as have not (though they are truly penitent, and
firmly believe in Christ) fully satisfied for their sins, or undergone
sufficient penance.

Panigarolla confidently affirms, That either there is a Purgatory, or God is
unjust: And he proves it thus; Suppose three men dye; one without sin both
mortal and venial; the second with both; and the third without mortal, but with
venial sin. The first passes immediately to Heaven; and the second to Hell.
But whither goes the third? If to Heaven, God is unjust in conferring the same
Reward which the first enjoys. If to Hell, God is unjust in inflicting the
same punishment upon him which the second suffers: Therefore he must go into
Purgatory, to satisfy Divine Justice, and to have his soul thoroughly purified.
Apud Chamier. de Purgator. cap. 3.

If such as be truly penitent, dye in Gods favor before they have satisfied
for their sins of omission and commission, by worthy fruits of penance, their
souls are purged after death with Purgatory-punishments. Eugenii 4. Bulla
Vnionis.

Thus you see, that this Doctrine of the Roman Church concerning Purgatory,
exactly agrees with that delivered by the Ancient Pagans. Hence Bellarmine
urging several Reasons for it, his third is taken from the common Opinion of
all Nations, Hebrews, Mahumetans, and Gentiles both Philosophers and Poets. De
Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 11.

CHAP. XIII. Prayers, Oblations, and Sacrifices for the Dead.
THE Heathen taught, That men upon earth might help souls out of Purgatory by
their Prayers, Gifts, and Sacrifices; and the very same is affirmed by our
Romanists.

1. The Heathen taught, That men upon earth might help souls out of Purgatory
by their prayers. Ye pray (says Arnobius) unto certain unknown Powers, that
they would be favorable to the deceased, and not hinder any in their passage
toward their Heavenly Country. And afterward in the same Book we have this
passage: Their Magi or Wise men promise, that they will send commendatory
prayers, wherewith certain unknown Powers being appeased, they have an easy
and speedy passage to Heaven, Adv. Gent. lib. 2. Which words imply, That it was
the general practice of the Heathen to pray for their departed friends; and
their firm belief, that such prayers were advantageous to them. Ovid also
speaks to the same purpose, Fastor. lib. 2.

Nec majora veto. Sed and his placabilis umbra est.
Add preces positis and sua verba focis.
It was once a custom among the Romans to burn their dead upon a great heap of
Wood; this before the burning (says Dr. Godwin) was properly called Pyra; in
the time that it burned, it was called Rogus, because then they were wont to
pray unto the Infernal gods for the deceased; after the burning it was called
Bustum, quasi been ^stum. Roman. Histor. lib. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 21.

Thus do Papists teach, That the prayers of the living profit the dead. A
certain Religious man, in his return from Jerusalem, being entertained for a
time in Sicily by a certain Anchorite, learned from him, among other things,
That there were places near unto them that used to cast up burning flames,
which by the Inhabitants were called the Pots of Vulcan, in which souls,
according to the quality of their deserts, did suffer diverse punishments. That
many Devils were sent thither to renew and heighten their pains, who lamented
that so many souls were taken out of their hands by the prayers of the
faithful, and more at this time by the prayers of the Monks of Cluny, who
prayed without ceasing for the rest of those that were departed. This Story is
related by Polydor Virgil, de invent. rer. lib. 6. cap. 9. Durand. Ration. de
Officio Mortuor. p. 433. Hospinian. de Origin Festor. Christ. p. 100. who
cites Volateranus, Antoninus, Petrus de Natalibus, Jacobus de Voragine, Petrus
Damianus, etc.

And that this is the practice of the Roman Church, all their Missals declare,
in which we have a particular Office for those who labor in Purgatory, which
contains both general and particular Prayers. Take one or two of either kind.

O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful, grant unto the souls of
thy servants the remission of all their sins; that the indulgence, which they
always desired by our pious supplications may be obtained; who live and
reignest, etc. Missale parvum.

O Lord Jesu Christ, the safety and redemption of faithful souls, who came
not to destroy, but save souls, and to give thy life a ransom for many: We
humbly implore thy great clemency, and ineffable mercy, that thou would
vouchsafe mercifully to look upon the souls of all the faithful departed this
life, and tormented in Purgatory; and let such as are justly punished for their
sins; he delivered by thy bountiful piety, and assist them with thy mercy: And
by the merits of the most blessed and glorious Virgin Mary, and all Saints, be
pleased to free them from the pains of Hell, and place them in the company of
Saints: command them to be clothed with the garment of immortality, and
refreshed with the pleasures of Paradise, etc. Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p.
132.

O God, whose property is always to have mercy and to spare: We thy Suppliants
earnestly entreat thee for the soul of thy Servant N, that thou would not
deliver it into the hands of the Enemy, nor be unmindful of it for ever; but
command the Angels to receive and convey it safe into Paradise; that because he
hoped and believed in that, he may not suffer the pains of hell, but possess
eternal joys; through our Lord, etc. Missale parvum.

Francis Cyprian, who enumerates the Indulgences conferred upon the
Confraternity of the Rosary, tells us, That every time they recite the whole
Rosary for the departed, they gain the delivery of a Soul out of Purgatory.
Paulus 3. granted this Vivae vocis oraculo, to the Rosarists of the Kingdom of
Spain, 1542; which Pius 5, Gregory 13, Sixtus 5, extend to all other
Confraternities of the Rosary throughout the world, p. 20.

Pope John 22, granted to all that say this following prayer as they pass
through any Churchyard or place of Burial, so many years of pardon as there
are bodies buried in it. Hor. B. Virg. sec. us. Sar. p. 132.

God save all faithful souls whose bodies rest here, and every where in the
dust. Our Lord Jesu Christ, who redeemed you and us with his most precious
blood, vouchsafe to free you from punishments, and place you in the Quire of
his ^ngels; and there being mindful of us, earnestly pray, that we may be
joined to you, and crowned in Heaven with you.

2. The Heathen offered Gifts for those that were departed, as Honey, Milk,
Wine, etc. Of these Ovid speaks, Fastor. lib. 2.

Est honor and tumulis animas placare paternas,
Parvaque in extruct as munera far pyras.
Parva petunt manes, pietas pro divite grata est
Munera, non avidos Styx habet ima Deos.
Tegula porrectis satis est velata coronis,
Et sparsae fruges, parvaque mica salis.
Inque mero mollita Ceres, violaeque solutae:
Nec habeat media testa relictavia.
And a little after he informs us, who was the Author of this Ceremony.

Hunc morem Aeneas pietatis idoneus Author
Attulit in terras just Latin tuas.
Ille patris Genio solemnia dona ferebat:
Hinc populi ritus edidicere pios.
And Homer writes to the same purpose, Odys. 11.

(...),
(...).
(...), etc.
Thus do our Romanists offer Gifts for the dead. Some Monks have taught (says
Du Plessis) that the Souls which are in Purgatory, do leap at the ound of the
money when it is cast into the Basin for them, De Missal. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Sometimes bread and wine is offered for the dead, sometimes silver and gold,
and sometimes a torch or candle to enlighten those who sit in the darkness of
Purgatory, says Durandus, Rational. Divin. Offic. lib. 4. cap. 30. numb. 39.
This is further clear from their prayers for the dead.

O Lord, we beseech thee graciously look upon the Gifts which we offer unto
thee for the soul of thy Servant N. that being purged by heavenly Remedies, it
may rest in thy piety; Through our Lord, etc. Missale parvum in Missa pro
defunctis, p. 240.

Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord that these Gifts which we offer before the eyes
of thy Majesty for the souls of thy servants, whose commemoration we celebrate
with special devotion; and for whom we are commanded to pray, and our
Benesactors, Kindred, familiar friends, and all the faithful, may be
comfortable; and they being freed by thy piety from the chains of terrible
death, may merit to be partakers of eternal happiness; Through our Lord, etc.
Missal. sec. us. Sar. Offic. pro defunct.

2. The Heathen Offered Sacrifices for the dead. Hetruria promises in the
Acherontick Boo^s (says Arnobius) with the blood of certain Animals, offered
unto certain Deities, to purge the so^ls of men, and free them from the Laws of
Mortality, Advers. Gent. lib. 2. The Feralia were instituted to appease the
infernal gods, in which Sacrifices were offered to them, Hospin. de Orig.
Festor. Pagan. p. 58. The Argives offered sacrifice unto Apollo immediately
after the decease of their Parents; and after thirty days unto Mercury.

Nay, they were so barbarous, as to offer human Victims for the dead. Virgil
having described the pomp of their Funerals, afterward makes mention of the
Sacrifices they offered for the deceased, Aeneid. lib. 1.

Vinxerat and post terga manus, quos mitteret umbris
Inferi^s, caeso sparsuros sanguine flammas.
And the like we have lib. 10.

Qua^uor hic juvenes, tot^dem, quos educat Vsens
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris,
Captivoque rogi persundat sanguine flammas.
In both these places Virgil imitates Homer, Iliad 23, where Achilles sends
twelve Trojans for a sacrifice to the infernal gods, for Patroclus his intimate
Friend, whom Hector slew. And he tells us how Aeneas chose eight young Gallants
out of the Prisoners he took of the Enemy, to sacrifice them to the gods of
Hell for the sake of Pallas deceased.

Many Nations observed this Custom at the Funerals of great persons, viz. to
kill and burn with them such as had been acceptable to them in their lives, and
such as were judged able to do them service in the other world. Some Commanders
took in War as many Prisoners as they could, to sacrifice them at this time,
says Virgil. That famous Gladiator Spartacus, who was so industrious and
daring, as to raise an Army of Slaves in Italy, and to march against the people
of Rome, did force three hundred of his Prisoners of War to kill themselves in
honor of his Captains slain in the fight, to procure unto them the favor of
the Infernal gods. This cruel Ceremony became so ordinary amongst the Romans,
that scarce any of the Chieftains of the Commonwealth, or of the Emperors,
died, but some thousands of Gladiators did follow them.

Thus you see the Heathen offered sacrifices for the dead. The dead (says
Plato, citing Mus^us and Orpheus) are purged by sacrifices, De Repub. lib. 2.

Thus our Romanists offer an Eucharistical Sacrifice, which (say they) is
propitiatory for the dead, as well as for the living. Gregory the Great
relates an excellent Story which he heard of Felix Bishop of Centum-cellae;
take it in short thus: A Presbyter of Centum-cellae went to the Bath-house to
wash himself, where he found a man unknown to him, but very humble and
serviceable. And after he had served him several days, the Presbyter, to
requite his kindness, brought unto him two consecrated Hosts, as a blessing and
reward for his service; but the man with a sad countenance answered, This bread
(not this body) is holy, and I am not worthy to eat it. I was sometimes Master
of this House; but now for my sins I am appointed to this servile occupation;
if thou would do me a kindness, offer them to Almighty God as a sacrifice for
my sins, and believe thou art heard of God, when thou can not find me in this
place any more. This he did, and the man was no more seen. Osiander Epit.
Histor. Eccles. Cent. 6. lib. 4. cap. 19.

The souls in Purgatory, (says the Council of Trent, Ses. 25.) are thence
delivered fidelium suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptabili Altaris sacrificio:
By the suffrages of the faithful, but especially by the acceptable sacrifice of
the Altar. And a little after they give this charge to Bishops: Let Bishops
take care that the suffrages of the faithful now living, that is, the
sacrifices of Masses, Prayers, Alms-deeds, and other works of Piety, which
according to the Constitutions of the Church ought to be performed for the
faithful deceased, that they be done piously and devoutly, etc. And they
anathematize every one that shall say, The sacrifice of the Mass is a naked
commemoration of that Sacrifice on the Cross and not propitiatory; or that it
only profits him that receives it, and ought not to be offered for the living
and the dead, for sins, punishments, satisfactions and other necessities, Ses.
22. Can. 3.

For the further clearing of this, I might set down several prayers in their
Missals; take one or two.

We beseech thee, O Lord mercifully to look upon the sacrifices which we offer
unto thee for the souls of thy servants; that upon whom thou have conferred the
merit of Christian faith, to them thou would also give the reward, Missale
parvum Offic. pro defunct.

O Lord, let the oblation of this present sacrifice satisfy thee for the soul
of thy servant; and let him find the pardon of his sins which he has sought;
and what he could not fulfill with the office of his mouth, he may through thy
grace reap the fruit of desired penance; Through our Lord, etc. Missal. sec.
us. Sar. p. 43.

4. The Heathen had a certain time especially assigned them every year, when
they were to offer their Purgatory-sacrifices. S. Aust. de Civit. Dei, lib. 7.
cap. 7. Plutarch tells us, That the Romans made their offerings and sacrifices
for the dead in the Month of February, Roman. Question. Quest. 34. Hence he
calls this Month (...), i. e. Expiatorie and purgative. In vita Romuli.

When the Romans (says Ovid) in the heat of their Wars, had for some time
omitted these yearly Feasts and Sacrifices for the dead, their Ghosts were
frequently seen, and lamentable howlings heard through the City, in the
nightime: Take the whole relation in his own words, Fastor. lib. 2.

At quondam, dum longa gerunt pugnacibus armis
Bella; parentales deseruere dies.
Non impune fuit: nam dicitur omine ab ipso
Roma suburbanis incaluisse rogis.
Vix equidem credo: bustis exisse feruntur,
Et tacitae questi tempore noctis avi.
Perque vias Vrbis, Latiosque ululasse per agros
Deformes animas vulgus inane ferunt.
Post ea praeteriti tumulis redduntur honores,
Prodigiisque venit funeribusque modus.
And a little after he adds,

Hanc, quia justa ferunt, dixere Feralia lucem,
Vltima placandis Manibus illa dies.
And in another place he tells us, That this Month of February (anciently the
last Month in the year) was consecrated to the Infernal Gods; because a
considerable part of it, viz. eleven days, was spent in offering Sacrifices to
them for the weal of the Dead.

Qui sacer est imis manibus, imus erat.
Fastor. Lib. 2.
Thus our Romanists have a certain day every year appointed, on which they are
to pray, and offer Sacrifices for all Souls, viz. the second of November,
There Is a particular Office appointed for this day in their Missals, on which
there must be two Masses in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches.

That herein they conform to the Heathen, nay, that they derive this custom
from them, is ingenuously confessed by their Polydor Virgil; who after he has
discoursed of the yearly Sacrifices, which the Pagans offered for the Dead,
says: Vnde omnino factum videtur, ut Odiloni in mentem venerit hujus
religionis celebrandi anniversarias exequias defunctorum: now Odilo was the
first Author of these Anniversary Commemorations. De Inventor. Rerum. Lib. 6.
cap. 9.

5. Besides the foresaid time the Heathen observed certain days every year for
particular persons. On these Anniversary days (says Natalis Comes) they killed
black Sheep, and, having taken the blood of them into a Vessel, with prayers
poured it into an hole dug in the earth, and called upon the souls to drink;
as Euripides in Hecuba has expressed it.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Has mortuorum inferias meas cape
Mulcimen, adsis ut bibas hunc sanguinem
Castae puellae, quem tibi donavimus.
Mythol. Lib. 1. cap. 13.
And much like to this is that of Virgil. Aeneid. Lib. 5.

-- Quinas de more bidentes,
Totque suos, totidem nigrantes terga juvencos:
Vinaque fundebat pateris, animamque vocabat
Anchysae magni, manesque Acheronte remissos.
Nec non and socii, quae cuique copia, laeti
Dona ferunt, onerantque aras, mactantque juvencos.
Thus do Papists observe certain days every year for particular persons; These
Anniversary days are kept (says Durand) for three Reasons. 1. That the Dead
may pass from the years of calamity to the years of eternity, i. e. eternal
life. 2. Because as we observe an Anniversary day to the honor of Saints, and
our profit; so we observe yearly the day of their Death, to their profit and
our devotion. 3. Anniversary days are kept for the Dead, because we know not
how it is with them in the other world; and it is better that our charity to them
superabound, than be defective. Rational. divin. Offic. lib. 6. cap. 35.

And if this Anniversary day for the Dead fall upon a Sunday, or any great
Festival, it must not be put off till the next day, as the Festivities of
Saints are, but be observed the day before; that the pains, which the deceased
suffer in Purgatory, may be sooner mitigated. Durand. ibid.

The Church of Rome has appointed a particular Office for these Anniversaries,
in which we have several Prayers; take one of them.

Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that the souls of thy Servants (when it is kept
for more than one) the Anniversary day of whose decease we commemorate, being
purged by these Sacrifices, may obtain indulgence, and eternal rest. Through
our Lord, etc. Missale parvum in Anniversario defunctor.

CHAP. XIV. Consecration of Bells.
THe Heathen had Trumpets for religious Uses. Rosinus Antiq. Romans Lib. 2. cap.
4. 1. These they purged and hallowed at the Feast of Minerva, called
Quinquatria; and at the Feast of Vulcan; and for this reason they were called
Tubillustria; Of which Ovid writes thus.

Summa dies quinque tubam lustrare canoram
Admonet, and forti sacrificare Deae.
Again,

Proxima Vulcani lux est, quam Lustria dicunt;
Lustrantur purae, quas fecit ille, tubae.
Hospinian de Origin Festor. Pagan. p. 73. and 95. And Rosinus out of Varro
informs us where these Trumpets for holy uses were consecrated. Antiq. Romans
Lib. 4. cap. 7.

2. They taught that these consecrated Trumpets were sovereign Antidotes
against Magical Conjurations, Apparitions, Thunder, Tempests, etc. So much is
affirmed by Ovid. Fast. Lib. 5.

Rursus aquam tangit Temisaeaque concrepat era,
Et rogat, ut tectis exeat umbra suis.
And the words of Arnobius import some extraordinary virtue (according to the
judgment of the Heathen) in these mystical Instruments: Etiamne aeris
tinnitibus, and quassationibus cymbalorum? Etiamne tympanis? quid efficient
crepitus scabillorum --? Adv. Gentes, Lib. 7.

Thus do Papists consecrate Bells appointed for religious uses, and attribute
the same virtues to them. Take the form of this Consecration as it is prescribed
in their Pontisical.

The Bell ought to be blessed in this manner before it be hung in the
Bell-frey. First, it must be so hung, or placed, that it may be conveniently
touched, and handled within and without: then near unto the Bell must be
prepared a Seat for the Bishop, a Vessel of Water, an Aspersory, a Vessel with
Salt, clean Linen Clothes to wipe the Bell, when there shall be occasion, a
Vessel of Oil, holy Chrysm, Frankincense, Myrrh, a Censer with Fire, etc.

These things being prepared, the Bishop in the Vestry, or some other
convenient place puts on his Robes, and coming unto the Bell, places himself
in the Seat, and says with the Ministers these following Psalms, viz. 50. 53.
56. 66. 69. 85. 129. After this the Bishop rises up, and standing without his
Mitre, blesses the Salt and Water, and mixeth them. Then he begins to wash the
Bell with Holy Water, the Ministers assisting him, within and without; and
afterward they wipe it with a clean Linen Cloth. Then they say or sing these
Psalms, viz. 145. 146. 147. 148. 149. 150. These being ended, the Bishop rises
up, and having dipped the forefinger of his right Hand in the holy Oil, he
makes the sign of the Cross on the outside of the Bell; which being done he
says this Prayer.

O God, who did command Silver-Trumpets to be made by blessed Moses thy
Servant, which whilst the Levites should sound in the time of Sacrifice, the
people being excited by the sound of sweetness, might prepare themselves to
worship thee, etc. Grant, we beseech thee, that this Vessel prepared for thy
holy Church, may be sancti fied by the Holy Ghost, that the faithful may be
invited to the reward by the sound of it. And when the melody of it shall sound
in the ears of the people, the devotion of faith may increase in them; all the
Conspiracies of the Enemy, the noise of hail, the danger of tempests, and
violence of storms may be driven away; the blasts of winds may be wholesome and
moderate; hurtful thunder may be tempered: that the powers of the Air may fall
down by the right hand of thy strength; that they hearing this Bell may
tremble, and fly before the Ensign of the Holy Cross of the Son: to whom every
knee boweth, of things in Heaven, of things on Earth, and of things under the
Earth, and every tongue confesses, that our Lord Jesus Christ, having
conquered death, by the Cross reigns in the glory of God the Father, with the
same Father, and the Holy Ghost throughout all Ages. Amen.

Then the Bishop stands up, and makes seven Crosses on the outside of the Bell
with holy Oil, and within the Bell four Crosses with Chrysm at an equal
distance: and at every one he says;

O Lord, Let this Bell be sanctisi ed, and conse crated: in the Name of the Fa
there, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; in the honor of S. N.

After this the Bishop puts off his Mitre, and says this Prayer.

Omnipotent, Everlasting God, who before the Ark of the Covenant did cause
the Walls wherewith the Enemy was environed to fall down by the sound of the
Trumpets; pour upon this Bell thy heavenly been diction: that at the sound of
it the siery Darts of the Enemy, the percussion of thunderbolts, the violence
of hailstones, the hurt of storms, may fly away, etc.

Then the Bishop sits, and puts Frankincense and Myrrh into the Censer, and
that into the Bell, that it may receive the smoke and perfume thereof. And then
(to pass by the rest, he adds this Prayer:

O Christ, Omnipotent Ruler, who sleeping in the Ship according to the
assumption of the flesh, whilst a storm troubled the Sea; but awaking, upon thy
command did presently cease; do thou graciously supply the necessities of thy
people; pour upon this Bell the dew of thy holy Spirit, that the Enemy of the
Faithful may fly before the sound of it, that Christian people may be invited
to faith; that the Hostile Army may be affrighted; that thy people assembled,
may be comforted by it in the Lord; and that the Holy Spirit, as delighted with
David's Harp, may descend from above; and as Samuel killing a sucking Lamb for
an Holocaust of the King of an Eternal Empire, the noise drove away all danger
of the Air; so whilst the sound of this Bell passes through the Clouds, an
Angelical hand may conserve the Assembly of thy Church; and that an eternal
protection may save the fruits, minds, and bodies of Believers; Through Christ,
etc. Pontificale Roman. de Benedict. Campan. p. 371.

And further, Godfathers and Godmothers are appointed, who give a Name to the
Bell, and cover it with white garments; as the custom was in the primitive
times, when young Children or adult persons were baptized, Manuale sec. us.
Sar. p. 162.

I remember Bellarmine falls heavy upon us, and plainly tells us, we lie in
saying, That they baptize their Bells, De Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 12. But why
is he so hot? Does not their Durantus say, That Bells are baptized; and that
the baptizing of them is ancient? De Rit. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 2. n. 6. And in
an old Pontifical (says the learned Rivet) we have these words: Let this
commixtion of Salt and Water become a wholesome Sacrament; in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Sum. Controv. Tract. 2. Quest.
17. And Gerhard affirms the same, De Baptis. cap. 7. sect. 1. But these words,
salutare sacramentum, are not to be found in their Pontifical, put forth by
Clement 8.

And since they have called it both Baptism, and a S^crament, why may not we be
allowed to give ^f the same Name? Besides, what is here wanting, that is used in
baptizing men? The whole external form is observed, Godfathers and Godmothers
are appointed, a Name is given to it, the Bell is washed with water, with
invocation of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; it is anointed with Chrism, etc.

I cannot dismiss this head, till I have given you an account of the manifold
Mysteries, which their great Durand has observed in these Bells, and the
Ceremonies used in the consecration of them.

They are made of brass, and so more shril than Trumpets under the Law; because
then God was known in Judea only, but now through the world. They are also more
durable, to signify that the preaching of the New Testament shall continue
longer than the Trumpets and Sacrifices of the old Law, even to the end of the
world.

Again, these Bells denote Preachers, which, like to Bells, ought to call men
to the Faith. The Bell it self denotes the mouth of the Preacher, according to
that of the Apostle, I am become as sounding-brass, etc. The hardness of the
metal denotes fortitude in the mind of the Preacher; hence says God, I have
given thee a forehead more hard than their foreheads.

The Clapper, which, striking on both sides of the Bell, makes the sound;
denotes the Doctors tongue, which is adorned with knowledge, and publishes both
the Testaments. A Prelate therefore without abilities to preach, is like a bell
without a clapper. And the striking of the clapper on both sides the bell,
signifies that a Preacher ought first to smite Vice in himself by correction,
and afterward proceed to reprove it in others.

The band wherewith the clapper is ti'd to the bell, denotes the moderation
wherewith the tongue is tempered. The Wood in which the bell hangs, signifies
the wood of the Cross of Christ. The Iron ligatures which tie and fasten the
bell to the wood, denote Charity, by which the Preacher being inseparably
conjoined to the Cross, glories, saying, Far be it from me to glory, except in
the Cross of our Lord. The wheel by which the bell is tolled, signifies the
right mind of the Preacher, which being wholly addicted to the Divine Laws, he
presses them upon the people by continual preaching.

The rope wherewith the bell is tolled, denotes the humility or life of the
Preacher. Again, the rope is tied to the wood in which the bell hangs, to
signify that the Scripture descends from the wood of the holy Cross; and as
the Rope is made of three cords, so the Scripture consists of a Trinity, viz.
History, Allegory, and Morality. And the rope descending from the wood in the
Priests hand, is the Scripture descending from the mystery of the Cross in the
mouth of the Preacher; and it comes to his hand, because the Scripture should
produce good works. The rising and falling of the Rope in tolling or ringing
the bell, denotes that the holy Scripture sometimes speaks of high, and
sometimes of low matters; or, that the Minister sometimes preaches
mysteriously, and sometimes plainly, according to the capacity of the people.
Again, the Priest pulls the Rope downward, when he descends from contemplation
to action; and upward, when the Scripture is exalted in contemplation. Lastly,
He pulls it downward when the Scripture is expounded literally; upward, when it
is expounded spiritually. Ration. divin. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 4.

CHAP. XV. The single Life of Priests.
POPE Syricius, speaking of the marriage of Priests, says, Let this reproach
be taken away which Gentilism does accuse, Epist. 4; whence it is clear (for we
must not question the Popes unerring faculty), That Marriage was prohibited
Pagan Priests. Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, That the ancient Heretics took
occasion to condemn Marriage from the Precepts and Practices of Pagan
Philosophers, Strom. lib. 3. The Athenian Hierophanta's (says S. Hierome) to
this day, by supping the broth of Hemlock, make themselves chaste (being
forbidden Marriage) before they were admitted into Sacred Orders, or advanced
to Prelatical Dignity. And discoursing of the Lives of the ancient Priests of
Egypt out of Chaeremon the Stoic, he faith, That they never mingled themselves
with women, never would see their Relations and Neighbors, no, not their
Children, from the time that they were consecrated; and they abstained from
flesh and wine, to suppress all lustful thoughts and desires, Adver. Jovinian.
lib. 1 in fine, and lib. 2.

And the Priests of Cybele (says Alexander ab Alexandro) did castrate
themselves that they might be chaste. And he further adds in the same place,
Those who performed their greatest solemnities (or their chief Priests) that
they might continue in chaste Religion, and escape the contagion of Women, did
emasculate themselves with certain Herbs, and lost their manliness. And this
(says he) was commanded by their Pontisical Law, which runs thus: Ad divos
adeunto casti pietatem adhibento, opes amovento; qui secus faxit, Deus ipse
vindex erit. And Euripides testifies, That in Crete those whom they called the
Prophets of Jupiter, do not only abstain from flesh, but also from all savoury
meat. And the like did the Indian Magi, who were advanced to the Priesthood of
the Sun, Alexander ab Alexandro in Genial. Dier. lib. 4. cap. 17. And among the
Assyrians, the Priests of Diana Ecbatana lived in perpetual Virginity, Idem
lib. 5. cap. 12. To add more Testimonies is unnecessary, since this is
generally confessed by our Romanists, and urged by Medina as an unanswerable
Argument against the Marriage of Priests, Chamier. de Caelibat. Sacerdot. lib.
17. cap. 7.

2. Pagan Priests defiled themselves with strange Women. Arnobius describing
the single life of Priests amongst the Gentiles, says, Where are Whoredoms
more committed by Priests than in the Temples, even by the Altars? Where are
Bawdries more practiced, and Adulteries more meditated? Lastly, Burning lust is
more frequently discharged in Chancels, than Brothel-houses, Adver. Gent. lib.
8.

Thus do our Romanists forbid their Priests to marry. The Council of Trent
denounces an Anathema against all those who shall say, That Clerks in Holy
Orders may contract Matrimony; and that such a Contract is valid,
notwithstanding the Laws and Constitutions of the Church, Ses. 24. Can. 9.

Costerus undertakes to prove, That Marriage is repugnant to the Evangelical
Priesthood in the very nature of it, De Coelib. Sacerdot. Others, as Major in
Sentent. Clichtovaeus de Continent. Sacerdot. etc. plead for a Divine Law. But
their great Bellarmine is forced to confess, that this prohibition is not
grounded upon any Divine Law, De Cler. lib. 1. cap. 18. So Aquinas 22, Quest.
88, Art. 11; and this is the most received Opinion among them. And yet with
them it is a greater Crime for a Priest to have one Wife, than many Whores,
which is expressly prohibited by the Law of God. It Is lawful with them for
Priests to keep Concubines, paying so much yearly to the Official, and the
price is set down in their Taxa Camerae Apostolicae; but for a lawful Wife no
dispensation will be granted: Nay, 'twas one of the German Grievances, That
such Priests as were disposed to live chastely, and abhorred this sin of
uncleanness, were compelled to take dispensations to keep Concubines. They are
not ashamed to confess, That no Priest is to be deposed for the cause of
Fornication, if he confine himself to one Woman. Decret. Did. 34. c. 4. And
Can. 7, we have these comfortable words: Though there be many things which the
Authority of Canonical Sublimity may command in these cases; yet because of the
defection of our times, in which not only the merits, but also the bodies of
men have failed, this severity must be remitted. And they generally affirm,
That a Priest sins more grievously in contracting Matrimony, than in
committing Fornication.

2. Our Roman Priests defile themselves with strange Women. This is most clear
from the Testimony of their own Authors. Mantuan speaking of the filthiness of
the Romish Clergy, says:

-- Nulla hic arcana revelo.
Non ignota loquor, liceat vulgata refer.
Sic Vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
Jam vetus Europam mores extirpat honestos.
Sanctus ager Scurris, venerabilis ara Cinaedis
Servit, honorandae divum Ganymedibus aedes.
De Calamit. Tempor. lib. 3.
In the last Visitation in Bavaria, such frequent Whoredoms were discovered,
that scarce three or four were found among One hundred Priests, which did not
either publicly keep Concubines, or privately contract Matrimony, said the
Orator of Albertus Duke of Bavaria, in the Council of Trent. Chamier de
Caelibat. Sacerdot. lib. 16. cap. 4.

Nay, their Popes have not been free; witness their Platina, Onuphrius, etc.
Take two Epitaphs.

Sixte jaces tandem, deflent tua busta Cynaedi,
Scortaque lenones, alea, vina, venus.
Again:

Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
The filthiness of the Romish Clergy is so notorious, that I forbear to add
other Testimonies out of Alvarus Pelagius de Planctu Ecclesiae, Nicolaus
Clemangis de Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, and many other eminent Authors.

Hence it is, that not a few of their great Doctors have wished, that this
Ecclesiastical Constitution might be abrogated, and Priests permitted to marry.
Far be it that this forced, should overcome that conjugal chastity, and the
crime of no fault bring a greater disgrace to the Order. What has brought more
evil to Religion, more grief to good men, than the filthiness of Priests? Let
the right of public Matrimony be restored to Priests, that they may rather
live holily, than defile themselves with sins against nature, Polydor Virgil de
Inventor. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 4.

About the time of the Council of Basil, the Emperor Sigismund drew up certain
Articles of Reformation, in which, among many things, this is remarkable: More
evil than good has come to the Church from the Decree of Calixtus; it is better
and more safe for the Soul, that liberty be granted unto Clerks to marry,
according to the custom of the Oriental Church, Gerhardus de Minister.
Ecclesiast. And Pope Pius 2. has left this saying, With great reason Marriage
was taken from Priests, but there is greater reason why it should be restored,
Platina in ejus vita. Which words are left out out in their later Editions.

CHAP. XVI. Shaven Crowns and Beards.
THE Pagan Priests shaved the crown of their heads and beards. We read Lev. 21.
5, They shall not make baldness upon their head; Not a round bare place, says
Vatablus: Ye shall not make roundness of the hair of your head, say the
Septuag. Radulphus affirms, That the Gentile Priests shaved their heads round,
for they thought that the gods were best pleased with a round figure, as the
most perfect, Cornel. a Lapid. and Bonfrerius in Synops. Criticor. Which was
the ground of this Prohibition, say Divines both Popish and Protestant.

Again, Ezekiel. 44. 20, Neither shall they shave their heads; That they might not
appear like the Gentile Priests, says Bellarmine: Out of a superstitious
imitation of the Heathen, who sacrificed to their Idols with shaven heads,
says Estius. Apuleius describing the Processions of the Gentiles, says, These
(their Priests) march forward with their shaven heads, etc. Metamorph. lib. 11.
The Egyptian Priests (as Alexander ab Alexandro informs us) were by law to
shave their heads every third day, and with brazen Knives; which custom (says
he) they received from the Sabines, whose Priests were shaven with such
Instruments. In Genesis Dierum. lib. 6. cap. 12. Of these Juvenal speaks, Sat. 6.

Qui grege linigero circumdatus, and grege calvo.
And Martial, Lib. 12. Epigram. 29.
Linigeri fugiunt calvi, sistrataque turba.
And Vossius gives us the reason of this Custom: Because of all Mortals none
should have such purity of Soul, of which that of the Body is a Symbol, as
Priests; they ought not to be burdened with sordid cares, which are signified
by the hair. Besides, long hair hurts the head, and the hair both of Men and
Beasts grows out of the excrements of food: not, as if they should stay here,
but because by this Symbol, they might be admonished to study purity. De
Physiologia Christ. etc. lib. 9. cap. 12. And this reason is urged by Plutarch
in his Treatise of Isis and Osiris. Thus do our Romish Priests shave their
heads and beards. For this we have the universal Testimony of their greatest
Doctors and Schoolmen. Bellarm. de Monachis, lib. 2. cap. 40. where he urges
several reasons, and the Authority of many Councils. Peter Lombard Sentent.
Lib. 4. Distinct. 24. Estius in Sentent. Lib. 4. Distinct. 24. Sect. 7. Durand
Ration. Divin. Officior. Lib. 2. cap. 1. And their Polydor Virgil derives this
Ceremony from Pagans, de Inventor. Rerum, Lib. 4. cap. 8.

Three things (says Durand) are here observable, viz. the shaving of the Head,
cropping the hair and the circular Form.

1. Three things follow upon the shaving of the Head, viz. the conservation of
cleanliness, deformation, and denudation. 1. The conservation of cleanliness;
because from the hair filthiness is contracted in the head. 2. Deformation;
because hair is for an ornament. And therefore this shaving signifies an
undefiled and singular life: that Clergymen should have purity of soul within;
and a singular life, that is, no exquisite habit without: Further, the shaving
and cutting of the hair denotes the deposition of all temporal things, and that
they should be content with food and raiment. 3. The baring of the upper part
of the head, shows that there should be nothing betwixt us and God, that with
open face we may contemplate the Divine Glory. Again, we shave the head, some
hair being left below in the form of a Crown; because the head signifies the
mind; and the hair, secular thoughts. Therefore as the top of the head is
cleansed from hair; so the mind, whilst it meditateth on heavenly things, ought
to be cleansed from worldly thoughts. But the lower part of the head has hair,
because it is sometimes lawful to think of worldly things, without which we
cannot live.

2. The cropping of the hair denotes, That no superfluous thoughts should
possess the mind. They go with shaven heads and naked ears, lest their hair by
growing long, cover their ears, and hinder their sight; to signify, that no
worldly thoughts should stop the ears or eyes of the Soul. And the hair is cut
above the ears, that the five senses of the head may be ready for the service
of God.

3. The hair is shaven in a circular form, or like a crown, for several
reasons: 1. In imitation of Christ our King, who being about to offer up
himself upon the Altar of the Cross, did wear a Crown of thorns. Hence it is,
that we, desiring to be saved by his Death, do wear upon our heads the Sign of
Christ's passion, that is, the form of a thorny Crown, which he wore in his
Sufferings, that he might take away the thorns of our sins: and to show that we
are ready to suffer derisions and reproaches for him, as he was for us. 2. The
circular form of the hair denotes the virtue of equality, every way agreeable
to reason: For then temporal things are rightly meditated on, when they are
consonant to reason. 3. A circular Figure is made because this Figure has
neither beginning nor end: by which we are given to understand, that Clerks are
the Ministers of God, who had no beginning, and shall have no end. 4. This
figure has no corner; by which is signified, that Clergymen ought not to have
a spot in their lives, and that they should have truth in their Doctrine;
because Truth loves not corners. 5. Because this figure of all figures is most
beautiful: Hence in this God made the celestial creatures; by which is
signified, that Clerks ought to have beauty within in the Soul, and without in
the conversation. 6. Because this figure is the most simple: For according to
S. Austin, no figure is constituted of one line only, except a circular; by
which is intimated, that Clergymen should have a Dove-like simplicity;
according to that, be ye simple as Doves. 7. A Crown shows, that Clerks are in
a peculiar respect the Kingdom of God. These are the doughty Reasons given by
Durand and others for this circular form, which my designed brevity will not
suffer me to make some pleasant remarks upon.

And then he proceeds to the shaving of their beards; where also this acute
Doctor discovers as great Mysteries as in the former.

The reason of hair on the Beard (says he) is the superfluity of humors in the
stomach; this denotes, That we should cut off those vices and sins which are
superfluous in us. We shave our Beards, that by Innocence and Humility we may
appear pure and undefiled; and be like unto the Angels, which are always fresh
and youthful: Yet in times of fasting, we suffer five hairs to grow, because
all thoughts which are not against God, as to build a Church, till the ground,
and suchlike, which we use to have in times of Abstinence, should not be
prohibited. I wish this great Mythologist had explicated these last words, that
the reason might have been more convincing to poor Heretics.

And for the more solemn performance of this Ceremony, our Masters at Rome have
appointed a particular Office. Pontif. Roman. p. 511. Ordo Romanus, p. 94.

CHAP. XVII. Lights in Churches.
1. THE Heathen had lighted-Candles and Tapers in their Temples, when they
offered sacrifice, Baruch 6. 18. Ceres, the Mother of Proserpina, was called
Taedifera, because they lighted Tapers and Torches, though it were at noonday,
when they offered Sacrifice unto her.

Illic accendit geminas pro lampade pinus:
Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque taeda datur.
Ovid. Fastor. lib. 4.
Natalis Comes discoursing of the Sacrifices of the Superior gods, tells us,
That they used lights; by which (says he) they did demonstrate the purity of
those gods, Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 10. And Macrobius informs us, That the Altars
of Saturn were garnished with burning Candles, Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Alexander ab Alexandro, affirms, That this Ceremony was anciently observed by
Pagans, viz. to have burning Torches, In Genial. Dierum, lib. 4. cap. 17. And
Andreas Tyraquellus, in his Annotations upon him, confirms this Assertion by
the Testimonies of Gyraldus, Cornelius, Dion. Halicarnassaeus, and Herodotus.
Let them burn Candles and Tapers daily, that are without light -- says
Tertullian de Idololatria, cap. 15. And Lactantius declaims against this
Heathenish custom, Institut. lib. 6. cap. 2.

Thus do Papists burn Candles and Tapers in their Churches, when they celebrate
Mass, and perform other Religious solemnities.

This practice is so general and well known, that I need not cite Authors for
it. Light (says Baily apud Rivet) is the symbol of Evangelical brightness, of
a lively faith, of inward joy, of flaming charity; in a word, of the Divinity,
which is nothing else but immortal fire, and a most pure act.

2. The Heathen changed these Lights every year, viz. on the Calends of March,
Hospin. de Orig. Fastor. Pagan. cap. 12. On the first day of this Month (says
Macrobius) they made a new fire on the Vestal Altars, that they might begin the
new year with new fire, Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 12. This Ceremony is more fully
described by Ovid, Fastor. lib. 3.

Non dubites, primae fuerint quin ante Calendae
Martis; ad haec animum signa refer potes.
Laurea flaminibus, quae toto perstitit anno,
Tollitur, and frondes sunt in honor novae.
Janua tunc regis posita viret arbore Phoebi;
Ante tuas itidem curia prisca fores.
Vesta quoque ut folio niteat velata recenti,
Caedit ab Iliacis laurea cana focis.
Add quod arcana fiere novus ignis in aede
Dicitur, and vires flamma refecta capit.
Thus do our Romanists change their Lights every year, viz. three days before
Easter. This Ceremony is fully described by Durand, with all its mystical
significations.

The Lights are put out, to denote, that Christ, the true Light, lay three days
in the Sepulcher. Some light 72 Candles, some 24, some 12, some 9, some 7, and
with some the number is not certain; yet all are not without a Mystery. The 72
Candles that are extinguished, denote the 72 Disciples, whose preaching was
almost extinct in the death of Christ; they also signify, that our Lord lay 72
hours in the Sepulcher; which must be synechdochically understood: or, so many
Candles are lighted for the 72 Nations, and kinds of Languages.

Twenty four Candles are lighted, 1. Because the Sun that enlightens the World
24 hours, signifies Christ the true Sun. 2. The day, of which Christ is the
greater light; and the night, of which the Church is the lesser light, are the
Apostles, and other Apostolical men, which, as the 24 hours, serve Christ the
Day, and the Church the Night. 3. Four and twenty Candles denote the Gloria
Patri, which is to be said 24 times in the Nocturns of Festivals. Fifteen
Candles signify the twelve Apostles and the three Mary's, which followed our
Lord. Or fourteen of those Candles signify the fourteen Articles of the
Christian Faith; and the extinguishing of them, denotes the extinction of the
Faith in the flight of the Apostles; but the putting out of the last Candle
signifies the death of Christ.

Twelve Candles burning, represent the twelve Apostles; and they are put out,
to show that the Apostles were then silent, and fled, and the Faith almost
extinct in them.

Nine Candles signify Mankind, which by sin had excluded themselves from the
Nine Orders of Angels, and from the true Light.

Seven Candles signify the sevenfold grace of the Spirit, which was almost
extinguished in the hearts of the Disciples.

Lastly, Where a certain number of Candles is not observed, there they signify
the Prophets, and other holy Fathers, who foretelling Christ our Light, and
preaching the Doctrine of Salvation, are now dead, being tormented with diverse
punishments. Further, All the Candles are not put out together, but one after
another, because the Disciples left Christ successively, and not all at once.
Some extinguish a Candle after every Canticle, to denote that our joy was
turned into sorrow, because the true Sun was set. Others put them out at three
times, in remembrance of Christ's three days burial. In some Churches the
Candles are put out with a Wax hand O the wit of man.
, which signifies the hand of Judas, which was as it were of Wax, that is,
flexible to evil; by which Christ our King, and true Light, was betrayed, and,
as much as in him lay, extinguished. The Candle in the midst is not put out,
but kept burning in a Chest or Corner, that afterward it may be brought forth,
and enlighten the Church. And this Candle signifies 1. The Faith which remained
only in the Virgin Mary, by whom all the Elect are taught and illuminated. 2.
It signifies Christ, who though he seemed according to his flesh extinguished;
yet according to his Divinity, which was hid from them, he lived; and
afterward rising with most glorious light, manifested himself to his
Disciples. 3. The bringing forth of the Candle which seemed to be put out,
notes the illumination of Faith in the Apostles and others, in whom it was then
almost extinct. 4. It denotes Faith after Infidelity. 5. It signifies, that
the fire of the holy Spirit, which seems extinguished in Believers, shines
forth again in them. 6. The renewing of the Light, signifies, the renovation
of the New Testament. 7. The Lights are put out successively one after another;
and one is as it were put out, because covered; and afterward brought forth,
to note, That the perverse dressers of the Vineyard, and wicked men, have slain
the Messengers of the Father, viz. the Prophets, and at last his Heir, whose
burial is signified by the covering of the Light, and resurrection by the
bringing of it forth. And the Candle last put out, according to some, is
greater than the rest, and signifies Christ, who was Lord of the Prophets; and
according to others, where the Candle is equal with the rest, it also
signifies Christ, who was reputed one of the Prophets; and the last
extinguished, because after him there was no Prophet. And lastly, The Candle it
self is put out at the Evangelical Canticle; because Christ was slain preaching
the Gospel, Ration. Divin. Officior. lib. 6. cap. 72.

Our Romanists have bestowed many glorious Titles upon several of their great
Doctors, as Angelical, Seraphical, Illuminate, Irrefragable, Profound --
Certainly this Doctor (if the first Discoverer of these strange Mysteries) has
deserved them all.

CHAP. XVIII. Worshipping toward the East.
THE Heathen worshipped toward the East: For this many Testimonies might be
produced out of their own Writers.

Surgit, and aetherei spectans orientia Solis
Lumina, rite cavis undam de flumine palmis
Sustulit, and tales effundit ad aethera voces.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.
Illi ad surgentem conversi lumina Solemn,
Dant fruges manibus salsas.
Idem, lib. 12.
And herein (says Servius) they observed the ancient Custom, which was to look
toward the East when they prayed. And Ovid speaks to the same purpose. Fastor.
lib. 4.

His Dea placanda est: haec tu conversus adortus Dic quater.
It was the general practice (as Alexander ab Alexandro testifies) to worship
the gods toward the East; In Genial. Dierum. lib. 4. cap. 17. Hence their
Temples were built East and West, as Vitruvius, Plutarch, and others have
affirmed. Nay, they thought no lustration was lawful, except that which was
done by those that turned to the East, says Cratinus in Chirone apud Natal.
Commit. Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 14.

Thus do our Romanists worship toward the East: and for this their famous
Bellarmin urges several arguments. As 1. Because Paradise was seated in the
East, Genesis 2. Therefore we pray toward the East, because we profess our selves
Pilgrims, and long for our Country, out of which we were ejected by sin. 2.
Because the Heavens begin to move from the East; hence it is that that part of
the world is most excellent. And therefore, when we pray, we turn our corporal
face to the most excellent Body, that we may be admonished to turn our
spiritual face to the most excellent Spirit, which is God. 3. Because Christ,
whom we invocate, is the Light of the World; and therefore to signify, that we
are illuminated by Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, as they are by the
Corporeal Sun, who look toward the East, we use this Ceremony. 4. Because our
Lord was crucified on the Cross toward the West; therefore we pray toward the
East, that we may look him in the face. These most convincing Arguments are
urged by Bellarmin, and many other Roman Doctors for this Custom: But their
Polydor Virgil ingenuously confesses that it was derived from the Gentiles, De
Inventor. Rerum. lib. 5. cap. 9. And Pope Leo 3. acknowledges that this
practice savours of a Pagan spirit, and ought not to be tolerated among
Christians. From such Institutions this impiety has proceeded, that the Sun,
when it rises in the mornning, is adored from high places by simple people:
which also some Christians do, and they think so religiously, that before they
come to the Church of Blessed Peter the Apostle, having passed the Steps to the
High Altar, they Though Basil made worshipping toward the East an ancient
Tradition, Lib. de Spir. Sanct. Yet their infallible Leo cancelled it as an
Heathenish Addition not fit to be entertained in Christian Religion.
turn their bodies to the rising Sun, and bow in honor of that glorious Body;
which being done, partly through ignorance, and partly from a spirit of
Paganism, we are greatly troubled, because though some perhaps rather worship
the Creator of Light, than Light it self, which is a Creature; yet we must
abstain from the very appearance of such Veneration: which when one that has
renounced Gentilism, observes in us, will he not retain this part of his old
Religion, as probable, which he sees common both to Christians and Gentiles.
Sermon. 7. de Nativit. And Pineda affirms, that in this Pope's time the custom of
building Churches, and worshipping toward the East was not observed; In Job
cap. 31. ver. 26.

CHAP. XIX. HOLY WATER.
THE Heathen besprinkled themselves with lustral or purgative Water, when they
went to sacrifice, and perform their Devotions.

Spargit and ipse suos lauro rorante capillos:
Incipit and solita fundere voce preces.
Ablue praeteriti perjuria temporis, inquit;
Ablue praeterita persida verba fide.
Ovid. Fastor. lib. 5.
Ter se convertit, ter sumptis flumine crinem
Irrogavit aquis; ternis and hiatibus ora Solvit.
Ovid. Metam. Lib. 7.
And their hands especially were to be washed, as Homer informs us, Iliad. lib.
6.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Non decet illotis manibus libare superno
Vina Jovi, pudor hoc prohibet fecisse: cruoure
Turpatum me and caede virum deis fundere vota.
And Timarchidas in libro de Coronis, tells us, That Asterius was smitten with
a Thunderbolt, because he touched the Altar of Jupiter with unclean, that is,
unwashed hands.

(...)
(...).
Illotis manibus libans Jovis attigit aram,
Quo pater hune ussit flagrantis fluminis igne.
Apud Natal. Commit. Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Justin Martyr, speaking of the Gentiles, says, They sprinkle themselves with
water, when they go into their Temples, and then offer sacrifices unto their
gods, Apol. 2. And Belethus tells us, That they built their Temples near unto
Fountains, that they might always have water in readiness, by which they
fancied themselves purified; and therefore they called those Fountains Delubra,
a diluendo, Explicat. Divin. Offic. cap. 110: And that they had certain men
standing at the doors of their Temples, whose Office it was to sprinkle persons
as they entered in, is clear from this Story of Valentinian: When the Tyrant
Julian went into the Temple of Fortune, the Priests stood at the door, that
they might sprinkle with water those that entered in; by which, according to
their opinion, they were expiated: Valentinian going before the Emperor, when
he saw the water upon his Cloak, smote the person that sprinkled it, and said,
That he was not purged, but polluted by it, Theodoret. Histor. Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 15.

Sozomen relates the same story, and adds, That 'twas a custom among the
Heathen to besprinkle persons with Lustral water when they entered into their
Temples, Histor. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 6.

Thus do our Romanists sprinkle themselves with Holy Water, when they go into
their Churches to hear Mass. Hence it is, that as the Heathen had a Vessel wide
at the top, and narrow at the bottom (so their Writers describe it) placed at
the doors of their Temples, and filled with lustral, or purgative Water; so
have our Romanists the like (which Vessel, says Durantus, must be made of
Marble or solid Stone) at their Church-doors, which is filled every Lords Day
with Holy Water, that the people may sprinkle themselves therewith, as they go
into the Church.

2. This lustral Water was mixed with Salt, and consecrated.

-- (...),
(...)
(...).
-- Puro vero purgate domum sulphur
Primum, postea vero sale mixtam (uti lex est)
Florido ramo aspergere decet aquam.
Theocritus in parvo Hercule.
'Twas the custom to cast Salt into the Water, and a Branch of Laurel or Olive
-- says Natalis Comes Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 14.

The Heathen (as Athenaeus informs us) had a peculiar form in making this
lustral Water: They dipped therein a Firebrand taken from the Altar, on which
they offered their Sacrifices. lib. 9.

Thus Holy Water is mixed with Salt, and consecrated with certain Prayers and
Ceremonies; of which I will give the Reader a brief acount out of their Ritual.

The Priest being apparelled according to his degree, First exorciseth the Salt
with these words: I exorcise thee, O Creature of Salt, by the living God, by
the true God, by the holy God, by God, who commanded thee to be cast into the
Water by the Prophet Eliseus, to heal the barrenness of it: that thou become
exorcised Salt for the salvation of Believers: and be thou health both of soul
and body to all that receive thee: and let all fantasy and wickedness, or
diabolical craftiness depart, and fly away from the place, where thou art
sprinkled; and let every unclean spirit be adjur'd by him, who shall come to
judge both the quick and the dead, and the world by Fire. Amen. And then follows
this Prayer.

Almighty, Everlasting God, we humbly implore thine immense Clemency, that thou
would vouchsafe to bless and sancti fie with thy piety this Creature of Salt,
which thou have given for the use of Mankind, that it may be health both of
mind and body to all that receive it: and that every thing toucbed or sprinkled
with it, may be delivered from all uncleanness and suggestions of spiritual
wickedness. Through our Lord, etc.

Then he proceeds to exorcize the Water with these words: I exorcize thee, O
Creature of Water, in the Name of God the Father Almighty, and in the Name of
Jesu Christ, his Son our Lord, and in the power of the Holy Ghost: that thou
become exorcized Water to drive away all power of the Enemy. And then he says
this Prayer.

O God, who for the salvation of Mankind have made the greatest Sacraments in
the substance of water; Be thou propitiously present to our prayers; and pour
upon this Element, prepared with many purifications, the virtue of thy Benedic
tion, that this Creature serving thy Mysteries, may through thy grace be
effectual to drive away the Devil and all diseases; that all things in the
houses or places of the faithful which shall be sprinkled therewith, they may
be freed from all uncleanness, and whatever is hurtful; let no evil spirit lodge
there, no pestilential breath; let all the wiles of the secret Enemy depart;
and if there be any thing hurtful to the quiet and safety of the Inhabitants,
let it depart upon the sprinkling of this water, etc.

After this, he puts Salt into the water in the form of a Cross, saying, Let
this commixtion of salt and water be as aforesaid. In the Name of the Fa there,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

And then follows another Prayer, not much unlike the former, Ritual. Roman. de
Exorcismo Aquae Benedictae, p. 209.

I cannot here pass over the Mysteries which their great Mythologist has
observed in this Consecration.

By Water we are to understand the people and confession; and by Salt, the word
of God and contrition. The mixture of Salt and Water, denotes the separation of
sin, and the beginning of virtue and good works. But why is the Salt blessed
before the Water? He answers, By Salt is understood the bitterness of
Repentance, and by Water, Baptism; therefore because Contrition of heart ought
to precede Absolution, and Repentance Baptism; therefore Salt is blessed before
Water, Ration. Divin. Officior. lib. 4. c. 4. number. 8, 9. Garantus Thesaur.
Sacror. Rituum. Pars 4. Tit. 19.

3. The Heathen attributed extraordinary Virtues to their Lustral water,
especially a power to purge away sin, as Incest, Theft, Murder, etc. to cure
diseases, preserve chastity, etc. For the first, see Virgil Aeneid. lib. 2.

Tu genitor cape sacra manu, patriosque penates.
Me bello e tanto digressum and caede recenti,
Attractare nefas, donec me flumine vivo Abluero.
And Ovid speaks to the same purpose, but more fully, Fast. lib. 2.

Omne nefas, omnemque mali purgamina causam
Credebant nostri tollere posse senes.
Graecia principium moris dedit: illa nocentes
Impia lustratos ponere facta putat.
And a little after, deriding this ridiculous, though generally received
Opinion, he says:

Ah nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.
And for the other Virtues, viz. to cure Diseases, preserve Chastity, etc. see
Alexander ab Alexandro in Genial. Dier. lib. 4. cap. 17. and Cicero lib. 1. de
Legibus.

Thus our Romanists attribute extraordinary Virtues to their Holy Water.
Costerus tells us, That the Virtues of Holy Water relate both to soul and body.
1. To the Soul, and they are seven. 1. By the power of Holy Water, Devils are
expelled out of places, persons, and things. 2. Sins are remitted. 3.
Phantasms, evil thoughts and distractions of mind in prayer, and at other
times, are excluded. 4. Our hearts are taken off from earthly things. 5. Our
souls are disposed to prayer and devotion. 6. The grace, favor, and presence
of the Holy Spirit are obtained. 7. Men's minds are better prepared to
understand Divine Mysteries, and to receive the Sacrament. For this aspersion
of Holy Water is of force against every thing that may hinder the effect of
Sacraments; and for this cause it is used in the consecration of Altars and
Temples, that from these places every impediment of prayer and devotion may be
excluded. 2. To the Body; and they are four: 1. The barrenness of men, beasts,
and human things, is cured. 2. Great plenty of good things is obtained. 3.
Infirmities of the body are both prevented and removed. 4. The noxious air is
purged, and the Pestilence, and every Contagion, expelled, Apud Hospin. de
Templis.

Most, or all of these Virtues, seem to be grounded upon the form of
Consecration, and are asserted by Durantus de Ritib. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Durand Rational. lib. 4. cap. 4. Bellarm. de Eccles. Triumph. lib. 2. cap. 7.
De Missa lib. 2. cap. 15. Aquin. 3. Quest. 65. Art. 1. Suarez. in 3. Disp. 12.
Sect. 2. Gavantus Thesaur. sacr. Rit. Pars 4. Tit. 19. I confess it is disputed
among the Schoolmen, Whether these Effects are produced by Holy Water, ex
opere operantis, or ex opere operato? The first is asserted by Aquinas, Hales,
Suarez, etc. and the second by Victoria, Sotus, Major, Ledesma, etc. apud
Suarez. But that these Effects are produced by Holy Water, is granted by all.
And Durantus has collected several Examples, as a further demonstration of
this extraordinary Virtue of Holy Water; take two or three.

One Joseph intending to re-build, or rather repair the Temple of Hadrian in
honor of Christ; and wanting lime, he commanded Furnaces to be made; but the
malicious Jews by their enchantments kept the fire from burning: Joseph
perceiving this, sprinkled Holy Water upon the Furnaces, and they presently
took fire and burned. Another cured the hip of a man with Holy Water. A certain
Woman turned into the form of a Mare, by the power of Holy Water was restored
to her former shape, De Ritib. lib. 1. cap. 21.

4. The Heathen sprinkled their Houses, Fields, Cities, etc. with lustral
water. This is clear from the forecited words of Theocritus, Gyrald. de Deis
Gentium Syntagma 17. and Hospin. de Origin Templor. lib. 2. cap. 25.

Thus do Papists sprinkle their Houses, Beds, Fields, Vineyards, etc. with
Holy Water. 1. Their Houses, saying this Prayer:

Omnipotent Lord God, bless this house, that there may be in it health,
chastity, victory, virtue, humility, goodness, and gentleness, fulfilling of
the Law, and giving of thanks to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and let
this blessing remain upon this House, and the Inhabitants, now and for ever,
Amen.

And if the House be new built, they say this Prayer.

We humbly beseech thee, O God, Father Almighty, for this house, and the
persons and things in it, that thou would be pleased to bless, and sancti fie
it, and bestow all good things upon it, etc.

2. Their Beds, saying this Prayer:

Bless O Lord, this Bed, that all who lie in it may be in thy peace, and remain
in thy favor, and grow old, and at last arrive at the Kingdom of heaven;
Through Christ our Lord. Rituale Romanum de Benedictionibus.

The Faithful may take Holy Water in Vessels, and carry it home to sprinkle
sick persons, their Fields, Vines, and other things, says the same Ritual de
Exorcismo Aquae Benedictae.

Thus you see there is no difference, except in Name, between Pagan Lustral, and
Popish Holy Water; they do most exactly agree in their matter, uses, and
properties.

CHAP. XX. AGNVS DEI'S.
THE Heathen used (says Hospinian) to send Sigillaria, or Sigillaritia munera,
little Images to each other on the Feasts of Saturn; and he urges the
Testimony of Martial in Apophoretis.

Gloria tam parvi non est obscura sigilli.
Sum fragilis, sed tu, moneo, ne sperne sigillum.
And it is reported of Spartianus, That he frequently sent these little Images
to his Friends, which at first were given to Children, De Origin. Festor.
Christian. p. 67. Macrobius gives us the original of these Sigillaria, Saturn.
lib. 1. cap. 7, but more fully cap. 11. and tells us, That the invention of
them added six days to the Feast of Saturn. Alexander ab Alexandro informs us,
That there was a Street in Rome where these Images were made and exposed to
sale on the foresaid days, In Genial. Dier. lib. 3. cap. 4.

And Baronius mentions certain Bulls (bullas) different at least in form from
the other, which were superstitiously consecrated, and had extraordinary
Virtues attributed to them; and therefore were hung about the necks of their
Children, to preserve them from Enchantments and Sorceries, Annal. Tom. 1. ad
annum 58. p. 606. These Bulls (says Authonius Thysius) were made of gold,
silver, or any other metal, in the form of a heart, and hollow, containing
Antidotes against Withcrafts and Enchantments; and they were hung about the
necks of Children, especially those of Noble Parentage, that they might become
wise men, overcome Sorceries, and to keep them from filthy places, companions,
and actions, Observe. in Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 1.

Thus do Papists hang little Images about their necks, which they call Agnus
Dei's, and attribute extraordinary Virtues to them. That this is done in
imitation of the Heathen, their great Baronius ingenuously confesses. The
Gentiles wore certain Bulls or Amulets about their necks (as Varro informs us
de Lingua Latina, lib. 6) which were superstitiously consecrated; for the
abolishing of these, as it happens in many things, Superstition being changed
into Religion, Christians carry about them a little Image of Christ made of
holy Wax, to which the same Virtues are attributed. Annal. ad annum 58. p* 606.

But that our Romanists are so far from abolishing Superstition, that they
exceed the Gentiles herein, will appear, if we consider, 1. The matter which
these Agnus Dei's are made of. 2. The Ceremonies they are consecrated with.

1. Let us remark the matter of which they are made. These little Images of
Christ, that immaculate Lamb, are made (says Durand) of new consecrated Wax,
or the Paschal Candle of the precedent year, mixed with holy Oil and Chrism.
Wax signifies his Humanity; Honey in the Wax, the Divinity in the Humanity. The
Be, which works the Wax with the Honey, is not inclined to lust; and the
Blessed Virgin conceived him, who is God and Man, without carnal copulation.
The Wax is mixed with Oil and Chrism, because our Lord is full of Mercy, which
is signified by the Oil, Ration. Divin. Offic. lib. 6. cap. 79.

2. Let us observe with what Ceremonies they are consecrated. On some day after
Easter, and before the next Sunday (called Dominica in Abbis) the Pope, having
said or heard Mass in his private Chapel, blesses the Water (if it was not
consecrated before) with the common Benediction; and then adds this Prayer.

O Lord God, Father Almighty, the Ordainer of all Elements, and Preserver of
Mankind, the Giver of spiritual grace, and the Author of eternal life; who have
commanded Waters, flowing from the Fountain of Paradise, to water the whole
Earth: Be thou graciously present, that those things which we have decreed to
put into this Vessel of water (prepared to the glory of thy Name), thou would
bless, and being blessed, sancti fie; that by the veneration and honor of
them, thy servants offenses may be discharged, the stains of sin washed away,
pardons obtained, and graces conferred; that at last with thy Saints and Elect,
we may merit to obtain eternal life; Through Christ our Lord, Amen.

After this, the Pope infuseth Oil into the Water, saying,

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to consecrate and sanctify these waters by this unction of
Oil, and our Benediction; In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Amen. And then the Chrism, repeating the same words.

The Water being thus blessed, the Pope turns himself to those little Images;
and standing without his Mitre, says these Prayers:

Almighty Everlasting God, who art the Institutor of Legal Sacrifices and
Ceremonies, which thou did ordain for the restoration of Mankind (seduced by
Diabolical subtilty) and with these would be appeased, etc. And as that
sacrificed Lamb, with whose blood the door-posts were sprinkled, delivered thy
people from the Egyptian Persesecution; and as that innocent Lamb Jesus Christ
thy Son, slain upon the Altar of the Cross according to thy good pleasure,
redeemed our Protoplast from the power of the Devil; so let these immaculate
Lambs, which we offer to be consecrated before thy Divine Majesty, receive the
same Virtue Horrible blasphemy! that a poor piece of Wax should be conceived
capable of as much power as the Son of God to redeem and reconcile the world,
or to destroy the power of the Devil.
: be thou pleased to bless, sancti fie, and conse crate them, that being
sanctified with thy liberal benediction, they may receive power against
Diabolical subtilties, and frauds of the evil spirit; that those who carry
these devoutly about them, no tempest may prevail against them, no pestilent
breath, no corruption of the air, no deadly disease, no storm at sea, no
burning, or iniquity hurt them, etc.

Let us beseech thy clemency, Almighty God, who have created all things of
nothing, and after the fall of Adam have blessed Noah and his sons, who were
found righteous before thy Majesty, and in thy mercy kept them safe from the
deluge of waters; so vouchsafe to bless, sancti fie, and conse crate these
Lambs, that all carrying them devoutly for the reverence and honor of thy
Name, may be delivered from all inundations of waters, and from all
fluctuations of Diabolical powers, and from sudden death, etc.

These being ended, the Pope takes up his Mitre, and places himself before the
Vessel of water, and those of his Bedchamber bring unto him the Agnus Dei's in
silver Basins, which the Pope puts into the water, and the Bishops there
present take them out, and place them upon Tables prepared for that use; and
all being baptized by the Pope or his Prelates, he says over them these
Prayers:

We beseech thee, O bountiful Spirit, who make the waters fruitful, and
give life to all things, and have ordained the greatest Sacraments in the
substance of water -- Vouchsafe to bless, sancti fie, and conse crate these
Lambs anointed with perpetual Water and Chrism, that being blessed by thee,
they may receive power against all Diabolical temptations; and that all who
carry them, may be safe both in prosperity and adversity, and may fear no
danger; that no Satanical Cruelty, or human subtilty, may hurt them; but being
strengthened with thy Virtue, they may glory in thy Consolation, who art truly
called the Comforter, etc.

O Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the Living God, who art truly the innocent Lamb,
Priest and Sacrifice: We beseech thy Clemency, That thou would be pleased to
bless, sancti fie, and conse crate these immaculate Lambs which we have made of
pure Wax to thy honor, and anointed them with holy Chrism in token of thine
Immaculate Conception; protect and defend those that carry them, from all
danger of Fire, Lightning, Storms, and Tempests, and from all Adversity, by the
Mystery of thy Passion; and vouchsafe to deliver them from all perils; and
Women laboring in Childbirth, as thou did deliver thy Mother from all
danger, etc. [But that was not by a piece of Wax.]

These Agnus Dei's being thus consecrated, they are put into their Boxes, and
the next Sunday distributed after this manner: All the Cardinals come to the
Pope, one after another in order, and reverently reach forth their Mitres,
turning the corners of them downward, and the Pope puts into them so many Agnus
Dei's as he pleases. Ceremoniale Romanum apud Hospinianum de Origin Fastor.
Christian. p. 66.

I will not mention the Miracles supposed to be wrought by these little Images;
only give you the Virtues of them (which exactly agree with the Prayers used at
their Consecration) as they are described in Thyraeus de Daemoniacis, pars. 3.
cap. 45.

Tollitur hoc signo tentatio Daemonis atri,
Et pietas animo surgit, abitque timor.
Hoc aconita fugit, subitaeque pericula mortis,
Hoc and ab insidiis vindice tutus eris.
Fulmina ne feriant, ne saeva tonitrua laedant,
Ne mala tempestas obruat, istud habe.
Vndarum discrimen idem propulsat, and ignis,
Illaque ne noceat vis inimica, valet.
Hoc facilem portum tribuente puerpera faetum
Incolumem mundo proferet, atque Deo.
A Man that can do all Offices, is called (...) in Petronius, and other
Authors; Well may these little Images (if all be true, that is affirmed of
them) be called our (...); for what evil can be feared, or good desired, which
they are not able to prevent, or procure?

CHAP. XXI. SACRED RELIQVES.
THe greatest respect that wicked men give to the Godly, is when they are dead.
While Moses was living, he was in danger of being destroyed; when dead, of
being adored by the Israelites. Joram, when Elisha was living, opposed him; but
when dead, laments over him in that pathetical Speech; My Father, my Father,
the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. Saul disobeys and rejects
Samuel, when living; but when dead, he with great pains (though no profit)
endeavors to recall him. They build the Tombs (says our Savior) of the
Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the Righteous, when dead, whom (living)
their Fathers (and they were acted by the same Spirit) opposed and persecuted
even unto death. Vetus est morbus (says one of the Ancients) quo mortui sancti
coluntur, vivi contemnuntur.

Thus do our Romanists at this day in their pretended honoring the ancient
Saints and Martyrs, whose Religion and Practices they persecute in the true
Professors; And their conformity herein with the old Pagans will appear in
these following Particulars.

1. The Heathen carefully kept and preserved the Relics of their deceased
Worthies, that is, Men eminent for Virtue, and noble Exploits. When their
Bodies were burnt (which Custom was generally observed in most Countries) they
carefully gathered their Bones and Ashes. Kirchman handling this Question; How
the Ashes and Bones of those, to whom they would give honor, could be
discerned from the ashes of the Wood, and the bones of Animals, which were
often burnt with them? He answers;

1. Some think, That they made Garments of Indian Flax, which could not be
burnt, and that their Bodies were covered with them, that their Bones and Ashes
might be kept separate; But this Opinion he rejects.

2. He answers with Isaac Causabon, That the dead Body to be burnt, was so
placed in the Pyra, that its bones and ashes might remain separate, and not be
mingled with the ashes and bones of such things and creatures were burnt with
it; and hence 'twas, that they could distinguish them, De Funeribus Roman. lib.
3. cap. 7.

And as these bones and ashes were carefully gathered, so they were with no
less care preserved; for after they were sprinkled with Wine, and perfumed with
Odors, they put them into a golden silver-pot or coffin. Aelian writing of
Severus the Emperor, says, That his Body was translated from England to Rome
in great pomp, though some say, 'twas only a golden Pot containing his Relics.

Thus do our Romanists carefully keep the Relics of their Saints; Are they
not put into Chests of Gold, Silver -- and kept under lock and key?

2. The Heathen gave much reverence and veneration to the Relics of their
Hero's, and the Places where they lay. Pythia answered the Athenians, who had
sent to the Oracle of Apollo, That they should bring back the bones of Theseus
from Scyros, (whither he fled, and where he was barbarously murdered by
Lycomedes); and putting them in some honorable place, they should preserve and
adore them devoutly, Plutarch in vita Thesei. And Plato says of those that
have lived well, and died nobly, That they are become like Demons, and that we
ought to serve them after their death, and worship their Shrines; (...): Apud
Eusebium de Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 13. cap. 7. and Cyril Alexand. contra
Julian. lib. 6. And from this custom of worshipping the Relics of their
Worthies, proceeded the difficulty in granting unto those primitive Christians
the Body of their Bishop Polycarp, thinking that they would adore it; though
they protested, That 'twas unto the true God alone that they paid that Homage,
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 15. I need not cite any more Authors, since
this practice of Pagans is confessed by our Adversaries of Rome. Aquinas
propounds this Argument against their Adoration of Relics (to which
afterward he returns a poor pitiful answer) To worship Relics, is the
practice of Heathens, Suarez in 3 part. Aquin. Disp. 25. Art. 6. I will not
stand to mention all the ways by which the Heathen expressed their honor and
veneration to these Relics; but only name two.

1. In swearing by them. 'Twas the Superstition (or Idolatry) of Ethnicks to
swear by the Relics of their deceased Worthies, Cyril. Alexand. lib. 10.
contra Julianum.

2. In translating ^^^m from private and obscure, to more public and
honorable places; and this was done with great pomp and splendour. Apollo
admonished the Athenians (as you heard) to translate the bones of Theseus to
Athens: And he further adds, That when Cymon had found them, and brought them
to the City, the people received them with Processions and great joy, as if
Theseus himself had been alive, Plutarch in ejus vita. And the same Author
tells us, That the Ashes of Demetrius were brought by his Son Antigonus in
great pomp to Corinth, and received by the people with great veneration, In
vita Demetrii. When the Messenians had killed, by poison, Philopaemenes,
Commander of the Achaians; Lycoras, having utterly razed Messenes, carried his
Bones to Megalopolis, because he was a worthy man, Pausan. in Arcadicis. I
forbear to mention the translation of Tisamenus the Son of Orestes, of Phocion,
and many others.

Thus do our Romanists reverence and adore the Relics of their Saints. This
is clear, 1. From their Principles. 2. From their Practices. 1. From their
Principles; Bellarmine urges ten Arguments for this worship and adoration of
Relics, De Sanctor. Beatitud. lib. 2. cap. 3. Suarez produces six, In 3.
part. Aq^in. Quaest. 25. Art. 6. Disp. 55. But why do I name private Doctors,
since it is the determination of their much-admired Council of Trent? The sacred
Bodies of Holy Martyrs, and others living with Christ, which were living
members of Christ, and Temples of the Holy Ghost, ought to be reverenced by the
faithful; so that let all be damned who affirm, that honor and adoration is
not due to the Relics of Saints, Ses. 25. de Reliquiis. And their Schoolmen
handling this Question, What adoration is to be given unto them? They generally
answer, That Relics, respectively considered, are to be worshipped with the
same veneration that is due to the person whose Relics they are.

2. From their Practices. Let us hear Cassander's ingenuous Confession: In
these last times too much is attributed to the Relics and Memories of Saints;
insomuch as the better sort of men, and those that were most zealous, have
placed the sum and substance, as it were, of Religion, in searching out such
Relics, adorning them with Gold and Jewels, and building Temples and
Memorials for them; and the worser and wickeder sort have reposed false
confidence in the foolish and superfluous worshipping of them, Consult. de
Reliquiis. Here we see the practice both of the better and worser sort of
people; the one esteeming it the chiefest part of Religion, and the other
relying wholly upon it as the only means of purging away their sins; and many
ways do they express their reverence and veneration to these Relics.

1. They adorn them with silver, gold, etc. The heads of Peter and Paul are
enclosed in so much silver as weighs four thousand pounds, besides Jewels and
precious Stones of inestimable value, Com. Pii 2. lib. 8. And the golden Tomb
of Thomas of Canterbury, was covered with Diamonds, Carbuncles -- Eras. Coll.
de Peregrin. Relig. ergo.

2. They translate them from one place to another in great pomp. Thomas
Hertford, a most holy Monk, died in Caelosyria, and being a stranger there,
they laid him in the common Sepulcher for Strangers, and laid many others upon
him; but afterward (God willing to honor his servant) his Body kept the
highest place, and by a certain Divine Power was separated from the other
Bodies. The Beholders of this Miracle told it to Euphemius their Bishop; of
which, when he was convinced, he translated the Body in great pomp to Antioch.
Laurentius Beyerlinck. Magnum Theatrum, lib. 15. p. 275. Prince Albertus
commanded the bones of Albertus, Martyr and Bishop of Liege, to be taken out of
the Church of Remes, where they had lien 400 years, and carried them upon his
shoulders in solemn procession, to a Church in Brussels, Idem p. 277. Pope Paul
the first, having congregated the Clergy, and all the people of Rome,
translated the Body of B. Petronella, the Daughter of S. Peter, together with
her Marble Sepulcher, from the Appian Gate (via Appia) to the Vatican, the
Priests singing, and people rejoicing, and placed it in the highest part of the
Quire in St. Peter's Church, Platina in ejus vita. In a sacred Expedition to
Jerusalem, Anno 1098, the Genuenses obtained in Myra, a City of Lycia, the holy
Ashes of S. John the Baptist, which they brought to Genua, where they are
worshipped with great devotion to this day, Sigonius lib. 9. Regni Ital.

3. They light Candles, and set up Tapers before them (which S. Jerome calls
insignia idolatriae, Ensigns of Idolatry) Bellarm. de Sanctor. Beatitud. lib.
2. cap. 3. Costerus Enchirid. de Sanctor. Reliquiis, Sua^^^* etc.

4. In their solemn Oaths, they touch not only the Bible, but the Relics also
(as the Heathen did) and so divide the Religion of an Oath, which is a
principal part of Gods worship, betwixt God and them. Filliucius Quest. Moral.
Tom. 2. Tract. 25. cap. 3. Number. 83.

5. Lastly, whereas in former times, when Superstition was in its Infancy, they
placed the Relics of Saints under the Altar; yet now (as Cassander observes)
contrary to the ancient Custom, their Practice is to place the Bodies of Saints
upon the Altar, which place is only proper for the Body of Christ. Consult. de
Reliquiis.

3. The Heathen placed much confidence in the Relics of their deceased
Worthies. Hence 'twas, that they frequently removed their Gods from one place
to another; sometimes for the removal, and sometimes for the prevention of
public Calamities. Aelian writes, That the Oracle told Aristandrus, after the
Body of Alexander the great was found, that in whatever Country that Body
should remain, it should be free from all hostile devastations. And hence arose
a sharp dispute amongst his Successors, every one endeavoring to translate the
Body into his own Country as a pledge of the stability of his Empire, and safety
of his Kingdom. In varia Histor. Lib. 12. cap. 64. For the conquering of
Hannibal, and enlarging the Roman Empire, the great Mother of the Gods, was
fetched out of Phrygia, and brought to Rome, and honored with a magnificent
Temple: and the like is storied of many other gods. Among the old Romans every
one had Relics, Bones, and Ashes in his house, which he looked upon, and
reverenced as his protectors, tanquam tutelares patronos, Lares atque penates;
as Servius observes in many places. In short, the Heathen thought themselves
secured against all hostile Invasions, and other wasting Judgments; because
they fancied themselves to be under the particular tutelage and protection of
that Demon or Hero whose Relics they enjoyed: supposing also that a kind of
Divine Power and Virtue resided in them.

Thus do our Romanists place much confidence in the Relics of their Saints.
They look upon them, as the Trojans did upon their Palladium, being assured of
the Patronage of that Saint, whose Relics are lodged with them, and which
they carry about with so much joy and triumph in their solemn Processions. In
the description of that Procession (called Processio Iubilaei) granted by Pope
Urban 8. to the German nation, and as 'twas solemnized at Cologne, we have
these words: Upon mature deliberation it seemed good, in this grievous
calamity, and perilous time of War, when the Enemies of the Church endeavor to
oppress and trample upon it, to invoke these Saints which rest in this holy
City, because they are Patrons of it: and being instant in our sighs and groans
to God and these Saints, to deprecate these most deserved judgments. And a
little after follows this Hymn:

Gaude faelix Agrippina.
Sanctaque Colonia,
Sanctitatis tua bina
Gerens testimonia.
Postquam sidem suscepisti
Civitas praenobilis,
Recidiva non fuisti
Sed in fide stabilis.
Gereonis cum bis nonis
Trecentena concio,
Et maurorum trecentorum
Sexaginta, passio,
Te tinxerunt et sanxerunt;
Virginumque, millia
Vndenarum, te decorum
Exornant martyria. etc. Apud Voetium Select. disput. pars 3. de processionibus.

And do not these words fully discover how much they trusted to the aid and
assistance, defense and protection of those Saints, whose Bodies were buried in
that City, or whose Relics they were blessed with? The Council of Trent does
not only anathematize those, that refuse to give Worship and Adoration to
Relics in any respect, but those also, who do not resort unto them opis
impetrandae causa, to obtain help from them. Sess. 25. de Reliquiis: which
shows what trust and confidence they repose in them. And hence it is, that many
Towns and Cities have had fierce contentions about, and been at great cost and
pains to procure the Relics of some eminent Saint.

When the Saracens had taken Sardinia, whither the Bones of S. Austin had been
translated from Hippo 250 years before, Luitprandus, King of the Lombards, sent
his Ambassadors thither to purchase them for which they paid 100 Talents of
silver, and a Talent of Gold. Laurent. Beyerlinck. magn. Theat. Lib. 15. A
great sum was likewise given for the Arm of St. Bartholomew, and not less for
the precious Arm of St. Samson. Walls and Bulwarks, and Armies are reputed a
sorry defense in comparison of these sacred Relics. Quasi quaedam turres
contra Adversariorum incursum refugium exhibent. Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. p.
219. And he further tells us, that whosoever touches the Bones of a Martyr, is
for the Grace inherent in them, after a certain manner thereby sanctified.
ibid. But Costerus speaks more positively: habent sanctitatem, et vim contactu
suo sanctificandi; they have sanctity, and a power of sanctifying by their
touch. Enchiridion. de venerat. Reliquiar. p. 414. And the foresaid Author,
viz. Durant, informs us from others, That by the Relics of Protasius and
Gervasius many have been dispossessed of Devils; That at the sacred Relics of
S. Andrew, Luke and Timothy, Devils roar, and make a noise. De Ritib. Eccles.
lib. 1. cap. 25. p. 221. Others tell us of many miraculous Cures, that have
been wrought by Relics. Hence it is, that they are constantly carried about
(says Suarez.) by many devout Persons, as an Antidote against all evils. In 3
part. Aquin. Quest. 25. Disput. 55. Sect. 2. And the lawfulness of this
Practice is asserted by Aquinas. 22. Quest. 96. Art. 4. Navar. Enchirid.
Confess. Cap. 11. Number. 35. It Is lawful for a man to hang the Relics of Saints
about his neck, or to carry them after any other manner for his Protection, if
they be carried ex fiducia Dei and Sanctorum, quorum sunt Reliquiae. Aquinas
ibid. And Filliucius affirms it to be not only lawful, but an act of Piety and
Devotion. Quest. Moral. Tom. 2. Tract. 24. Cap. 6. Number. 145. Sure I am an act
of prudence it is, if that be true, which Magnetes affirms: It Is manifest, that
the Bones of Saints are not dead, but full of power and virtue. Apud Durantum
de Ritib. p. 220.

4. The Heathen frequently resorted to the places, where the Bodies of their
Heroes were buried. Plutarch in the life of Theseus tells us, That his Relics
lie yet in the midst of Athens, whither all Slaves and poor People go, and
there offer up their Prayers and Sacrifices; who, while he lived, was Protector
of the Oppressed, and courteously received their Petitions, who desired aid of
him. The Gentile Egyptians (says Epiphanius) went frequently with great
devotion to the place, where Jeremy the Prophet was buried; because they
believed, that venomous Serpents and Crocodiles were driven away by him. De
Prophetar. vita and interitu: if we may believe that Book to be his. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus discoursing of the reverence and veneration, which the Gentiles
gave unto the Relics of their deceased Worthies, says: In old time, when
certain men had hazarded themselves in the Battle of Marathon, in defense of
Greece, and died, valiantly fighting against the Army of Zerxes; there was a
Custom among the Athenians to resort unto their Sepulchers. Contra Julianum,
Lib. 6. And Eusebius tells us, that the Gentiles made their Supplications near
to the Shrines, where the the Ashes of those were kept, whom they thought to
have been valiant and virtuous, De praeparat. Evangel. lib. 13. cap. 7.

Thus do our Romanists frequently resort to the places, where the Bodies of
Saints are buried, or their Relics preserved. Council. Trident. Sess. 25. de
Reliquiis. They teach, That their Prayers are better and more effectual, and
acceptable to God, if they be made before the Relics of Saints; and therefore
their Practice is in times of necessity to make votive Pilgrimages to such
places, where the most famous Relics are. All Histories make mention of their
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, Many letcherous Men and Women resort to
Compostella; to cat Scallops for the kindling of Lust, and increase of nature,
under the name of a Pilgrimage to St. James his Shrine. Musset. chap. 18. p.
166.
Rome, Compostella, etc. And they are excited thereunto by miraculous Cures,
and large Indulgences.

1. By the many miraculous Cures wrought at them. Gregory Turonensis informs
us, That sick people ran to the Sepulcher of Junianus, and being cured, became
tributary to that Saint, De Gloria Confessor. cap. 103. At these places (says
Thyraeus) some have recovered their sight, others the use of their feet, others
have been restored to life, and others freed from incurable diseases, De
Demon. par. 3. cap. 43. p. 97. And a little before he mentions several Saints,
by whose Relics many strange Cures have been wrought, whose Shrines are
frequently resorted unto by Roman Catholics. I will only entertain the Reader
with what Hieronymus Emser (who was an eyewitness) writes concerning their
Pilgrimages to the Sepulcher of S. Benno, Apud Laurent. Beyerlinck. Magnum
Theatrum, lib. 14. p. 201.

Ad cujus tumulum glomerantur pendula vota,
Multus ut accepta contulit aeger open.
Cernitur hic lacero confossus pectore ferro:
Hic alius fracto crure perire timet.
Hic cecidit summa quondam resupinus ab arce;
Ille suit rapidas obrutus inter aquas.
Hic trahit in mediis positus suspiria flammis:
Hic cinctus valido corripit host fugam.
Hic queritur sebres, alius feratormina ventris;
Hic misero nervos vellet abesse pede, etc.
And he adds a little after:

Denique quisquis adest, placida redit inde salute,
Nec patitur cassas Benno fuisse preces, etc.
And then he tells us, That great multitudes of men, even from all Nations,
resorted to it.

Huc veniunt Thurii, Pruteni, Sarmata, Sclavus,
Huc vicinus agit saepe Bohemus iter.
Saepe etiam admonitus media per somnia nocte,
Huc tulit Arctoo Cymber ab axe pedem.
2. By the large Indulgences annexed to them. And because the Churches in Rome
are most enriched with these Sacred Relics, therefore the largest Indulgences
are granted to such as resort unto them. Take a few Instances.

Pope Sylvester gave to those who visit the Lateran-Church, so many Indulgences
as none but God can number. And Gregory gave so many days of Pardon, as drops
fall when it rains three days and nights without intermission. And when he
feared lest the Treasure of the Church should be exhausted by this profuseness,
Christ appeared to him, and said, I will give you leave to grant more
Indulgences, for the people have need of them. Indulgent. in Station. Romans apud
Chemnit. Exam. Council. Trident. de Indulgent. p. 79.

Whosoever shall visit the Sepulchers of S. Stephen and S. Lawrence in S.
Lawrence-Church, is granted a Pardon for 7000 years.

To those that visit St. Paul's Church upon the day of its Dedication, are
granted Pardons for -- 8000 years.

And to such as shall visit these and other Churches in Rome at certain times,
are granted full Pardons both a paena and culpa by later Popes. Fiscus Papalis
tanslated into English by Mr. Crashaw, 1621.

These Indulgences occasioned many Pilgrimages to Rome; which Johannes
Pannonius, the Hungarian Poet, could not (though a Papist) pass over without a
jeer.

Hispani, Galli, Sclavi, Teutones, and Hunni
Clavigeri petitis limina sancta Petri:
Quo ruitis stulti Latios ditare penates?
Salvari in patria siccine nemo potest?
The Spaniard, French, Pole, German, and the Hun,
Unto S. Peter 's Chair for Heaven does run.
Whither, O fools! to enrich the Pope, do you gad?
As if salvation cannot at home be had. Henry Foulis Preface to his Hist. of
Romans Treas.

And not only to Rome, but many other places also, have large Indulgences been
annexed. Pope Nicholas, at the earnest request of Stephen Manley Archdeacon of
Cleveland, granted an Indulgence of enjoined Penances of a year and forty days,
to be remitted to all that should visit S. William's Tomb in the Cathedral at
York (where he had been Bishop) eight days immediately following his Festival:
And they are directed to pray unto him in these words:

O Willielme, Pastor bone,
Cleri Pater, and Patron,
Mundi nobis in agone.
Confer opem, and depone
Vitae sordes, and coronae
Caelestis da gaudia.
These are yet to be seen in two Manuscript-Tables in the Cathedral at York.

I will conclude this with a remarkable passage in the Bull of Clement 6, who
does not only grant a plenary Pardon to such as actually visit the Churches of
S. Peter and Paul at Rome, but to those also who dye in the way. Take his own
words; Item concedimus, quod si vere confessus in via moriatur, quod ab omnibus
peccatis suis sit immunis penitus and absolutus. Et mandamus Angelis Paradisi,
ut animam a Purgatorio penitus absolutam, in Paradisi gloriam introducant. We
also grant, That if he dye in the way, being truly confessed, he is
absosolutely absolved from all his sins. And we command the Angels of Paradise,
That they convoy his Soul, delivered from Purgatory, into the Glory of
Paradise, Apud Hospin. de Temp. p. 381. And let not any Heretic interpret this
as a piece of Arrogance in his Holiness; For why may he not command the Angels,
to whom all things are subject? And who can do in a manner whatsoever God
himself can do?

CHAP. XXII. EXORCISMS.
THAT the Heathen arrogated to themselves a power to cast out Devils (as our
Romanists do) is clear from their own Historians, and the Confessions both of
Popish and Protestant Writers. I will briefly remark the Methods and Ceremonies
observed by them in their Exorcisms, and show how far our present Adversaries
of Rome symbolize with them. The Ways and Methods, Rites and Ceremonies
observed by the Heathen, may be reduced unto two Heads, viz. Words and Things.

1. The Heathen used certain words in their Exorcisms. Serapis prescribed the
Egyptians a form of words, wherewith they might expel Devils, Eusebius de
Preparat. Evangel. lib. 4. cap. ult. Clemens Alexandrinus says, Magos gloriari
se daemones habere coactos vi suorum carminum, In Protrept. apud Filesacum de
Idol. Mag. p. 800. These words were opprobrious, commanding, menacing,
barbarous, and obscure. Apollonius cast out a Devil (says Philostratus) by
reproachful words (such as Masters use to their vain and idle servants) calling
him wicked and impudent, and in great wrath commanded him to give some sign of
his departure, In vita Apollonii, lib. 4. cap. 6. It Is enquired by an Egyptian
(says Eusebius) the Prince of Magicians, How it comes to pass that Devils are
moved by terrible and threatening words, and are bound by them, as with certain
chains? De Praeparat. Evang. lib. 5. cap. 6 And what were those (...), Ephesian
words or writings (so often spoken of by Writers) but certain Enchantments used
by Magicians in casting out Devils? Magicians commanded (says Plutarch) those
who are possessed with evil spirits, to pronounce the Ephesian words, Sympos.
lib. 7. Quest. 5. And That they were certain obscure and barbarous words, is
affirmed by Suidas and others. These Ephesian words (says Hesychius) were
anciently six, but afterward Deceivers added others to them; the names of the
former were, (...). See Dr. Hammond in Act. 29. That the Heathen used in their
Exorcisms certain exotic, strange, and barbarous words, is confessed by
Filesacus de Idol. Magica, p. 793 -- for such words are accounted most
efficacious by Magicians.

And these words were not always spoken, but sometimes written. Philostratus
mentions certain Philosophers called Brachmanni, who by certain written words
(verbis terrificis and minacibus) commanded the Devil to go out of a young man,
lib. 3. cap. 12. And those (...), before mentioned, were sometimes written, and
carried about by many, who thereupon promised themselves, That they should
obtain whatsoever they desired; and among other things, a power to cast out
Devils. Anaxilas the Poet is said to have carried the Ephesian Letters in
pieces of Leather sewed together, Athenaeus Dypnosoph. lib. 12.

2. The Heathen used certain Things in their Exorcisms, as Herbs, Fumigations,
etc. St. Austin tells us, That the Heathen cast out Devils by Herbs, Stones,
certain Animals, Sounds, Voices, and Figures, De Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 11.
And lib. 21. cap. 6, he says, Devils are enticed and allured by certain kinds
of Herbs, Animals, Charms and Ceremonies. I saw a certain private man (says
Josephus) amongst the Hebrews, that cured diverse possessed of Devils, in the
presence of Vespasian, his Sons, Tribunes, and Soldiers. And the Cure was
effected after this manner: He applied to the Nose of the Daemoniack a Ring,
under the Seal whereof was a kind of Root, discovered by Solomon, which drew
out the Devil through the nostrils of the Possessed, as soon as he smelled at
it, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. And the same Historian mentions the Herb or Root
used in their Exorcisms. On the North-side of the City there is a place called
Baaras, where also grows a root of the same name; the color whereof
resembles the flame, and it shines at night like the Sunbeams, and is not
easy to be pulled up, till that one cast upon it the Urine of a Woman, or her
Flowers; which being done, whosoever touches it, is sure to dye, except he
carry the root hanging on his hand. And a little after he adds; This Herb,
notwithstanding all this danger, is diligently sought out for the virtue it
has; for it drives away Devils out of men's bodies, if it be but applied unto
them, De Bello Judaico, lib. 7. cap. 25. And Justin Martyr tells us, That this
way of ejecting Devils, was like to that of the Gentiles, In Dial. cum Tryphon.
And the same is affirmed by Pliny, Hist. Not. lib. 24. cap. 17. Democritus, the
Prince of Magicians after Pythagoras, has commended the Herb Aglaophotis
(which is thought to be the same with Baaras) so called for its bright shining
color, and that Magicians use it when they cast out Devils.

And that the Heathen used certain Fumigations, is not less evident. Your
Exorcists (says Justin Martyr, loc. praedict.) as the Gentiles, use Thymiamata
and vincula. By the first he understands Fumigations, such as the Heathen used
in casting out Devils. And by the latter, Enchantments, which are called Bonds
ab effectu. The Jews and Gentiles thought, that Devils are expelled out of men's
Bodies by Fumigations, Martin. Delrio Disq. Magic. lib. 6. cap. 2.

And to the foresaid Remedies, they added a certain (I suppose consecrated)
Garment, Eusebius. de Pr^parat. Evang. lib. 5. cap. 6.

These, and many suchlike Methods and Ceremonies, the Heathen used in ejecting
Devils.

And that our Romanists herein symbolize with them, is most evident. They
observe the very same Methods, but with some additions of Folly and
Superstition. To make this clear, I will give the Reader a brief account of
them.

The Priest or Exorcist being come into the Church, and apparelled according to
his Order, and kneeling devoutly before the Altar, he makes the sign of the
Cross in his forehead, mouth, and breast, saying, Let the sign of the Cross be
in my forehead. Let the words of Christ be in my mouth. Let the Weapons of
Christ be in my breast. By the sign of the Cross deliver us, O God, from our
enemies. Let the power of the Fa there confirm me. Let the Wisdom of the Son
teach me. Let the love of the Holy Ghost enlighten me.

Nos cum prole pia
Benedicat Virgo Maria.
Mengus Flagel. Demon. p. 36.
The Priest being thus prepared and armed in all points, what is he not able to
do? how do the poor Devils quake and tremble at the very sight of him? But let
us come to the bloody skirmish, and observe the valor of the Man.

1. He signs the Demoniack in the Forehead, Mouth, and Breast, with the sign of
the Cross, saying, Let the Power of the Fa there comfort thee. Let the Wisdom of
the Son teach thee. Let the Love of the Holy Ghost enlighten thee. And a little
after, I command you, O Devils (who are come to the help of those that vex this
Creature of God N.) upon pain of Excommunication, Here he shows his Courage.
and immersion in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for a thousand years, that ye
yield no aid and assistance to these Devils who torment the Body of this
Creature of God N. And I command you, O Devils, who trouble this Creature of
God N, That ye presently depart, and leave him safe and sound, without any hurt
either of soul or body. And I command all your Enemies in the Name of the most
Holy Trinity, That they compel you to yield obedience to my Precepts. And I
command you upon the same pains, That ye neither say nor do any thing that may
displease those that are either present or absent, except what I shall ask you,
Mengus ibid.

2. He ties a Stole about the neck of the possessed, with three knots, saying,
O ye abominable and rebellious Spirits! I conjure, adjure, and compel you,
wheresoever you have your residence in this man, By the Fa there, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, that ye immediately understand the words of my conjuration,
and the virtue of it; and that ye dare not to depart from this Creature of God,
and Image of Christ, without my license; and as the They report of S. Juliana,
that she ti'd the Devils hands behind him, whipped him bravely with a great
Chain: and though he earnestly begged her savor, and not to abuse him before
all the people; yet she dragged him about the Marketplace, and then without
any compassion threw him into a Jakes, Foulis Hist. of Popish Treas.
Saints of God have bound Devils with Chains, so I bind you cum ista stola
jocunditatis, with this Stole of jocundity, Mengus, p. 37. If it be queried,
Why it is called Stola jocunditatis? I suppose, because the Priest does greatly
rejoice when he has got the poor Devils thus bound and fettered. And here his
Policy is to be commended, who first chains and shackles these wicked Spirits;
for having them once fast bound, he may with more ease rule and govern them.
But his Courage I do not much admire, who dares not enter the list with them,
except they be first shackled. But I proceed:

3. The Priest lays his hands on the head of the Daemoniack, and signing him in
the forehead with the sign of the Cross, repeateth certain words; and these are
either Sacred or Profane.

The former are either some Sentences of Scripture, or some Names of God.

1. Some Sentences of Scripture; and here the beginning of St. John's Gospel is
accounted most prevalent; as also those words in the Canon of the Mass
Caesarius mentions a certain Woman possessed, that came to Sigeberg; and being
in the Oratory of S. Michael, when 'twas discoursed, How Luciser was bound in
Hell? The Devil answered by her, Ye fools, With what Chains do ye think my
Master is bound in Hell? With Iron Chains? No, no; There are three words in the
Mass wherewith he is bound: Some asking him, What words they are? Answered,
That he durst not repeat them; But, says he, bring me a Book, and I will show
you them. A Missal is brought, which she opened; and at the very first, found
the Canon of the Mass, and laid her finger on these words, Per ipsum, etc.
Serarius in Tob. cap. 8. Quest. 8.
: Per ipsum, and cum ipso, and in ipso.

2. Some Names of God, especially those strange and obscure Names: Hell, Heloym,
Heloa, Eheye, Tetragrammaton, Adonay, Saday, Sabbath, Sother, Emanuel, Alpha
and Omega, Primus and Novissimus, Principium and Finis, Agyos, Yschiros,
Otheos, Athanatos, Agla, Jehova, Homousion, Ya, Messiah, Esereheye, Christus
Vincit, Christus Regnat, Christus Imperat, Increatus Pater, Increatus Filius,
Increatus Spiritus Sanctus, Mengus, p. 38.

The latter are either Inquisitory or Opprobrious.

1. The Priest puts some Questions to them; as, Whether they be many, or few?
What is his Name, and the Names of his Companions? For what cause they entered?
In what hour? By what person they are to be expelled? By what Saint? Who are
their Enemies in Heaven? and, Who in Hell? By what Words they are most
tormented? Whether they are bound there by any Compact or Enchantment? How that
may be dissolved? Who is the chief of them in that person --? Mengus docum. 4.
and p. 50. Ritual. Roman. p. 301. Nay, the Priest may put an Oath to the Devil
for the discovery of such things as are necessary to his expulsion. Take the
form of this Oath:

I swear and promise to thee, Priest or Minister of Christ, to observe all
things which thou shall command me; and that I will be punctual in what I
promise thee, I invoke the Almighty God against me; and as a Revenger of this
my Perjury, let him send his Holy Angels, mighty in battle, to cast and expel
me out of this Body. And I invoke Lucifer, together with all other
Principalities, Furies, and Infernal Punishments, that they rise up against me
with all their Fury and Indignation, and hale me into the lowest and most
tormenting-place in Hell, where I may suffer a thousand thousand times greater
Torments, and from which I may never be delivered, Amen. Mengus, p. 195.

2. The Priest uses certain reproachful words. Mengus gives us several forms
of exprobation, Docum. 10, and p. 103. O unclean Spirit, most miserable
Tempter, Deceiver, Father of Lies, Heretic, Fool, Beastial, Furious, Enemy of
thy Creator, Luxurious, Mad, Cruel, Unjust, Thief, Beast, Serpent, Damned
Creature, cursed eternally of God for thy pride, etc. Mengus, from the example
of S. Francis, commends sordid words uttered to the disgrace and reproach of
the Devil: For when B. Francis would deliver his This is like the man that
called Satanas Snotty-nose.
Brother Ruffinus, he bids him say to the Devil, Open thy mouth, and I will
fill it with a Turd, or I will shite in it: Which when he had done, the Devil
departed in great rage, In Fuste Demon. apud Voetium, Par. 3. Disp. Select. p.
1160. Serarius defends these Contumelies and Reproaches; laying for a
foundation, if not probative, yet at least amplificative, the Example of
Apollonius Thyanaeus, In Tob. cap. 8. Quaest. 5. And in the same place he tells
us, That reproachful words uttered against the Devils, are very grievous to
those proud Spirits. As stripes are painful to the Body, so is opprobrious
language to the Devil. Thyraeus de Demon. pars 3. p. 119.

4. The Priest or Exorcist shows the Daemoniack the sign of the Cross, and
says:

Salve Crux sancta,
Qua dantur munera tanta,
Fac tua me velle,
Quae sunt nobis noxia pelle.
Da mihi virtutem,
Veniam, pacemque salutem.
Spes mihi viventi,
Protectio sis morienti.
Crux bona, Crux digna,
Lignum super omnia ligna.
Crux via virtutis,
Crux via verae salutis.
Crux virtus hominum,
Crux levat ad Dominum. Meng. p. 62.
And then, after several Adjurations, he says this Prayer:

O Lord, expel the Devil from this thy Creature N. from his head, from his
hair, from the top of his head, from his forehead, from his eyes, from his
tongue, from his ears, from his nostrils, from his nock, from his jaw-bones,
from his teeth, from his throat, from his gums, from his mouth, from his
palate, from his brain, from his eyelids, from the hair on his eyelids, from
his feet, from his shin-bones, from his knees, from his legs, from his
privy-members, from his reins, from his sides, from his inward parts both above
and below, from his thigh, from his belly, from his stomach, from his heart,
from his shoulders, from his breast, from his paps, from his arms, from his
hands, from his nails, from his bones, from his nerves, from his veins, from
his marrow, from his lungs, from the ligaments of his body, from his five
senses of body and soul, from his whole body both within and without, etc.
Mengus, p. 76.

If the Devils be obstinate, and will not depart, and the Priest forced for a
time to leave off his Conjuration; then he is to command them to leave the
Head, Heart, and Stomach, and descend to the inferior parts of his body, viz.
the dead Nails of his feet, Meng. p. 197.

It Is confidently affirmed of the Fox, that being troubled with Fleas, he gets
a lock of Wool in his mouth, and goes into the water, and by a gradual
immersion forces them into the upper parts of his body, his neck and head, and
at last into the lock of Wool, which, popping his head under water, he parts
with, and so frees himself from those troublesome Companions. How easily might
the Priest, when he has the Devils lodged in the dead parts of the Nails, take
his knife and pare them off, and so prevent the trouble and hazard of a second
Encounter. But let us proceed.

5. The Priest takes the Image of the Devil that troubles the possessed,
painted on a paper, with his Name written at the head of it; and having first
conjured the Fire, and cast into it consecrated Sulphur, Galbanum, Assa
foetida, Aristolochia, Ypericon, and Ruta; he holds this painted Image over it;
and, having read a long Adjuration (which is too long to be inserted) he
casts the Image into the fire; and turning himself to the Devil, says, Let
all thy cogitations turn to thy detriment and confusion, O cursed Spirit, to
the praise of God, and thy terrible punishment, and eternal malediction, and
thy present expulsion out of this Creature of God N. And as this fire burns thy
Name and Image; so may thou (O cursed Spirit) feel in thy self a
thousandfold greater pains, and let them be augmented till the day of Judgment,
Meng. p. 153, 157, 161.

6. The Priest applies several things to the Demoniack. As

1. He writes several Names on a Paper, which he lays upon the Possessed, or
hangs about his Neck; Mengus docum. 9. But the Paper must be first conjured
after this manner.

I conjure thee, O Paper, by those words of the triumphant Title of our Lord
and Savior Jesu Christ; and by all other words which are spoken of the Creator
of all things; and by Him who is able to infuse into thee such Virtue, that
thou may be able to bring all things (or Names) which are written upon thee,
to the blessed effect of eternal Salvation; and that all the fallacy and virtue
of the Devil may depart from thee, and all the foresaid virtue may enter into
thee without delay. In the Name of the Fa there, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen. Mengus p. 244.

2. The Priest takes consecrated Rue, and holding it to the Nose of the
Demoniack, says:

I exorcise, adjure, and command thee by Him whom thou did tempt in the
Mountain; I adjure thee by all the Apostles of Christ; I adjure thee by all the
Martyrs of Christ, by all the Confessors of Christ, by all the Virgins of
Christ, by all the Ministers of Christ: I adjure thee by a Crucified Savior,
by Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael. I adjure thee by the tremendous Day of
Judgment, by the Resurrection of our Savior, by the Patriarchs and Prophets,
by S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, etc. That thou dwell no longer in this
Creature of God, Amen. Meng. p. 102.

3. The Priest takes consecrated Incense, and casting it into the Fire,
likewise consecrated, says, O Adonay, Saday, Eloym, By the invocation of thy
most holy Name, grant that the fume of this Incense may torment, inflame and
expel these cursed Spirits, etc. Meng. p. 110. It Is the common Opinion, That
Devils are expelled by Fumigations, Abulensis apud Serarium in Tob. cap. 8.
Quaest. 4.

4. He casts Sulphur, Rue, etc. into the fire, and holds the Demoniack over
it whether he will or no, for a considerable time, Meng. p. 242.

5. He anoints the Possessed with consecrated Oil in several places, viz. his
eyes, forehead, ears, breast, the pulses of his hands, and his hands; the
pulses of his feet, and his feet; at every place saying, I anoint thee N. with
this holy Oil, and by this Unction absolve thee from all Witchcrafts,
Enchantments, etc. In the Name of the Fa there, etc. Meng. p. 221. And the
Unction is made after this manner:

Recipe Rutarum Cymas tres. Recipe Salviae Cymas tres. Recipe Anethi Cymas
tres.

Cineres Olivarum.

Aquam Benedictam:

These are boiled in Oil, and consecrated with these words:

O unclean Spirit, I exorcise thee by the Living God, by the True God, by the
Holy God, who made Heaven and Earth; That all the power of the Enemy, the whole
Host of Satan, and every phantasm, may be eradicated, and fly away from this
Creature of Oil, and all Herbs that are in it, that it may be a flaming fire
against all the snares of the Enemy, etc. Meng. p. 222.

6. If what has been done, be not effectual, then the Priest flies to his
never-failing Remedy, a certain Potion. And though some men industriously
conceal what has cost them much pains and study (though it be eminently useful
and advantageous to others); yet these Gentlemen are not more happy in
discovering, than charitable in communicating Secrets that may be beneficial to
Mankind; and particularly this excellent Recipe, which they say must be made
after this manner:

Take a pound or two of Veal, or any other flesh in season, and boil it well
without Salt; then take six or eight ounces of the Broth, first consecrated by
the Priest, and put into it two ounces of consecrated Oil, and when they are
well mixed, give it warm to the Patient or Possessed; but before he take it,
let the Priest give him a piece of consecrated bread, saying Take this bread
for the destruction of all the Enchantments and wicked works of Satan. In the
Name of the Fa there, etc. Mengus, p. 120, 121.

Here it may be necessary to give the Reader one Caution, That he be not so
unmannerly as to ask these great Masters, How these sensible and corporeal
things can act upon spiritual and immaterial Substances? It Is enough that they
say it is so. That Devils are affected, vexed, tormented, and expelled by
natural and corporeal things, is affirmed by Mengus, Docum. 3. And Serarius
tells us, That they do it efficacia quadantenus naturali, by an efficiency
after a sort natural, In Tob. 8. Quaest. 3.

We must therefore suppose the Devil upon the receipt of this Potion, to be in
great pain and torment; and doubtless the poor Fiend would gladly be gone: But
behold, he is chained and fettered, and cannot depart without license; and
another piece of penance he must do before he can obtain it, viz. That to the
honor of God, and edification of others, he confess some Article of the Faith;
that in the virtue of that Article he give reverence to God Almighty, by
bending the knee, and bowing the head thrice to the ground, in adoration of the
most Holy Trinity, Meng. Docum. 5. These, you will say, are hard terms; but no
question the Devil, in this sad pickle, readily submits to them for ease and
liberty.

And now we must suppose the skirmish over, and this great Conqueror, I mean
the Priest, triumphing over his vanquished Enemy; and yet it is hard to say
whether of the two is more joyful.

And what can keep the Patient or Possessed from rejoicing with them? Doubtless
nothing, except the fear of a second Invasion, either by this, or some other
Devil.

We say, The burnt child dreads the fire; and this Devil being once delivered
from the torments which he lately suffered, methinks he should not desire to
return: certainly he will not, if the late Potion was but as painful to him as
'twas to the poor Demoniack. Yet lest he should attempt it, the Priest uses
this dreadful and most effectual Conjuration.

I conjure you, O Air Earth, Water and Fire, by God the Father Almighty, and by
the Angels and Archangels, and by all the Court of Heaven, and by the Merits
and Prayers of all Saints, That ye have no power to entertain and keep this
cursed and most wicked Spirit, but that ye presently cast him out, and all that
favor him. And O thou Hell and infernal Fire, and all you infernal Devils,
observe and understand the words of my mouth. I conjure you by all the Names of
God, by S. Mary the Mother of our Lord Jesu Christ, by S. John the Baptist,
etc. That ye presently obey my Commands, and receive and secure this wicked
Spirit, Meng. p. 141 --

But though this Devil may be confined to the infernal pit, yet by others he
may be assaulted and invaded. Against those also there is an effectual Remedy,
which is thus prepared: The Priest takes a Paper, and having blessed and
besprinkled it with Holy Water, writes upon it these words;

Qui verbum caro factum est, and habitavit in nobis nascens ex Maria Virgin,
per ineffabilein pietatem, misericordiam suam piissimam, and per intercessionem
ejusdem beatae Mariae Virginis, and Angelorum, Sanctorumque omnium, and maxim
Apostolorum, and Evangelistarum suorum, Joannis, and Matthaei, Marci, and Lucae
ipsum quaeso; ut dignetur me liberare, and conservare ab omni infestatione
Satanae, and ministrorum ejus. Qui cum Patre, and Spiritu S. vivit, and regnat
in secula seculorum, Amen.

Then he takes exorcised Salt, some Wax of the Paschal Candle, or any other
Consecrated Wax, and consecrated Rue; and having sprinkled them with Holy
water, he wraps them all up in the foresaid Paper, and hangs them about the
neck of the Patient, Meng. p. 256, 257. And now I leave him in a transport of
joy, and bidding defiance to all the Devils in Hell.

CHAP. XXIII. Observation of Holy Days.
THE Institution of Festivals by the Heathen in honor of their gods, and the
conformity of our Romanists herein, were before asserted and cleared. I come
now to remark the manner of their Observation, or with what Rites and
Ceremonies they were solemnized; wherein also the Church of Rome does exactly
symbolize with them. This has been confessed by many, and lamented by some of
their own VVriters, Nicolaus de Clemangis, Erasmus, Cornelius Agrippa, Polydor
Virgil, etc. The last tells us, That in his time Holy Days were most acceptable
to young men for no other reason, but that they had then leisure to lead about
dances; especially among the Italians, who after the custom of the ancient
Pagans, did usually exhibit Shows and Plays unto the people, reciting Comedies,
and personating the Lives and Martyrdoms of the Saints, in Churches; in which,
that all might receive equal delight, they acted them in their Mother Tongue.
Thus was it heretofore among the ancient Romans, De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 5.
cap. 2. For the further illustration of this point, I will instance in several
Festivals.

The Feast of our Saviors Nativity.
That the Pagan Saturnalia were kept about the same time that we observe our
Christmas, is agreed upon by most Authors, Gyraldus, Rosinus, Macrobius, etc.
And that our Romanists celebrated this Feast with the same Solemnities, will
appear if we consider these following particulars.

1. The ancient Romans and Grecians on their Saturnalia entertained their
Friends and Neighbors with most costly Feasts and Banquets, and so spent the
time in excessive eating and drinking, Mutuas inter sese ^^nas epulationesque
agitabant. Hospin. Fest. Pagan. p. 130. Lazius de Repub. Roman. lib. 10. cap. 9.

And thus do our Romanists celebrate this great Festival of our Saviors
Nativity. This is so notorious to all men, that 'twill be unnecessary to
mention Authors. Their practice is thus described by Naogeorgus, apud Hospin.
Fest. Christ. p. 26.

Selectis onerant dapibus mensasque faecumque
Paneque vescuntur miro, magnisque placentis.
Ludunt, compotant, ineunt convivia laeti.
2. In the ancient Saturnalia, Masters feasted their Servants, and became
Servants to them.

Maxima pars Graium Saturno, and maxim Athenae,
Conficiunt sacra, quae Cronia esse iterantur ab illis,
Cumque diem celebrant per agros, Vrbesque fere omnes
Exercent epulis laeti, samulosque procurant
Quisque suos, nostrique itidem: and mos traditus illinc
Iste, ut cum dominis famuli tum epulentur ibidem.
Laur. Accius apud Gyrald. de Diis Gent. Syntag. 4. p. 133. Macrob. Saturnal.
lib. 1. cap. 10 and 12.

And Tyraquellus has produced the Testimonies of several Authors for this
Custom, Annot. in Genial. Dier. lib. 2. cap. 22. On these days Servants did
take upon them to command their Masters, and Slaves had liberty to be unruly
without fear of punishment, wearing on their heads a Cap as a badg of freedom,
while those days lasted. Lazius and Hospinian further add, That Servants wore
the Apparel of their Masters, and Masters the Apparel of their Servants, Lazius
de Repub. Roman. lib. 10. cap. 9. Hospin. Fest. Pagan. p. 131.

And do not Papists the very same thing at Christmas? In France (says
Hospinian) one of the Servants at Court is chosen King; upon whom the King, and
the rest of the Nobles wait at Table. And in Germany this is observed (says
the same Author) through all Universities and Cities by Students and Citizens;
that is, They create one King, prepare a magnificent Feast for him, and
minister unto him. Fest. Christ. p. 29.

And Polydor Virgil affirms, That our Christmass-Lords of Mis-rule (which
custom (says he) is chiefly observed in England) to whom both Masters and
Servants must be obedient, were derived from these Roman Saturnalia, De Invent.
Rer. lib. 5. cap. 2.

3. The ancient Romans celebrated their Saturnalia with Masks, Interludes,
Dancings, etc. Ovid. Fast. lib. 1. Herod. Histor. lib. 1. On the Ides of
January men went through the streets in women's apparel, and were most immodest
and lascivious in their deportment, Alexand. ab Alexandro in Genial. Dier. lib.
3. cap. 18. Plut. Quaest. Romans Quaest. 55. This was a time dedicated to
Debaucheries and Disorders: We have them described by Al^uinus; These Calends,
according to the madness of the Gentiles, ought rather to be called Cavendae,
than Calendae. This day they hallowed with many Villainies; some changed
themselves into monstrous shapes, and were transformed into the habit of wild
Beasts; others put on women's apparel, and wearied themselves in Dances, etc.
whereupon the Universal Church appointed a Fast on the First of January, to
bewail these Exorbitances, and beg of God, That he would put an end to them, De
Divin. Offic. cap. 4. And Isidor. Hispan. speaks to the same purpose, De
Eccles. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 40.

And do not our Romanists herein symbolize with the Heathen? How do they spend
this time in Masks, Plays, Dancing --?What hellish and monstrous Impieties
are committed? All places are full of Drunkenness and Uncleanness. Lazius
having mentioned these disorders and extravagancies, concludes thus: Ita
veterum consuetudinum solenniorumque reliquiae, ac saltem imagines illius
magnificae Reipublicae nobis manserunt: Thus the Relics of their ancient
Customs and Solemnities, and at least some Images of old Rome, are retained by
us, De Repub. Romans lib. 10. cap. 9.

The ancient Romans ran up and down in Vizards, madly and lasciviously
committing many Immodesties; This is not only imitated, but outstripped by
Papists in their Carnaval; for this madness of committing Outrages in Vizards
(as if they could hide themselves under them from the eye of God) lasts not
two days, but two whole Months in many places: At which time also they indulge
themselves in intemperance of eating and drinking, as if they intended to make
their bodies Cellars and Storehouses against the approaching Fast of Lent. So
that this Carnaval (as one observes) seems to be a conjoining of those two lewd
Pagan Solemnities, I mean their Ludi Megalenses, and Saturnalia. The foul and
abominable miscarriages of which Festivals, in unclean and impudent gestures,
and all manner of obscenities, though they be so great and so various as none
can easily imagine who have not read their Authors; yet, as Historians and
Travelers inform us, our Romanists have outgone the old Pagans in all manner
of filthiness in this Festival. So much is confessed by Polydor Virgil, De
Invent. Rer. lib. 5. cap. 2. I will conclude this with what their Mantuan has
written concerning these Exorbitancies, Fast. lib. 2.

Altera nil melior nuper dementia venit,
Sordida produxit vetitos comoedia ludos.
Scorta, ambubaias, balatrones, and parasitos,
Et genus id reliquos trahit in proscaenia mensis
Improbus, unde trahunt juvenilia pectora pestem
Mortiferam, siuntque ipsae sine front puellae.
I pudor in villas, si non patiuntur easdem
Et villae vomicas, urbs est jam tota lupanar.
The Feast of S. Marie's Purification.
The Poets fable, That Pluto being in love with Proserpina (the Daughter of
Jupiter and Ceres) he stole her away when she was gathering flowers. Hereupon
her Mother sought her for many days with lighted Torches through the woods upon
Mount Aetna in Sicily. In commemoration of this, the people of Rome did
celebrate the Feast of Lights in the beginning of February, and walked in
procession about the City with lighted Candles and Torches, Dempster in Rosin.
lib. 2. cap. 11. Gyrald. de Diis Gent. Syntag. 14. p. 410.

The Romans also on the Calends of this Month went about the City with Candles
and Torches in honor of Juno She is called Febru^, because in this Month they
offered Sacrifice unto her, Gyrald. Syntag. 3.
the Mother of Mars, that her Son might give victory to them, whose Mother was
so solemnly honored by them.

The like Ceremony is observed by our Romanists on the second of February; and
that 'twas derived from the Pagans, many of their great Doctors have confessed.
It flowed (says Beleth) from an ancient usage of Ethnicks: For in former times
there was a Custom at Rome, about this time in the beginning of February, to
walk about the City in procession with burning Candles in their hands. And so
what was done by Pagans for indiscreet ends, about the beginning of this month;
is now done by Christians on the Feast of the B. Mary, Explic. Divin. Offic.
cap. 81.

And the Learned Beatus Rhenanus writes thus: Truly it cannot be denied, That
the Ceremonies of burning Candles, which Christians carry about on the day
dedicated to the Purification of the Virgin Mary, have had their beginning from
the Februalia, or cleansing Sacrifices of the Romans, In lib. 5. Tertul. cont.
Marcion.

And Baronius affirms as much, Annot. in Martyrol. Romans Feb. 2.

Nay, we have the confession of Pope Innocent; Why do we in this Feast carry
burning Candles? The Gentiles dedicated the Month of February to the Infernal
gods, because, as they thought, in the beginning of this Month Proserpina was
stolen away by Pluto; and because her Mother Ceres sought her in the night with
lighted Torches through Sicily; They, in commemoration of it, walked about the
City in the beginning of this month with lighted Torches. Hence that Feast was
called Amburbale. And because the holy Fathers could not utterly extirpate this
custom, they ordained that Christians should carry about burning Candles in
honor of the B. Virgin Mary. And thus, what was before done to the honor of
Ceres, is now done to the honor of the Virgin; and what was before done to the
honor of Proserpina, is now done to the praise of Mary, Innocent. 3. in Fest.
Purif. Sermon. 1.

And Durandus, Jacobus de Voragine, etc. tell us, That these Ceremonies are
still observed, being changed to the better; which Institution some attribute
to Pope Vigilius, others to Sergius, and others to Gregory the Great; but
others think, That this Feast was instituted by Vigilius, adorned with Candles
by Sergius, and with Processions by Gregory, Ration. Divin. Offic. lib. 7. cap.
7. Anselm. Ryd. apud Hospin. Fest. Christ. p. 35.

I will give the Reader a brief account of the Ceremonies with which our
Romanists solemnize this Festival, and then leave him to judge whether they be
not as idle and superstitious as those observed by the Heathen. Certainly, if
there be any thing more than a change of the Name, it is from the better to the
worse.

Here three things are to be considered:

1. The Benediction of these Candles. 2. The Distribution of them. 3. Their
Processions.
1. The Benediction of these Candles. The Priest having dispatched so much of
the Office for the day, proceeds to bless the Candles placed before the Altar,
saying over them several Prayers; of which take one or two.

O Lord Jesu Christ, who inlightnest every one that comes into the World, pour
out thy Been diction upon these Candles, and sancti fie them with the Light of
thy Grace; and propitiously grant, That as these Lights, kindled with visible
Fire, expel nocturnal darkness; so inlighten our Hearts with invisible Fire,
that is, the Splendour of the Holy Spirit, that we may discern the things that
are pleasing to thee, and profitable to our Salvation. Through Jesus Christ,
etc. Amen. Missale sec. usum Ebor. in Fest. Purificat.

Holy Lord, Father Almighty, Everlasting God, who have created all things of
Nothing, and by the Labor of Bees caused this Liquor to come to the perfection
of a Wax-Candle; We humbly beseech thee, That by the Invocation of thy most
Holy Name, and by the Intercession of the B. Virgin, ever a Virgin, whose
Festivals are this Day devoutly Celebrated, and by the Prayers of all thy
Saints, thou would vouchsafe to bless and sancti fie these Candles to the Use
of Men, and to the Health both of their Bodies and Souls. And hear from Heaven
the Prayers of this People, who desire to carry these Candles devoutly in their
Hands, and to Praise thee in Hymns. And be propitious to all that call upon
thee, whom thou have redeemed with the precious Blood of thy Son. Who with Thee
-- Amen. Missale parvum in Fest. Purisicat. B. Mariae.

Then the Priest sprinkles the Candles thrice with Holy Water, saying this
Antiphona, Sprinkle me with, etc. And perfumes them thrice with Incense.
Gavantus Pars 4. Tit. 14.

And that they attribute no less Power and Virtue to these Consecrated Candles,
than the old Pagans did to their Tapers and Torches, is clear, from what
Naogeorgus writes of them:

Mira est candelis illis and magna potestas:
Nam tempestates creduntur tollere diras
Accensae, simul and sedare tonitrua coeli, etc.
Apud Hospin. Fest. Christ. p. 35.

But lest they should question the Testimony of this Author, I will subjoin one
of their Consecratory Prayers, which implies no less:

O Lord Jesu Christ, Bless this Creature of Wax to us thy Suppliants; and
infuse into it, by the Virtue of the Holy Cross, thy heavenly Benediction; that
in whatsoever places it shall be lighted, or put, the Devil may depart, and
tremble, and fly away, with all his Ministers, from those Habitations, and not
presume any more to disturb them --. Manuale sec. us. Sarum. p. 13.

And in the Ordo Romanus we have this Benediction; I bless thee, O Wax, in the
Name of the Holy Trinity, That thou may be in every place the Ejection of
Satan, and Subversion of all his Companions, etc. Purificat. S. Mariae.

2. Let us consider the Distribution of them. After the aforesaid Ceremonies of
Consecration are over, the chiefest Priest goes to the Altar, and he that
officiates receives a Candle from him; afterward, that Priest, standing before
the Altar toward the People, distributes the Candles, first to the Priest from
whom he received a Candle, then to others in order, all kneeling (except
Bishops) and kissing the Candle, and the Priests Hand who delivers it. And when
he begins to distribute the Candles, they sing this Antiphona, A Light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel. Missale parvum in
Fest. Purificat. B. Mariae Gavantus, Pars 4. Tit. 14.

Perhaps some squeamish Heretic will say, Why must these Candles be received
with so much Reverence?

Ans. 1. This Scruple alone bespeaks the Infelicity of those Persons, who
cannot resolve their Faith into the Church's Determinations. But,

2. Let him consider the great Sanctity of them, the rare Virtues communicated
to them, and the excellent Mysteries which their great Doctors have discovered
in them! There are three things (says Jacobus de Voragine) in a Wax-Candle,
viz. The Wax, the Week, and Fire: And these represent these three things in
Christ; The Wax signifies the Flesh of Christ, which was born of the Virgin
Mary without carnal corruption, as the Bees make Wax without any commixtion or
copulation: The Week hid in the Wax, signifies the pure Soul of Christ, which
lay hid in the Flesh: The Fire, or Light, signifies the Divinity, because our
God is a consuming Fire. Hence one says:

Accipe per ceram carnem de Virgin veram,
Per lumen numen Majestatisque cacumen,
Lychnus and est anima sub carne latens opima.
Legend. 37. de Purificat. Virgin.
3. When these Candles are distributed, a solemn Procession is made; in which
one carries a Censer, another a Crucifix, and the rest burning Candles in their
Hands, Rituale Roman. p. 267. Gavantus Thesaurus, Pars 4. Tit. 14. And the
rudeness and disorders in their Processions are as great as those of Pagans.
See how their Mantuan speaks of them, Fastor lib. 2.

Ecce sacerdotum, cera flagrante, coruscant
Agmina, quae turbam faculas jaculantur in omnem.
Irruit undatim vulgus, puerique frequentes,
Ad sacra porrectis manibus munuscula currunt.
Saepius accensis pubes villatica ceris
Lascivire solet per rustica templa, quod olim
Me memini vidisse; faces immittere certant
Alter in alterius crines, fumumque ciere
Ludo incomposito, tetris nidoribus aras
Insiciunt, risuque levi delubra profanant.
Sacrorum sic lapsus honor, sic sancta recessit Relligio.
The Feast of S. Martin.
The old Romans had their Vinalia, and the Greeks their Pithaegia. Certain
Festivals which they Solemnized with great Disorders and Extravagancies; for
then they first Broached their new Wine, and (having offered a certain quantity
thereof to the gods, and devoutly prayed, that the use of this Medicinal Drink
might be healthful, and not hurtful unto them (Plutarch Sympos. Lib. 3. Quaest.
7.) when they had called together their Friends, Servants, -- they drank most
liberally, Alexander ab Alexand. in Genial. dierum lib. 6. cap. 8. Pithaegia
(says Proclus) was a Feast among the Ancients, in which they called their
Servants and Neighbors together, to drink Wine (for then they first pierced
their Wine-Vessels) and drunk excessively, Coelius Rhodigin. Antiq. Lection.
lib. 28. cap. 25. Natal. Comes Mythol. lib. 5. cap. 13.

With the like Compotations do our Romanists celebrate the Feast of S. Martin,
Lazius de Repub. Romans lib. 11. cap. 2. p. 1030. We have them described by
Naogeorgus, apud Hospin. Fest. Christ. p. 101.

Altera Martinus dein Bacchanalia praebet,
Quem colit anseribus populus, multoque Lyaeo,
Tota nocte dieque. Aperit nam dolia quisque
Omnia, degustatque haustu spumosa frequenti
Musta, sacer quae post Martinus vina vocari
Efficit. Ergo canunt illum, laudantque bibendo
Fortiter ansatis pateris, amplisque culullis.
The same is affirmed by Mantuan, and their conformity herein with the Pagan
Vinalia and Pithaegia, Fastor. lib. 11.

Haec est laeta dies, ista populusque patresque
Luce cados relinunt, and defaecata per omnes
Vina ferunt mensas, ac libera verba loquntur.
Talis apud veteres olim sacrata Lyaeo
Lux erat, a priscis vocitata Pithaegia Graiis,
Quod signata dies aperiret dolia festus.
I will conclude this with a Tragical Story related by Pantaleon: About the
year of our Lord 1179, (in the time of the Holy War), the Germans kept Joppa
against the Barbarians, and could not be drawn either by Promises or Menaces to
deliver it into their hands: But at last, having drunk freely on the Feast of
St. Martin, and being in a dead sleep (even those who were upon the Watch), a
certain Syrian opened a Gate unto the Enemy. Thus the Barbarians came
unexpectedly upon the Christians, put them all to the Sword, and utterly razed
the City, De Gestis Joannitar. lib. 2. p. 65.

The Feast of S. John Baptist.
Three things are done by our Romanists on this Festival; all which were
derived from the Heathen. 1. They gather Bones, and other stinking combustible
matter, and make a great Fire of them, Durandus Rational. lib. 7. cap. 14.
Belethus Explicat. divin. Officior. cap. 137. 2. They Dance about, and Leap
through these Fires, Lazius de Repub. Roman. lib. 11. cap. 2. p. 1028. 3. They
carry Torches or Firebrarnds about the Fields, Durand. and Beleth. ibid.

That the first is derived from the Heathen, Durand and Beleth do confess:
Anciently (say they) Dragons about this time of the year, excited to Lust
through heat, in flying through the Air did frequently drop their Seed into Pits
and Fountains, whereby the Water was infected, and then the Year was Mortal, by
reason of the Corruption of the Air and Water; because whosoever did drink of
the one, or breath in the other, either died or fell in^o some grievous
distemper. Their Philosophers observing this, commanded Fires to be made about
their Ponds and Fountains, and all filthy things to be burnt, that might make a
stinking Fume; for they knew that such a Smoke would drive away the Dragons.
And because this was done about this time of the Year, therefore the Custom of
making Fires on this Day is still observed by all. Ibid.

The second seems to be derived from the Pagan Palilia, in which they made
Fires of Straw or Stubble, and leaped through them.

Ille levis stipulae solennes potus acervos,
Accendet flammas transilietque sacras.
Tibullus Lib. 2. Eleg. 6.
And the same is attested by Ovid, Fastor. lib. 4.

Moxque per ardentes stipulae crepitantis acervos
Trajicias celeri strenua membrae pede.
And a little before,

Certe ego transilii positas ter in ordine flammas.
And the third is confessed by Polydor Virgil: It Is a Custom in Vmbria, a
famous Country in Italy, every year to make many Fires, and for Children to run
about the Fields with burning Torches, made of dried Reeds, praying that the
Earth may bring forth plenty of Fruits. And this we received from the old
Romans, who have transmitted to us many such Observations, De Inventor. Rerum.
lib. 5. cap. 2.

Ash Wednesday.
That the Heathen, in their Solemn Fasts and Times of Mourning, sprinkled Dust
and Ashes upon their Heads, is abundantly clear, both from Sacred Writ and
their own Authors. When Hercules heard of the death of Proclus, he sprinkled
Ashes upon his Head.

(...);
(...), etc. Homer. Iliad. 18. Prope Princip.
And the same Ceremony did Priamus use in Mourning for the death of Hector.
Homer. Iliad. 24.

Demittunt mentes, it scissa vest Latinus,
Conjugis attonitus fatis, urbisque ruina,
Canitiem immundo perfusam pulvere turpans.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 12.
I will not stand to add other Testimonies for this Custom, which our
Adversaries have confessed.

And do not our Romanists observe the same Custom on Ash Wednesday, the first
day of their Quadragesimal-Fast? I confess, in two particulars they differ from
the Heathen; both which bespeak them more vain and superstitious, viz. in their
Consecration and Distribution of these Ashes.

1. In their Consecration of these Ashes, which is after this manner: The
Priest takes the Ashes of Olive-Boughs, or of other Dignare hos cineres
sanctificare, quos causa humilitatis, and sanctae religionis, ad emundanda
delicta nostra far constituisti. Missale Processionale, and Manuale sec. us.
Sarum. But where has God ordained Ashes as the Means to purge away Sin?
Trees, consecrated the year before, and reads these Prayers over them:
Almighty, Everlasting God, Spare thy Penitent, be propitious to thy Suppliants,
and vouchsafe to send thy holy Angel from Heaven, who may bless and sancti fie
these Ashes, that they may be a healthful Remedy to all that humbly implore thy
holy Name, and accuse themselves for their Offenses, and bewail them before thy
Divine Clemency, or earnestly supplicate thy most serene Piety. And grant by
the Invocation of thy most holy Name, That whosoever shall sprinkle these Ashes
upon them for the Redemption of their Sins, they may obtain Health of Body, and
Protection of Soul. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, who desire not the Death, but Repentance of Sinners; Graciously
consider the frailty of human condition; and vouchsafe to bless these Ashes,
which we decree to put upon our Heads, to express our Humility, and to Merit
thy Pardon: That we, who know our selves to be Dust, and that for the demerit
of our Offenses we must return to Dust; may merit to obtain the Pardon of all
our Sins, and the Rewards which thou have promised to the Penitent; Through
Christ our Lord. Amen. Missale parvum, p. 58.

These Prayers being ended, the Priest sprinkles the Ashes with Holy Water, and
perfumes them thrice with Incense. Idem p. 59. Gavantus Thesaurus sacror. Rit.
Pars 4. Tit. 6.

2. The Ashes being thus Consecrated, the People come unto the Priest, and
falling down upon their Knees, he puts Ashes upon their Heads in the form of a
Cross; saying,

Remember, O man, because thou art Dust, and shall return to Dust; In the Name
of the Father, etc. Missale parvum and Gavantus. Ibid.

And this has a pretty mystical signification, as Durand has informed us:
This aspersion of Ashes signifies, That as in the ejection of Adam out of
Paradise, the Earth was cursed; so by the Humility of Penance, our Earth, viz.
our Free Will, is blessed; that it may not bring forth Thorns and Thistles, but
Fruit worthy of Repentance, Rationale divin. Officior. lib. 6. cap. 28. number.
19.

At Rome this Ceremony is performed by the Pope; to whom Cardinals, Bishops,
Kings, Princes, -- come with great reverence, and receive Ashes from him.

I will conclude this with what their Platina writes of Pope Boniface 8:
Prochetus Archbishop of Genoa, being at Rome on an Ash Wednesday, he amongst
others fell down at the Pope's Feet, to be signed on the Forehead with a Cross
of holy Ashes. Boniface thinking him to be his Enemy, changes the words, and
says, Remember that thou art a Gibellin, and with the Gibellins thou shall
return to Ashes, and so cast all the Ashes in his eyes, Platina in ejus vita.

Rogation-Week.
The Heathen observed certain Festivals in the Spring, called Robigalia,
Amburbalia, and Ambervalia, in which they supplicated the gods, to divert Evils
from their Cities, Fields, and Fruits. Their Robigalia were instituted in
Honor of Robigo, or Robigus, about the seventh of May; in which they offered
Sacrifice unto him, that he might not hurt their Corn and Vines with Blasting,
Brissonius de Formal. lib. 1. p. 57. Rosinus Antiq. Roman. lib. 4. cap. 8. p.
374.

And they prayed unto him (as Ovid informs us) in these words:

Aspera Rubigo parcas Cerealibus herbis, Et tremat in summa laeve cacumen humo.
Tu sata syderibus coeli nutrita secundis Crescere, dum siant falcibus apta,
sinas.
Vis tua non levis est: quae tu frumenta notasti,
Maestus in amissis illa colonus habet.
Nec venti tantum Cereri nocuere, nec imbres;
Nec sic marmoreo pallet adusta gelu;
Quantum, si culmos Titan incalfacit udos, Tunc locus est irae diva timenda
tuae.
Parce precor, scabrasque manus a messibus aufer,
Neve noce cultis, posse nocere sat est.
Nec teneras segetes, sed durum amplectere ferrum,
Quodque potest alias perdere, perde prius, etc.
Fastor. lib. 4.
And their Ambervalia were dedicated to Ceres, which they solemnized with
certain Rites and Ceremonies. Virgil gives us an account of them:

Cuncta tibi Cererem pubes agrestis adoret:
Cui tu lacte favos, and miti dilue Baccho:
Terque novas circum felix eat hostia fruges,
Omnes quam chorus, and socii comitentur orantes;
Et Cererem clamore vocent in tecta: neque ante
Falcem maturis quisquam supponat aristis,
Quam Cereri torta redimitus tempora quercu
Det motus incompositos, and carmina dicat.
Georg. lib. 1.
And do not Papists the like on their Rogation-days? Are not the very same
Rites and Ceremonies observed? Did they go about their Fields singing and
praying that the gods would bless the fruits of the Earth? Our Romanists do the
same. Did a Priest go before the people clothed in white? The same Ceremony is
observed in the Roman Church. All Travelers who have seen their Processions on
these days, will tell us, That one Egg is not more like another, than these are
to the Pagan Robigalia, and Ambarvalia. I will conclude this with the words of
Hadrianus Junius; Robigalia, Ambarvalia, Amburbalia, continuae tres feriae,
quibus supplicabatur ad urbis, agrorum, and segetis calamitates avertendas: ad
eorum exemplum instituti suppliciorum, supplicationumve dies hodie religiosi
habentur. The Robigalia, Ambarvalia, and Amburbalia, were three continued
Festivals, on which they supplicated the gods to divert evils from the City,
Fields, and Fruits; in imitation of these were our Rogation-days instituted,
etc. Nomenclat. p. 374. And though this Book has been revised by their great
Masters, and some other passages censured and commanded to be expunged in their
Index Expurgatorius; yet these words are passed by with a kind salute, as most
consonant to the Sentiments of their Church.

The Feast of S. Philip and James, or May Day.
Historians tell us, That Flora made the People of Rome Heir to those Goods,
which she had gotten by Prostituting her Body to young Gentlemen. Leaving also
a certain Sum of Money for the Solemnization of her Birthday. Which the People
being ashamed to do, by reason of her Infamy; they feigned her to be the
Goddess of Flowers, and that she must be first appeased by Sports and Plays,
performed in Honor of her, before the Trees and Fruits of the Earth would
prosper. And that they might gain the more credit to this Fable and Fiction,
they add further, That she was once called Chloris, and was married unto
Zephyrus, from whom by way of Dowry, she received power over the Flowers, Ovid.
Fastor. lib. 5. These Sports were observed on the four last days of April, and
the first of May: And hence is that of Ovid, Fastor. lib. 5.

Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maii:
Alter te fugiens, cum venit alter, habet.
This Festival was solemnized with great Disorders and Exorbitances: Strumpets
did then run through the Streets naked, using many lascivious and obscene
Gestures and Speeches, Alexander ab Alex. in Genial. dierum, lib. 6. cap. 8.
Gyraldus de Diis Gentium, Syntag. 1. p. 42.

The Story concerning Cato is well known; who being come into these Floralian
Plays, (in which all impieties were committed), he was forced, upon the account
of his Gravity, to depart. Hence is that of Martial:

Nosses jocosae dulce cum sacrum Florae,
Festosque lusus, and licentiam vulgi.
Cur in theatrum Cato severe venisti?
An ideo tantum veneras, ut exires?
Gyraldus, ibid.
The Rites and Ceremonies of this Feast are largely described by Ovid, Fastor.
lib. 5.

Quaerere conabar, quare lascivia major
His foret in ludis, liberiorque jocus:
Sed mihi succurrit, numen non esse severum,
Aptaque deliciis munera far Deam.
Tempora futilibus pinguntur tota coronis,
Et latet injecta splendida mensa rosa.
Ebrius incinctis Philyra conviva capillis
Saltat, and imprudens vertitur art meri.
Ebrius ad durum formosae limen amicae
Cantat, habent unctae mollia serta comae.
Nulla coronata peraguntur seria front
Nec liquidae vinctis flore bibuntur aquae.
And how like to these Floralian Sports is the fetching in of May (as some call
it), or May-Games in the Roman-Church, and some other Countries, not thoroughly
purged from the Dregs of Popery? I will not entertain the Reader with a
Description of them, which has been done by others in our own Language; but
conclude this with the words of their Polydor Virgil: 'The Sportful Youth of
both Sexes goes into the Fields, and brings back the green Branches of Trees,
with Songs, Dances --, These things seem to be taken from the old Romans, by
whom Flora the Goddess of all Fruits was lasciviously worshipped, De Inventor.
Rerum, lib. 5. cap. 2.

These Instances are sufficient to prove this Assertion, That the Roman Church
does symbolize with the old Pagans in the Observation of their Festivals;
wherein they follow the Counsel and Advice of Gregory the Great to Mellitus,
Beda Histor. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 30.

CHAP. XXIV. MASSE-CEREMONIES.
THE Pagan Priests observed several Ceremonies in their Sacrifices and solemn
Ministrations; and that herein they are imitated by our Romanists in the Mass,
will appear in these following Particulars.

1. The Pagan Priests used many Turnings in their Sacrifices; and these had
their mystical significations, Dempster in Rosin. de Antiq. Roman. p. 324.
Gyraldus de Diis Gent. Syntag. 17. p. 499. Alexander ab Alexand. in Genial.
dier. lib. 4. cap. 17. and Tiraquellus Annot. in eund.

Atque aliquis modo trux, visa jam vertitur ara,
Vinaque dat tepidis, farraque salsa focis.
Ovid Fastor. lib. 3.
Cumque manus puras fontana perluit unda,
Vertitur. Ovid. Fastor. lib. 3.
And that they turned on their right Hand, is affirmed by Gyraldus, Syntag. 17.
p. 502. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. Brissonius de Formul. lib. 1. p. 35.
And Dempster produces the Testimony of Valerius Flaccus Setinus:

Inde ubi sacrificas cum conjuge venis ad aras
Aesonides unaque adeunt, unaque precari
Incipiunt, ignem Pollux, undamque jugalem
Praetulit, ut dextrum vertantur in orbem.
To this he adds many other Testimonies:
Take only that of Plautus;
-- Quo me vertam, nescio.
Si Deos adoras, dextrovorsum censeo.
These Ceremonies are exactly observed by our Romish Priests in the Mass: The
Priest (says Durand) turns himself five times at the Altar; which denote the
five Apparitions of Christ to his Disciples on the Day of his Resurrection. And
he turns on the Right Hand; 1. To signify, That the Angel sat on the Right
Hand in the Sepulcher of our Lord. 2. That the Priest has a Right Intention
for himself and the People to the Heavenly Country, which is signified by the
Right Hand; according to that in the Canticles, His right hand shall embrace
me. 3. That the People are to pray for things Eternal, which are signified by
the Right Hand; hence Christ is said, to sit at the Right Hand of his Father,
Rationale Divin. Officior. Here the Reader may see what a rare Faculty
Romanists have in expounding and applying Scripture.
lib. 4. cap. 14. number. 10, 11.

2. The Heathen taught, That the Gods delighted in an odd Number.

-- Numero Deus impare gaudet. Virgil.

And this was so constantly observed in their Sacrifices, that 'twas known by
the Number, unto what God they were offered, whether Celestial or Infernal; for
to the latter, the Number is equal, and to the former unequal, Gyraldus de diis
Gentium. Syntag. 17. And the Number Three was the Prince of all the unequal
Numbers. So much is confessed by Virgil, Tibul, Ovid, Natalis Comes, etc.

Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 6.
Et digitis tria thura tribus sub limine ponit.
Ovid* Fastor. lib. 2.
And the Number Seven was sometimes observed, Apuleius de Asino Aureo. lib. 11.
This Number was consecrated to Minerva by the Pythagoreans, Natal. Comes
Mythol. lib. 4. cap. 5. p. 296.

That our Romanists observe constantly an odd Number in their Prayers and
Mass-Collects, is so notorious, that it needs not any proof: Because God
delights in an odd Number Observe it is grounded on Virgil's Maxim, which
discovers the Original of this Custom.
(says Durand) they say odd Prayers in the Mass, viz. either One, Three, Five,
or Seven: One, to signify the Unity of Faith, or Sacrament of Unity; Three, to
signify the Mystery of the Trinity, Rare Mysteries, and such as a dull
Protestant could never have discovered!
and because Christ prayed three times in his Passion, saying, Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass away from me: Five, to denote the Five Wounds of
Christ, or that his Passion was divided into Five: Seven, to signify the Seven
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Rationale divin. Officior. lib. 4. cap. 15. number. 15.
Durantus de Ritib. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 9. But Two they must not say,
according to the judgment of Pope Innocent; since the Number of Two is
infamous; for God hates Division and Discord. Hence, when God blessed the
Works of the other Days, we do not read that he blessed those of the Second,
because the Number Two first departed from Unity, and from it all other
divisible Numbers have their Original, Durandus and Durantus ibid. A most
admirable Reason, and fit only for a Romanist to urge.

3. The Pagan Priests washed their Hands often in their Sacrifices, Gyraldus de
diis Gentium, Syntag. 17. Alexander ab Alex. in Genial. dierum. lib. 4. cap.
17. Natalis Comes Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 10.

His Dea placanda est; haec tu conversus ad aras,
Dic quater, and vivo perlue rore manus.
Ovid. Fastor. lib. 4.
Thus do Popish Priests wash their Hands three times at the Mass. The first
precedeth the Mass, in reverence of so great a Sacrament, and that the Action
may be spiritually purified, Durandus Rational. lib. 4. cap. 3. number. 4.
Gavantus Thesaurus Sacror. Rit. pars 2. Tit. 1. p. 115. And Durantus grounds
this Ceremony upon the Practice of the Heathen, De Rit. Eccles. lib. 2. cap.
28. number. 6. The second Washing is after the Offertory; and here they wash only
their Thumbs and First-fingers, that they may more worthily touch their God,
Gavantus pars 2. tit. 7. p. 188. The Priest going about (says Durantus) to
offer the Sacrifice, washes his Hands again; as if, according to Albertus
Magnus, there needs a further and fuller Purification, even from Venial Sins,
and the Relics of all Sins; saying with the Psalmist, I will wash my hands
among the innocent, De Ritib. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 28. number. 1. After the second
Thurification (says Durand) the Priest washes his Hands again, that being
more and more cleansed, he may offer an immaculate Sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to God; and that he may not be guilty of the Body and Blood of our
Lord, according to that, My hands are clean from the blood of this man. And he
washes at the Right Corner of the Altar (the Right Hand signifying Prosperity,
and the Left Adversity) because we offend more in Prosperity than Adversity,
Rationale divin. Offic. lib. 4. cap. 28. number. 1, 2, 3. The third Washing is
after the Mass; then the Priest (says the same Author) washes his Fingers,
lest any thing of the Sacrament should stick to them; not that any Pollution is
contracted thereby, but rather to commemorate his Unworthiness, who judges
himself unmeet to celebrate such Sacraments. Again, It Is unfit, that those
Hands which have handled so Sacred a Body, should touch common things, before
they are carefully washed, Rationale lib. 4. cap. 55. number. 1. Gavantus pars 2.
tit. 12. p. 248. And Durand tells us, That this threefold Washing denotes the
Purification of our Thoughts, Words, and Works; or the Purgation of Original,
Venial, and Mortal Sin; or what Evil has been committed through Ignorance,
Inadvertency, or with Industry, lib. 4. cap. 55. number 2. Most weighty Reasons,
and pretty Mysteries! Admire the Ingeny of a Catholic.

4. The Heathen burnt Incense in their Sacrifices, Alexand. ab Alexand. in Genesis
Dier. lib. 4. cap. 17. Gyrald. de diis Gent. Syntag. 17. Rosin. Antiq. Roman.
lib. 2. cap. 2. Not. Com. lib. 1. cap. 10.

Thus do our Romanists in the Mass, Durand. Ration. Divin. Offic lib. 4.. cap.
10. Durantus de Ritib. Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 9. And this (says
Gavantus) they do for several reasons: 1. To represent the glory of God, who
appeared in a Cloud. 2. In reverence of the Place, that every noisome smell, by
reason of the concourse of the people, may be expelled, Bellar. lib. 2. de
Missa, cap. 15. 3. To represent the sweet odor of Christ, S. German. in
Theoria. 4. To signify, that our Prayers are to be directed unto God, Psalm.
140. S. Thomas 3. p. Quaest. 83. Art. 5. 5. To expel Devils, Innocent. 3. lib.
2. cap. 17. Thesaurus S. Rituum, pars 2. Tit. 4. p. 161. Durand gives us some
other pretty Reasons and mystical significations of this Ceremony, which I must
pass over for brevity sake, Ration. lib. 4. cap. 31. number. 1, 2, 3.

The Heathen burnt Lamps and Torches in their Sacrifices, Gyrald. de diis Gent.
Syntag. 17. Passim. Natal. Com. Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 10. Apuleius de Asino
Aureo, lib. 11. Ceres, Mother of Proserpina, was called Taedifera, because at
her Sacrifices this Ceremony was constantly observed.

Illic accendit geminas pro lampade pinus:
Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque taeda datur.
Ovid. Fast. lib. 4.
Thus our Romanists have Wax-Candles burning at their Mass, Conc. Trident.
Sess. 22. And several most weighty reasons are urged by Gavantus for this
usage, and most profound Mysteries discovered in it: 1. The Ordo Romanus
requires Lights in the Mass, in type of that Light of which we make
Sacraments, and without which we shall grope at noonday, as in the night. 2.
This Light also signifies the Faith of the people, whom the Candlesticks
represent, Innocent. 3, or the Charity of Christ in his Sacrifice. 3. Because
Christ, as Fire, takes away the filthiness of our sins, Biel. Lect. 13. 4.
Because we expect the Bridegroom with light. 5. To excite and stir up Devotion,
Soto 4. Did. 13. q. 2. Art. 4. 6. To express eternal Joy, represented by this
Sacrament, Thesaur. S. Rituum, par. 1. Tit. 20. p. 105.

6. The Heathen used Pipes and Trumpets in their Sacrifices, Gyrald. de diis
Gent. Syntag. 17. p. 499. Rosin. Antiq. Romans lib. 3. cap. 33. Alex. ab Alex.
Genesis Dier. lib. 4. cap. 17. Not. Com. Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 15. And that the
Ancients used them instead of Bells, Durand has confessed, Ration. lib. 1.
cap. 4. number. 3.

Thus our Romanists ring a little Bell at the Mass, Durand. Rational. lib. 4.
cap. 41. Gavant. par. 1. Tit. 20. p. 106. And in a solemn Mass they ring the
great Bells, Gavant. par. 2. Tit. 7. p. 197.

7. The Heathen did eat little round Wafers, after the Sacrifices were over, in
Honor of the Gods to whom they were offered, Alexander ab Alex. Genial. dier.
lib. 4. cap. 17. Pollux Onomast lib. 6. cap. 6.

Thus our Romanists have their round Wafers or Hosts, which after the Priests
consecration and oblation, the people eat. And their Durand has discovered
excellent Mysteries in this Figure: The Bread (says he) is made round in the
form of a penny, to signify, That the Bread of life was sold for thirty pence;
that the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and that Christ is
without either Beginning or End, Ration. lib. 4. cap. 30. number. 8. and cap. 41.
number. 8. And not less witty is their Gemma animae de Antiq. Ritu Miss. lib. 1.
cap. 35.

And the Image of the Cross impressed on the Host, is derived by Gavantus from
the old Romans, Imago vero Crucis in Hostia deducitur a Romanorum usu, qui
panem coquebant quadrifida incistone in formam Crucis decussatam, ex quo
laudabilior est Imago Crucifixi tantum in Hostia, quam aliud quicquam. The
Image of the Cross in the Host is deduced from the custom of the Romans, who
made their Bread with an Incision in the form of a Cross, etc. Thesaur. S.
Rituum par. 2. Tit. 7. p. 182.

It were easy to instance in many other particulars; but these are sufficient
to prove the conformity of our Romanists with the old Pagans in their
Mass-Ceremonies.

CHAP. XXV. PROCESSIONS.
THAT our Romanists in their Processions imitate the old Pagans, will appear,
if we consider these particulars:

1. In their Processions some ludicrous Show preceded: Behold (says Apuleius)
the Anteludia of this great Procession, leisurely walking on: Here one plays
the Soldier with his Sword and Belt about him; there another acts the
Hunts-man with his short Coat girt close, with a Wood-knife, or Faucheon at his
side, and Hunting pole in his hand. Another clad in purple, acts the supreme
Magistrate, and has the Fasces carried before him. I have also seen (says he)
a tame Bear dressed up like a Lady, carried in a Horse-litter, and an Ape with
a woven Cap on his head, De Asino Aureo, lib. 11.

And for the better entertaining of the rude people, they carried also a
certain ludicrous Image, which the Latins call Citeria Quid ego cum illo
disertem amplius, quem ego erecto in pompa rectitatum in ludis pro Citeria,
atque cum spectatoribus sermo-cinatnrum? Cato in M. Cecilium apud Festum.
; they ordinarily derive it from (...) and (...), alluding therein to the
loquacity of the Magpye; for this Image was made to chatter something like that
Bird. Plautus makes mention of another formidable Idol, that was carried in
their Processions, which he calls Manducus; 'twas a great ugly Image, with a
wide mouth riven up to the ears, and gaping horribly, and making a gnashing
with its teeth to the great terror of the simple. Of this Mormo Juvenal speaks,
who says, That it scares the children of the Rusticks in their Mothers bosom
by its wide gapings.

-- Personae pallantis hiatum
In gremio Matris formidat rusticus Infans.
And the like is done by Papists in their Processions. In the pomp (says
Polydor Virgil) of our Supplications or Processions, there uses some ludicrous
Show to precede; as Ranks of Soldiers Horse and Foot, or some chattering Image,
ridiculous and loquacious, or else gaping with wide chaps, and making a
gnashing noise with its teeth, very formidable to behold, with other sportful
sights; amongst which the ancient Prophets are personated, and Boys with wings
go singing, as if they were of the Heavenly Quire of Angels; whom, immediately
follows a Company of men and women dancing after their Music; Here one acts
David; there another, Solomon. Some play the parts of Queens and Princesses;
others of Hunts-men. Beasts also are brought into the pomp, an Ape or Monky, --
De Invent. Rer. lib. 6. cap. 11.

In their Processions (says Jacobus de Voragine) which they make three days
before our Savior's Ascension, the custom is, especially in the Gallican
Churches, to carry the Image of a Dragon with a long tail. On the two first
days this Image goes before the Cross with its tail erected; but on the last
day it comes after the Cross with its tail hanging down, Legend. 66. This
Dragon (says Durand) represents the Devil, who for three Ages or periods of
time has deceived men, viz. Before the Law, under the Law, and under the
Gospel; which times are signified by these three days. In the two first Ages he
reigned; and* being as it were Lord of the world, had a long tail; hence Christ
calls him the Prince of the World; and S. John says, That the Dragon drew
with his tail the third part of the Stars of Heaven. And to express this Power
and Dominion, on the two first days the Image is carried before the Cross in
the foresaid manner. But in the time of the Gospel he is overcome by Christ, and
power is given to the Angels to cast forth unclean spirits; and therefore on
the third day this Image follows the Cross with its tail hanging down,
Rational. Divin. Officior. lib. 6. cap. 102. number. 9.

2. The Heathen carried the Images of their gods in their Processions, Baruch
6. 3. After these (says Apulcius) come on with a slow pace the peculiar pomp
of the Goddess her self -- De Asino Aureo, lib. 11. Vossius informs us from
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, That the Romans carried about the Image of Cybele in
Procession, De Origin. and Progress. Idol. lib. 2. cap. 52. Alexander ab
Alexand. in Genial. dier. lib. 5. cap. 27.

Thus do Papists carry the Images of their Saints along with them in their
Processions, Polydor Virgil de Inventor. Rerum. lib 6. cap. 11. The Fathers in
the Council of Constance, Decreed a solemn Procession for the removal of the
Plague; and that the Image of S. Roch should be carried by the Clergy through
the City, Baronius Martyrol. Aug. 16.

3. The Heathen had Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, in their Processions.
Some played on Flutes and Pipes, and others Sung most sweetly, Apuleius de
Asino Aureo, lib. 11. The Processions which the old Romans observed in Honor
of the Goddess Cybele, are thus described by Dionysius Halicarnassaeus; They
carry the Goddess through the City, they sing Hymns, play on Instruments etc.
apud Vossium de Origin. and Progress. Idolat. lib. 2. cap. 52. The Salii sing
Hymns in their Processions, says Plutarch in vita Numae. Gyraldus speaking of
their Processions, says, Sacro carmine supplicare, and Deum pacem exposcere
solebant. Syntag. 17. p. 482. And Alexander ab Alexandro affirms of the
Grecians, That they commanded an old Song to be sung in their Processions, In
Genial. dier. lib. 5. cap. 27.

And thus do Papists in their Processions: Boys with Wings go singing, as if
they were of the Heavenly Quire of Angels, Polydor. Virgil. ibid. Let Hymns be
alternately sung, Gavantus Thesaurus S. Rituum, pars 4. tit. 12. Durantus tells
us, That in a solemn Procession, a Boy was suddenly carried up into the Air, by
a certain Divine Power in the sight of all the People, even into Heaven; where
he heard that Divine Song, wherewith the Angels praise God continually; which
when he had heard and learned, he was let down again, and reported it to the
People: The Song was, Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, Have mercy on us.
And hereupon 'twas commanded, that this Hymn, viz. Thrice Holy, should be sung
through the World, De Ritibus Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 10. The same Story is related
by Jacobus de Voragine, Legenda 66.

4. The Heathen strewed the Ground along as they went in their Processions,
with odoriferous Herbs and Flowers, Apuleius, ibid.

And thus do Papists: The air is filled with Odours as they go; and the ground
they pass over, strewn with Flowers, Polydor Virgil de Inventor. Rerum lib. 6.
cap. 11.

5. The Heathen carried burning Lamps and Torches in their Processions,
Apuleius de Asino Aureo, lib. 11. Alexander ab Alex. and others.

And thus do our Romanists: There are men carrying Torches in their Hands,
says Polydor Virgil. In Procession let the Clergy (says Gavantus) immediately
precede the Priest that officiates, and let the rest go before the Clergy; all
carrying Wax-Candles in one Hand, and laying the other upon their Breasts,
Thesaurus S. Rit. pars 4. tit. 12.

6. The Heathen had Heralds in their Processions, who cried to the People to
give way, that the Pomp might not be impeded by any rudeness and crowding; nor
any look down out of their Windows upon them; and that they should mind what
they were doing, Apuleius, ibid.

And thus have Papists in their Processions: To some (says Polydor Virgal) is
appointed the Office of speaking unto the People, to give way, that the Pomp
may march on without impediment; And Boys and Girls are prohibited to look down
out of their Windows, ibid. Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 10. number.
10.

7. The Heathen in their Processions went to the Temples and Altars of their
gods, Gyraldus de diis Gent. Syntag. 17. p. 482. Alexand. ab Alex. in Genial.
dier. lib. 5. cap. 27.

And that Papists do the same, that is, go in their Processions to the Temples
and Altars of their Saints, is clear from their daily Practice, and Testimony
of all their Writers.

8. The Heathen attributed great Power and Efficacy unto their Processions,
both to remove Judgments, and procure Blessings. This is clear from the
Confessions of Gyraldus, ^rissonius, Alexander ab Alexandro, and others.

And the same Power and Virtue do our Romanists attribute to their Processions.
Jacobus de Voragine, Durantus, and others, tell us, what great Wonders have
been wrought by them.

Can one drop of Water be more like unto another, than these Roman Processions
are to those of the ancient Pagans? Wherefore Polydor's Inference is most true;
Ita Romani factitabant, and aliae pleraeque Gentes, a quibus ad nos ritus
ejusmodi dubio procul manavit; So did the old Romans, and many other Nations,
from whom without all doubt these Rites and Ceremonies were derived to us, De
Inventor. Rerum lib. 6. cap. 11.

CHAP. XXVI. FVNERAL-CEREMONIES.
1. THE Heathen washed and anointed the Bodies of their dead, Alexander ab
Alex. in Genial. dier. lib. 3. cap. 7.

-- Date vulnera lymphis
Abluam. Virgil Aeneid. lib. 4.
Per calidos latices, and ahena undantia flammis
Expediunt, corpusque lavant frigentis, and ungunt.
Aeneid. lib. 6.

And Homer speaking of the dead Body of Achilles, says;

(...). Deposuimus in lectis, purgantes corpus pulchrum
Aquaque calida, and unguento.
Odyss. 24.
And their Writers tell us, that they had certain persons whose Office 'twas to
anoint the dead; these they called Pollinctores, quasi pollutorum unctores.

Thus do Papists besprinkle the dead with Holy Water. Let a little Cross be set
upon the breast of the dead person; or if that be wanting, let his hands be
laid after the manner of a Cross; and let the body be sometimes sprinkled with
holy water, Ritu. Romans p. 171. And immediately before the Corpse is carried
forth to be buried, the Priest sprinkles it with holy water, Idem. p. 177. And
the like is done after it is brought into the Church, Idem. p. 182. The bodies
of the dead (says Durand) are perfumed and sprinkled with holy water, to drive
away unclean Spirits. And a little after he tells us, That the body ought to be
washed, except 'twas lately anointed, to signify, that if the Soul be cleansed
from guilt by confession and contrition, both, viz. Soul and Body, may obtain
eternal glory at the day of Judgment; and that they truly dye in the Lord, and
are blessed, who carry no spot hence, but are thoroughly purged by penance in
this life, Ration. Divin. Offic. lib. 7. cap. 35. number. 29 and 36. And Polydor
Virgil informs us, That sometimes the dead bodies, especially of Noblemen, are
anointed; which Ceremony (says he) with the other of washing, is derived from
the old Pagans, De Invent. Rer. lib. 6. cap. 9. Durantus de Ritib. Eccles. lib.
1. cap. 23. n. 13.

2. The Heathen buried their dead in such Gowns and Garments as were proper to
their Places and Offices. The Grecians had their Mantle called Pallium; and the
Romans their Gown, called Toga: and by these different Garments the one was so
certainly distinguished from the other, that this word Togatus was often used
to signify a Roman, and Palliatus a Grecian. Now these Roman Gowns were of
several kinds; there was Toga pura, candida, praetexta, paludamentum, picta,
trabea. The Toga pura was worn by young men about the sixteenth year of their
age. The Toga candida was worn by those who sued for a place of Office; and
hence they were called Candidati. The Toga praetexta was worn by the chief
Magistrates. The Paludamentum was proper to the Lord General, or the chief
Captains. The Toga picta was worn by Emperors in their Triumphs. And the Trabea
was worn by the Augures.

And that the Romans were burnt, or buried in these Gowns proper to their
Degrees and Offices, is most clear from all their Writers. We have several
testimonies collected by Kirchman, De Funerib. Roman. lib. 1. cap. 10.

And the like is done by our Romanists. A Priest or Clergyman of any Order,
ought to be clothed with his common and ordinary Vestments, even to his long
Garment (or Gown) inclusively; and above that, with a Sacred Vestment
Sacerdotal or Clerical as his Order does require. A Priest is to have above his
Gown, an Albe, Girdle, Stole, etc. Ritual. Roman. p. 173. Durand. Rational.
lib. 7. cap. 35. n. 41.

3. When the Heathen carried their dead to be buried, they had their certain
stations or pauses in the way, Rosin. Antiq. Roman. lib. 5. p. 624.

And this Ceremony is observed by our Romanists.

It Is the custom (says Durand) in some places to make a threefold pause in
the way; 1. To signify, that while he lived, he exercised himself especially
in three things, viz. in the love of God, charity to his neighbors, and
custody of himself; that he might be worthily presented to the Lord, and with
other Saints enjoy a perpetual Rest; or that he lived and died in the faith of
the holy Trinity. 2. To denote, that our Lord Jesus Christ continued three days
in the bowels of the earth. 3. Three pauses are made in the way, that by three
courses of singing, there may be a threefold Absolution from sins committed
three ways, viz. in thought, word, and work, Ration. lib. 7. cap. 35. number. 37.

4. The Heathen sung their dead to their graves, or places of burial, Alex. ab
Alex. Genial. Dier. lib. 3. cap. 7. And Macrobius affirms, That this custom was
according to the Institutions of several Nations, and grounded upon this
reason; Because they believed that Souls after death returned to the original
of Musical sweetness, that is, Heaven; and therefore in this life every Soul is
taken with Musical sounds, etc. In Somn. Scipion. lib. 2. cap. 3. Other reasons
are assigned by Kirchman, and several Authorities urged for this custom, De
Funreib. Roman. lib. 2. cap. 4.

And thus do Papists: Certain Hymns are appointed to be sung by course or
turns, from the House to the Church, Rituale Roman. p. 177. Belethus Explicat.
divin. Officior. cap. 161. And when they are come into the Church, the Quire
begins; Help, O ye Saints of God; and come, O ye Angels, and receive his Soul,
and present it before the most high, etc. Rituale, p. 178.

5. The Heathen carried burning Candles and Torches before their dead,
Alexander ab Alex. in Genial. dier. lib. 3. cap. 7.

-- Et de more vetusto
Funereas rapuere faces, lucet via longo
Ordine flammarum, and late discriminat agros.
Virgil Aeneid. lib. 11.
And Martial speaks to the same purpose, Lib. 8. Epigr. 43.

Effert uxores Fabius, Christilla maritos,
Funereamque toris quassatque uterque facem.
The Testimonies of Servius, Persius, Tacitus, Plutarch, Ovid, Isidorus, -- Do
fully confirm this Custom; which are amassed togegether by the learned
Kirchman, De Funerib. Roman. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Thus our Romanists carry Candles and Torches before their dead Rituale Roman.
p. 172. And if the person be poor, the Priests are enjoined to provide Candles
at their own charge, p. 173. This Ceremony is derived by Polydor Virgil from
the Heathen; Vnde haud dubie ortum est, ut apud nos illud idem in cujusvis
funere servetur; Hence it is, that we observe the same Custom in every Funeral,
De Inventor. Rerum. lib. 6. cap. 10.

6. The Heathen sprinkled their Sepulchers with lustral Water, perfumed them
with Incense, and cast Flowers into them. The first is clear from the
Confession of Baronius, Annal. in ann. 44. p. 382. The second is confirmed by
the Testimony of Lucan; who discoursing of the Funeral of Pompeius, says,

Non pretiosa petit cumulato thure sepulchra
Pompeius, Fortuna, tuus: non pignus ad astra
Vt ferat e membris Eoos fumus odores.
Apud Kirchman de Funerib. Roman. lib. 3. cap. 5. And for the last, this
learned Author has collected many Testimonies out of their own Writers, lib.
4. cap. 3.

And thus do Papists sprinkle their Sepulchers with Holy Water, perfume them
with Incense, etc. Holy Water (says Durand), burning Coals, with Frankincense,
are put into the Sepulcher: Holy Water, that Devils, who much dread it, may not
come near unto the Body; for they are wont to rage against the Bodies of the
dead, that what they could not do in life, they may do after death.
Frankincense is put there, to remove the noisome smell of the Body; or to
signify, that the departed offered unto his Creator the acceptable odor of
good Works, etc. Lastly, Laurel, and suchlike which always keep their
greenness, are cast in, to signify, that they who are dead in Christ, cease
not to live, Rational, lib. 7. cap. 35. number. 38. Belethus Explicat. divin.
Officior. cap. 161.

7. The Heathen offered Gifts and Sacrifices for the dead, on certain days
after their decease; the third, seventh, ninth, tenth, twentieth, thirtieth,
and fortieth day; that is, for so many days. So much is asserted by Rosinus;
And hence (says he) their Parentationes, Feralia, Novendialia, Decennalia,
Vicennalia, Tricennalia, etc. had their Original, Antiq. Roman. lib. 5. cap.
39. The some is affirmed by Kirchman, de Funerib. Roman. lib. 4. cap. 1. And in
the next Chapter he gives us a large account of the Gifts and Sacrifices which
were offered for them on these days.

Thus do our Romanists offer Gifts and Sacrifices for the dead, the third,
seventh -- day after their decease. The Church of Rome has appointed an Office
for the dead on these days; in which we have this Prayer:

We beseech thee, O Lord, graciously accept the Gifts which we offer unto thee
for the Soul of thy Servant N. that being purged by Heavenly Remedies, it may
rest in thy Piety: Through our Lord, etc. Amen. Missale parvum Miss. pro
defunctis, p. 240.

I cannot here pass over in silence, the pretty taking Reasons which their
great Durand has given for these Observations, and their mystical
Significations: Some commemorate the Dead the third day, having respect to the
Resurrection of Christ, which was on the third day; or to the Trinity; or that
their Sins may be remitted, which they, when alive, committed three ways, viz.
in thought, word, and work. Others observe the seventh day: 1. That the dead
may sooner come to the Sabbath of Eternal Rest. 2. That all his Sins may be
pardoned that he committed in this life, which is measured by seven days. 3.
Because of the sevenfold Number of Soul and Body; for the Soul has three
Powers, viz. rational, concupiscible, and irascible; and the Body consists of
four Elements. Others observe the ninth day, that the Souls of the deceased,
being freed from punishment by this Office, they may be joined to the nine
Orders of Angels. Others observe the thirtieth day: 1. Because three tens make
thirty; for by three we understand the Trinity, and by ten the Decalogue;
Therefore we observe the thirtieth day for the dead, that God would in mercy
pardon their offenses, committed against the Decalogue and the Trinity. 2.
Because the Number of the Moon is perfected in thirty days; therefore we
observe the thirtieth day for the dead, to denote, that their Works are full
and perfect before God. Others observe the fortieth day; 1. That God would
pardon what they have committed against the Doctrine of the four Gospels and
ten Commandments. 2. To represent our Saviors Burial; praying, that the dead
may have Glory with Christ, who lay in the Sepulcher forty hours. Others
observe the fiftieth day; because fifty is a perfect Number, and signifies the
year of Jubilee, etc. Rationale divin. Officior. lib. 7. cap. 35.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici. CHAP. XXVII.
I Will only mention (lest this Book should swell into too great a Volume) some
other Doctrines and Ceremonies taught and observed in the Roman Church; which
they have derived from, or at least wherein they symbolize with the old Pagans.

Holy Vessels and Vestments.
The Heathen consecrated their Vessels and Vestments, used in Sacrifice, and
other holy Services, Natalis Comes Mythol. lib. 1. cap. 14. Brissonius de
Formul. lib. 1. p. 6. And Homer tells us, that these Purifications were made
with Sulphur and Water:

(...)
(...),
(...).
Iliad. lib. 16.
And their Vestments also were purified;

Casta placent superis, pura cum vest venite.

Tibul. lib. 2. eleg. 1.
-- Puraque in vest sacerdos
Setigerae faetum suis, intonsamque bidentem
Attulit. Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 12.
Thus do our Romanists consecrate their Vessels and Vestments for holy uses.
The Bishop having put on his Robes, says to the People:

Beloved Brethren, let us pray, That God and our Lord would sanctify these
Vessels with the inspiration of his heavenly Grace, etc.

And then after a short Prayer, he anoints the Patten and Chalice with holy
Oil; saying,

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to conse crate and sancti fie this Patten and Chalice by
this Unction, and our Benediction, in Christ Jesu our Lord, etc.

And then follows this Prayer:

Almighty, Everlasting God, we beseech thee pour out by our hands the aid of
thy Benediction; that these Vessels may be sanctified by our Been diction; and
by the Grace of the Holy Ghost may become a new Sepulcher for the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesu Christ; Through the same -- Amen.

And lastly, he sprinkles them with holy Water.

And much after the same manner does the Bishop consecrate their Sacerdotal
Vestments. He reads certain Prayers, of which this is one.

O God of invincible Power, the Creator and Sanctifier of all things, attend to
our Prayers; and be pleased with thine own mouth to bless, sancti sie, These
Vessels and Vestments are supposed to be so holy upon their Consecration, that
it is not lawful for Laymen to touch them, Decret. pars 3. did. 1. cap. 41, 42.
and conse crate these Vestments of Levitical, Sacerdotal, and Pontifical
Glory, which are to be used by thy Servants; and vouchsafe to make all, that
use them, fit for thy Mysteries, and devoutly serving thee in them, acceptable
to thee; Through our Lord -- Amen.

And then he sprinkles them with holy Water, Pontificale Roman. p. 355.

Blessing of Sheep.
The Heathen had their Palilia, on the 11th, or (as others) on the 12th of the
Calends of May. Which F^stival was dedicated to Pales, the Goddess of
Shepherds. This Feast was solemnized with several Ceremonies: 1. They made a
Perfume of the Embers of a Calf, the Blood of a Horse, and the Top of a Bean. 2
Early in the morning the Shepherd did lustrate or purge the Sheepfold, and
Sheep after this manner; He sprinkled the Sheep with Water, and walked about
the Sheepfold, burning Sulphur, Savine, and Laurel; and by this Perfume he
thought the Sheep were purged, and all Diseases expelled. 3. After these
Purgations, Prayers were made to Pales, that she would bless the Sheep, etc.
Gyraldus de diis Gent. Syntag 17. p. 526. Rosinus Antiq: Roman. lib. 4. cap. 8.
p. 372. All the foresaid Ceremonies are thus described by Ovid Fastor. lib. 4.

I, pete virginea populus suffimen ab ara,
Vesta dabit, Vestae munere purus eris.
Sanguis equi suffimen erit, vitulique favilla,
Tertia res durae culmen inane fabae.
Pastor oves saturas ad prima crepuscula lustret,
Vnda prius spargat, virgaque verrat humum.
Frondibus, and fixis decorentur ovilia ramis,
Et tegat ornatas longa corona fores.
Caerulei siant puro de sulphur fumi,
Tractaque fumanti sulphur balet ovis.
Ure mares oleas, taedamque herbasque Sabinas,
Et crepet in mediis laurus adusta focis.
Consule, dic, pariter pecori, pecorisque magistris,
Effugiat stabulis noxa repulsa meis.
Da veniam culpae, nec dum degrandinat, obsit,
Agresti Fauno supposuisse pecus.
Tu Dea pro nobis fontes, fontanaque placa
Numina, tu sparsos per nemus omne Deos.
That the same Custom is observed by our Romanists, and with the like
Ceremonies, is clear from this following Office, appointed for it:

The Sheep being brought into the Church, the Priest blesses the Salt and
Water; then in one Corner he reads this Gospel [To us a Child is born] with the
whole Office, a a Farthing being laid upon the Book and taken up again; in the
second Corner he reads this Gospel [Ye men of Galilce] with the whole Office, a
Farthing being laid upon the Book and taken up again; in the third Corner he
reads this Gospel [I am the good Shepherd] with the whole Office, a Farthing
being laid upon the Book and taken up again; and in the fourth Corner he reads
this Gospel [In these days] with the whole Office, a Farthing being laid upon
the Book and taken up again. After this he sprinkles all the Sheep with holy
Water; saying,

Let the Blessing of God, the Father Almighty, descend and remain upon you: In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then the Priest signeth all the Sheep with the Sign of the Cross, repeating
thrice these Verses:

Crux fugat omne malum, crux est reparatio rerum,
Per crucis signum fugiat procul omne malignum,
Et per idem signum salvetur quodque benignum.
Pater Noster, Ave Maria. And then is sung the Mass of the Holy Ghost. The
whole Office being concluded, Four Pennies are offered to the Priest, and Three
to the Poor, Ex Antiquo M S. S. Mariae de Lilleshall in Agro Solopiensi. p. 62.

Whippings.
The Lacedaemonians (says Tertullian) had their (...), in which Five Noblemens
Sons whipped themselves, their Parents and Kinsfolk being present, and
exhorting them to persevere, lib ad Martyr. cap. 4. Upon which Rhenanus has
this Annotation; Of that old Custom of Whipping ones self, a Trace may be seen
among the Italians, in their Letanies.
The Egyptians sacrificed a Cow with many Ceremonies to their greatest Demon,
or Isis; and they all whipped themselves whilst this Sacrifice was burning,
Herodotus lib. 2. And the Lupercians upon a certain day, called Lupercalia, ran
through the City all naked, save that they had Aprons to cover their Privities,
carrying Leather Whips in their Hands, wherewith they scourged themselves,
Plutarch Quaest. Roman. Q. 68. Gyraldus, Rosinus, etc. These Whippings were
accounted Expiatory, and therefore used in the Month of February, which was the
Purgative Month. So much is affirmed by Ovid:

Mensis ab his dictus, secta quia pelle Luperci Omne solum lustrant, idque
piamen habet. Fastor. lib. 2. How like to these are the Roman Flagellants? And
Polydor Virgil affirms, That Christians hence borrowed their Whippings, and use
them for the same End, De Inventor. Rerum, lib. 7. cap. 6.

Abstinence from Flesh.
Gyraldus informs us, That the Egyptian Priests abstained from Flesh and Wine.
And the Gymnosophists were so abstemious, that they fed only on Rice and Meal.
And in Crete, those whom they called the Prophets of Jupiter, not only refused
to eat Flesh, but whatsoever was either Baked or Boiled. And the Indian Magi,
advanced to the Priesthood of the Sun, abstained wholly from Flesh, De diis
Gent. Syntag. 17. p. 497. The same is affirmed by their Polydor Virgil; who
further adds, That three Precepts only were found in the Temple of Ceres, viz.
That Parents must be honored, the gods worshipped, and no Flesh eaten, De
Inventor. Rerum, lib. 3. cap. 5. Alex. ab Alex. in Genial. dier. lib. 4. cap.
17. Others also at certain times were prohibited the eating of Flesh, as the
foresaid Authors do testify.

How exactly our Romanists agree in this particular with the old Pagans, is
evident to all. The Precept of abstaining from Flesh (says Bellarmine) is
religiously observed by all at certain times, and by some at all times, De
Bonis Operib. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Religious Orders.
The Heathen had several Religious Orders, or Confraternities of both Sexes: So
much is confessed by our Adversaries, Beyerlinck Magn. Theat. lib. 5. p. 366.
Polydor Virgil, De Inventor. lib. 7. cap. 6. The Romans had their Vestal,
Titian, or Tatian, Augustal, Antonian, Aelian, Aurelian, Faustinian, and Salian
Confraternities, Alexander ab Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 1. cap. 26.

Thus our Romanists have several Religious Orders; as, Benedictins,
Carthusians, Bernardins, Praedicators, Carmelites, Johannites, Antonites,
Lazarites, Sclavonians, Gregorians, Ambrosians, Dominicans, Franciscans,
Templars, The Servants of Mary, The Brethren of the Cross, The Soldiers of
Jesu, The Barefooted, The Poor Brethen, The Brethren of S. Sophia, The
Brethren of S. James, The Brethren of S. Helen, The Order of the Valley of
Jehosaphat, The Order of S. John, The Order of S. Brigit, The Order of
Whippers, The Order of Basil, The Order of the Sepulchrits, The Order of
Wilhelmites, The Order of Wenceslaites, The Order of Purgatory, The Order of
the Dark Valley, The Order of Joseph, The Order of B. Mary de mercede, with
many more, to the Number of 65, enumerated by Tileman Heshusius, Errores
Pontif. Loc. 25.

Thus as the old Pagans had, so our Romanists now have several Religious
Orders, or Confraternities; which (says Polydor Virgil) were derived from the
Heathen, De Inventor. lib. 7. cap. 6.

Canonical Hours.
The Heathen had their Canonical Hours for Sacrifice and Devotion, Apuleius de
Asino Aureo, lib. 11. Philostratus in vita Apollonii, lib. 4. cap. 6.

And thus have Papists; which (says Polydor Virgil) may be deduced from the
old Pagans, Inventor. lib. 6. cap. 2. The Roman Church has instituted Seven
Canonical Hours, that is, Hours of Prayer, to signify the Seven Mysteries of
our Redemption, which the Glossa, cap. 1. de celeb. Missar. comprehends in
these Verses:

Haec sunt septenas propter quae psallimus horas.
Matutina ligat Christum, qui crimina purgat.
Prima replet sputis: causam dat tertia mortis.
Sexta cruci nectit: latus ejus nona bipertit.
Vespera deponit: tumulo completa reponit.
Apud Beyerlinck Mag. Theat. lib. 3. p. 69.
Durantus Rational. divin. Officior. lib. 5. cap. 1. number. 6.
CONCLUSION.
I Could easily give you many other Instances of this Conformity and Agreement
between Rome-Pagan and Rome-Christian; which has been (as you heard) confessed
by many, and defended by some of their greatest Doctors: But I have already
exceeded my Bounds, and therefore will conclude with one Inference from the
preceding Discourse:

Hence it appears, How extremely hazardou^ it is, to live and dye in the Roman
Communion; For what Blasphemy, Superstition, and Idolatry is disfused through
all the Veins of their Worship and Religion? Antichrist (...) Man of Sin, is
called the Son of Perdition 2 These. ^. 3; and so he is, both actively and
passively; he is damned himself, and the cause of the damnation of others. Read
v. 9, 10, 11, 12, of that Chapter; His coming is after the working of Satan,
with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish: because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a l^e, that
they all might be damned. And they, whom the Whore of Babylon has made drunk
with the Wine of her Fornication, shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God,
Rev. 14. 9, 10.

The only doubt is, Whether the Pope be Antichrist, which seemed so probable to
the famous Lord Bacon, that being asked by King James, Whether he thought him
so to be? 'Twas not less truly than wittily answered by him, That if an Hue and
Cry should come after Antichrist, which should describe him by those
Characters, by which he is decyphered in the Bible, he would certainly
apprehend the Pope for him. And whosoever will but peruse, with an impartial
eye, the Authors on both sides that have treated of this Subject, will, I doubt
not, conclude the notorious weakness of their Answers to our Allegations, to be
at least an high Presumption of the Truth of our Assertion; if not sufficient
to put an end to all further Doubtings.

Quest. Is not then Salvation possible in the Roman Church? Or may not a man,
who lives and dies in the Communion of that Church, be saved?

Answ. Many of our Divines have answered this Question Affirmatively, with some
limitations. Which charitable Concession is grossly abused by our Adversaries of
Rome. When they meet with some weak and ignorant Persons, whom they endeavor
to proselyte; the medium which they commonly use, is this, That their Religion
is the safer; And they prove it thus, By our Confession, Salvation may be had
in their Church; but their Doctors absolutely deny the possibility of Salvation
This Objection has been most solidly confuted by the learned Dr. Tillotson
Dean of Canterbury.
in ours; and therefore by the Confession of both Parties, they may be safe;
but of us there is a great question; for none but our selves say, that we can be
saved.

That I may give the Reader the true state of, and return a full Answer to the
Question propounded, I will lay down these following Propositions:

1. That we have great reason to think, That many of the Laity in the Romish
Church, if not the greatest number of them, do not cordially embrace many of
their Corruptions in Doctrinals, nor the most dangerous of them.

2. That these are commonly tainted with so much of their Corruptions, as
renders their Salvation extremely hazardous. 1 Cor. 3. 12, 15. If any man build
on this foundation, wood, hay, stubble, -- He shall be saved, yet so as by
fire. This Phrase [so as by fire] is Proverbial, and notes the extreme danger a
man is in, and yet escapes. They are not saved with less danger than the Seven
Thousand were, among the Idolatry of the Ten Tribes, 1 King. 19. 18; or the
Corites in the Tents of Corah their Father, Number. 26. 11. 'Twas an extraordinary
Mercy that preserved the one, and, I cannot tell how, rescued the other.

3. That a Protestant, leaving the Communion of our Church, does incur a
greater guilt, and consequently run a greater hazard than one who was bred up
in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and continues therein by invincible
ignorance. For a Protestant is supposed to have sufficient Convictions of the
Errors of the Roman Church; or is guilty of wilful Ignorance, if he has not.
And although we know not what allowance God will make for invincible Ignorance,
and the impresses of Birth and Education; yet we are sure, that wilful
Ignorance, or choosing a worse Church before a better, is a damnable Sin, and,
unrepented of, destroys Salvation.

4. When we say, That Salvation may be had in the Roman Church; it is grounded
on the hopes we conceive of their Repentance, and not the goodness of their
Religion.

5. That man who embraces Popery in its latitude, that is, the Canons of the
Tridentine Council, and as they are explicated by many of their greatest
Doctors, and whose practices exactly correspond therewith, cannot be saved: 1.
Because he embraces damnable Errors, as worshipping of Images, and the Host in
the Sacrament. 2. Because a Reprobate may do, nay often does as much, and more
than many of their chiefest Doctors have placed among the Agenda of that Church
for the attainment of eternal life. I grant, that damnable Errors do no more
than damnable Practices, as Whoredom, Drunkenness -- actually damn men; when
sincere Repentance intervenes, this will obtain from God a Pardon of the one,
as well as of the other. But the Repentance prescribed by their Doctors, falls
so far short of that required by God in his word, that if a man rest in it (and
I fear too many do), he adds Impenitency to his other Crimes, and consequently
is excluded from all hopes of Salvation.

This will appear, if we remark the nature of that Repentance which (say they)
is sufficient to obtain remission of sin. In the new Law (says Layman) after
the commission of a mortal sin, true Contrition is not necessary to a man who
is about to receive the Sacrament of Penance; but Attrition is sufficient,
though he know it to be no more. And when it is said, That of Attrite, by virtue
of the Sacrament, a man is made Contrite; it is not to be understood as if the
act of Attrition did pass into an act of Contrition; but that the sinner, by
Attrition with the Sacrament of Penance, is as well justified, as by Contrition
without it, Theol. Moral. lib. 5. tract. 6. cap. 2. And Fillincius starting
this Question, Whether Attrition in the Article of Death, be sufficient with
the Sacrament, or a man ought to have Contrition? Answers, That according to
Divine Justice a man that is attrite with the Sacrament, is not obliged to be
contrite in the Article of Death; and he gives this reason, Because the opinion
of the sufficiency of Attrition with the Sacrament, is practically certain
according to the Council of Trent, Quaest. Mor. Tom. 1. Tract. 6. cap. 8. number.
197. And Escobar affirms, That this is the received opinion of their Schoolmen
and Casuists, Theol. Moral. Tract. ^. Exam. 4. cap. 7.

Reader, My hearty prayer is, That God would give thee a right understanding in
all things that concern Religion and thy Salvation; and to those of the Romish
Persuasion Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth, that they may recover
themselves from the snare of the Devil.

FINIS.
To the READER.
SEveral Errata's have past in this Impression, by reason of the Authors
distance from the Press; which the Candid Reader is desired to pardon, and
amend with his Pen.


